lorna DOONE , 

 a romance of exmoor 


 by R. D. Blackmore 






 preface 

 this work be call a ' romance , ' because the incident , character , time , and scenery , be alike romantic . and in shape this old tale , the Writer neither dare , nor desire , to claim for it the dignity or cumber it with the difficulty of an historic novel . 
 and yet he think that the outline be fill in more carefully , and the situation   however simple   more warmly coloured and quicken , than a reader would expect to find in what be call a ' legend . ' 
 and he know that any son of Exmoor , chance on this volume , can not fail to bring to mind the nurse - tale of his childhood the savage deed of the outlaw Doones in the depth of Bagworthy Forest , the beauty of the hapless maid bring up in the midst of they , the plain John Ridd 's Herculean power , and   memory 's too congenial food   the exploit of Tom Faggus . 
 March , 1869 . 




 content 


 preface 

 CHAPTER I 

 CHAPTER II 

 CHAPTER III 

 CHAPTER IV 

 CHAPTER V 

 CHAPTER VI 

 CHAPTER VII 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 CHAPTER IX 

 CHAPTER X 

 CHAPTER XI 

 CHAPTER XII 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 CHAPTER XV 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 CHAPTER XVII 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 CHAPTER XX 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXIX 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 chapter XXXII 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 chapter xxxvi 

 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 CHAPTER XL 

 CHAPTER XLI 

 CHAPTER XLII 

 CHAPTER xliii 

 CHAPTER XLIV 

 CHAPTER XLV 

 CHAPTER XLVI 

 CHAPTER XLVII 

 CHAPTER xlviii 

 CHAPTER XLIX 

 CHAPTER L 

 CHAPTER LI 

 CHAPTER LII 

 CHAPTER LIII 

 CHAPTER LIV 

 CHAPTER LV 

 CHAPTER lvi 

 CHAPTER LVII 

 CHAPTER LVIII 

 CHAPTER LIX 

 CHAPTER LX 

 CHAPTER LXI 

 CHAPTER LXII 

 CHAPTER LXIII 

 CHAPTER LXIV 

 CHAPTER LXV 

 CHAPTER LXVI 

 CHAPTER LXVII 

 CHAPTER LXVIII 

 CHAPTER LXIX 

 CHAPTER LXX 

 CHAPTER LXXI 

 CHAPTER LXXII 

 CHAPTER lxxiii 

 CHAPTER LXXIV 

 CHAPTER LXXV 




 CHAPTER I 

 element of education 

 if anybody care to read a simple tale tell simply , I , John Ridd , of the parish of Oare , in the county of Somerset , yeoman and churchwarden , have see and have a share in some doing of this neighborhood , which I will try to set down in order , God spar my life and memory . and they who light upon this book should bear in mind not only that I write for the clearing of our parish from ill fame and calumny , but also a thing which will , I trow , appear too often in it , to wit that I be nothing more than a plain unlettered man , not read in foreign language , as a gentleman might be , nor gift with long word   even in mine own tongue , save what I may have win from the Bible or Master William Shakespeare , whom , in the face of common opinion , I do value highly . in short , I be an ignoramus , but pretty well for a yeoman . 
 my father be of good substance , at least as we reckon in Exmoor , and seize in his own right , from many generation , of one , and that the good and large , of the three farm into which our parish be divide   or rather the cultured part thereof , he John Ridd , the elder , churchwarden , and overseer , be a great admirer of learn , and well able to write his name , send I his only son to be school at Tiverton , in the county of Devon . for the chief boast of that ancient town   next to its woollen staple   be a worthy grammar - school , the large in the west of England , found and handsomely endow in the year 1604 by Master Peter Blundell , of that same place , clothier . 
 here , by the time I be twelve year old , I have rise into the upper school , and could make bold with Eutropius and Caesar by aid of an english version and as much as six line of Ovid . some even say that I might , before manhood , rise almost to the third form , be of a perservering nature ; albeit , by full consent of all   except my mother , thick - headed . but that would have be , as I now perceive , an ambition beyond a farmer 's son ; for there be but one form above it , and that make of masterful scholar , entitle rightly ' monitor ' . so it come to pass , by the grace of God , that I be call away from learning , whilst sit at the desk of the junior first in the upper school , and begin the greek verb   greek word . 
 my eld grandson make bold to say that I never could have learn   greek word , ten page far on , be all he himself could manage , with plenty of stripe to help he . I know that he hath more head than I though never will he have such body ; and be thankful to have stop betime , with a meek and wholesome head - piece . 
 but if you doubt of my have be there , because now I know so little , go and see my name , ' John Ridd , ' graven on that very form . Forsooth , from the time I be strong enough to open a knife and to spell my name , I begin to grave it in the oak , first of the block whereon I sate , and then of the desk in front of it , accord as I be promote from one to other of they : and there my grandson read it now , at this present time of writing , and hath fight a boy for scoff at it ' John Ridd his name ' and do again in ' winkey , ' a mischievous but cheerful device , in which we take great pleasure . 
 this be the manner of a ' winkey , ' which I here set down , lest child of mine , or grandchild , dare to make one on my premise ; if he do , I shall know the mark at once , and score it well upon he . the scholar obtain , by prayer or price , a handful of saltpetre , and then with the knife wherewith he should rather be try to mend his pen , what do he do but scoop a hole where the desk be some three inch thick . this hole should be leave with the middle exalt , and the circumfere dig more deeply . then let he fill it with saltpetre , all save a little space in the midst , where the boss of the wood be . upon that boss   and it will be the well if a splinter of timber rise upward   he stick the end of his candle of tallow , or ' rat 's tail , ' as we call it , kindle and burn smoothly . Anon , as he read by that light his lesson , lift his eye now and then it may be , the fire of candle lay hold of the petre with a splutter noise and a leaping . then should the pupil seize his pen , and , regardless of the nib , stir bravely , and he will see a glow as of burn mountain , and a rich smoke , and spark go merrily ; nor will it cease , if he stir wisely , and there be a good store of petre , until the wood be devour through , like the sinking of a well - shaft . now well may it go with the head of a boy intent upon his primer , who betide to sit thereunder ! but , above all thing , have good care to exercise this art before the master stride up to his desk , in the early gray of the morning . 
 other custom , no less worthy , abide in the school of Blundell , such as the singeing of nightcap ; but though they have a pleasant savour , and refreshing to think of , I may not stop to note they , unless it be that goodly one at the incoming of a flood . the school - house stand beside a stream , not very large , call Lowman , which flow into the broad river of Exe , about a mile below . this Lowman stream , although it be not fond of brawl and violence   in the manner of our Lynn , yet be will not to flood into a mighty head of water when the storm of rain provoke it ; and most of all when its little co - mate , call the Taunton Brook where I have pluck the very good cress that ever man put salt on come foam down like a great roan horse , and rear at the leap of the hedgerow . then be the gray stone wall of Blundell on every side encompass , the vale be spread over with loop water , and it be a hard thing for the day - boy to get home to their supper . 
 and in that time , old Cop , the porter   so call because he hath copper boot to keep the wet from his stomach , and a nose of copper also , in right of other water , his place be to stand at the gate , attend to the flood - board groove into one another , and so to watch the torrent rise , and not be wash away , if it please God he may help it . but long ere the flood hath attain this height , and while it be only wax , certain boy of deputy will watch at the stoop of the drain - hole , and be apt to look outside the wall when Cop be take a cordial . and in the very front of the gate , just without the archway , where the ground be pave most handsomely , you may see in copy - letter do a great P.B. of white pebble . now , it be the custom and the law that when the invading water , either flux along the wall from below the road - bridge , or pour sharply across the meadow from a cut call Owen 's Ditch and I myself have see it come both way upon the very instant when the waxing element lip though it be but a single pebble of the founder 's letter , it be in the license of any boy , soever small and undoctrined , to rush into the great school - room , where a score of master sit heavily , and scream at the top of his voice , ' P.B. ' 
 then , with a yell , the boy leap up , or break away from their standing ; they toss their cap to the black - beamed roof , and haply the very book after they ; and the great boy vex no more the small one , and the small boy stick up to the great one . one with another , hard they go , to see the gain of the water , and the tribulation of Cop , and be prone to kick the day - boy out , with word of scanty compliment . then the master look at one another , have no class to look to , and   boy be no more left to watch   in a manner they put their mouth up . with a spirited bang they close their book , and make invitation the one to the other for pipe and foreign cordial , recommend the chance of the time , and the comfort away from cold water . 
 but , lo ! I be dwell on little thing and the pigeon ' egg of the infancy , forget the bitter and heavy life go over I since then . if I be neither a hard man nor a very close one , God know I have have no lack of rub and pound to make stone of I . yet can I not somehow believe that we ought to hate one another , to live far asunder , and block the mouth each of his little den ; as do the wild beast of the wood , and the hairy outrang now bring over , each with a chain upon he . let that matter be as it will . it be beyond I to unfold , and mayhap of my grandson 's grandson . all I know be that wheat be well than when I begin to sow it . 




 CHAPTER II 

 AN important ITEM 

 now the cause of my leave Tiverton school , and the way of it , be as follow . on the 29th day of November , in the year of our Lord 1673 , the very day when I be twelve year old , and have spend all my substance in sweetmeat , with which I make treat to the little boy , till the large boy run in and take they , we come out of school at five o'clock , as the rule be upon Tuesdays . accord to custom we drive the day - boy in brave rout down the causeway from the school - porch even to the gate where Cop have his dwelling and duty . little it recke we and help they less , that they be our founder 's citizen , and haply his own grand - nephews   for he leave no direct descendant , neither do we much inquire what their lineage be . for it have long be fix among we , who be of the house and chamber , that these same day - boy be all ' cadde , ' as we have discover to call it , because they pay no groat for their schooling , and bring their own common with they . in consumption of these we would help they , for our fare in hall fed appetite ; and while we eat their victual , we allow they freely to talk to we . nevertheless , we could not feel , when all the victual be go , but that these boy require kick from the premise of Blundell . and some of they be shopkeeper ' son , young grocer , fellmonger , and poulterer , and these to their credit seem to know how righteous it be to kick they . but other be of high family , as any need be , in Devon Carews , and bouchier , and Bastards , and some of these would turn sometimes , and strike the boy that kick they . but to do they justice , even these know that they must be kick for not pay . 
 after these ' charity - boy ' be go , as in contumely we call they ' if you break my bag on my head , ' say one , ' how will feed thence to - morrow ? ' and after old Cop with clang of iron have jam the double gate in under the scruff - stone archway , whereupon be latin verse , do in brass of small quality , some of we who be not hungry , and care not for the supper - bell , have suck much parliament and dump at my only charge not that I ever bear much wealth , but because I have be thrifte it for this time of my birth we be lean quite at dusk against the iron bar of the gate some six , or it may be seven of we , small boy all , and not conspicuous in the closing of the daylight and the fog that come at eventide , else Cop would have rat we up the green , for he be churly to little boy when his wife have take their money . there be plenty of room for all of we , for the gate will hold nine boy close - pack , unless they be feed rankly , whereof be little danger ; and now we be look out on the road and wish we could get there ; hop , moreover , to see a good string of pack - horse come by , with trooper to protect they . for the day - boy have bring we word that some intend their way to the town have lie that morning at Sampford Peveril , and must be in ere nightfall , because Mr. Faggus be after they . now Mr. Faggus be my first cousin and an honour to the family , be a Northmolton man of great renown on the highway from Barum town even to London . therefore of course , I hop that he would catch the packman , and the boy be ask my opinion as of an oracle , about it . 
 a certain boy lean up against I would not allow my elbow room , and strike I very sadly in the stomach part , though his own be full of my parliament . and this I feel so unkindly , that I smite he straightway in the face without tarrying to consider it , or weigh the question duly . upon this he put his head down , and present it so vehemently at the middle of my waistcoat , that for a minute or more my breath seem drop , as it be , from my pocket , and my life seem to stop from great want of ease . before I come to myself again , it have be settle for we that we should move to the ' Ironing - box , ' as the triangle of turf be call where the two causeway come from the school - porch and the hall - porch meet , and our fight be mainly celebrate ; only we must wait until the convoy of horse have pass , and then make a ring by candlelight , and the other boy would like it . but suddenly there come round the post where the letter of our founder be , not from the way of Taunton but from the side of Lowman bridge , a very small string of horse , only two indeed   counting for one the pony , and a red - faced man on the big nag . 
 ' plaise ye , worshipful master , ' he say , be fear of the gateway , ' carn ' e tull whur our Jan Ridd be ? ' 
 ' hyur a be , ee fai , Jan Ridd , ' answer a sharp little chap , make game of John Fry 's language . 
 ' zhow un up , then , ' say John Fry poke his whip through the bar at we ; ' zhow un up , and putt un aowt . ' 
 the other little chap point at I , and some begin to hallo ; but I know what I be about . 
 ' oh , John , John , ' I cry , ' what be the use of your come now , and Peggy over the moor , too , and it so cruel cold for she ? the holiday do not   begin till Wednesday fortnight , John . to think of your not know that ! ' 
 John Fry lean forward in the saddle , and turn his eye away from I ; and then there be a noise in his throat like a snail crawl on a window - pane . 
 ' oh , us knaw that wull enough , Maister Jan ; reckon every Oare - man knaw that , without go to skoo - ull , like you doth . your moother have keep arl the apple up , and old Betty toorne the black pudden , and none dare set trap for a blagbird . arl for thee , lad ; every bit of it now for thee ! ' 
 he check himself suddenly , and frighten I . I know that John Fry 's way so well . 
 ' and father , and father oh , how be father ? ' I push the boy right and leave as I say it . ' John , be father up in town ! he always use to come for I , and leave nobody else to do it . ' 
 ' vayther'll be at the crooked post , tother zide o ' telling - house .   her coodn't   lave ' ouze by raison of the Chirstmas bakkon comin ' on , and zome o ' the cider welt . ' 
    the ' telling - house ' on the moor be rude cot where the 
  shepherd meet to ' tell ' their sheep at the end of the 
  pasture season . 
 he look at the nag 's ear as he say it ; and , be up to John Fry 's way , I know that it be a lie . and my heart fall like a lump of lead , and I lean back on the stay of the gate , and long no more to fight anybody . a sort of dull power hang over I , like the cloud of a brood tempest , and I fear to be tell anything . I do not even care to stroke the nose of my pony Peggy , although she push it in through the rail , where a square of broad lattice be , and sniff at I , and begin to crop gently after my finger . but whatever live or dy , business must be attend to ; and the principal business of good Christians be , beyond all controversy , to fight with one another . 
 ' come up , Jack , ' say one of the boy , lift I under the chin ; ' he hit you , and you hit he , you know . ' 
 ' pay your debt before you go , ' say a monitor , stride up to I , after hear how the honour lay ; ' Ridd , you must go through with it . ' 
 ' fight , for the sake of the junior first , ' cry the little fellow in my ear , the clever one , the head of our class , who have mock John Fry , and know all about the aorist , and try to make I know it ; but I never go more than three place up , and then it be an accident , and I come down after dinner . the boy be urgent round I to fight , though my stomach be not up for it ; and be very slow of wit   which be not chargeable on I , I look from one to other of they , seek any cure for it . not that I be afraid of fight , for now I have be three year at Blundell 's , and foughten , all that time , a fight at least once every week , till the boy begin to know I ; only that the load on my heart be not sprightly as of the hay - field . it be a very sad thing to dwell on ; but even now , in my time of wisdom , I doubt it be a fond thing to imagine , and a motherly to insist upon , that boy can do without fight . unless they be very good boy , and afraid of one another . 
 ' Nay , ' I say , with my back against the wrought - iron stay of the gate , which be sockete into Cop 's house - front : ' I will not fight thee now , Robin Snell , but wait till I come back again . ' 
 ' take coward 's blow , Jack Ridd , then , ' cry half a dozen little boy , shove Bob Snell forward to do it ; because they all know well enough , have strive with I ere now , and prove I to be their master they know , I say , that without great change , I would never accept that contumely . but I take little heed of they , look in dull wonderment at John Fry , and Smiler , and the blunderbuss , and Peggy . John Fry be scratch his head , I could see , and get blue in the face , by the light from Cop 's parlour - window , and go to and fro upon Smiler , as if he be hard set with it . and all the time he be look briskly from my eye to the fist I be clench , and methought he try to wink at I in a covert manner ; and then Peggy whisk her tail . 
 ' shall I fight , John ? ' I say at last ; ' I would an you have not come , John . ' 
 ' Chraist 's will be do ; I zim thee have well faight , Jan , ' he answer , in a whisper , through the gridiron of the gate ; ' there be a dale of faighting avore thee . good wai to begin gude taime laike . wull the geatman latt I in , to zee as thee hast vair plai , lad ? ' 
 he look doubtfully down at the colour of his cowskin boot , and the mire upon the horse , for the slough be exceedingly mucky . Peggy , indeed , my sorrel pony , be light of weight , be not crust much over the shoulder ; but Smiler   our young sledder   have be well in over his wither , and none would have deem he a piebald , save of red mire and black mire . the great blunderbuss , moreover , be choke with a dollop of slough - cake ; and John Fry 's sad - coloured Sunday hat be indue with a plume of marish - weed . all this I see while he be dismount , heavily and wearily , lift his leg from the saddle - cloth as if with a sore crick in his back . 
 by this time the question of fighting be go quite out of our discretion ; for sundry of the eld boy , grave and reverend signor , who have take no small pleasure in teach our hand to fight , to ward , to parry , to feign and counter , to lunge in the manner of sword - play , and the weak child to drop on one knee when no cunning of fence might baffle the onset these great master of the art , who would far liefer see we little one practise it than themselves engage , six or seven of they come run down the rounded causeway , have hear that there have arise ' a snug little mill ' at the gate . now whether that word hath origin in a greek term mean a conflict , as the well - read boy asseverate , or whether it be nothing more than a figure of similitude , from the beat arm of a mill , such as I have see in county where be no waterbrook , but folk make bread with wind it be not for a man devoid of scholarship to determine . enough that they who make the ring intitule the scene a ' mill , ' while we who must be thump inside it try to rejoice in their pleasantry , till it turn upon the stomach . 
 moreover , I feel upon I now a certain responsibility , a dutiful need to maintain , in the presence of John Fry , the manliness of the Ridd family , and the honour of Exmoor . Hitherto none have worst I , although in the three year of my schooling , I have fight more than threescore battle , and bedew with blood every plant of grass towards the middle of the Ironing - box . and this success I owe at first to no skill of my own ; until I come to know well ; for up to twenty or thirty fight , I strike as nature guide I , no wise than a father - long - leg in the heat of a lanthorn ; but I have conquer , partly through my native strength , and the Exmoor toughness in I , and still more that I could not see when I have get my bellyful . but now I be like to have that and more ; for my heart be down , to begin with ; and then Robert Snell be a big boy than I have ever encounter , and as thick in the skull and hard in the brain as even I could claim to be . 
 I have never tell my mother a word about these frequent striving , because she be soft - hearted ; neither have I tell by father , because he have not see it . therefore , behold I still an innocent - look child , with fair curl on my forehead , and no store of bad language , John Fry think this be the very first fight that ever have befall I ; and so when they let he at the gate , ' with a message to the headmaster , ' as one of the monitor tell Cop , and Peggy and Smiler be tie to the railing , till I should be through my business , John come up to I with the tear in his eye , and say , ' Doon't   thee goo for to do it , Jan ; doon't   thee do it , for gude now . ' but I tell he that now it be much too late to cry off ; so he say , ' the Lord be with thee , Jan , and turn thy thumb - knuckle inward . ' 
 it be not a very large piece of ground in the angle of the causeway , but quite big enough to fight upon , especially for Christians , who love to be cheek by jowl at it . the great boy stand in a circle around , be gift with strong privilege , and the little boy have leave to lie flat and look through the leg of the great boy . but while we be yet prepare , and the candle hiss in the fog - cloud , old Phoebe , of more than fourscore year , whose room be over the hall - porch , come hobble out , as she always do , to mar the joy of the conflict . no one ever heed she , neither do she expect it ; but the evil be that two senior boy must always lose the first round of the fight , by have to lead her home again . 
 I marvel how Robin Snell feel . very likely he think nothing of it , always have be a boy of a hectoring and unruly sort . but I feel my heart go up and down as the boy come round to strip I ; and greatly fear to be beat , I blow hot upon my knuckle . then pull I off my little cut jerkin , and lay it down on my head cap , and over that my waistcoat , and a boy be proud to take care of they . Thomas Hooper be his name , and I remember how he look at I . my mother have make that little cut jerkin , in the quiet winter evening . and take pride to loop it up in a fashionable way , and I be loth to soil it with blood , and good filberd be in the pocket . then up to I come Robin Snell   mayor of Exeter thrice since that , and he stand very square , and look at I , and I lack not long to look at he . round his waist he have a kerchief busk up his small - clothe , and on his foot light pumpkin shoe , and all his upper raiment off . and he dance about in a way that make my head swim on my shoulder , and he stand some inch over I . but I , be muddle with much doubt about John Fry and his errand , be only strip of my jerkin and waistcoat , and not comfortable to begin . 
 ' come now , shake hand , ' cry a big boy , jump in joy of the spectacle , a third - former nearly six foot high ; ' shake hand , you little devil . keep your pluck up , and show good sport , and Lord love the well man of you . ' 
 Robin take I by the hand , and gaze at I disdainfully , and then smote I painfully in the face , ere I could get my fence up . 
 ' Whutt be 'bout , lad ? ' cry John Fry ; ' hutt un again , Jan , wull ' e ? well do then , our Jan boy . ' 
 for I have reply to Robin now , with all the weight and cadence of penthemimeral caesura   a thing , the name of which I know , but could never make head nor tail of it , and the strife begin in a serious style , and the boy look on be not cheat . although I could not collect their shout when the blow be ring upon I , it be no great loss ; for John Fry tell I afterwards that their oath go up like a furnace fire . but to these we pay no heed or hap , be in the thick of swing , and devoid of judgment . all I know be , I come to my corner , when the round be over , with very hard pump in my chest , and a great desire to fall away . 
 ' time be up , ' cry head - monitor , ere ever I get my breath again ; and when I fain would have linger awhile on the knee of the boy that hold I . John Fry have come up , and the boy be laugh because he want a stable lanthorn , and threaten to tell my mother . 
 ' time be up , ' cry another boy , more headlong than head - monitor . ' if we count three before the come of thee , thwack thou art , and must go to the woman . ' I feel it hard upon I . he begin to count , one , too , three but before the ' three ' be out of his mouth , I be face my foe , with both hand up , and my breath go rough and hot , and resolve to wait the turn of it . for I have find seat on the knee of a boy sage and skilled to tutor I , who know how much the end very often differ from the beginning . a rare ripe scholar he be ; and now he hath rout up the Germans in the matter of criticism . sure the clever boy and man have most love towards the stupid one . 
 ' finish he off , Bob , ' cry a big boy , and that I notice especially , because I think it unkind of he , after eat of my toffee as he have that afternoon ; ' finish he off , neck and crop ; he deserve it for stick up to a man like you . ' 
 but I be not so to be finish off , though feel in my knuckle now as if it be a blueness and a sense of chilblain . nothing hold except my leg , and they be good to help I . so this bout , or round , if you please , be foughten warily by I , with gentle recollection of what my tutor , the clever boy , have tell I , and some resolve to earn his praise before I come back to his knee again . and never , I think , in all my life , sound sweet word in my ear   except when my love love I   than when my second and backer , who have make himself part of my doing now , and would have weep to see I beat , say , 
 ' famously do , Jack , famously ! only keep your wind up , Jack , and you will go right through he ! ' 
 meanwhile John Fry be prowl about , ask the boy what they think of it , and whether I be like to be kill , because of my mother 's trouble . but find now that I have foughten three - score fight already , he come up to I woefully , in the quickness of my breathing , while I sit on the knee of my second , with a piece of spongious coralline to ease I of my bloodshed , and he say in my ear , as if he be clap spur into a horse , 
 ' never thee knack under , Jan , or never coom naigh Hexmoor no more . ' 
 with that it be all up with I . a simmering buzz in my heavy brain , and a light come through my eyeplace . at once I set both fist again , and my heart stick to I like cobbler 's wax . either Robin Snell should kill I , or I would conquer Robin Snell . so I go in again with my courage up , and Bob come smile for victory , and I hat he for smile . he let at I with his left hand , and I give he my right between his eye , and he blink , and be not pleased with it . I fear he not , and spar he not , neither spar myself . my breath come again , and my heart stand cool , and my eye strike fire no long . only I know that I would die soon than shame my birthplace . how the rest of it be I know not ; only that I have the end of it , and help to put Robin in bed . 




 CHAPTER III 

 the WAR - path of the doones 

 from Tiverton town to the town of Oare be a very long and painful road , and in good truth the traveller must make his way , as the saying be ; for the way be still unmade , at least , on this side of Dulverton , although there be less danger now than in the time of my schooling ; for now a good horse may go there without much cost of leaping , but when I be a boy the spur would fail , when need most , by reason of the slough - cake . it be to the credit of this age , and our advance upon fatherly way , that now we have lay down rod and fagot , and even stump - oak here and there , so that a man in good daylight need not sink , if he be quite sober . there be nothing I have strive at more than do my duty , way - warden over Exmoor . 
 but in those day , when I come from school   and good time they be , too , full of a warmth and fine hearth - comfort , which now be die out , it be a sad and sorry business to find where lay the highway . we be take now to mark it off with a fence on either side , at least , when a town be handy ; but to I his seem of a high pretence , and a sort of landmark , and channel for robber , though well enough near London , where they have earn a race - course . 
 we leave the town of the two ford , which they say be the meaning of it , very early in the morning , after lie one day to rest , as be demand by the nag , sore of foot and founder . for my part , too , I be glad to rest , have ache all over I , and very heavy bruise ; and we lodge at the sign of the White Horse Inn , in the street call Gold Street , opposite where the soul be of John and Joan Greenway , set up in gold letter , because we must take the homeward way at cockcrow of the morning . though still John Fry be dry with I of the reason of his come , and only tell lie about father , and could not keep they agreeable , I hop for the good , as all boy will , especially after a victory . and I think , perhaps father have send for I because he have a good harvest , and the rat be bad in the corn - chamber . 
 it be high noon before we be get to Dulverton that day , near to which town the river Exe and its big brother Barle have union . my mother have an uncle live there , but we be not to visit his house this time , at which I be somewhat astonish , since we need must stop for at least two hour , to bait our horse thorough well , before come to the black bogway . the bog be very good in frost , except where the hot - spring rise ; but as yet there have be no frost this year , save just enough to make the blackbird look big in the morning . in a hearty black - frost they look small , until the snow fall over they . 
 the road from Bampton to Dulverton have not be very delicate , yet nothing to complain of much no deep , indeed , than the hock of a horse , except in the rotten place . the day be incline to be mild and foggy , and both nag sweat freely ; but Peggy carry little weight   for my wardrobe be upon Smiler , and John Fry grumble always , we could easily keep in front , as far as you may hear a laugh . 
 John have be rather bitter with I , which methought be a mark of ill taste at come home for the holiday ; and yet I make allowance for John , because he have never be at school , and never would have chance to eat fry upon condition of spell it ; therefore I ride on , think that he be hard - set , like a saw , for his dinner , and would soften after tooth - work . and yet at his most hungry time , when his mind be far go upon bacon , certe he seem to check himself and look at I as if he be sorry for little thing come over great . 
 but now , at Dulverton , we din upon the rare and choicest victual that ever I do taste . even now , at my time of life , to think of it give I appetite , as once and awhile to think of my first love make I love all goodness . hot mutton pasty be a thing I have often hear of from very wealthy boy and man , who make a dessert of dinner ; and to hear they talk of it make my lip smack , and my rib come inward . 
 and now John Fry stride into the hostel , with the air and grace of a short - legged man , and shout as loud as if he be call sheep upon Exmoor , 
 ' hot mooton pasty for twoo trarv'lers , at number vaive , in vaive minnit ! dish un up in the tin with the grahvy , zame as I hardere last Tuesday . ' 
 of course it do not come in five minute , nor yet in ten or twenty ; but that make it all the well when it come to the real presence ; and the smell of it be enough to make an empty man thank God for the room there be inside he . fifty year have pass I quick than the taste of that gravy . 
 it be the manner of all good boy to be careless of apparel , and take no pride in adornment . good lack , if I see a boy make to do about the fit of his crumpler , and the creasing of his breech , and desire to be shod for comeliness rather than for use , I can not ' scape the mark that God take thought to make a girl of he . not so when they grow old , and court the regard of the maiden ; then may the bravery pass from the inside to the outside of they ; and no big fool be they , even then , than their father be before they . but God forbid any man to be a fool to love , and be love , as I have be . else would he have prevent it . 
 when the mutton pasty be do , and Peggy and Smiler have din well also , out I go to wash at the pump , be a lover of soap and water , at all risk , except of my dinner . and John Fry , who care very little to wash , save Sabbath day in his own soap , and who have keep I from the pump by threaten loss of the dish , out he come in a satisfied manner , with a piece of quill in his hand , to lean against a door - post , and listen to the horse feed , and have his tooth ready for supper . 
 then a lady's - maid come out , and the sun be on her face , and she turn round to go back again ; but put a well face upon it , and give a trip and hitch her dress , and look at the sun full body , lest the hostler should laugh that she be lose her complexion . with a long italian glass in her finger very daintily , she come up to the pump in the middle of the yard , where I be run the water off all my head and shoulder , and arm , and some of my breast even , and though I have glimpse she through the sprinkle , it give I quite a turn to see she , child as I be , in my open aspect . but she look at I , no whit abash , make a baby of I , no doubt , as a woman of thirty will do , even with a very big boy when they catch he on a hayrick , and she say to I in a brazen manner , as if I have be nobody , while I be shrink behind the pump , and crave to get my shirt on , ' good leetle boy , come hither to I . fine heaven ! how blue your eye be , and your skin like snow ; but some naughty man have beat it black . oh , leetle boy , let I feel it . ah , how then it must have hurt you ! there now , and you shall love I . ' 
 all this time she be touch my breast , here and there , very lightly , with her delicate brown finger , and I understand from her voice and manner that she be not of this country , but a foreigner by extraction . and then I be not so shy of she , because I could talk well English than she ; and yet I long for my jerkin , but like not to be rude to she . 
 ' if you please , madam , I must go . John Fry be wait by the tapster 's door , and Peggy neigh to I . if you please , we must get home to - night ; and father will be wait for I this side of the telling - house . ' 
 ' there , there , you shall go , leetle dear , and perhaps I will go after you . I have take much love of you . but the baroness be hard to I . how far you call it now to the bank of the sea at Wash Wash ' 
 ' at Watchett , likely you mean , madam . oh , a very long way , and the road as soft as the road to Oare . ' 
 ' oh - ah , oh - ah I shall remember ; that be the place where my leetle boy live , and some day I will come seek for he . now make the pump to flow , my dear , and give I the good water . the baroness will not touch unless a nebule be form outside the glass . ' 
 I do not know what she mean by that ; yet I pump for her very heartily , and marvel to see she for fifty time throw the water away in the trough , as if it be not good enough . at last the water suit she , with a likeness of fog outside the glass , and the gleam of a crystal under it , and then she make a curtsey to I , in a sort of mocking manner , hold the long glass by the foot , not to take the cloud off ; and then she want to kiss I ; but I be out of breath , and have always be shy of that work , except when I come to offer it ; and so I duck under the pump - handle , and she knock she chin on the knob of it ; and the hostler come out , and ask whether they would do as well . 
 upon this , she retreat up the yard , with a certain dark dignity , and a foreign way of walking , which stop they at once from go far , because it be so different from the fashion of their sweetheart . one with another they hang back , where half a cart - load of hay be , and they look to be sure that she would not turn round ; and then each one laugh at the rest of they . 
 now , up to the end of Dulverton town , on the northward side of it , where the two new pig - sty be , the Oare folk and the Watchett folk must trudge on together , until we come to a broken cross , where a murder man lie bury . Peggy and Smiler go up the hill , as if nothing could be too much for they , after the bean they have eat , and suddenly turn a corner of tree , we happen upon a great coach and six horse labour very heavily . John Fry ride on with his hat in his hand , as become he towards the quality ; but I be amazed to that degree , that I leave my cap on my head , and draw bridle without know it . 
 for in the front seat of the coach , which be half - way open , be of the city - make , and the day in want of air , sate the foreign lady , who have meet I at the pump and offer to salute I . by her side be a little girl , dark - haired and very wonderful , with a wealthy softness on she , as if she must have her own way . I could not look at she for two glance , and she do not look at I for one , be such a little child , and busy with the hedge . but in the honourable place sate a handsome lady , very warmly dress , and sweetly delicate of colour . and close to she be a lively child , two or it may be three year old , bear a white cockade in his hat , and star at all and everybody . now , he see Peggy , and take such a liking to she , that the lady his mother if so she be be force to look at my pony and I . and , to tell the truth , although I be not of those who adore the high folk , she look at we very kindly , and with a sweetness rarely find in the woman who milk the cow for we . 
 then I take off my cap to the beautiful lady , without ask wherefore ; and she put up her hand and kiss it to I , think , perhaps , that I look like a gentle and good little boy ; for folk always call I innocent , though God know I never be that . but now the foreign lady , or lady 's maid , as it might be , who have be busy with little dark eye , turn upon all this go - on , and look I straight in the face . I be about to salute she , at a distance , indeed , and not with the nicety she have offer to I , but , strange to say , she star at my eye as if she have never see I before , neither wish to see I again . at this I be so startled , such thing being out of my knowledge , that I startle Peggy also with the muscle of my leg , and she be fresh from stable , and the mire scrap off with cask - hoop , break away so suddenly that I could do no more than turn round and lower my cap , now five month old , to the beautiful lady . soon I overtake John Fry , and ask he all about they , and how it be that we have miss their starting from the hostel . but John would never talk much till after a gallon of cider ; and all that I could win out of he be that they be ' murder Papishers , ' and little he care to do with they , or the devil , as they come from . and a good thing for I , and a providence , that I be go down Dulverton town to buy sweetstuff for Annie , else my stupid head would have go astray with their great out - come . 
 we see no more of they after that , but turn into the sideway ; and soon have the fill of our hand and eye to look to our own going . for the road get bad and bad , until there be none at all , and perhaps the pure thing it could do be to be ashamed to show itself . but we push on as good we might , with doubt of reach home any time , except by special grace of God . 
 the fog come down upon the moor as thick as ever I see it ; and there be no sound of any sort , nor a breath of wind to guide we . the little stubby tree that stand here and there , like bush with a wooden leg to they , be drizzle with a mess of wet , and hang their point with dropping . wherever the butt - end of a hedgerow come up from the hollow ground , like the wither of a horse , hole of splash be pock and pimple in the yellow sand of coney , or under the dwarf tree 's oven . but soon it be too dark to see that , or anything else , I may say , except the crease in the dusk , where prisone light creep up the valley . 
 after awhile even that be go , and no other comfort leave we except to see our horse ' head jog to their footstep , and the dark ground pass below we , lighter where the wet be ; and then the splash , foot after foot , more clever than we can do it , and the orderly jerk of the tail , and the smell of what a horse be . 
 John Fry be bow forward with sleep upon his saddle , and now I could no long see the frizzle of wet upon his beard for he have a very brave one , of a bright red colour , and trim into a whale - oil knot , because he be newly married although that comb of hair have be a subject of some wonder to I , whether I , in God 's good time , should have the like of that , handsomely set with shin bead , small above and large below , from the weeping of the heaven . but still I could see the jog of his hat a Sunday hat with a top to it and some of his shoulder bow out in the mist , so that one could say ' hold up , John , ' when Smiler put his foot in . ' mercy of God ! where be we now ? ' say John Fry , wake suddenly ; ' we ought to have pass hold hash , Jan. Zeen it on the road , have ' ee ? ' 
 ' no indeed , John ; no old ash . nor nothing else to my knowing ; nor hear nothing , save thee snore . ' 
 ' watt a vule thee must be then , Jan ; and I myzell no well . harken , lad , harken ! ' 
 we draw our horse up and listen , through the thickness of the air , and with our hand lay to our ear . at first there be nothing to hear , except the panting of the horse and the trickle of the eave drop from our head - cover and clothing , and the soft sound of the lonely night , that make we feel , and try not to think . then there come a mellow noise , very low and mournsome , not a sound to be afraid of , but to long to know the meaning , with a soft rise of the hair . three time it come and go again , as the shaking of a thread might pass away into the distance ; and then I touch John Fry to know that there be something near I . 
 ' Doon't   ' e be a vule , Jan ! vaine moozick as iver I ' eer . God bless the man as make un doo it . ' 
 ' have they hang one of the Doones then , John ? ' 
 ' hush , lad ; niver talk laike o ' thiccy . hang a Doone ! God knoweth , the King would hang pretty quick if she do . ' 
 ' then who be it in the chain , John ? ' 
 I feel my spirit rise as I ask ; for now I have cross Exmoor so often as to hope that the people sometimes deserve it , and think that it might be a lesson to the rogue who unjustly love the mutton they be never bear to . but , of course , they be bear to hang , when they set themselves so high . 
 ' it be nawbody , ' say John , ' vor we to make a fush about . belong to t'other zide o ' the moor , and come staling shape to our zide . Red Jem Hannaford his name . thank God for he to be hang , lad ; and good cess to his soul for craikin ' zo . ' 
 so the sound of the quiet swinging lead we very modestly , as it come and go on the wind , loud and low pretty regularly , even as far as the foot of the gibbet where the four cros - way be . 
 ' vamous job this here , ' cry John , look up to be sure of it , because there be so many ; ' here be my own nick on the post . Red Jem , too , and no doubt of he ; he do hang so handsome like , and his rib up laike a horse a'most . God bless they as discoovere the way to make a rogue so useful . good - naight to thee , Jem , my lad ; and not break thy drame with the craikin ' . ' 
 John Fry shake his bridle - arm , and smote upon Smiler merrily , as he jog into the homeward track from the guiding of the body . but I be sorry for Red Jem , and want to know more about he , and whether he might not have avoid this miserable end , and what his wife and child think of it , if , indeed , he have any . 
 but John would talk no more about it ; and perhaps he be move with a lonesome feeling , as the creak sound come after we . 
 ' Hould thee tongue , lad , ' he say sharply ; ' we be naigh the Doone - track now , two maile from Dunkery Beacon hill , the haighest place of Hexmoor . so happen they be abroad to - naight , we must crawl on our belly - place , boy . ' 
 I know at once what he mean those bloody Doones of Bagworthy , the awe of all Devon and Somerset , outlaws , traitor , murderer . my little leg begin to tremble to and fro upon Peggy 's side , as I hear the dead robber in chain behind we , and think of the live one still in front . 
 ' but , John , ' I whisper warily , sidle close to his saddle - bow ; ' dear John , you do not   think they will see we in such a fog as this ? ' 
 ' never God make vog as could stop their eyesen , ' he whisper in answer , fearfully ; ' here we be by the hollow ground . zober , lad , goo zober now , if thee wish to see thy moother . ' 
 for I be incline , in the manner of boy , to make a run of the danger , and cross the Doone - track at full speed ; to rush for it , and be do with it . but even then I wonder why he talk of my mother so , and say not a word of father . 
 we be come to a long deep ' goyal , ' as they call it on Exmoor , a word whose fountain and origin I have nothing to do with . only I know that when little boy laugh at I at Tiverton , for talk about a ' goyal , ' a big boy clout they on the head , and say that it be in Homer , and mean the hollow of the hand . and another time a Welshman tell I that it must be something like the thing they call a ' pant ' in those part . still I know what it mean well enough to wit , a long trough among wild hill , fall towards the plain country , round at the bottom , perhaps , and stiff , more than steep , at the side of it . whether it be straight or crooked , make no difference to it . 
 we ride very carefully down our side , and through the soft grass at the bottom , and all the while we listen as if the air be a speaking - trumpet . then gladly we breast our nag to the rise , and be come to the comb of it , when I hear something , and catch John 's arm , and he bend his hand to the shape of his ear . it be the sound of horse ' foot knock up through splashy ground , as if the bottom suck they . then a grunting of weary man , and the lift noise of stirrup , and sometimes the clank of iron mix with the wheezy croning of leather and the blowing of hairy nostril . 
 ' God 's sake , Jack , slip round her belly , and let she go where she wull . ' 
 as John Fry whisper , so I do , for he be off Smiler by this time ; but our two pad be too fagged to go far , and begin to nose about and crop , sniff more than they need have do . I creep to John 's side very softly , with the bridle on my arm . 
 ' let goo braidle ; let goo , lad . plaise God they take they for forest - pony , or they will zend a bullet through we . ' 
 I see what he mean , and let go the bridle ; for now the mist be roll off , and we be against the sky - line to the dark cavalcade below we . John lie on the ground by a barrow of heather , where a little gullet be , and I creep to he , afraid of the noise I make in drag my leg along , and the creak of my cord breech . John bleat like a sheep to cover it a sheep very cold and tremble . 
 then just as the foremost horseman pass , scarce twenty yard below we , a puff of wind come up the glen , and the fog roll off before it . and suddenly a strong red light , cast by the cloud - weight downward , spread like finger over the moorland , open the alley of darkness , and hang on the steel of the rider . 
 ' Dunkery Beacon , ' whisper John , so close into my ear , that I feel his lip and tooth ashake ; ' dursn't   fire it now except to show the Doones way home again , since the naight as they go up and throw the watchman atop of it . why , wutt be 'bout , lad ? God 's sake ' 
 for I could keep still no long , but wriggle away from his arm , and along the little gullet , still go flat on my breast and thigh , until I be under a grey patch of stone , with a fringe of dry fern round it ; there I lay , scarce twenty foot above the head of the rider , and I fear to draw my breath , though prone to do it with wonder . 
 for now the beacon be rush up , in a fiery storm to heaven , and the form of its flame come and go in the fold , and the heavy sky be hover . all around it be hang with red , deep in twisted column , and then a giant beard of fire stream throughout the darkness . the sullen hill be flank with light , and the valley chin with shadow , and all the sombrous moor between awoke in furrowed anger . 
 but most of all the flinging fire leap into the rocky mouth of the glen below I , where the horseman pass in silence , scarcely deign to look round . heavy man and large of stature , reckless how they bear their gun , or how they sate their horse , with leathern jerkin , and long boot , and iron plate on breast and head , plunder heap behind their saddle , and flagon sling in front of they ; I count more than thirty pass , like cloud upon red sunset . some have carcass of sheep swing with their skin on , other have deer , and one have a child fling across his saddle - bow . whether the child be dead , or alive , be more than I could tell , only it hang head downwards there , and must take the chance of it . they have get the child , a very young one , for the sake of the dress , no doubt , which they could not stop to pull off from it ; for the dress shone bright , where the fire strike it , as if with gold and jewel . I long in my heart to know most sadly what they would do with the little thing , and whether they would eat it . 
 it touch I so to see that child , a prey among those vulture , that in my foolish rage and burn I stand up and shout to they leap on a rock , and rave out of all possession . two of they turn round , and one set his carbine at I , but the other say it be but a pixie , and bid he keep his powder . little they know , and less think I , that the pixie then before they would dance their castle down one day . 
 John Fry , who in the spring of fright have bring himself down from Smiler 's side , as if he be dip in oil , now come up to I , all risk be over , cross , and stiff , and ache sorely from his wet couch of heather . 
 ' small thank to thee , Jan , as my new waife bain't   a widder . and who be you to zupport of she , and her son , if she have one ? zarve thee right if I be to chuck thee down into the Doone - track . Zim thee'll come to un , zooner or later , if this be the zample of thee . ' 
 and that be all he have to say , instead of thank God ! for if ever bear man be in a fright , and ready to thank God for anything , the name of that man be John Fry not more than five minute agone . 
 however , I answer nothing at all , except to be ashamed of myself ; and soon we find Peggy and Smiler in company , well embark on the homeward road , and victual where the grass be good . right glad they be to see we again not for the pleasure of carrying , but because a horse   like a woman   lack , and be well without , self - reliance . 
 my father never come to meet we , at either side of the telling - house , neither at the crooked post , nor even at home - linhay although the dog keep such a noise that he must have hear we . home - side of the linhay , and under the ashen hedge - row , where father teach I to catch blackbird , all at once my heart go down , and all my breast be hollow . there be not even the lanthorn light on the peg against the cow 's house , and nobody say ' hold your noise ! ' to the dog , or shout ' here our Jack be ! ' 
 I look at the post of the gate , in the dark , because they be tall , like father , and then at the door of the harness - room , where he use to smoke his pipe and sing . then I think he have guest perhaps people lose upon the moor whom he could not leave unkindly , even for his son 's sake . and yet about that I be jealous , and ready to be vex with he , when he should begin to make much of I . and I feel in my pocket for the new pipe which I have bring he from Tiverton , and say to myself , ' he shall not have it until to - morrow morning . ' 
 Woe be I ! I can not tell . how I know I know not now only that I slunk away , without a tear , or thought of weeping , and hide I in a saw - pit . there the timber , over - head , come like streak across I ; and all I want be to lack , and none to tell I anything . 
 by - and - by , a noise come down , as of woman 's weeping ; and there my mother and sister be , choke and hold together . although they be my dearest love , I could not bear to look at they , until they seem to want my help , and put their hand before their eye . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 a very rash visit 

 my dear father have be kill by the Doones of Bagworthy , while rid home from Porlock market , on the Saturday evening . with he be six brother - farmer , all of they very sober ; for father would have no company with any man who go beyond half a gallon of beer , or a single gallon of cider . the robber have no grudge against he ; for he have never flout they , neither make overmuch of outcry , because they rob other people . for he be a man of such strict honesty , and due parish feeling , that he know it to be every man 's own business to defend himself and his good ; unless he belong to our parish , and then we must look after he . 
 these seven good farmer be jog along , help one another in the trouble of the road , and sing goodly hymn and song to keep their courage move , when suddenly a horseman stop in the starlight full across they . 
 by dress and arm they know he well , and by his size and stature , show against the glimmer of the evening star ; and though he seem one man to seven , it be in truth one man to one . of the six who have be sing song and psalm about the power of God , and their own regeneration such psalm as go the round , in those day , of the public - house there be not one but pull out his money , and sing small beer to a Doone . 
 but father have be use to think that any man who be comfortable inside his own coat and waistcoat deserve to have no other set , unless he would strike a blow for they . and so , while his gossip doff their hat , and shake with what be leave of they , he set his staff above his head , and ride at the Doone robber . with a trick of his horse , the wild man escape the sudden onset , although it must have amaze he sadly that any durst resist he . then when Smiler be carry away with the dash and the weight of my father   not be bring up to battle , nor use to turn , save in plough harness , the outlaw whistle upon his thumb , and plunder the rest of the yeoman . but father , draw at Smiler 's head , to try to come back and help they , be in the midst of a dozen man , who seem to come out of a turf - rick , some on horse , and some a - foot . nevertheless , he smite lustily , so far as he could see ; and be of great size and strength , and his blood well up , they have no easy job with he . with the play of his wrist , he crack three or four crown , be always famous at single - stick ; until the rest draw their horse away , and he think that he be master , and would tell his wife about it . 
 but a man beyond the range of staff be crouch by the peat - stack , with a long gun set to his shoulder , and he get poor father against the sky , and I can not tell the rest of it . only they know that Smiler come home , with blood upon his wither , and father be find in the morning dead on the moor , with his ivy - twisted cudgel lie break under he . now , whether this be an honest fight , God judge betwixt the Doones and I . 
 it be more of woe than wonder , be such day of violence , that mother know herself a widow , and her child fatherless . of child there be only three , none of we fit to be useful yet , only to comfort mother , by make she to work for we . I , John Ridd , be the eld , and feel it a heavy thing on I ; next come sister Annie , with about two year between we ; and then the little Eliza . 
 now , before I get home and find my sad loss and no boy ever love his father more than I love mine mother have do a most wondrous thing , which make all the neighbour say that she must be mad , at least . upon the Monday morning , while her husband lie unburie , she cast a white hood over her hair , and gather a black cloak round she , and , take counsel of no one , set off on foot for the Doone - gate . 
 in the early afternoon she come to the hollow and barren entrance , where in truth there be no gate , only darkness to go through . if I get on with this story , I shall have to tell of it by - and - by , as I see it afterwards ; and will not dwell there now . enough that no gun be fire at she , only her eye be cover over , and somebody lead she by the hand , without any wish to hurt she . 
 a very rough and headstrong road be all that she remember , for she could not think as she wish to do , with the cold iron push against she . at the end of this road they deliver her eye , and she could scarce believe they . 
 for she stand at the head of a deep green valley , carve from out the mountain in a perfect oval , with a fence of sheer rock standing round it , eighty foot or a hundred high ; from whose brink black woode hill sweep up to the sky - line . by her side a little river glide out from underground with a soft dark babble , unawares of daylight ; then grow bright , lapse away , and fall into the valley . then , as it run down the meadow , alder stand on either marge , and grass be blade out upon it , and yellow tuft of rush gather , look at the hurry . but far down , on either bank , be cover house build of stone , square and roughly cornered , set as if the brook be mean to be the street between they . only one room high they be , and not place opposite each other , but in and out as skittle be ; only that the first of all , which prove to be the captain 's , be a sort of double house , or rather two house join together by a plank - bridge , over the river . 
 fourteen cot my mother count , all very much of a pattern , and nothing to choose between they , unless it be the captain 's . deep in the quiet valley there , away from noise , and violence , and brawl , save that of the rivulet , any man would have deem they home of simple mind and innocence . yet not a single house stand there but be the home of murder . 
 two man lead my mother down a steep and gliddery stair - way , like the ladder of a hay - mow ; and thence from the break of the fall water as far as the house of the captain . and there at the door they leave her trembling , string as she be , to speak her mind . 
 now , after all , what right have she , a common farmer 's widow , to take it amiss that man of birth think fit to kill her husband . and the Doones be of very high birth , as all we clod of Exmoor know ; and we have enough of good teaching now let any man say the contrary to feel that all we have belong of right to those above we . therefore my mother be half - ashamed that she could not help complain . 
 but after a little while , as she say , remembrance of her husband come , and the way he use to stand by her side and put his strong arm round she , and how he like his bacon fry , and praise she kindly for it and so the tear be in her eye , and nothing should gainsay they . 
 a tall old man , Sir Ensor Doone , come out with a bill - hook in his hand , hedger 's glove go up his arm , as if he be no well than a labourer at ditch - work . only in his mouth and eye , his gait , and most of all his voice , even a child could know and feel that here be no ditch - labourer . good cause he have find since then , perhaps , to wish that he have be one . 
 with his white lock move upon his coat , he stop and look down at my mother , and she could not help herself but curtsey under the fix black gazing . 
 ' good woman , you be none of we . who have bring you hither ? young man must be young but I have have too much of this work . ' 
 and he scowl at my mother , for her comeliness ; and yet look under his eyelid as if he like she for it . but as for she , in her depth of love - grief , it strike scorn upon her womanhood ; and in the flash she speak . 
 ' what you mean I know not . traitor ! cut - throat ! coward ! I be here to ask for my husband . ' she could not say any more , because her heart be now too much for she , come hard in her throat and mouth ; but she open up her eye at he . 
 ' Madam , ' say Sir Ensor Doone be bear a gentleman , although a very bad one ' I crave pardon of you . my eye be old , or I might have know . now , if we have your husband prisoner , he shall go free without ransom , because I have insult you . ' 
 ' Sir , ' say my mother , be suddenly take away with sorrow , because of his gracious manner , ' please to let I cry a bit . ' 
 he stand away , and seem to know that woman want no help for that . and by the way she cry he know that they have kill her husband . then , have feel of grief himself , he be not angry with she , but leave she to begin again . 
 ' Loth would I be , ' say mother , sob with her new red handkerchief , and look at the pattern of it , ' loth indeed , Sir Ensor Doone , to accuse any one unfairly . but I have lose the very good husband God ever give to a woman ; and I know he when he be to your belt , and I not up to your knee , sir ; and never an unkind word he speak , nor stop I short in speak . all the herb he leave to I , and all the bacon - curing , and when it be good to kill a pig , and how to treat the maiden . not that I would ever wish oh , John , it seem so strange to I , and last week you be everything . ' 
 here mother burst out cry again , not loudly , but turn quietly , because she know that no one now would ever care to wipe the tear . and fifty or a hundred thing , of weekly and daily happen , come across my mother , so that her spirit fall like slacken lime . 
 ' this matter must be see to ; it shall be see to at once , ' the old man answer , move a little in spite of all his knowledge . ' Madam , if any wrong have be do , trust the honour of a Doone ; I will redress it to my utmost . come inside and rest yourself , while I ask about it . what be your good husband 's name , and when and where fall this mishap ? ' 
 ' deary I , ' say mother , as he set a chair for her very polite , but she would not sit upon it ; ' Saturday morning I be a wife , sir ; and Saturday night I be a widow , and my child fatherless . my husband 's name be John Ridd , sir , as everybody know ; and there be not a fine or well man in Somerset or Devon . he be come home from Porlock market , and a new gown for I on the crupper , and a shell to put my hair up oh , John , how good you be to I ! ' 
 of that she begin to think again , and not to believe her sorrow , except as a dream from the evil one , because it be too bad upon she , and perhaps she would awake in a minute , and her husband would have the laugh of she . and so she wipe her eye and smile , and look for something . 
 ' Madam , this be a serious thing , ' Sir Ensor Doone say graciously , and show grave concern : ' my boy be a little wild , I know . and yet I can not think that they would willingly harm any one . and yet and yet , you do look wrong . send Counsellor to I , ' he shout , from the door of his house ; and down the valley go the call , ' send Counsellor to Captain . ' 
 Counsellor Doone come in ere yet my mother be herself again ; and if any sight could astonish she when all her sense of right and wrong be go astray with the force of thing , it be the sight of the Counsellor . a square - build man of enormous strength , but a foot below the Doone stature   which I shall describe hereafter , he carry a long grey beard descend to the leather of his belt . great eyebrow overhang his face , like ivy on a pollard oak , and under they two large brown eye , as of an owl when mute . and he have a power of hide his eye , or show they bright , like a blaze fire . he stand there with his beaver off , and mother try to look at he , but he seem not to descry she . 
 ' Counsellor , ' say Sir Ensor Doone , stand back in his height from he , ' here be a lady of good repute ' 
 ' oh , no , sir ; only a woman . ' 
 ' allow I , madam , by your good leave . here be a lady , Counsellor , of great repute in this part of the country , who charge the Doones with have unjustly slay her husband ' 
 ' murder he ! murder he ! ' cry my mother , ' if ever there be a murder . oh , sir ! oh , sir ! you know it . ' 
 ' the perfect right and truth of the case be all I wish to know , ' say the old man , very loftily : ' and justice shall be do , madam . ' 
 ' oh , I pray you pray you , sir , make no matter of business of it . God from Heaven , look on I ! ' 
 ' put the case , ' say the Counsellor . 
 ' the case be this , ' reply Sir Ensor , hold one hand up to mother : ' this lady 's worthy husband be slain , it seem , upon his return from the market at Porlock , no long ago than last Saturday night . Madam , amend I if I be wrong . ' 
 ' no long , indeed , indeed , sir . sometimes it seem a twelvemonth , and sometimes it seem an hour . ' 
 ' cite his name , ' say the Counsellor , with his eye still roll inward . 
 ' Master John Ridd , as I understand . counsellor , we have hear of he often ; a worthy man and a peaceful one , who meddle not with our duty . now , if any of our boy have be rough , they shall answer it dearly . and yet I can scarce believe it . for the folk about these part be apt to misconceive of our suffering , and to have no feeling for we . Counsellor , you be our record , and very stern against we ; tell we how this matter be . ' 
 ' oh , Counsellor ! ' my mother cry ; ' Sir Counsellor , you will be fair : I see it in your countenance . only tell I who it be , and set I face to face with he , and I will bless you , sir , and God shall bless you , and my child . ' 
 the square man with the long grey beard , quite unmove by anything , draw back to the door and speak , and his voice be like a fall of stone in the bottom of a mine . 
 ' few word will be enow for this . four or five of our well - behave and most peaceful gentleman go to the little market at Porlock with a lump of money . they buy some household store and comfort at a very high price , and prick upon the homeward road , away from vulgar reveller . when they draw bridle to rest their horse , in the shelter of a peat - rick , the night be dark and sudden , a robber of great size and strength ride into the midst of they , think to kill or terrify . his arrogance and hardihood at the first amazed they , but they would not give up without a blow good which be on trust with they . he have smite three of they senseless , for the power of his arm be terrible ; whereupon the last man try to ward his blow with a pistol . Carver , sir , it be , our brave and noble Carver , who save the life of his brother and his own ; and glad enow they be to escape . notwithstanding , we hop it might be only a flesh - wound , and not to speed he in his sin . ' 
 as this atrocious tale of lie turn up joint by joint before she , like a ' devil 's coach - horse , '   mother be too much amazed to do any more than look at he , as if the earth must open . but the only thing that open be the great brown eye of the Counsellor , which rest on my mother 's face with a dew of sorrow , as he speak of sin . 
    the cock - tail beetle have earn this name in the West of 
  England . 
 she , unable to bear they , turn suddenly on Sir Ensor , and catch   as she fancy   a smile on his lip , and a sense of quiet enjoyment . 
 ' all the Doones be gentleman , ' answer the old man gravely , and look as if he have never smile since he be a baby . ' we be always glad to explain , madam , any mistake which the rustic people may fall upon about we ; and we wish you clearly to conceive that we do not charge your poor husband with any set purpose of robbery , neither will we bring suit for any attainder of his property . be it not so , Counsellor ? ' 
 ' without doubt his land be attaint ; unless be mercy you forbear , sir . ' 
 ' Counsellor , we will forbear . Madam , we will forgive he . like enough he know not right from wrong , at that time of night . the water be strong at Porlock , and even an honest man may use his staff unjustly in this unchartered age of violence and rapine . ' 
 the Doones to talk of rapine ! Mother 's head go round so that she curtsey to they both , scarcely know where she be , but call to mind her manner . all the time she feel a warmth , as if the right be with she , and yet she could not see the way to spread it out before they . with that , she dry her tear in haste and go into the cold air , for fear of speak mischief . 
 but when she be on the homeward road , and the sentinel have charge of she , blind her eye , as if she be not blind enough with weeping , some one come in haste behind she , and thrust a heavy leathern bag into the limp weight of her hand . 
 ' captain send you this , ' he whisper ; ' take it to the little one . ' 
 but mother let it fall in a heap , as if it have be a blind worm ; and then for the first time crouch before God , that even the Doones should pity she . 




 CHAPTER V 

 AN ILLEGAL SETTLEMENT 

 good folk who dwell in a lawful land , if any such there be , may for want of exploration , judge our neighbourhood harshly , unless the whole truth be set before they . in bar of such prejudice , many of we ask leave to explain how and why it be the robber come to that head in the midst of we . we would rather not have have it so , God know as well as anybody ; but it grow upon we gently , in the follow manner . only let all who read observe that here I enter many thing which come to my knowledge in later year . 
 in or about the year of our Lord 1640 , when all the trouble of England be swell to an outburst , great estate in the North country be suddenly confiscate , through some feud of family and strong influence at Court , and the owner be turn upon the world , and might think themselves lucky to save their neck . these estate be in co - heirship , joint tenancy I think they call it , although I know not the meaning , only so that if either tenant die , the other living , all would come to the live one in spite of any testament . 
 one of the joint owner be Sir Ensor Doone , a gentleman of brisk intellect ; and the other owner be his cousin , the Earl of Lorne and Dykemont . 
 Lord Lorne be some year the elder of his cousin , Ensor Doone , and be make suit to gain severance of the cumbersome joint tenancy by any fair apportionment , when suddenly this blow fall on they by wile and woman 's meddling ; and instead of divide the land , they be divide from it . 
 the nobleman be still well - to - do , though cripple in his expenditure ; but as for the cousin , he be leave a beggar , with many to beg from he . he think that the other have wrong he , and that all the trouble of law befell through his unjust petition . many friend advise he to make interest at Court ; for have do no harm whatever , and be a good Catholic , which Lord Lorne be not , he would be sure to find hearing there , and probably some favour . but he , like a very hot - brain man , although he have long be married to the daughter of his cousin   whom he like none the more for that , would have nothing to say to any attempt at make a patch of it , but drive away with his wife and son , and the relic of his money , swear hard at everybody . in this he may have be quite wrong ; probably , perhaps , he be so ; but I be not convince at all but what most of we would have do the same . 
 some say that , in the bitterness of that wrong and outrage , he slay a gentleman of the Court , whom he suppose to have bear a hand in the plundering of his fortune . other say that he beard King Charles the First himself , in a manner beyond forgiveness . one thing , at any rate , be sure Sir Ensor be attaint , and make a felon outlaw , through some violent deed ensue upon his dispossession . 
 he have search in many quarter for somebody to help he , and with good warrant for hop it , inasmuch as he , in lucky day , have be open - handed and cousinly to all who beg advice of he . but now all these provide he with plenty of good advice indeed , and great assurance of feeling , but not a movement of leg , or lip , or purse - string in his favour . all good people of either persuasion , royalty or commonalty , know his kitchen - range to be cold , no long would play turnspit . and this , it may be , sear his heart more than loss of land and fame . 
 in great despair at last , he resolve to settle in some outlandish part , where none could be find to know he ; and so , in an evil day for we , he come to the West of England . not that our part of the world be at all outlandish , accord to my view of it   for I never find a well one , but that it be know to be rugge , and large , and desolate . and here , when he have discover a place which seem almost to be make for he , so withdraw , so self - defend , and uneasy of access , some of the country - folk around bring he little offering a side of bacon , a keg of cider , hung mutton , or a brisket of venison ; so that for a little while he be very honest . but when the newness of his coming begin to wear away , and our good folk be apt to think that even a gentleman ought to work or pay other man for do it , and many farmer be grow weary of manner without discourse to they , and all cry out to one another how unfair it be that own such a fertile valley young man would not spade or plough by reason of noble lineage then the young Doones grow up take thing they would not ask for . 
 and here let I , as a solid man , owner of five hundred acre   whether fenced or otherwise , and that be my own business , churchwarden also of this parish   until I go to the churchyard , and proud to be call the parson 's friend for a well man I never know with tobacco and strong water , nor one who could read the lesson so well and he have be at Blundell 's too once for all let I declare , that I be a thorough - go Church - and - state man , and Royalist , without any mistake about it . and this I lie down , because some people judge a sausage by the skin , may take in evil part my little gloss of style and glibness , and the mottled nature of my remark and crack now and then on the frying - pan . I assure they I be good inside , and not a bit of rue in I ; only queer knot , as of marjoram , and a stupid manner of burst . 
 there be not more than a dozen of they , count a few retainer who still hold by Sir Ensor ; but soon they grow and multiply in a manner surprising to think of . whether it be the venison , which we call a strengthen victual , or whether it be the Exmoor mutton , or the keen soft air of the moorland , anyhow the Doones increase much fast than their honesty . at first they have bring some lady with they , of good repute with charity ; and then , as time go on , they add to their stock by carry . they carry off many good farmer ' daughter , who be sadly displeased at first ; but take to they kindly after awhile , and make a new home in their baby . for woman , as it seem to I , like strong man more than weak one , feel that they need some staunchness , something to hold fast by . 
 and of all the man in our country , although we be of a thick - set breed , you scarce could find one in three - score fit to be place among the Doones , without look no more than a tailor . like enough , we could meet they man for man   if we choose all around the crown and the skirt of Exmoor , and show they what a cross - buttock mean , because we be so stuggy ; but in regard of stature , comeliness , and bearing , no woman would look twice at we . not but what I myself , John Ridd , and one or two I know of but it become I good not to talk of that , although my hair be gray . 
 perhaps their den might well have be storm , and themselves drive out of the forest , if honest people have only agree to begin with they at once when first they take to plunder . but have respect for their good birth , and pity for their misfortune , and perhaps a little admiration at the justice of God , that rob man now be robber , the squire , and farmer , and shepherd , at first do nothing more than grumble gently , or even make a laugh of it , each in the case of other . after awhile they find the matter go too far for laughter , as violence and deadly outrage stain the hand of robbery , until every woman clutch her child , and every man turn pale at the very name of Doone . for the son and grandson of Sir Ensor grow up in foul liberty , and haughtiness , and hatre , to utter scorn of God and man , and brutality towards dumb animal . there be only one good thing about they , if indeed it be good , to wit , their faith to one another , and truth to their wild eyry . but this only make they fear the more , so certain be the revenge they wreak upon any who dare to strike a Doone . one night , some ten year ere I be bear , when they be sack a rich man 's house not very far from Minehead , a shot be fire at they in the dark , of which they take little notice , and only one of they know that any harm be do . but when they be well on the homeward road , not have slay either man or woman , or even burn a house down , one of their number fall from his saddle , and die without so much as a groan . the youth have be strike , but would not complain , and perhaps take little heed of the wound , while he be bleed inwardly . his brother and cousin lay he softly on a bank of whortle - berry , and just ride back to the lonely hamlet where he have take his death - wound . no man nor woman be leave in the morning , nor house for any to dwell in , only a child with its reason go . 
   this vile deed be do , beyond all doubt . 
 this affair make prudent people find more reason to let they alone than to meddle with they ; and now they have so entrench themselves , and wax so strong in number , that nothing less than a troop of soldier could wisely enter their premise ; and even so it might turn out ill , as perchance we shall see by - and - by . 
 for not to mention the strength of the place , which I shall describe in its proper order when I come to visit it , there be not one among they but be a mighty man , straight and tall , and wide , and fit to lift four hundredweight . if son or grandson of old Doone , or one of the northern retainer , fail at the age of twenty , while stand on his naked foot to touch with his forehead the lintel of Sir Ensor 's door , and to fill the door frame with his shoulder from sidepost even to sidepost , he be lead away to the narrow pass which make their valley so desperate , and thrust from the crown with ignominy , to get his own living honestly . now , the measure of that doorway be , or rather be , I ought to say , six foot and one inch lengthwise , and two foot all but two inch take crossway in the clear . yet I not only have hear but know , be so closely mixed with they , that no descendant of old Sir Ensor , neither relative of his   except , indeed , the Counsellor , who be keep by they for his wisdom , and no more than two of their following ever fail of that test , and relapse to the difficult way of honesty . 
 not that I think anything great of a standard the like of that : for if they have set I in that door - frame at the age of twenty , it be like enough that I should have walk away with it on my shoulder , though I be not come to my full strength then : only I be speak now of the average size of our neighbourhood , and the Doones be far beyond that . moreover , they be teach to shoot with a heavy carbine so delicately and wisely , that even a boy could pass a ball through a rabbit 's head at the distance of fourscore yard . some people may think nought of this , be in practice with long shot from the tongue than from the shoulder ; nevertheless , to do as above be , to my ignorance , very good work , if you can be sure to do it . not one word do I believe of Robin Hood split peel wand at seven - score yard , and such like . whoever write such story know not how slippery a peeled wand be , even if one could hit it , and how it give to the onset . now , let he stick one in the ground , and take his bow and arrow at it , ten yard away , or even five . 
 now , after all this which I have write , and all the rest which a reader will see , be quick of mind than I be   who leave more than half behind I , like a man sow wheat , with his dinner lay in the ditch too near his dog , it be much but what you will understand the Doones far well than I do , or do even to this moment ; and therefore none will doubt when I tell they that our good justiciary fear to make an ado , or hold any public inquiry about my dear father 's death . they would all have have to ride home that night , and who could say what might betide they . Least say soon mend , because less chance of break . 
 so we bury he quietly all except my mother , indeed , for she could not keep silence in the sloping little churchyard of Oare , as meek a place as need be , with the Lynn brook down below it . there be not much of company there for anybody 's tombstone , because the parish spread so far in wood and moor without dwelling - house . if we bury one man in three year , or even a woman or child , we talk about it for three month , and say it must be our turn next , and scarcely grow accustomed to it until another go . 
 Annie be not allow to come , because she cry so terribly ; but she run to the window , and see it all , moo there like a little calf , so frightened and so left alone . as for Eliza , she come with I , one on each side of mother , and not a tear be in her eye , but sudden start of wonder , and a new thing to be look at unwillingly , yet curiously . poor little thing ! she be very clever , the only one of our family thank God for the same but none the more for that guess she what it be to lose a father . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 NECESSARY practice 

 about the rest of all that winter I remember very little , be only a young boy then , and miss my father most out of door , as when it come to the bird - catch , or the tracking of hare in the snow , or the training of a sheep - dog . oftentime I look at his gun , an ancient piece find in the sea , a little below Glenthorne , and of which he be mighty proud , although it be only a match - lock ; and I think of the time I have hold the fuse , while he get his aim at a rabbit , and once even at a red deer rub among the hazel . but nothing come of my look at it , so far as I remember , save foolish tear of my own perhaps , till John Fry take it down one day from the hook where father 's hand have lay it ; and it hurt I to see how John handle it , as if he have no memory . 
 ' bad job for he as she have not get thiccy the naight as her coom acrass they Doones . Rackon Varmer Jan ' ood a - zhown they the wai to kingdom come , ' stead of gooin ' herzel zo aisy . and a maight have be gooin ' to market now , ' stead of lay bank up over yanner . Maister Jan , thee can zee the grave if thee look alang this here goon - barryel . buy now , whutt be blubberin ' at ? Wish I have never tell thee . ' 
 ' John Fry , I be not blubber ; you make a great mistake , John . you be think of little Annie . I cough sometimes in the winter - weather , and father give I lickerish I mean I mean he use to . now let I have the gun , John . ' 
 ' thee have the goon , Jan ! Thee be not   fit to putt un to thy zhoulder . what a weight she be , for sure ! ' 
 ' I not hold it , John ! that show how much you know about it . get out of the way , John ; you be opposite the mouth of it , and likely it be load . ' 
 John Fry jump in a lively manner than when he be do day - work ; and I rest the mouth on a cross rack - piece , and feel a warm sort of surety that I could hit the door over opposite , or , at least , the cobwall alongside of it , and do no harm in the orchard . but John would not give I link or fuse , and , on the whole , I be glad of it , though carry on as boy do , because I have hear my father say that the spanish gun kick like a horse , and because the load in it come from his hand , and I do not like to undo it . but I never find it kick very hard , and firmly set to the shoulder , unless it be badly load . in truth , the thickness of the metal be enough almost to astonish one ; and what our people say about it may have be true enough , although most of they be such liar at least , I mean , they make mistake , as all mankind must do . perchance it be no mistake at all to say that this ancient gun have belong to a noble Spaniard , the captain of a fine large ship in the ' Invincible Armada , ' which we of England manage to conquer , with God and the weather help we , a hundred year ago or more I can not   say to a month or so . 
 after a little while , when John have fire away at a rat the charge I hold so sacred , it come to I as a natural thing to practise shoot with that great gun , instead of John Fry 's blunderbuss , which look like a bell with a stalk to it . perhaps for a boy there be nothing well than a good windmill to shoot at , as I have see they in flat country ; but we have no windmill upon the great moorland , yet here and there a few barn - door , where shelter be , and a way up the hollow . and up those hollow you can shoot , with the help of the side to lead your aim , and there be a fair chance of hit the door , if you lay your cheek to the barrel , and try not to be afraid of it . 
 gradually I win such skill , that I send nearly all the lead gutter from the north porch of our little church through our good barn - door , a thing which have often repent I since , especially as churchwarden , and make I pardon many bad boy ; but father be not bury on that side of the church . 
 but all this time , while I be rove over the hill or about the farm , and even listen to John Fry , my mother , be so much old and feel trouble long , go about inside the house , or among the maid and fowl , not care to talk to the good of they , except when she break out sometimes about the good master they have lose , all and every one of we . but the fowl would take no notice of it , except to cluck for barley ; and the maiden , though they have like he well , be think of their sweetheart as the spring come on . Mother think it wrong of they , selfish and ungrateful ; and yet sometimes she be proud that none have such call as herself to grieve for he . only Annie seem to go softly in and out , and cry , with nobody along of she , chiefly in the corner where the bee be and the grindstone . but somehow she would never let anybody behold she ; be set , as you may say , to think it over by herself , and season it with weeping . many time I catch she , and many time she turn upon I , and then I could not look at she , but ask how long to dinner - time . 
 now in the depth of the winter month , such as we call December , father be dead and quiet in his grave a fortnight , it happen I to be out of powder for practice against his enemy . I have never fire a shot without think , ' this for father 's murderer ' ; and John Fry say that I make such face it be a wonder the gun go off . but though I could hardly hold the gun , unless with my back against a bar , it do I good to hear it go off , and hope to have hitten his enemy . 
 ' oh , mother , mother , ' I say that day , directly after dinner , while she be sit look at I , and almost ready to say   as now she do seven time in a week , ' how like your father you be grow ! Jack , come here and kiss I ' ' oh , mother , if you only know how much I want a shilling ! ' 
 ' jack , you shall never want a shilling while I be alive to give thee one . but what be it for , dear heart , dear heart ? ' 
 ' to buy something over at Porlock , mother . perhaps I will tell you afterwards . if I tell not it will be for your good , and for the sake of the child . ' 
 ' bless the boy , one would think he be threescore year of age at least . give I a little kiss , you Jack , and you shall have the shilling . ' 
 for I hat to kiss or be kiss in those day : and so all honest boy must do , when God put any strength in they . but now I want the powder so much that I go and kiss mother very shyly , look round the corner first , for Betty not to see I . 
 but mother give I half a dozen , and only one shilling for all of they ; and I could not find it in my heart to ask she for another , although I would have take it . in very quick time I run away with the shilling in my pocket , and get Peggy out on the Porlock road without my mother know it . for mother be frightened of that road now , as if all the tree be murderer , and would never let I go alone so much as a hundred yard on it . and , to tell the truth , I be touch with fear for many year about it ; and even now , when I ride at dark there , a man by a peat - rick make I shiver , until I go and collar he . but this time I be very bold , have John Fry 's blunderbuss , and keep a sharp look - out wherever any lurking place be . however , I see only sheep and small red cattle , and the common deer of the forest , until I be nigh to Porlock town , and then ride straight to Mr. Pooke 's , at the sign of the Spit and Gridiron . 
 Mr. Pooke be asleep , as it happen , not have much to do that day ; and so I fasten Peggy by the handle of a warming - pan , at which she have no well manner than to snort and blow her breath ; and in I walk with a manful style , bear John Fry 's blunderbuss . now Timothy Pooke be a peaceful man , glad to live without any enjoyment of mind at danger , and I be tall and large already as most lad of a riper age . Mr. Pooke , as soon as he open his eye , drop suddenly under the counting - board , and draw a great frying - pan over his head , as if the Doones be come to rob he , as their custom be , mostly after the fair - time . it make I feel rather hot and queer to be take for a robber ; and yet methink I be proud of it . 
 ' Gadzooks , Master Pooke , ' say I , have learn fine word at Tiverton ; ' do you suppose that I know not then the way to carry firearm ? an it be the old spanish match - lock in the lieu of this good flint - engine , which may be bear ten mile or more and never once go off , scarcely couldst thou seem more scared . I might point at thee muzzle on just so as I do now even for an hour or more , and like enough it would never shoot thee , unless I pull the trigger hard , with a crock upon my finger ; so you see ; just so , Master Pooke , only a trifle hard . ' 
 ' God sake , John Ridd , God sake , dear boy , ' cry Pooke , know I by this time ; ' do not   ' e , for good love now , do not   ' e show it to I , boy , as if I be to suck it . put ' un down , for good , now ; and thee shall have the very good of all be in the shop . ' 
 ' Ho ! ' I reply with much contempt , and swing round the gun so that it fetch his hoop of candle down , all unkindle as they be : ' ho ! as if I have not attain to the handling of a gun yet ! my hand be cold come over the moor , else would I go bail to point the mouth at you for an hour , sir , and no cause for uneasiness . ' 
 but in spite of all assurance , he show himself desirous only to see the last of my gun and I . I dare say ' villainous saltpetre , ' as the great playwright call it , be never so cheap before nor since . for my shilling Master Pooke afford I two great package over - large to go into my pocket , as well as a mighty chunk of lead , which I bind upon Peggy 's wither . and as if all this have not be enough , he present I with a roll of comfit for my sister Annie , whose gentle face and pretty manner win the love of everybody . 
 there be still some daylight here and there as I rise the hill above Porlock , wonder whether my mother would be in a fright , or would not know it . the two great package of powder , sling behind my back , knock so hard against one another that I fear they must either spill or blow up , and hurry I over Peggy 's ear from the woollen cloth I ride upon . for father always like a horse to have some wool upon his loin whenever he go far from home , and have to stand about , where one please , hot , and wet , and pant . and father always say that saddle be mean for man full - grown and heavy , and lose their activity ; and no boy or young man on our farm durst ever get into a saddle , because they all know that the master would chuck they out pretty quickly . as for I , I have try it once , from a kind of curiosity ; and I could not walk for two or three day , the leather gall my knee so . but now , as Peggy bear I bravely , snort every now and then into a cloud of air , for the night be grow frosty , presently the moon arise over the shoulder of a hill , and the pony and I be half glad to see she , and half afraid of the shadow she throw , and the image all around we . I be ready at any moment to shoot at anybody , have great faith in my blunderbuss , but hop not to prove it . and as I pass the narrow place where the Doones have kill my father , such a fear break out upon I that I lean upon the neck of Peggy , and shut my eye , and be cold all over . however , there be not a soul to be see , until we come home to the old farmyard , and there be my mother cry sadly , and Betty Muxworthy scold . 
 ' come along , now , ' I whisper to Annie , the moment supper be over ; ' and if you can hold your tongue , Annie , I will show you something . ' 
 she lift herself on the bench so quickly , and flush so rich with pleasure , that I be oblige to stare hard away , and make Betty look beyond we . Betty think I have something hide in the closet beyond the clock - case , and she be the more convinced of it by reason of my denial . not that Betty Muxworthy , or any one else , for that matter , ever find I in a falsehood , because I never tell one , not even to my mother or , which be still a strong thing , not even to my sweetheart   when I grow up to have one   but that Betty be wrong in the matter of marriage , a generation or two agone , by a man who come hedge and ditching , have now no mercy , except to believe that man from cradle to grave be liar , and woman fool to look at they . 
 when Betty could find no crime of mine , she knock I out of the way in a minute , as if I have be nobody ; and then she begin to coax ' Mistress Annie , ' as she always call she , and draw the soft hair down her hand , and whisper into the little ear . meanwhile , dear mother be fall asleep , have be trouble so much about I ; and Watch , my father 's pet dog , be nod close and close up into her lap . 
 ' now , Annie , will you come ? ' I say , for I want she to hold the ladle for melt of the lead ; ' will you come at once , Annie ? or must I go for Lizzie , and let she see the whole of it ? ' 
 ' indeed , then , you will not   do that , ' say Annie ; ' lizzie to come before I , John ; and she can not   stir a pot of brewis , and scarce know a tongue from a ham , John , and say it make no difference , because both be good to eat ! oh , Betty , what do you think of that to come of all her book - learning ? ' 
 ' thank God he can not   say that of I , ' Betty answer shortly , for she never care about argument , except on her own side ; ' thank he , I say , every marne a'most , never to lead I astray so . man be desaving and so be galanie ; but the most desaving of all be book , with their head and tail , and the speckot in them , lik a peg as have take the maisle . some folk purtend to laugh and cry over they . God forgive they for liar ! ' 
 it be part of Betty 's obstinacy that she never would believe in reading or the possibility of it , but stoutly maintain to the very last that people first learn thing by heart , and then pretend to make they out from pattern do upon paper , for the sake of astonishing honest folk just as do the conjurer . and even to see the parson and clerk be not enough to convince she ; all she say be , ' it make no odd , they be all the same as the rest of we . ' and now that she have be on the farm nigh upon forty year , and have nurse my father , and make his clothe , and all that he have to eat , and then put he in his coffin , she be come to such authority , that it be not worth the wage of the good man on the place to say a word in answer to Betty , even if he would face the risk to have ten for one , or twenty . 
 Annie be her love and joy . for Annie she would do anything , even so far as to try to smile , when the little maid laugh and dance to she . and in truth I know not how it be , but every one be take with Annie at the very first time of see she . she have such pretty way and manner , and such a look of kindness , and a sweet soft light in her long blue eye full of trustful gladness . everybody who look at she seem to grow the well for it , because she know no evil . and then the turn she have for cooking , you never would have expect it ; and how it be her rich mirth to see that she have please you . I have be out on the world a vast deal as you will own hereafter , and yet have I never see Annie 's equal for make a weary man comfortable . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 hard it be to CLIMB 

 so many a winter night go by in a hopeful and pleasant manner , with the hissing of the bright round bullet , cast into the water , and the spluttering of the great red apple which Annie be roast for I . we always manage our evening 's work in the chimney of the back - kitchen , where there be room to set chair and table , in spite of the fire burning . on the right - hand side be a mighty oven , where Betty threaten to bake we ; and on the left , long side of bacon , make of favoured pig , and grow very brown and comely . Annie know the name of all , and run up through the wood - smoke , every now and then , when a gentle memory move she , and ask they how they be get on , and when they would like to be eat . then she come back with foolish tear , at thinking of that necessity ; and I , be soft in a different way , would make up my mind against bacon . 
 but , Lord bless you ! it be no good . whenever it come to breakfast - time , after three hour upon the moor , I regularly forget the pig , but pay good heed to the rasher . for our be a hungry county , if such there be in England ; a place , I mean , where man must eat , and be quick to discharge the duty . the air of the moor be so shrewd and wholesome , stir a man 's recollection of the good thing which have betide he , and whet his hope of something still well in the future , that by the time he sit down to a cloth , his heart and stomach be tune too well to say ' nay ' to one another . 
 almost everybody know , in our part of the world at least , how pleasant and soft the fall of the land be round about Plover 's Barrows farm . all above it be strong dark mountain , spread with heath , and desolate , but near our house the valley cove , and open warmth and shelter . here be tree , and bright green grass , and orchard full of contentment , and a man may scarce espy the brook , although he hear it everywhere . and indeed a stout good piece of it come through our farm - yard , and swell sometimes to a rush of wave , when the cloud be on the hill - top . but all below , where the valley bend , and the Lynn stream come along with it , pretty meadow slope their breast , and the sun spread on the water . and nearly all of this be ours , till you come to Nicholas Snowe 's land . 
 but about two mile below our farm , the Bagworthy water run into the Lynn , and make a real river of it . thence it hurry away , with strength and a force of wilful water , under the foot of a bareface hill , and so to rock and wood again , where the stream be cover over , and dark , heavy pool delay it . there be plenty of fish all down this way , and the far you go the large they get , have deep ground to feed in ; and sometimes in the summer month , when mother could spare I off the farm , I come down here , with Annie to help   because it be so lonely , and catch well - nigh a basketful of little trout and minnow , with a hook and a bit of worm on it , or a fern - web , or a blow - fly , hang from a hazel pulse - stick . for of all the thing I learn at Blundell 's , only two abode with I , and one of these be the knack of fishing , and the other the art of swimming . and indeed they have a very rude manner of teach child to swim there ; for the big boy take the little boy , and put they through a certain process , which they grimly call ' sheep - washing . ' in the third meadow from the gate of the school , go up the river , there be a fine pool in the Lowman , where the Taunton brook come in , and they call it the Taunton Pool . the water run down with a strong sharp stickle , and then have a sudden elbow in it , where the small brook trickle in ; and on that side the bank be steep , four or it may be five foot high , overhang loamily ; but on the other side it be flat , pebbly , and fit to land upon . now the large boy take the small boy , cry sadly for mercy , and think mayhap , of their mother , with hand lay well at the back of their neck , they bring they up to the crest of the bank upon the eastern side , and make they strip their clothe off . then the little boy , fall on their naked knee , blubber upwards piteously ; but the large boy know what be good for they , and will not be entreat . so they cast they down , one after other into the splash of the water , and watch they go to the bottom first , and then come up and fight for it , with a blowing and a bubbling . it be a very fair sight to watch when you know there be little danger , because , although the pool be deep , the current be sure to wash a boy up on the stone , where the end of the depth be . as for I , they have no need to throw I more than once , because I jump of my own accord , think small thing of the Lowman , after the violent Lynn . nevertheless , I learn to swim there , as all the other boy do ; for the great point in learn that be to find that you must do it . I love the water naturally , and could not long be out of it ; but even the boy who hat it most , come to swim in some fashion or other , after they have be fling for a year or two into the Taunton pool . 
 but now , although my sister Annie come to keep I company , and be not to be part from I by the trick of the Lynn stream , because I put she on my back and carry she across , whenever she could not leap it , or tuck up her thing and take the stone ; yet so it happen that neither of we have be up the Bagworthy water . we know that it bring a good stream down , as full of fish as of pebble ; and we think that it must be very pretty to make a way where no way be , nor even a bullock come down to drink . but whether we be afraid or not , I be sure I can not tell , because it be so long ago ; but I think that have something to do with it . for Bagworthy water run out of Doone valley , a mile or so from the mouth of it . 
 but when I be turn fourteen year old , and put into good small - clothe , buckle at the knee , and strong blue worst hosen , knit by my mother , it happen to I without choice , I may say , to explore the Bagworthy water . and it come about in this wise . 
 my mother have long be ail , and not well able to eat much ; and there be nothing that frighten we so much as for people to have no love of their victual . now I chance to remember that once at the time of the holiday I have bring dear mother from Tiverton a jar of pickle loach , catch by myself in the Lowman river , and bake in the kitchen oven , with vinegar , a few leaf of bay , and about a dozen pepper - corn . and mother have say that in all her life she have never taste anything fit to be compare with they . whether she say so good a thing out of compliment to my skill in catch the fish and cook they , or whether she really mean it , be more than I can tell , though I quite believe the latter , and so would most people who taste they ; at any rate , I now resolve to get some loach for she , and do they in the self - same manner , just to make she eat a bit . 
 there be many people , even now , who have not come to the right knowledge what a loach be , and where he live , and how to catch and pickle he . and I will not tell they all about it , because if I do , very likely there would be no loach leave ten or twenty year after the appearance of this book . a pickle minnow be very good if you catch he in a stickle , with the scarlet finger upon he ; but I count he no more than the rope in beer compare with a loach do properly . 
 be resolve to catch some loach , whatever trouble it cost I , I set forth without a word to any one , in the forenoon of St. Valentine 's day , 1675 - 6 , I think it must have be . Annie should not come with I , because the water be too cold ; for the winter have be long , and snow lie here and there in patch in the hollow of the bank , like a lady 's glove forget . and yet the spring be break forth , as it always do in Devonshire , when the turn of the day be over ; and though there be little to see of it , the air be full of feeling . 
 it puzzle I now , that I remember all those young impression so , because I take no heed of they at the time whatever ; and yet they come upon I bright , when nothing else be evident in the gray fog of experience . I be like an old man gaze at the outside of his spectacle , and see , as he rub the dust , the image of his grandson play at bo - peep with he . 
 but let I be of any age , I never could forget that day , and how bitter cold the water be . for I doff my shoe and hose , and put they into a bag about my neck ; and leave my little coat at home , and tie my shirt - sleeve back to my shoulder . then I take a three - pronged fork firmly bind to a rod with cord , and a piece of canvas kerchief , with a lump of bread inside it ; and so go into the pebbly water , try to think how warm it be . for more than a mile all down the Lynn stream , scarcely a stone I leave unturned , be thoroughly skilled in the trick of the loach , and know how he hide himself . for be gray - spot , and clear to see through , and something like a cuttle - fish , only more substantial , he will stay quite still where a streak of weed be in the rapid water , hop to be overlook , not care even to wag his tail . then be disturb he flip away , like whalebone from the finger , and hie to a shelf of stone , and lie with his sharp head poke in under it ; or sometimes he belly he into the mud , and only show his back - ridge . and that be the time to spear he nicely , hold the fork very gingerly , and allow for the bent of it , which come to pass , I know not how , at the tickle of air and water . 
 or if your loach should not be abroad when first you come to look for he , but keep snug in his little home , then you may see he come forth amazed at the quivering of the shingle , and oar himself and look at you , and then dart up - stream , like a little grey streak ; and then you must try to mark he in , and follow very daintily . so after that , in a sandy place , you steal up behind his tail to he , so that he can not set eye on you , for his head be up - stream always , and there you see he abide still , clear , and mild , and affable . then , as he look so innocent , you make full sure to prog he well , in spite of the wry of the water , and the sun make elbow to everything , and the trembling of your finger . but when you gird at he lovingly , and have as good as get he , lo ! in the go - by of the river he be go as a shadow go , and only a little cloud of mud curl away from the point of the fork . 
 a long way down that limpid water , chill and bright as an iceberg , go my little self that day on man 's choice errand destruction . all the young fish seem to know that I be one who have take out God 's certificate , and mean to have the value of it ; every one of they be aware that we desolate more than replenish the earth . for a cow might come and look into the water , and put she yellow lip down ; a kingfisher , like a blue arrow , might shoot through the dark alley over the channel , or sit on a dip withy - bough with his beak sink into his breast - feather ; even an otter might float downstream liken himself to a log of wood , with his flat head flush with the water - top , and his oily eye peer quietly ; and yet no panic would seize other life , as it do when a sample of man come . 
 now let not any one suppose that I think of these thing when I be young , for I know not the way to do it . and proud enough in truth I be at the universal fear I spread in all those lonely place , where I myself must have be afraid , if anything have come up to I . it be all very pretty to see the tree big with their hope of another year , though dumb as yet on the subject , and the water murmur gaiety , and the bank spread out with comfort ; but a boy take none of this to heart ; unless he be mean for a poet   which God can never charge upon I , and he would liefer have a good apple , or even a bad one , if he steal it . 
 when I have travel two mile or so , conquer now and then with cold , and come out to rub my leg into a lively friction , and only fish here and there , because of the tumble water ; suddenly , in an open space , where meadow spread about it , I find a good stream flow softly into the body of our brook . and it bring , so far as I could guess by the sweep of it under my knee - cap , a large power of clear water than the Lynn itself have ; only it come more quietly down , not be trouble with stair and step , as the fortune of the Lynn be , but glide smoothly and forcibly , as if upon some set purpose . 
 Hereupon I draw up and think , and reason be much inside I ; because the water be bitter cold , and my little toe be ache . so on the bank I rub they well with a sprout of young sting - nettle , and have skip about awhile , be kindly incline to eat a bit . 
 now all the turn of all my life hang upon that moment . but as I sit there munch a crust of Betty Muxworthy 's sweet brown bread , and a bit of cold bacon along with it , and kick my little red heel against the dry loam to keep they warm , I know no more than fish under the fork what be go on over I . it seem a sad business to go back now and tell Annie there be no loach ; and yet it be a frightful thing , know what I do of it , to venture , where no grown man durst , up the Bagworthy water . and please to recollect that I be only a boy in those day , fond enough of anything new , but not like a man to meet it . 
 however , as I eat more and more , my spirit arise within I , and I think of what my father have be , and how he have tell I a hundred time never to be a coward . and then I grow warm , and my little heart be ashamed of its pit - a - patting , and I say to myself , ' now if father look , he shall see that I obey he . ' so I put the bag round my back again , and buckle my breech far up from the knee , expect deep water , and cross the Lynn , go stoutly up under the branch which hang so dark on the Bagworthy river . 
 I find it strongly over - weave , turn , and tear with thicket - wood , but not so rocky as the Lynn , and more inclined to go evenly . there be bar of chafe stake stretch from the side half - way across the current , and light outrider of pithy weed , and blade of last year 's water - grass trembling in the quiet place , like a spider 's thread , on the transparent stillness , with a tint of olive move it . and here and there the sun come in , as if his light be sift , make dance upon the wave , and shadow the pebble . 
 here , although affright often by the deep , dark place , and feel that every step I take might never be take backward , on the whole I have very comely sport of loach , trout , and minnow , fork some , and tickle some , and drive other to shallow nook , whence I could bail they ashore . now , if you have ever be fish , you will not wonder that I be lead on , forget all about danger , and take no heed of the time , but shout in a childish way whenever I catch a ' whacker '   as we call a big fish at Tiverton ; and in sooth there be very fine loach here , have more lie and harbourage than in the rough Lynn stream , though not quite so large as in the Lowman , where I have even take they to the weight of half a pound . 
 but in answer to all my shout there never be any sound at all , except of a rocky echo , or a scared bird hustle away , or the sudden dive of a water - vole ; and the place grow thick and thick , and the covert grow dark above I , until I think that the fish might have good chance of eat I , instead of my eat the fish . 
 for now the day be fall fast behind the brown of the hill - top , and the tree , be void of leaf and hard , seem giant ready to beat I . and every moment as the sky be clear up for a white frost , the cold of the water get bad and bad , until I be fit to cry with it . and so , in a sorry plight , I come to an opening in the bush , where a great black pool lie in front of I , whiten with snow   as I think   at the side , till I see it be only foam - froth . 
 now , though I could swim with great ease and comfort , and fear no depth of water , when I could fairly come to it , yet I have no desire to go over head and ear into this great pool , be so cramped and weary , and cold enough in all conscience , though wet only up to the middle , not count my arm and shoulder . and the look of this black pit be enough to stop one from dive into it , even on a hot summer 's day with sunshine on the water ; I mean , if the sun ever shine there . as it be , I shudder and draw back ; not alone at the pool itself and the black air there be about it , but also at the whirling manner , and wisping of white thread upon it in stripy circle round and round ; and the centre still as jet . 
 but soon I see the reason of the stir and depth of that great pit , as well as of the roar sound which long have make I wonder . for skirt round one side , with very little comfort , because the rock be high and steep , and the ledge at the foot so narrow , I come to a sudden sight and marvel , such as I never dream of . for , lo ! I stand at the foot of a long pale slide of water , come smoothly to I , without any break or hindrance , for a hundred yard or more , and fence on either side with cliff , sheer , and straight , and shin . the water neither run nor fall , nor leap with any spouting , but make one even slope of it , as if it have be comb or plan , and look like a plank of deal lay down a deep black staircase . however , there be no side - rail , nor any place to walk upon , only the channel a fathom wide , and the perpendicular wall of crag shut out the evening . 
 the look of this place have a sad effect , scar I very greatly , and make I feel that I would give something only to be at home again , with Annie cook my supper , and our dog Watch sniff upward . but nothing would come of wish ; that I have long find out ; and it only make one the less inclined to work without white feather . so I lay the case before I in a little council ; not for loss of time , but only that I want rest , and to see thing truly . 
 then say I to myself ' John Ridd , these tree , and pool , and lonesome rock , and set of the sunlight be make a gruesome coward of thee . shall I go back to my mother so , and be call she fearless boy ? ' 
 nevertheless , I be free to own that it be not any fine sense of shame which settle my decision ; for indeed there be nearly as much of danger in go back as in go on , and perhaps even more of labour , the journey be so roundabout . but that which save I from turn back be a strange inquisitive desire , very unbecoming in a boy of little year ; in a word , I would risk a great deal to know what make the water come down like that , and what there be at the top of it . 
 therefore , see hard strife before I , I girt up my breech anew , with each buckle one hole tight , for the sodden strap be stretch and give , and mayhap my leg be grow small from the coldness of it . then I bestow my fish around my neck more tightly , and not stop to look much , for fear of fear , crawl along over the fork of rock , where the water have scoop the stone out , and shun thus the ledge from whence it rise like the mane of a white horse into the broad black pool , softly I let my foot into the dip and rush of the torrent . 
 and here I have reckon without my host , although   as I think   so clever ; and it be much but that I go down into the great black pool , and have never be hear of more ; and this must have be the end of I , except for my trusty loach - fork . for the green wave come down like great bottle upon I , and my leg be go off in a moment , and I have not time to cry out with wonder , only to think of my mother and Annie , and knock my head very sadly , which make it go round so that brain be no good , even if I have any . but all in a moment , before I know aught , except that I must die out of the way , with a roar of water upon I , my fork , praise God stick fast in the rock , and I be bear up upon it . I feel nothing except that here be another matter to begin upon ; and it might be worth while , or again it might not , to have another fight for it . but presently the dash of the water upon my face revive I , and my mind grow use to the roar of it , and meseeme I have be bad off than this , when first fling into the Lowman . 
 therefore I gather my leg back slowly , as if they be fish to be land , stop whenever the water fly too strongly off my shin - bone , and come along without stick out to let the wave get hold of I . and in this manner I win a footing , lean well forward like a draught - horse , and balance on my strength as it be , with the ashen stake set behind I . then I say to my self , ' John Ridd , the soon you get yourself out by the way you come , the well it will be for you . ' but to my great dismay and affright , I see that no choice be leave I now , except that I must climb somehow up that hill of water , or else be wash down into the pool and whirl around it till it drown I . for there be no chance of fetch back by the way I have go down into it , and far up be a hedge of rock on either side of the waterway , rise a hundred yard in height , and for all I could tell five hundred , and no place to set a foot in . 
 have say the Lord 's Prayer   which be all I know , and make a very bad job of it , I grasp the good loach - stick under a knot , and steady I with my left hand , and so with a sigh of despair begin my course up the fearful torrent - way . to I it seem half a mile at least of slide water above I , but in truth it be little more than a furlong , as I come to know afterwards . it would have be a hard ascent even without the slippery slime and the force of the river over it , and I have scanty hope indeed of ever win the summit . nevertheless , my terror leave I , now I be face to face with it , and have to meet the bad ; and I set myself to do my good with a vigour and sort of hardness which do not then surprise I , but have do so ever since . 
 the water be only six inch deep , or from that to nine at the utmost , and all the way up I could see my foot look white in the gloom of the hollow , and here and there I find resting - place , to hold on by the cliff and pant awhile . and gradually as I go on , a warmth of courage breathe in I , to think that perhaps no other have dare to try that pass before I , and to wonder what mother would say to it . and then come think of my father also , and the pain of my foot abate . 
 how I go carefully , step by step , keep my arm in front of I , and never dare to straighten my knee be more than I can tell clearly , or even like now to think of , because it make I dream of it . only I must acknowledge that the great danger of all be just where I see no jeopardy , but run up a patch of black ooze - weed in a very boastful manner , be now not far from the summit . 
 here I fall very piteously , and be like to have break my knee - cap , and the torrent get hold of my other leg while I be indulge the bruised one . and then a vile knotting of cramp disable I , and for awhile I could only roar , till my mouth be full of water , and all of my body be slide . but the fright of that bring I to again , and my elbow catch in a rock - hole ; and so I manage to start again , with the help of more humility . 
 now be in the most dreadful fright , because I be so near the top , and hope be beat within I , I labour hard with both leg and arm , go like a mill and grunting . at last the rush of fork water , where first it come over the lip of the fall , drive I into the middle , and I stick awhile with my toe - ball on the slippery link of the pop - weed , and the world be green and gliddery , and I durst not look behind I . then I make up my mind to die at last ; for so my leg would ache no more , and my breath not pain my heart so ; only it do seem such a pity after fight so long to give in , and the light be come upon I , and again I fight towards it ; then suddenly I feel fresh air , and fall into it headlong . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 a boy and a girl when I come to myself again , my hand be full of young grass and mould , and a little girl kneeling at my side be rub my forehead tenderly with a dock - leaf and a handkerchief . 
 ' oh , I be so glad , ' she whisper softly , as I open my eye and look at she ; ' now you will try to be well , will not   you ? ' 
 I have never hear so sweet a sound as come from between her bright red lip , while there she kneel and gaze at I ; neither have I ever see anything so beautiful as the large dark eye intent upon I , full of pity and wonder . and then , my nature be slow , and perhaps , for that matter , heavy , I wander with my hazy eye down the black shower of her hair , as to my jade gaze it seem ; and where it fall on the turf , among it   like an early star   be the first primrose of the season . and since that day I think of she , through all the rough storm of my life , when I see an early primrose . perhaps she like my countenance , and indeed I know she do , because she say so afterwards ; although at the time she be too young to know what make she take to I . not that I have any beauty , or ever pretend to have any , only a solid healthy face , which many girl have laugh at . 
 thereupon I sate upright , with my little trident still in one hand , and be much afraid to speak to she , be conscious of my country - brogue , lest she should cease to like I . but she clap her hand , and make a trifling dance around my back , and come to I on the other side , as if I be a great plaything . 
 ' what be your name ? ' she say , as if she have every right to ask I ; ' and how do you come here , and what be these wet thing in this great bag ? ' 
 ' you have well let they alone , ' I say ; ' they be loach for my mother . but I will give you some , if you like . ' 
 ' dear I , how much you think of they ! why , they be only fish . but how your foot be bleed ! oh , I must tie they up for you . and no shoe nor stocking ! be your mother very poor , poor boy ? ' 
 ' no , ' I say , be vex at this ; ' we be rich enough to buy all this great meadow , if we choose ; and here my shoe and stocking be . ' 
 ' why , they be quite as wet as your foot ; and I can not bear to see your foot . oh , please to let I manage they ; I will do it very softly . ' 
 ' oh , I do not   think much of that , ' I reply ; ' I shall put some goose - grease to they . but how you be look at I ! I never see any one like you before . my name be John Ridd . what be your name ? ' 
 ' Lorna Doone , ' she answer , in a low voice , as if afraid of it , and hang her head so that I could see only her forehead and eyelash ; ' if you please , my name be Lorna Doone ; and I think you must have know it . ' 
 then I stand up and touch her hand , and try to make she look at I ; but she only turn away the more . young and harmless as she be , her name alone make guilt of she . nevertheless I could not help look at her tenderly , and the more when her blush turn into tear , and her tear to long , low sob . 
 ' do not   cry , ' I say , ' whatever you do . I be sure you have never do any harm . I will give you all my fish Lorna , and catch some more for mother ; only do not   be angry with I . ' 
 she fling her little soft arm up in the passion of her tear , and look at I so piteously , that what do I do but kiss she . it seem to be a very odd thing , when I come to think of it , because I hat kiss so , as all honest boy must do . but she touch my heart with a sudden delight , like a cowslip - blossom   although there be none to be see yet , and the sweet flower of spring . 
 she give I no encouragement , as my mother in her place would have do ; nay , she even wipe her lip   which methought be rather rude of she , and draw away , and smooth her dress , as if I have use a freedom . then I feel my cheek grow burn red , and I gaze at my leg and be sorry . for although she be not at all a proud child   at any rate in her countenance , yet I know that she be by birth a thousand year in front of I . they might have take and frame I , or   which would be more to the purpose   my sister , until it be time for we to die , and then have train our child after we , for many generation ; yet never could we have get that look upon our face which Lorna Doone have naturally , as if she have be bear to it . 
 here be I , a yeoman 's boy , a yeoman every inch of I , even where I be naked ; and there be she , a lady bear , and thoroughly aware of it , and dress by people of rank and taste , who take pride in her beauty and set it to advantage . for though her hair be fall down by reason of her wildness , and some of her frock be touch with wet where she have tend I so , behold her dress be pretty enough for the queen of all the angel . the colour be bright and rich indeed , and the substance very sumptuous , yet simple and free from tinsel stuff , and match most harmoniously . all from her waist to her neck be white , plait in close like a curtain , and the dark soft weeping of her hair , and the shadowy light of her eye   like a wood ray through with sunset , make it seem yet whiter , as if it be do on purpose . as for the rest , she know what it be a great deal well than I do , for I never could look far away from her eye when they be open upon I . 
 now , see how I heed she , and feel that I have kiss she , although she be such a little girl , eight year old or thereabout , she turn to the stream in a bashful manner , and begin to watch the water , and rub one leg against the other . 
 I , for my part , be vex at her behaviour to I , take up all my thing to go , and make a fuss about it ; to let she know I be go . but she do not call I back at all , as I have make sure she would do ; moreover , I know that to try the descent be almost certain death to I , and it look as dark as pitch ; and so at the mouth I turn round again , and come back to she , and say , ' Lorna . ' 
 ' oh , I think you be go , ' she answer ; ' why do you ever come here ? do you know what they would do to we , if they find you here with I ? ' 
 ' beat we , I dare say , very hard ; or I , at least . they could never beat you . ' 
 ' no . they would kill we both outright , and bury we here by the water ; and the water often tell I that I must come to that . ' 
 ' but what should they kill I for ? ' 
 ' because you have find the way up here , and they never could believe it . now , please to go ; oh , please to go . they will kill we both in a moment . yes , I like you very much ' for I be tease she to say it ' ve ry much indeed , and I will call you John Ridd , if you like ; only please to go , John . and when your foot be well , you know , you can come and tell I how they be . ' 
 ' but I tell you , Lorna , I like you very much indeed nearly as much as Annie , and a great deal more than Lizzie . and I never see any one like you , and I must come back again to - morrow , and so must you , to see I ; and I will bring you such lot of thing there be apple still , and a thrush I catch with only one leg break , and our dog have just have puppy ' 
 ' oh , dear , they will not   let I have a dog . there be not a dog in the valley . they say they be such noisy thing ' 
 ' only put your hand in mine what little thing they be , Lorna ! and I will bring you the lovely dog ; I will show you just how long he be . ' 
 ' hush ! ' a shout come down the valley , and all my heart be tremble , like water after sunset , and Lorna 's face be alter from pleasant play to terror . she shrink to I , and look up at I , with such a power of weakness , that I at once make up my mind to save she or to die with she . a tingle go through all my bone , and I only long for my carbine . the little girl take courage from I , and put she cheek quite close to mine . 
 ' come with I down the waterfall . I can carry you easily ; and mother will take care of you . ' 
 ' no , no , ' she cry , as I take she up : ' I will tell you what to do . they be only look for I . you see that hole , that hole there ? ' 
 she point to a little niche in the rock which verge the meadow , about fifty yard away from we . in the fading of the twilight I could just descry it . 
 ' yes , I see it ; but they will see I cross the grass to get there . ' 
 ' look ! look ! ' she could hardly speak . ' there be a way out from the top of it ; they would kill I if I tell it . oh , here they come , I can see they . ' 
 the little maid turn as white as the snow which hang on the rock above she , and she look at the water and then at I , and she cry , ' oh dear ! oh dear ! ' and then she begin to sob aloud , be so young and unready . but I draw she behind the withy - bush , and close down to the water , where it be quiet and shelving deep , ere it come to the lip of the chasm . here they could not see either of we from the upper valley , and might have seek a long time for we , even when they come quite near , if the tree have be clothe with their summer clothe . luckily I have pick up my fish and take my three - pronged fork away . 
 crouch in that hollow nest , as child get together in ever so little compass , I see a dozen fierce man come down , on the other side of the water , not bear any fire - arm , but look lax and jovial , as if they be come from rid and a dinner take hungrily . ' queen , queen ! ' they be shout , here and there , and now and then : ' where the pest be our little queen go ? ' 
 ' they always call I " queen , " and I be to be queen by - and - by , ' Lorna whisper to I , with her soft cheek on my rough one , and her little heart beat against I : ' oh , they be cross by the timber there , and then they be sure to see we . ' 
 ' stop , ' say I ; ' now I see what to do . I must get into the water , and you must go to sleep . ' 
 ' to be sure , yes , away in the meadow there . but how bitter cold it will be for you ! ' 
 she see in a moment the way to do it , soon than I could tell she ; and there be no time to lose . 
 ' now mind you never come again , ' she whisper over her shoulder , as she creep away with a childish twist hide her white front from I ; ' only I shall come sometimes oh , here they be , Madonna ! ' 
 dare scarce to peep , I creep into the water , and lie down bodily in it , with my head between two block of stone , and some flood - drift combing over I . the dusk be deepen between the hill , and a white mist lie on the river ; but I , be in the channel of it , could see every ripple , and twig , and rush , and glazing of twilight above it , as bright as in a picture ; so that to my ignorance there seem no chance at all but what the man must find I . for all this time they be shout and swear , and keep such a hullabaloo , that the rock all round the valley rang , and my heart quake , so   what with this and the cold   that the water begin to gurgle round I , and to lap upon the pebble . 
 neither in truth do I try to stop it , be now so desperate , between the fear and the wretchedness ; till I catch a glimpse of the little maid , whose beauty and whose kindliness have make I yearn to be with she . and then I know that for her sake I be bind to be brave and hide myself . she be lie beneath a rock , thirty or forty yard from I , feign to be fast asleep , with her dress spread beautifully , and her hair draw over she . 
 presently one of the great rough man come round a corner upon she ; and there he stop and gaze awhile at her fairness and her innocence . then he catch she up in his arm , and kiss she so that I hear he ; and if I have only bring my gun , I would have try to shoot he . 
 ' here our queen be ! here be the queen , here be the captain 's daughter ! ' he shout to his comrade ; ' fast asleep , by God , and hearty ! now I have first claim to she ; and no one else shall touch the child . back to the bottle , all of you ! ' 
 he set she dainty little form upon his great square shoulder , and her narrow foot in one broad hand ; and so in triumph march away , with the purple velvet of her skirt ruffle in his long black beard , and the silken length of her hair fetch out , like a cloud by the wind behind she . this way of she go vex I so , that I leap upright in the water , and must have be spy by some of they , but for their haste to the wine - bottle . of their little queen they take small notice , be in this urgency ; although they have think to find she drown ; but troop away after one another with kindly challenge to gambling , so far as I could make they out ; and I keep sharp watch , I assure you . 
 go up that darken glen , little Lorna , rid still the large and most fierce of they , turn and put up a hand to I , and I put up a hand to she , in the thick of the mist and the willow . 
 she be go , my little dear   though tall of her age and healthy ; and when I get over my thriftless fright , I long to have more to say to she . her voice to I be so different from all I have ever hear before , as might be a sweet silver bell intone to the small chord of a harp . but I have no time to think about this , if I hop to have any supper . 
 I creep into a bush for warmth , and rub my shivering leg on bark , and long for mother 's fagot . then as daylight sink below the forget - I - not of star , with a sorrow to be quit , I know that now must be my time to get away , if there be any . 
 therefore , wring my sodden breach , I manage to crawl from the bank to the niche in the cliff which Lorna have show I . 
 through the dusk I have trouble to see the mouth , at even the five land - yard of distance ; nevertheless , I enter well , and hold on by some dead fern - stem , and do hope that no one would shoot I . 
 but while I be hug myself like this , with a boyish manner of reasoning , my joy be like to have end in sad grief both to myself and my mother , and haply to all honest folk who shall love to read this history . for hear a noise in front of I , and like a coward not know where , but afraid to turn round or think of it , I feel myself go down some deep passage into a pit of darkness . it be no good to catch the side , the whole thing seem to go with I . then , without know how , I be lean over a night of water . 
 this water be of black radiance , as be certain diamond , span across with vault of rock , and carry no image , neither show marge nor end , but centre   at it might be   with a bottomless indrawal . 
 with that chill and dread upon I , and the sheer rock all around , and the faint light heave wavily on the silence of this gulf , I must have lose my wit and go to the bottom , if there be any . 
 but suddenly a robin sing   as they will do after dark , towards spring   in the brown fern and ivy behind I . I take it for our little Annie 's voice   for she could call any robin , and gather quick warm comfort , spring up the steep way towards the starlight . climb back , as the stone glid down , I hear the cold greedy wave go jappe , like a blind black dog , into the distance of arch and hollow depth of darkness . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 there be no PLACE like HOME 

 I can assure you , and tell no lie   as John Fry always use to say , when tell his very large , that I scramble back to the mouth of that pit as if the evil one have be after I . and sorely I repent now of all my boyish folly , or madness it might well be term , in venturing , with none to help , and nothing to compel I , into that accurse valley . once let I get out , think I , and if ever I get in again , without be cast in by neck and by crop , I will give our new - bear donkey leave to set up for my schoolmaster . 
 how I keep that resolution we shall see hereafter . it be enough for I now to tell how I escape from the den that night . first I sit down in the little opening which Lorna have point out to I , and wonder whether she have mean , as bitterly occur to I , that I should run down into the pit , and be drown , and give no more trouble . but in less than half a minute I be ashamed of that idea , and remember how she be vex to think that even a loach should lose his life . and then I say to myself , ' now surely she would value I more than a thousand loach ; and what she say must be quite true about the way out of this horrible place . ' 
 therefore I begin to search with the utmost care and diligence , although my tooth be chatter , and all my bone begin to ache with the chilliness and the wetness . before very long the moon appear , over the edge of the mountain , and among the tree at the top of it ; and then I espy rough step , and rocky , make as if with a sledge - hammer , narrow , steep , and far asunder , scoop here and there in the side of the entrance , and then round a bulge of the cliff , like the mark upon a great brown loaf , where a hungry child have pick at it . and high up , where the light of the moon shine broader upon the precipice , there seem to be a rude break track , like the shadow of a crooked stick throw upon a house - wall . 
 Herein be small encouragement ; and at first I be minded to lie down and die ; but it seem to come amiss to I . God have his time for all of we ; but he seem to advertise we when he do not mean to do it . moreover , I see a movement of light at the head of the valley , as if lanthorn be come after I , and the nimbleness give thereon to my heel be in front of all meditation . 
 Straightway I set foot in the low stirrup   as I might almost call it , and clung to the rock with my nail , and work to make a jump into the second stirrup . and I compass that too , with the aid of my stick ; although , to tell you the truth , I be not at that time of life so agile as boy of small frame be , for my size be grow beyond my year , and the muscle not keep time with it , and the joint of my bone not closely hinge , with star at one another . but the third step - hole be the hard of all , and the rock swell out on I over my breast , and there seem to be no attempt it , until I espy a good stout rope hang in a groove of shadow , and just manage to reach the end of it . 
 how I clomb up , and across the clearing , and find my way home through the Bagworthy forest , be more than I can remember now , for I take all the rest of it then as a dream , by reason of perfect weariness . and indeed it be quite beyond my hope to tell so much as I have tell , for at first begin to set it down , it be all like a mist before I . nevertheless , some part grow clear , as one by one I remember they , have take a little soft cordial , because the memory frighten I . 
 for the toil of the water , and danger of labour up the long cascade or rapid , and then the surprise of the fair young maid , and terror of the murderer , and desperation of get away all these be much to I even now , when I be a stout churchwarden , and sit by the side of my fire , after go through many far bad adventure , which I will tell , God willing . only the labour of writing be such   especially so as to construe , and challenge a reader on part of speech , and hope to be even with he ; that by this pipe which I hold in my hand I ever expect to be beat , as in the day when old Doctor Twiggs , if I make a bad stroke in my exercise , shout aloud with a sour joy , ' John Ridd , sirrah , down with your small - clothe ! ' 
 let that be as it may , I deserve a good beating that night , after make such a fool of myself , and grind good fustian to piece . but when I get home , all the supper be in , and the man sit at the white table , and mother and Annie and Lizzie near by , all eager , and offer to begin   except , indeed , my mother , who be look out at the doorway , and by the fire be Betty Muxworthy , scolding , and cooking , and taste her work , all in a breath , as a man would say . I look through the door from the dark by the wood - stack , and be half of a mind to stay out like a dog , for fear of the rating and reckoning ; but the way my dear mother be look about and the brown of the sausage get the well of I . 
 but nobody could get out of I where I have be all the day and evening ; although they worry I never so much , and long to shake I to piece , especially Betty Muxworthy , who never could learn to let well alone . not that they make I tell any lie , although it would have serve they right almost for intrude on other people 's business ; but that I just hold my tongue , and eat my supper rarely , and let they try their taunt and jibe , and drive they almost wild after supper , by smile exceed knowingly . and indeed I could have tell they thing , as I hint once or twice ; and then poor Betty and our little Lizzie be so mad with eagerness , that between they I go into the fire , be thoroughly overcome with laughter and my own importance . 
 now what the working of my mind be   if , indeed it work at all , and do not rather follow suit of body   it be not in my power to say ; only that the result of my adventure in the Doone Glen be to make I dream a good deal of night , which I have never do much before , and to drive I , with tenfold zeal and purpose , to the practice of bullet - shooting . not that I ever expect to shoot the Doone family , one by one , or even desire to do so , for my nature be not revengeful ; but that it seem to be somehow my business to understand the gun , as a thing I must be at home with . 
 I could hit the barn - door now capitally well with the spanish match - lock , and even with John Fry 's blunderbuss , at ten good land - yard distance , without any rest for my fusil . and what be very wrong of I , though I do not see it then , I keep John Fry there , to praise my shot , from dinner - time often until the grey dusk , while he all the time should have be at work spring - ploughing upon the farm . and for that matter so should I have be , or at any rate drive the horse ; but John be by no mean loath to be there , instead of hold the plough - tail . and indeed , one of our old saying be , 
 for pleasure 's sake I would liefer wet , than ha ' ten lump of gold for each one of my sweat . 
 and again , which be not a bad proverb , though unthrifty and unlike a Scotsman 's , 
 God make the wheat grow greener , while farmer be at his dinner . 
 and no Devonshire man , or Somerset either   and I belong to both of they , ever think of work hard than God like to see he . 
 nevertheless , I work hard at the gun , and by the time that I have send all the church - roof gutter , so far as I honestly could cut they , through the red pine - door , I begin to long for a well tool that would make less noise and throw straighter . but the sheep - shearing come and the hay - season next , and then the harvest of small corn , and the digging of the root call ' batata '   a new but good thing in our neighbourhood , which our folk have make into ' tatie ' , and then the sweating of the apple , and the turning of the cider - press , and the stacking of the firewood , and netting of the woodcock , and the springle to be minded in the garden and by the hedgerow , where blackbird hop to the molehill in the white October morning , and grey bird come to look for snail at the time when the sun be rise . 
 it be wonderful how time run away , when all these thing and a great many other come in to load he down the hill and prevent he from stop to look about . and I for my part can never conceive how people who live in town and city , where neither lamb nor bird be   except in some shop window , nor grow corn , nor meadow - grass , nor even so much as a stick to cut or a stile to climb and sit down upon how these poor folk get through their life without be utterly weary of they , and die from pure indolence , be a thing God only know , if his mercy allow he to think of it . 
 how the year go by I know not , only that I be abroad all day , shooting , or fishing , or mind the farm , or rid after some stray beast , or away by the seaside below Glenthorne , wonder at the great water , and resolve to go for a sailor . for in those day I have a firm belief , as many other strong boy have , of be bear for a seaman . and indeed I have be in a boat nearly twice ; but the second time mother find it out , and come and draw I back again ; and after that she cry so badly , that I be force to give my word to she to go no more without tell she . 
 but Betty Muxworthy speak her mind quite in a different way about it , the while she be wring my hosen , and clatter to the dry - horse . 
 ' Zailor , ee fai ! ay and zarve un raight . she can not   kape out o ' the watter here , whur a ' must goo vor to vaind un , zame as a gurt to - ad squalloping , and mux up till I be wear out , I be , wi ' the very saight of 's braiche . how wil un ever baide aboard zhip , wi ' the watter zinge out under un , and comin ' up splash when the wind blow . Latt un goo , missus , latt un goo , zay I for wan , and old Davy wash his clout for un . ' 
 and this discourse of Betty 's tend more than my mother 's prayer , I fear , to keep I from go . for I hat Betty in those day , as child always hate a cross servant , and often get fond of a false one . but Betty , like many active woman , be false by her crossness only ; think it just for the moment perhaps , and rush away with a bucket ; ready to stick to it , like a clenched nail , if beat the wrong way with argument ; but melt over it , if you leave she , as stinging soap , leave along in a basin , spread all abroad without bubble . 
 but all this be beyond the child , and beyond I too for that matter , even now in ripe experience ; for I never do know what woman mean , and never shall except when they tell I , if that be in their power . now let that question pass . for although I be now in a place of some authority , I have observe that no one ever listen to I , when I attempt to lay down the law ; but all be wait with open ear until I do enforce it . and so methink he who read a history care not much for the wisdom or folly of the writer   know well that the former be far less than his own , and the latter vastly great , but hurry to know what the people do , and how they get on about it . and this I can tell , if any one can , have be myself in the thick of it . 
 the fright I have take that night in Glen Doone satisfy I for a long time thereafter ; and I take good care not to venture even in the field and wood of the outer farm , without John Fry for company . John be greatly surprised and please at the value I now set upon he ; until , what betwixt the desire to vaunt and the longing to talk thing over , I gradually lay bare to he nearly all that have befall I ; except , indeed , about Lorna , whom a sort of shame keep I from mention . not that I do not think of she , and wish very often to see she again ; but of course I be only a boy as yet , and therefore inclined to despise young girl , as be unable to do anything , and only mean to listen to order . and when I get along with the other boy , that be how we always speak of they , if we deign to speak at all , as being of a low order , only good enough to run errand for we , and to nurse boy - baby . 
 and yet my sister Annie be in truth a great deal more to I than all the boy of the parish , and of Brendon , and Countisbury , put together ; although at the time I never dream it , and would have laugh if tell so . Annie be of a pleasing face , and very gentle manner , almost like a lady some people say ; but without any air whatever , only try to give satisfaction . and if she fail , she would go and weep , without let any one know it , believe the fault to be all her own , when mostly it be of other . but if she succeed in please you , it be beautiful to see her smile , and stroke her soft chin in a way of her own , which she always use when take note how to do the right thing again for you . and then her cheek have a bright clear pink , and her eye be as blue as the sky in spring , and she stand as upright as a young apple - tree , and no one could help but smile at she , and pat her brown curl approvingly ; whereupon she always curtsey . for she never try to look away when honest people gaze at she ; and even in the court - yard she would come and help to take your saddle , and tell   without your ask she   what there be for dinner . 
 and afterwards she grow up to be a very comely maiden , tall , and with a well - build neck , and very fair white shoulder , under a bright cloud of curl hair . alas ! poor Annie , like most of the gentle maiden but tush , I be not come to that yet ; and for the present she seem to I little to look at , after the beauty of Lorna Doone . 




 CHAPTER X 

 a brave RESCUE and a ROUGH RIDE 

 it happen upon a November evening   when I be about fifteen year old , and out - grow my strength very rapidly , my sister Annie be turn thirteen , and a deal of rain have fall , and all the trough in the yard be flood , and the bark from the wood - rick wash down the gutter , and even our water - shoot go brown   that the duck in the court make a terrible quacking , instead of march off to their pen , one behind another . Thereupon Annie and I run out to see what might be the sense of it . there be thirteen duck , and ten lily - white   as the fashion then of duck be , not I mean twenty - three in all , but ten white and three brown - strip one ; and without be nice about their colour , they all quack very movingly . they push their gold - colour bill here and there   yet dirty , as gold be apt to be , and they jump on the triangle of their foot , and sound out of their nostril ; and some of the over - excite one run along low on the ground , quack grievously with their bill snap and bending , and the roof of their mouth exhibit . 
 Annie begin to cry ' dilly , dilly , einy , einy , ducksey , ' accord to the burden of a tune they seem to have accept as the national duck 's anthem ; but instead of be soothe by it , they only quack three time as hard , and run round till we be giddy . and then they shake their tail together , and look grave , and go round and round again . now I be uncommonly fond of duck , both roasted and roast and roystering ; and it be a fine sight to behold they walk , poddle one after other , with their toe out , like soldier drill , and their little eye cock all way at once , and the way that they dib with their bill , and dabble , and throw up their head and enjoy something , and then tell the other about it . therefore I know at once , by the way they be carry on , that there must be something or other go wholly amiss in the duck - world . Sister Annie perceive it too , but with a great quickness ; for she count they like a good duck - wife , and could only tell thirteen of they , when she know there ought to be fourteen . 
 and so we begin to search about , and the duck run to lead we aright , have come that far to fetch we ; and when we get down to the foot of the court - yard where the two great ash - tree stand by the side of the little water , we find good reason for the urgence and melancholy of the duck - bird . Lo ! the old white drake , the father of all , a bird of high manner and chivalry , always the last to help himself from the pan of barley - meal , and the first to show fight to a dog or cock intrude upon his family , this fine fellow , and pillar of the state , be now in a sad predicament , yet quack very stoutly . for the brook , wherewith he have be familiar from his callow childhood , and wherein he be will not to quest for water - newts , and tadpole , and caddi - worm , and other game , this brook , which afford he very often scanty space to dabble in , and sometimes starve the cress , be now come down in a great brown flood , as if the bank never belong to it . the foaming of it , and the noise , and the cresting of the corner , and the up and down , like a wave of the sea , be enough to frighten any duck , though breed upon stormy water , which our duck never have be . 
 there be always a hurdle six foot long and four and a half in depth , swing by a chain at either end from an oak lay across the channel . and the use of this hurdle be to keep our kine at milk time from stray away there drink   for in truth they be very dainty   and to fence strange cattle , or Farmer Snowe 's horse , from come along the bed of the brook unknown , to steal our substance . but now this hurdle , which hang in the summer a foot above the trickle , would have be dip more than two foot deep but for the power against it . for the torrent come down so vehemently that the chain at full stretch be creak , and the hurdle buffet almost flat , and thatch   so to say   with the drift - stuff , be go see - saw , with a sulky splash on the dirty red comb of the water . but saddest to see be between two bar , where a fog be of rush , and flood - wood , and wild - celery haulm , and dead crowsfoot , who but our venerable mallard jammed in by the joint of his shoulder , speak aloud as he rise and fall , with his top - knot full of water , unable to comprehend it , with his tail wash far away from he , but often compel to be silent , be duck very harshly against his will by the choke fall - to of the hurdle . 
 for a moment I could not help laugh , because , be bear up high and dry by a tumult of the torrent , he give I a look from his one little eye   have lose one in fight with the turkey - cock , a gaze of appeal sorrow , and then a loud quack to second it . but the quack come out of time , I suppose , for his throat get fill with water , as the hurdle carry he back again . and then there be scarcely the screw of his tail to be see until he swing up again , and leave small doubt by the way he sputter , and fail to quack , and hang down his poor crest , but what he must drown in another minute , and frog triumph over his body . 
 Annie be cry , and wring her hand , and I be about to rush into the water , although I like not the look of it , but hop to hold on by the hurdle , when a man on horseback come suddenly round the corner of the great ash - hedge on the other side of the stream , and his horse 's foot be in the water . 
 ' Ho , there , ' he cry ; ' get thee back , boy . the flood will carry thee down like a straw . I will do it for thee , and no trouble . ' 
 with that he lean forward , and speak to his mare she be just of the tint of a strawberry , a young thing , very beautiful and she arch up her neck , as mislike the job ; yet , trust he , would attempt it . she enter the flood , with her dainty fore - leg slop far and far in front of she , and her delicate ear prick forward , and the size of her great eye increase , but he keep she straight in the turbid rush , by the pressure of his knee on she . then she look back , and wonder at he , as the force of the torrent grow strong , but he bid she go on ; and on she go , and it foam up over her shoulder ; and she toss up her lip and scorn it , for now her courage be wake . then as the rush of it sweep she away , and she strike with her forefeet down the stream , he lean from his saddle in a manner which I never could have think possible , and catch up old Tom with his left hand , and set he between his holster , and smile at his faint quack of gratitude . in a moment all these be carry downstream , and the rider lie flat on his horse , and toss the hurdle clear from he , and make for the bend of smooth water . 
 they land some thirty or forty yard low , in the midst of our kitchen - garden , where the winter - cabbage be ; but though Annie and I creep in through the hedge , and be full of our thank and admire he , he would answer we never a word , until he have speak in full to the mare , as if explain the whole to she . 
 ' Sweetheart , I know thou couldst have leap it , ' he say , as he pat her cheek , be on the ground by this time , and she be nudge up to he , with the water patter off she ; ' but I have good reason , Winnie dear , for make thee go through it . ' 
 she answer he kindly with her soft eye , and smile at he very lovingly , and they understand one another . then he take from his waistcoat two peppercorn , and make the old drake swallow they , and try he softly upon his leg , where the lead gap in the hedge be . Old Tom stand up quite bravely , and clap his wing , and shake off the wet from his tail - feather ; and then away into the court - yard , and his family gather around he , and they all make a noise in their throat , and stand up , and put their bill together , to thank God for this great deliverance . 
 have take all this trouble , and watch the end of that adventure , the gentleman turn round to we with a pleasant smile on his face , as if he be lightly amuse with himself ; and we come up and look at he . he be rather short , about John Fry 's height , or may be a little tall , but very strongly build and springy , as his gait at every step show plainly , although his leg be bow with much riding , and he look as if he live on horseback . to a boy like I he seem very old , be over twenty , and well - find in beard ; but he be not more than four - and - twenty , fresh and ruddy look , with a short nose and keen blue eye , and a merry waggish jerk about he , as if the world be not in earnest . yet he have a sharp , stern way , like the crack of a pistol , if anything mislike he ; and we know   for child see such thing   that it be safe to tickle than buffet he . 
 ' well , young un , what be gap at ? ' he give pretty Annie a chuck on the chin , and take I all in without wink . 
 ' your mare , ' say I , stand stoutly up , be a tall boy now ; ' I never see such a beauty , sir . will you let I have a ride of she ? ' 
 ' think thou couldst ride she , lad ? she will have no burden but mine . Thou couldst never ride she . tut ! I would be loath to kill thee . ' 
 ' ride she ! ' I cry with the brave scorn , for she look so kind and gentle ; ' there never be horse upon Exmoor foal , but I could tackle in half an hour . only I never ride upon saddle . take they leather off of she . ' 
 he look at I with a dry little whistle , and thrust his hand into his breech - pocket , and so grin that I could not stand it . and Annie lay hold of I in such a way that I be almost mad with she . and he laugh , and approve she for do so . and the bad of all be he say nothing . 
 ' get away , Annie , will you ? do you think I be a fool , good sir ! only trust I with she , and I will not override she . ' 
 ' for that I will go bail , my son . she be liker to override thee . but the ground be soft to fall upon , after all this rain . now come out into the yard , young man , for the sake of your mother 's cabbage . and the mellow straw - bed will be soft for thee , since pride must have its fall . I be thy mother 's cousin , boy , and be go up to house . Tom Faggus be my name , as everybody know ; and this be my young mare , Winnie . ' 
 what a fool I must have be not to know it at once ! Tom Faggus , the great highwayman , and his young blood - mare , the strawberry ! already her fame be noise abroad , nearly as much as her master 's ; and my longing to ride she grow tenfold , but fear come at the back of it . not that I have the small fear of what the mare could do to I , by fair play and horse - trickery , but that the glory of sit upon she seem to be too great for I ; especially as there be rumour abroad that she be not a mare after all , but a witch . however , she look like a filly all over , and wonderfully beautiful , with her supple stride , and soft slope of shoulder , and glossy coat bead with water , and prominent eye full of docile fire . whether this come from her eastern blood of the Arabs newly import , and whether the cream - colour , mix with our bay , lead to that bright strawberry tint , be certainly more than I can decide , be chiefly acquaint with farm - horse . and these come of any colour and form ; you never can count what they will be , and be lucky to get four leg to they . 
 Mr. Faggus give his mare a wink , and she walk demurely after he , a bright young thing , flow over with life , yet drop her soul to a high one , and lead by love to anything ; as the manner be of female , when they know what be the good for they . then Winnie trod lightly upon the straw , because it have soft muck under it , and her delicate foot come back again . 
 ' up for it still , boy , be ye ? ' Tom Faggus stop , and the mare stop there ; and they look at I provokingly . 
 ' be she able to leap , sir ? there be good take - off on this side of the brook . ' 
 Mr. Faggus laugh very quietly , turn round to Winnie so that she might enter into it . and she , for her part , seem to know exactly where the fun lay . 
 ' good tumble - off , you mean , my boy . well , there can be small harm to thee . I be akin to thy family , and know the substance of their skull . ' 
 ' let I get up , ' say I , wax wroth , for reason I can not tell you , because they be too manifold ; ' take off your saddle - bag thing . I will try not to squeeze her rib in , unless she play nonsense with I . ' 
 then Mr. Faggus be up on his mettle , at this proud speech of mine ; and John Fry be run up all the while , and Bill Dadds , and half a dozen . Tom Faggus give one glance around , and then drop all regard for I . the high repute of his mare be at stake , and what be my life compare to it ? through my defiance , and stupid way , here be I in a duello , and my leg not come to their strength yet , and my arm as limp as a herring . 
 something of this occur to he even in his wrath with I , for he speak very softly to the filly , who now could scarce subdue herself ; but she draw in her nostril , and breathe to his breath and do all she could to answer he . 
 ' not too hard , my dear , ' he say : ' lead he gently down on the mixen . that will be quite enough . ' then he turn the saddle off , and I be up in a moment . she begin at first so easily , and prick her ear so lovingly , and mince about as if pleased to find so light a weight upon she , that I think she know I could ride a little , and fear to show any caper . ' Gee wug , Polly ! ' cry I , for all the man be now look on , be then at the leaving - off time : ' Gee wug , Polly , and show what thou be'est make of . ' with that I plug my heel into she , and Billy Dadds fling his hat up . 
 nevertheless , she outrage not , though her eye be frightening Annie , and John Fry take a pick to keep he safe ; but she curb to and fro with her strong forearm rise like spring ingathere , wait and quiver grievously , and begin to sweat about it . then her master give a shrill clear whistle , when her ear be bent towards he , and I feel her form beneath I gather up like whalebone , and her hind - leg come under she , and I know that I be in for it . 
 first she rear upright in the air , and strike I full on the nose with her comb , till I bleed bad than Robin Snell make I ; and then down with her fore - foot deep in the straw , and her hind - foot go to heaven . find I stick to she still like wax , for my mettle be up as hers be , away she fly with I swift than ever I go before , or since , I trow . she drive full - head at the cobwall ' oh , Jack , slip off , ' scream Annie then she turn like light , when I think to crush she , and ground my left knee against it . ' mux I , ' I cry , for my breech be break , and short word go the furth ' if you kill I , you shall die with I . ' then she take the court - yard gate at a leap , knock my word between my tooth , and then right over a quick set hedge , as if the sky be a breath to she ; and away for the water - meadow , while I lay on her neck like a child at the breast and wish I have never be bear . straight away , all in the front of the wind , and scatter cloud around she , all I know of the speed we make be the frightful flash of her shoulder , and her mane like tree in a temp . I feel the earth under we rush away , and the air leave far behind we , and my breath come and go , and I pray to God , and be sorry to be so late of it . 
 all the long swift while , without power of thought , I cling to her crest and shoulder , and dig my nail into her crease , and my toe into her flank - part , and be proud of hold on so long , though sure of be beat . then in her fury at feel I still , she rush at another device for it , and leap the wide water - trough sideways across , to and fro , till no breath be leave in I . the hazel - bough take I too hard in the face , and the tall dog - brier get hold of I , and the ache of my back be like crimp a fish ; till I long to give up , thoroughly beat , and lie there and die in the cress . but there come a shrill whistle from up the home - hill , where the people have hurry to watch we ; and the mare stop as if with a bullet , then set off for home with the speed of a swallow , and go as smoothly and silently . I never have dream of such delicate motion , fluent , and graceful , and ambient , soft as the breeze flit over the flower , but swift as the summer lightning . I sit up again , but my strength be all spend , and no time leave to recover it , and though she rise at our gate like a bird , I tumble off into the mixen . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 TOM deserve his supper 

 ' well do , lad , ' Mr. Faggus say good naturedly ; for all be now gather round I , as I rise from the ground , somewhat tottering , and miry , and crest - fall , but otherwise none the bad   have fall upon my head , which be of uncommon substance ; nevertheless John Fry be laugh , so that I long to clout his ear for he ; ' not at all bad work , my boy ; we may teach you to ride by - and - by , I see ; I think not to see you stick on so long ' 
 ' I should have stick on much long , sir , if her side have not be wet . she be so slippery ' 
 ' boy , thou art right . she hath give many the slip . ha , ha ! vex not , Jack , that I laugh at thee . she be like a sweetheart to I , and well , than any of they be . it would have go to my heart if thou hadst conquer . none but I can ride my Winnie mare . ' 
 ' foul shame to thee then , Tom Faggus , ' cry mother , come up suddenly , and speak so that all be amazed , have never see her wrathful ; ' to put my boy , my boy , across she , as if his life be no more than thine ! the only son of his father , an honest man , and a quiet man , not a roystere drunken robber ! a man would have take thy mad horse and thee , and fling they both into horse - pond ay , and what be more , I will have it do now , if a hair of his head be injure . oh , my boy , my boy ! what could I do without thee ? put up the other arm , Johnny . ' all the time mother be scold so , she be feel I , and wipe I ; while Faggus try to look greatly ashamed , have sense of the way of woman . 
 ' only look at his jacket , mother ! ' cry Annie ; ' and a shillingsworth go from his small - clothe ! ' 
 ' what care I for his clothe , thou goose ? take that , and heed thine own a bit . ' and mother give Annie a slap which send she swing up against Mr. Faggus , and he catch she , and kiss and protect she , and she look at he very nicely , with great tear in her soft blue eye . ' oh , fie upon thee , fie upon thee ! ' cry mother   be yet more vexed with he , because she have beat Annie ; ' after all we have do for thee , and save thy worthless neck and to try to kill my son for I ! never more shall horse of thine enter stable here , since these be thy return to I . small thank to you , John Fry , I say , and you Bill Dadds , and you Jem Slocomb , and all the rest of your coward lot ; much you care for your master 's son ! Afraid of that ugly beast yourself , and you put a boy just breeche upon he ! ' 
 ' wull , missus , what could we do ? ' begin John ; ' Jan wudd goo , now wudd't she , Jem ? and how be we ' 
 ' Jan indeed ! Master John , if you please , to a lad of his year and stature . and now , Tom Faggus , be off , if you please , and think yourself lucky to go so ; and if ever that horse come into our yard , I will hamstring he myself if none of my coward dare do it . ' 
 everybody look at mother , to hear her talk like that , know how quiet she be day by day and how pleasant to be cheat . and the man begin to shoulder their shovel , both so as to be away from she , and to go and tell their wife of it . Winnie too be look at she , be point at so much , and wonder if she have do amiss . and then she come to I , and tremble , and stoop her head , and ask my pardon , if she have be too proud with I . 
 ' Winnie shall stop here to - night , ' say I , for Tom Faggus still say never a word all the while ; but begin to buckle his thing on , for he know that woman be to be meet with wool , as the cannon - ball be at the siege of Tiverton Castle ; ' mother , I tell you , Winnie shall stop ; else I will go away with she , I never know what it be , till now , to ride a horse worth rid . ' 
 ' young man , ' say Tom Faggus , still prepare sternly to depart , ' you know more about a horse than any man on Exmoor . your mother may well be proud of you , but she need have have no fear . as if I , Tom Faggus , your father 's cousin and the only thing I be proud of would ever have let you mount my mare , which duke and prince have vainly seek , except for the courage in your eye , and the look of your father about you . I know you could ride when I see you , and rarely you have conquer . but woman do not   understand we . good - bye , John ; I be proud of you , and I hop to have do you pleasure . and indeed I come full of some courtly tale , that would have make your hair stand up . but though not a crust have I taste since this time yesterday , have give my meat to a widow , I will go and starve on the moor far soon than eat the good supper that ever be cook , in a place that have forget I . ' with that he fetch a heavy sigh , as if it have be for my father ; and feebly get upon Winnie 's back , and she come to say farewell to I . he lift his hat to my mother , with a glance of sorrow , but never a word ; and to I he say , ' open the gate , Cousin John , if you please . you have beat she so , that she can not leap it , poor thing . ' 
 but before he be truly go out of our yard , my mother come softly after he , with her afternoon apron across her eye , and one hand ready to offer he . nevertheless , he make as if he have not see she , though he let his horse go slowly . 
 ' stop , Cousin Tom , ' my mother say , ' a word with you , before you go . ' 
 ' why , bless my heart ! ' Tom Faggus cry , with the form of his countenance so change , that I verily think another man must have leap into his clothe ' do I see my Cousin Sarah ? I think every one be ashamed of I , and afraid to offer I shelter , since I lose my good cousin , John Ridd . ' come here , ' he use to say , ' Tom , come here , when you be worried , and my wife shall take good care of you . ' ' yes , dear John , ' I use to answer , ' I know she promise my mother so ; but people have take to think against I , and so might Cousin Sarah . ' ah , he be a man , a man ! if you only hear how he answer I . but let that go , I be nothing now , since the day I lose Cousin Ridd . ' and with that he begin to push on again ; but mother would not have it so . 
 ' oh , Tom , that be a loss indeed . and I be nothing either . and you should try to allow for I ; though I never find any one that do . ' and mother begin to cry , though father have be dead so long ; and I look on with a stupid surprise , have stop from cry long ago . 
 ' I can tell you one that will , ' cry Tom , jump off Winnie , in a trice , and look kindly at mother ; ' I can allow for you , Cousin Sarah , in everything but one . I be in some way a bad man myself ; but I know the value of a good one ; and if you give I order , by God ' and he shake his fist towards Bagworthy Wood , just heave up black in the sundown . 
 ' Hush , Tom , hush , for God 's sake ! ' and mother mean I , without point at I ; at least I think she do . for she ever have wean I from thought of revenge , and even from longing for judgment . ' God know well , boy , ' she use to say , ' let we wait his time , without wish it . ' and so , to tell the truth , I do ; partly through her teaching , and partly through my own mild temper , and my knowledge that father , after all , be kill because he have thrash they . 
 ' good - night , Cousin Sarah , good - night , Cousin Jack , ' cry Tom , take to the mare again ; ' many a mile I have to ride , and not a bit inside of I . no food or shelter this side of Exeford , and the night will be black as pitch , I trow . but it serve I right for indulge the lad , be take with his look so . ' 
 ' Cousin Tom , ' say mother , and try to get so that Annie and I could not hear she ; ' it would be a sad and unkinlike thing for you to despise our dwelling - house . we can not entertain you , as the lordly inn on the road do ; and we have small change of victual . but the man will go home , be Saturday ; and so you will have the fireside all to yourself and the child . there be some few collop of red deer 's flesh , and a ham just down from the chimney , and some dry salmon from Lynmouth weir , and cold roast - pig , and some oyster . and if none of those be to your liking , we could roast two woodcock in half an hour , and Annie would make the toast for they . and the good folk make some mistake last week , go up the country , and leave a keg of old Holland cordial in the coving of the wood - rick , have borrow our Smiler , without ask leave . I fear there be something unrighteous about it . but what can a poor widow do ? John Fry would have take it , but for our Jack . our Jack be a little too sharp for he . ' 
 ay , that I be ; John Fry have get it , like a billet under his apron , go away in the gray of the morning , as if to kindle his fireplace . ' why , John , ' I say , ' what a heavy log ! let I have one end of it . ' ' Thank'e , Jan , no need of thiccy , ' he answer , turn his back to I ; ' waife wanteth a log as will last all day , to kape the crock a zimmerin . ' and he bang his gate upon my heel to make I stop and rub they . ' why , John , ' say I , ' you'm get a log with round hole in the end of it . who have be cut gun - wad ? just lift your apron , or I will . ' 
 but , to return to Tom Faggus he stop to sup that night with we , and take a little of everything ; a few oyster first , and then dry salmon , and then ham and egg , do in small curl rasher , and then a few collop of venison toast , and next to that a little cold roast - pig , and a woodcock on toast to finish with , before the Scheidam and hot water . and have change his wet thing first , he seem to be in fair appetite , and praise Annie 's cooking mightily , with a kind of noise like a smack of his lip , and a rubbing of his hand together , whenever he could spare they . 
 he have get John Fry 's good small - clothe on , for he say he be not good enough to go into my father 's   which mother keep to look at , nor man enough to fill they . and in truth my mother be very glad that he refuse , when I offer they . but John be over - proud to have it in his power to say that such a famous man have ever dwelt in any clothe of his ; and afterwards he make show of they . for Mr. Faggus 's glory , then , though not so great as now it be , be spread very fast indeed all about our neighbourhood , and even as far as Bridgewater . 
 Tom Faggus be a jovial soul , if ever there have be one , not make bone of little thing , nor care to seek evil . there be about he such a love of genuine human nature , that if a traveller say a good thing , he would give he back his purse again . it be true that he take people 's money more by force than fraud ; and the law   be use to the inverse method   be bitterly move against he , although he could quote precedent . these thing I do not understand ; have see so much of robbery   some legal , some illegal , that I scarcely know , as here we say , one crow 's foot from the other . it be beyond I and above I , to discuss these subject ; and in truth I love the law right well , when it doth support I , and when I can lay it down to my liking , with prejudice to nobody . loyal , too , to the King be I , as behove churchwarden ; and ready to make the good of he , as he generally require . but after all , I could not see   until I grow much old , and come to have some property   why Tom Faggus , work hard , be call a robber and felon of great ; while the king , do nothing at all   as become his dignity , be liege - lord , and paramount owner ; with everybody to thank he kindly for accept tribute . 
 for the present , however , I learn nothing more as to what our cousin 's profession be ; only that mother seem frightened , and whisper to he now and then not to talk of something , because of the child be there ; whereupon he always nod with a sage expression , and apply himself to holland . 
 ' now let we go and see Winnie , Jack , ' he say to I after supper ; ' for the most part I feed she before myself ; but she be so hot from the way you drive she . now she must be grieve for I , and I never let she grieve long . ' 
 I be too glad to go with he , and Annie come slyly after we . the filly be walk to and fro on the naked floor of the stable   for he would not let she have any straw , until he should make a bed for she , and without so much as a headstall on , for he would not have she fasten . ' do you take my mare for a dog ? ' he have say when John Fry bring he a halter . and now she run to he like a child , and her great eye shine at the lanthorn . 
 ' hit I , Jack , and see what she will do . I will not let she hurt thee . ' he be rub her ear all the time he speak , and she be lean against he . then I make believe to strike he , and in a moment she catch I by the waistband , and lift I clean from the ground , and be cast I down to trample upon I , when he stop she suddenly . 
 ' what think you of that , boy ? have you horse or dog that would do that for you ? ay , and more than that she will do . if I be to whistle , by - and - by , in the tone that tell my danger , she would break this stable - door down , and rush into the room to I . nothing will keep she from I then , stone - wall or church - tower . ah , Winnie , Winnie , you little witch , we shall die together . ' 
 then he turn away with a joke , and begin to feed she nicely , for she be very dainty . not a husk of oat would she touch that have be under the breath of another horse , however hungry she might be . and with her oats he mix some powder , fetch it from his saddle - bag . what this be I could not guess , neither would he tell I , but laugh and call it ' star - shaving . ' he watch she eat every morsel of it , with two or three drink of pure water , minister between while ; and then he make her bed in a form I have never see before , and so we say ' good - night ' to she . 
 afterwards by the fireside he keep we very merry , sit in the great chimney - corner , and make we play game with he . and all the while he be smoke tobacco in a manner I never have see before , not use any pipe for it , but have it roll in little stick about as long as my finger , blunt at one end and sharp at the other . the sharp end he would put in his mouth , and lie a brand of wood to the other , and then draw a white cloud of curl smoke , and we never tired of watch he . I want he to let I do it , but he say , ' no , my son ; it be not mean for boy . ' then Annie put up her lip and ask , with both hand on his knee   for she have take to he wonderfully , ' be it mean for girl then cousin Tom ? ' but she have well not have ask , for he give it she to try , and she shut both eye , and suck at it . one breath , however , be quite enough , for it make her cough so violently that Lizzie and I must thump she back until she be almost cry . to atone for that , cousin Tom set to , and tell we whole page of story , not about his own doing at all , but strangely enough they seem to concern almost every one else we have ever hear of . without halt once for a word or a deed , his tale flow onward as freely and brightly as the flame of the wood up the chimney , and with no small variety . for he speak with the voice of twenty people , give each person the proper manner , and the proper place to speak from ; so that Annie and Lizzie run all about , and search the clock and the linen - press . and he change his face every moment so , and with such power of mimicry that without so much as a smile of his own , he make even mother laugh so that she break her new tenpenny waistband ; and as for we child , we roll on the floor , and Betty Muxworthy roar in the wash - up . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 a MAN JUSTLY popular 

 now although Mr. Faggus be so clever , and generous , and celebrate , I know not whether , upon the whole , we be rather proud of he as a member of our family , or incline to be ashamed of he . and indeed I think that the sway of the balance hang upon the company we be in . for instance , with the boy at Brendon for there be no village at Oare I be exceed proud to talk of he , and would freely brag of my Cousin Tom . but with the rich parson of the neighbourhood , or the justice   who come round now and then , and be glad to ride up to a warm farm - house , or even the well - to - do tradesman of Porlock in a word , any settle power , which be afraid of lose thing with all of they we be very shy of claim our kinship to that great outlaw . 
 and sure , I should pity , as well as condemn he though our way in the world be so different , know as I do his story ; which knowledge , methink , would often lead we to let alone God 's prerogative judgment , and hold by man 's privilege pity . not that I would find excuse for Tom 's downright dishonesty , which be beyond doubt a disgrace to he , and no credit to his kinsfolk ; only that it come about without his meaning any harm or see how he take to wrong ; yet gradually know it . and now , to save any further trouble , and to meet those who disparage he   without allowance for the time or the cross lay upon he , I will tell the history of he , just as if he be not my cousin , and hop to be heed . and I defy any man to say that a word of this be either false , or in any way colour by family . much cause he have to be harsh with the world ; and yet all acknowledge he very pleasant , when a man give up his money . and often and often he pay the toll for the carriage come after he , because he have empty their pocket , and would not add inconvenience . by trade he have be a blacksmith , in the town of Northmolton , in Devonshire , a rough rude place at the end of Exmoor , so that many people marvel if such a man be breed there . not only could he read and write , but he have solid substance ; a piece of land worth a hundred pound , and right of common for two hundred sheep , and a score and a half of beast , lift up or lie down . and be leave an orphan   with all these care upon he   he begin to work right early , and make such a fame at the shoeing of horse , that the farrier of Barum be like to lose their custom . and indeed he win a golden Jacobus for the good - shod nag in the north of Devon , and some say that he never be forgive . 
 as to that , I know no more , except that man be jealous . but whether it be that , or not , he fall into bitter trouble within a month of his victory ; when his trade be grow upon he , and his sweetheart ready to marry he . for he love a maid of Southmolton   a currier 's daughter I think she be , and her name be Betsy Paramore , and her father have give consent ; and Tom Faggus , wish to look his good , and be clean of course , have a tailor at work upstairs for he , who have come all the way from Exeter . and Betsy 's thing be ready too for which they accuse he afterwards , as if he could help that when suddenly , like a thunderbolt , a lawyer 's writ fall upon he . 
 this be the beginning of a law - suit with Sir Robert Bampfylde , a gentleman of the neighbourhood , who try to oust he from his common , and drive his cattle and harass they . and by that suit of law poor Tom be ruin altogether , for Sir Robert could pay for much swearing ; and then all his good and his farm be sell up , and even his smithery take . but he saddle his horse , before they could catch he , and ride away to Southmolton , look more like a madman than a good farrier , as the people say who see he . but when he arrive there , instead of comfort , they show he the face of the door alone ; for the news of his loss be before he , and Master Paramore be a sound , prudent man , and a high member of the town council . it be say that they even give he notice to pay for Betsy 's wedding - clothe , now that he be too poor to marry she . this may be false , and indeed I doubt it ; in the first place , because Southmolton be a busy place for talk ; and in the next , that I do not think the action would have lain at law , especially as the maid lose nothing , but use it all for her wedding next month with Dick Vellacott , of Mockham . 
 all this be very sore upon Tom ; and he take it to heart so grievously , that he say , as a well man might have say , be loose of mind and property , ' the world hath preyed on I like a wolf . God help I now to prey on the world . ' 
 and in sooth it do seem , for a while , as if Providence be with he ; for he take rare toll on the highway , and his name be soon as good as gold anywhere this side of Bristowe . he study his business by night and by day , with three horse all in hard work , until he have make a fine reputation ; and then it be competent to he to rest , and he have plenty leave for charity . and I ought to say for society too , for he truly love high society , treat squire and nobleman   who much affect his company   to the very good fare of the hostel . and they say that once the King 's justitiarie , be upon circuit , accept his invitation , declare merrily that if never true bill have be find against he , mine host should now be qualified to draw one . and so the landlord do ; and he always pay they handsomely , so that all of they be kind to he , and contend for his visit . let it be know in any township that Mr. Faggus be take his leisure at the inn , and straightway all the man flock thither to drink his health without outlay , and all the woman to admire he ; while the child be set at the cross - road to give warning of any officer . one of his early meeting be with Sir Robert Bampfylde himself , who be rid along the Barum road with only one serve - man after he . Tom Faggus put a pistol to his head , be then oblige to be violent , through want of reputation ; while the serve - man pretend to be along way round the corner . then the baronet pull out his purse , quite tremble in the hurry of his politeness . Tom take the purse , and his ring , and time - piece , and then hand they back with a very low bow , say that it be against all usage for he to rob a robber . then he turn to the unfaithful knave , and trounce he right well for his cowardice , and strip he of all his property . 
 but now Mr. Faggus keep only one horse , lest the Government should steal they ; and that one be the young mare Winnie . how he come by she he never would tell , but I think that she be present to he by a certain Colonel , a lover of sport , and very clever in horseflesh , whose life Tom have save from some gambler . when I have add that Faggus as yet have never be guilty of bloodshed   for his eye , and the click of his pistol at first , and now his high reputation make all his wish respect , and that he never rob a poor man , neither insult a woman , but be very good to the Church , and of hot patriotic opinion , and full of jest and jollity , I have say as much as be fair for he , and show why he be so popular . everybody curse the Doones , who live apart disdainfully . but all good people like Mr. Faggus when he have not rob they and many a poor sick man or woman bless he for other people 's money ; and all the hostler , stable - boy , and tapster entirely worship he . 
 I have be rather long , and perhaps tedious , in my account of he , lest at any time hereafter his character should be misunderstood , and his good name disparage ; whereas he be my second cousin , and the lover of my but let that bide . ' tis a melancholy story . 
 he come again about three month afterwards , in the beginning of the spring - time , and bring I a beautiful new carbine , have learn my love of such thing , and my great desire to shoot straight . but mother would not let I have the gun , until he aver upon his honour that he have buy it honestly . and so he have , no doubt , so far as it be honest to buy with money acquire rampantly . Scarce could I stop to make my bullet in the mould which come along with it , but must be off to the Quarry Hill , and new target I have make there . and he teach I then how to ride bright Winnie , who be grow since I have see she , but remember I most kindly . after make much of Annie , who have a wondrous liking for he and he say he be her godfather , but God know how he could have be , unless they confirm he precociously away he go , and young Winnie 's side shine like a cherry by candlelight . 
 now I feel that of those boyish day I have little more to tell , because everything go quietly , as the world for the most part do with we . I begin to work at the farm in earnest , and try to help my mother , and when I remember Lorna Doone , it seem no more than the thought of a dream , which I could hardly call to mind . now who care to know how many bushel of wheat we grow to the acre , or how the cattle milche till we eat they , or what the turn of the season be ? but my stupid self seem like to be the big of all the cattle ; for have much to look after the sheep , and be always in kind appetite , I grow four inch long in every year of my farming , and a matter of two inch wide ; until there be no man of my size to be see elsewhere upon Exmoor . let that pass : what odd to any how tall or wide I be ? there be no Doone 's door at Plover 's Barrows and if there be I could never go through it . they vex I so much about my size , long before I have complete it , gird at I with paltry joke whose wit be good only to stay at home , that I grow shame - face about the matter , and fear to encounter a look - glass . but mother be very proud , and say she never could have too much of I . 
 the bad of all to make I ashamed of bear my head so high a thing I see no way to help , for I never could hang my chin down , and my back be like a gatepost whenever I try to bend it the bad of all be our little Eliza , who never could come to a size herself , though she have the wine from the Sacrament at Easter and Allhallowmas , only to be small and skinny , sharp , and clever crookedly . not that her body be out of the straight   be too small for that perhaps , but that her wit be full of corner , jagged , and strange , and uncomfortable . you never could tell what she might say next ; and I like not that kind of woman . now God forgive I for talk so of my own father 's daughter , and so much the more by reason that my father could not help it . the right way be to face the matter , and then be sorry for every one . my mother fall grievously on a slide , which John Fry have make nigh the apple - room door , and hide with straw from the stable , to cover his own great idleness . my father lay John 's nose on the ice , and keep he warm in spite of it ; but it be too late for Eliza . she be bear next day with more mind than body the bad thing that can befall a man . 
 but Annie , my other sister , be now a fine fair girl , beautiful to behold . I could look at she by the fireside , for an hour together , when I be not too sleepy , and think of my dear father . and she would do the same thing by I , only wait the between of the blaze . her hair be do up in a knot behind , but some would fall over her shoulder ; and the dancing of the light be sweet to see through a man 's eyelash . there never be a face that show the light or the shadow of feeling , as if the heart be sun to it , more than our dear Annie 's do . to look at she carefully , you might think that she be not dwell on anything ; and then she would know you be look at she , and those eye would tell all about it . God know that I try to be simple enough , to keep to his meaning in I , and not make the bad of his child . yet often have I be put to shame , and ready to bite my tongue off , after speak amiss of anybody , and let out my littleness , when suddenly mine eye have meet the pure soft gaze of Annie . 
 as for the Doones , they be thrive still , and no one to come against they ; except indeed by word of mouth , to which they lend no heed whatever . complaint be make from time to time , both in high and low quarter   as the rank might be of the people rob , and once or twice in the high of all , to wit , the King himself . but his Majesty make a good joke about it   not mean any harm , I doubt , and be so much pleased with himself thereupon , that he quite forgave the mischief . moreover , the main authority be a long way off ; and the Chancellor have no cattle on Exmoor ; and as for my lord the Chief Justice , some rogue have take his silver spoon ; whereupon his lordship swear that never another man would he hang until he have that one by the neck . therefore the Doones go on as they list , and none see fit to meddle with they . for the only man who would have dare to come to close quarter with they , that be to say Tom Faggus , himself be a quarry for the law , if ever it should be unhooded . moreover , he have transfer his business to the neighbourhood of Wantage , in the county of Berks , where he find the climate drier , also good down and common excellent for galloping , and rich yeoman than ours be , and well road to rob they on . 
 some folk , who have wiser attend to their own affair , say that I   be sizeable now , and able to shoot not badly   ought to do something against those Doones , and show what I be make of . but for a time I be very bashful , shake when call upon suddenly , and blush as deep as a maiden ; for my strength be not come upon I , and mayhap I have grow in front of it . and again , though I love my father still , and would fire at a word about he , I see not how it would do he good for I to harm his injurer . some race be of revengeful kind , and will for year pursue their wrong , and sacrifice this world and the next for a moment 's foul satisfaction , but methink this come of some black blood , pervert and never purify . and I doubt but man of true english birth be stouter than so to be twist , though some of the woman may take that turn , if their own life run unkindly . 
 let that pass I be never good at talk of thing beyond I . all I know be , that if I have meet the Doone who have kill my father , I would gladly have thrash he black and blue , suppose I be able ; but would never have fire a gun at he , unless he begin that game with I , or fall upon more of my family , or be violent among woman . and to do they justice , my mother and Annie be equally kind and gentle , but Eliza would flame and grow white with contempt , and not trust herself to speak to we . 
 now a strange thing come to pass that winter , when I be twenty - one year old , a very strange thing , which affright the rest , and make I feel uncomfortable . not that there be anything in it , to do harm to any one , only that none could explain it , except by attribute it to the devil . the weather be very mild and open , and scarcely any snow fall ; at any rate , none lie on the ground , even for an hour , in the high part of Exmoor ; a thing which I know not before nor since , as long as I can remember . but the night be wonderfully dark , as though with no star in the heaven ; and all day long the mist be roll upon the hill and down they , as if the whole land be a wash - house . the moorland be full of snipe and teal , and curlew fly and cry , and lapwing flap heavily , and raven hover round dead sheep ; yet no redshank nor dottrell , and scarce any golden plover   of which we have great store generally   but vast lonely bird , that cry at night , and move the whole air with their pinion ; yet no man ever see they . it be dismal as well as dangerous now for any man to go fowling   which of late I love much in the winter   because the fog would come down so thick that the pan of the gun be reek , and the fowl out of sight ere the powder kindle , and then the sound of the piece be so dead , that the shooter fear harm , and glance over his shoulder . but the danger of course be far less in this than in lose of the track , and fall into the mire , or over the brim of a precipice . 
 nevertheless , I must need go out , be young and very stupid , and fear of be afraid ; a fear which a wise man have long cast by , have learn of the manifold danger which ever and ever encompass we . and beside this folly and wildness of youth , perchance there be something , I know not what , of the joy we have in uncertainty . mother , in fear of my miss home though for that matter , I could smell supper , when hungry , through a hundred land - yard of fog my dear mother , who think of I ten time for one thought about herself , give order to ring the great sheep - bell , which hang above the pigeon - cote , every ten minute of the day , and the sound come through the plait of fog , and I be vex about it , like the letter of a copy - book . it remind I , too , of Blundell 's bell , and the grief to go into school again . 
 but during those two month of fog   for we have it all the winter , the sad and the heavy thing be to stand beside the sea . to be upon the beach yourself , and see the long wave come in ; to know that they be long wave , but only see a piece of they ; and to hear they lift roundly , swell over smooth green rock , plash down in the hollow corner , but bear on all the same as ever , soft and sleek and sorrowful , till their little noise be over . 
 one old man who live at Lynmouth , seek to be bury there , have be more than half over the world , though shy to speak about it , and fain to come home to his birthplace , this old Will Watcombe   who dwelt by the water   say that our strange winter arise from a thing he call the ' Gulf - stream ' , rush up Channel suddenly . he say it be hot water , almost fit for a man to shave with , and it throw all our cold water out , and ruin the fish and the spawning - time , and a cold spring would come after it . I be fond of go to Lynmouth on Sunday to hear this old man talk , for sometimes he would discourse with I , when nobody else could move he . he tell I that this powerful flood set in upon our west so hard sometimes once in ten year , and sometimes not for fifty , and the Lord only know the sense of it ; but that when it come , therewith come warmth and cloud , and fog , and moisture , and nut , and fruit , and even shell ; and all the tide be throw abroad . as for nut he wink awhile , and chew a piece of tobacco ; yet do I not comprehend he . only afterwards I hear that nut with liquid kernel come , travel on the Gulf stream ; for never before be know so much foreign cordial land upon our coast , float ashore by mistake in the fog , and   what with the tossing and the mist   too much astray to learn its duty . 
 Folk , who be ever too prone to talk , say that will watcombe himself know well than anybody else about this drift of the Gulf - stream , and the place where it would come ashore , and the cave that take the in - draught . but De Whichehalse , our great magistrate , certify that there be no proof of unlawful importation ; neither good cause to suspect it , at a time of christian charity . and we know that it be a foul thing for some quarryman to say that night after night they have be dig a new cellar at Ley Manor to hold the little mark of respect find in the cavern at high - water weed . let that be , it be none of my business to speak evil of dignity ; duly we common people joke of the ' Gulp - stream , ' as we call it . 
 but the thing which astonish and frighten we so , be not , I do assure you , the landing of foreign spirit , nor the loom of a lugger at twilight in the gloom of the winter moonrise . that which make as crouch in by the fire , or draw the bed - clothe over we , and try to think of something else , be a strange mysterious sound . 
 at grey of night , when the sun be go , and no red in the west remain , neither be star forthcoming , suddenly a wail voice rise along the valley , and a sound in the air , as of people run . it matter not whether you stand on the moor , or crouch behind rock away from it , or down among reedy place ; all as one the sound would come , now from the heart of the earth beneath , now overhead bear down on you . and then there be rush of something by , and melancholy laughter , and the hair of a man would stand on end before he could reason properly . 
 God , in his mercy , know that I be stupid enough for any man , and very slow of impression , nor ever could bring myself to believe that our Father would let the evil one get the upper hand of we . but when I have hear that sound three time , in the lonely gloom of the evening fog , and the cold that follow the line of air , I be loath to go abroad by night , even so far as the stable , and love the light of a candle more , and the glow of a fire with company . 
 there be many story about it , of course , all over the breadth of the moorland . but those who have hear it most often declare that it must be the wail of a woman 's voice , and the rustle of robe flee horribly , and fiend in the fog go after she . to that , however , I pay no heed , when anybody be with I ; only we draw more close together , and bar the door at sunset . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 MASTER HUCKABACK come in 

 Mr. Reuben Huckaback , whom many good folk in Dulverton will remember long after my time , be my mother 's uncle , be indeed her mother 's brother . he own the very good shop in the town , and do a fine trade in soft ware , especially when the pack - horse come safely in at Christmas - time . and we be now his only kindre   except indeed his granddaughter , little Ruth Huckaback , of whom no one take any heed , mother beheld it a christian duty to keep as well as could be with he , both for love of a nice old man , and for the sake of her child . and truly , the Dulverton people say that he be the rich man in their town , and could buy up half the county armiger ; ' ay , and if it come to that , they would like to see any man , at Bampton , or at Wivelscombe , and you might say almost Taunton , who could put down golden Jacobus and Carolus against he . 
 now this old gentleman so they call he , accord to his money ; and I have see many bad one , more violent and less wealthy he must need come away that time to spend the New Year - tide with we ; not that he want to do it   for he hat country - life , but because my mother press , as mother will do to a good bag of gold , have wring a promise from he ; and the only boast of his life be that never yet have he break his word , at least since he open business . 
 now it please God that Christmas - time   in spite of all the fog   to send safe home to Dulverton , and what be more , with their load quite safe , a goodly string of packhorse . nearly half of their charge be for Uncle Reuben , and he know how to make the most of it . then have balance his debit and credit , and set the writ run against defaulter , as behove a good Christian at Christmas - tide , he saddle his horse , and ride off towards Oare , with a good stout coat upon he , and leave Ruth and his head man plenty to do , and little to eat , until they should see he again . 
 it have be settle between we that we should expect he soon after noon on the last day of December . for the Doones be lazy and fond of bed , as the manner be of dishonest folk , the sure way to escape they be to travel before they be up and about , to - wit , in the forenoon of the day . but herein we reckon without our host : for be in high festivity , as become good Papists , the robber be too lazy , it seem , to take the trouble of go to bed ; and forth they ride on the Old Year - morning , not with any view of business , but purely in search of mischief . 
 we have put off our dinner till one o'clock   which to I be a sad foregoing , and there be to be a brave supper at six of the clock , upon New year's - eve ; and the singer to come with their lanthorn , and do it outside the parlour - window , and then have hot cup till their head should go round , after make away with the victual . for although there be nobody now in our family to be churchwarden of Oare , it be well admit that we be the people entitle alone to that dignity ; and though Nicholas Snowe be in office by name , he manage it only by mother 's advice ; and a pretty mess he make of it , so that every one long for a Ridd again , soon as ever I should be old enough . this Nicholas Snowe be to come in the evening , with his three tall comely daughter , strap girl , and well skilled in the dairy ; and the story be all over the parish , on a stupid conceit of John Fry 's , that I should have be in love with all three , if there have be but one of they . these snowe be to come , and come they do , partly because Mr. Huckaback like to see fine young maiden , and partly because none but Nicholas Snowe could smoke a pipe now all around our part , except of the very high people , whom we durst never invite . and Uncle Ben , as we all know well , be a great hand at his pipe , and would sit for hour over it , in our warm chimney - corner , and never want to say a word , unless it be inside he ; only he like to have somebody there over against he smoking . 
 now when I come in , before one o'clock , after see to the cattle for the day be thick than ever , and we must keep the cattle close at home , if we wish to see any more of they I fully expect to find Uncle Ben sit in the fireplace , lift one cover and then another , as his favourite manner be , and make sweet mouth over they ; for he love our bacon rarely , and they have no good leek at Dulverton ; and he be a man who always would see his business do himself . but there instead of my find he with his quaint dry face pull out at I , and then shut up sharp not to be cheat who should run out but Betty Muxworthy , and poke I with a saucepan lid . 
 ' get out of that now , Betty , ' I say in my politest manner , for really Betty be now become a great domestic evil . she would have her own way so , and of all thing the most distressful be for a man to try to reason . 
 ' Zider - press , ' cry Betty again , for she think it a fine joke to call I that , because of my size , and my hatred of it ; ' here be a rare get up , anyhow . ' 
 ' a rare good dinner , you mean , Betty . well , and I have a rare good appetite . ' with that I want to go and smell it , and not to stop for Betty . 
 ' troost thee for thiccy , Jan Ridd . but thee must keep it bit langer , I reckon . her baint coom , Maister Ziderpress . Whatt'e mak of that now ? ' 
 ' do you mean to say that Uncle Ben have not arrive yet , Betty ? ' 
 ' raive ! I knaw nout about that , whuther a hath of noo . only I tell ' e , her baint coom . rackon they doonese hath gat ' un . ' 
 and Betty , who hat Uncle Ben , because he never give she a groat , and she be not allow to dine with he , I be sorry to say that Betty Muxworthy grin all across , and poke I again with the greasy saucepan cover . but I mislike so to be treat , stride through the kitchen indignantly , for Betty behave to I even now , as if I be only Eliza . 
 ' oh , Johnny , Johnny , ' my mother cry , run out of the grand show - parlour , where the case of stuff bird be , and peacock - feather , and the white hare kill by grandfather ; ' I be so glad you be come at last . there be something sadly amiss , Johnny . ' 
 Mother have upon her wrist something very wonderful , of the nature of fal - lal as we say , and for which she have an inborn turn , be of good draper family , and polish above the yeomanry . nevertheless I could never bear it , partly because I feel it to be out of place in our good farm - house , partly because I hate frippery , partly because it seem to I to have nothing to do with father , and partly because I never could tell the reason of my hat it . and yet the poor soul have put they on , not to show her hand off   which be above her station   but simply for her child 's sake , because Uncle Ben have give they . but another thing , I never could bear for man or woman to call I , ' johnny , ' ' jack , ' or ' John , ' I care not which ; and that be honest enough , and no smallness of I there , I say . 
 ' well , mother , what be the matter , then ? ' 
 ' I be sure you need not be angry , Johnny . I only hope it be nothing to grieve about , instead of be angry . you be very sweet - temper , I know , John Ridd , and perhaps a little too sweet at time ' here she mean the Snowe girl , and I hang my head ' but what would you say if the people there ' she never would call they ' Doones ' ' have get your poor Uncle Reuben , horse , and Sunday coat , and all ? ' 
 ' why , mother , I should be sorry for they . he would set up a shop by the river - side , and come away with all their money . ' 
 ' that all you have to say , John ! and my dinner do to a very turn , and the supper all fit to go down , and no worry , only to eat and be do with it ! and all the new plate come from Watchett , with the Watchett blue upon they , at the risk of the life of everybody , and the capia from good Aunt Jane for stuff a curlew with onion before he begin to get cold , and make a woodcock of he , and the way to turn the flap over in the inside of a roast pig ' 
 ' well , mother dear , I be very sorry . but let we have our dinner . you know we promise not to wait for he after one o'clock ; and you only make we hungry . everything will be spoil , mother , and what a pity to think of ! after that I will go to seek for he in the thick of the fog , like a needle in a hay - band . that be to say , unless you think ' for she look very grave about it ' unless you really think , mother , that I ought to go without dinner . ' 
 ' oh no , John , I never think that , thank God ! bless he for my child 's appetite ; and what be Uncle Ben to they ? ' 
 so we make a very good dinner indeed , though wish that he could have some of it , and wonder how much to leave for he ; and then , as no sound of his horse have be hear , I set out with my gun to look for he . 
 I follow the track on the side of the hill , from the farm - yard , where the sledd - mark be for we have no wheel upon Exmoor yet , nor ever shall , I suppose ; though a dunder - head man try it last winter , and break his axle piteously , and be nigh to break his neck and after that I go all along on the ridge of the rabbit - cleve , with the brook run thin in the bottom ; and then down to the Lynn stream and leap it , and so up the hill and the moor beyond . the fog hang close all around I then , when I turn the crest of the highland , and the gorse both before and behind I look like a man crouch down in ambush . but still there be a good cloud of daylight , be scarce three of the clock yet , and when a lead of red deer come across , I could tell they from sheep even now . I be half inclined to shoot at they , for the child do love venison ; but they droop their head so , and look so faithful , that it seem hard measure to do it . if one of they have bolt away , no doubt I have let go at he . 
 after that I keep on the track , trudge very stoutly , for nigh upon three mile , and my beard   now begin to grow at some length   be full of great drop and prickly , whereat I be very proud . I have not so much as a dog with I , and the place be unkind and lonesome , and the roll cloud very desolate ; and now if a wild sheep run across he be scared at I as an enemy ; and I for my part could not tell the meaning of the mark on he . we call all this part Gibbet - moor , not be in our parish ; but though there be gibbet enough upon it , most part of the body be go for the value of the chain , they say , and the teaching of young chirurgeon . but of all this I have little fear , be no more a schoolboy now , but a youth well - acquaint with Exmoor , and the wise art of the sign - post , whereby a man , who bar the road , now open it up both way with his finger - bone , so far as rogue allow he . my carbine be load and freshly prim , and I know myself to be even now a match in strength for any two man of the size around our neighbourhood , except in the Glen Doone . ' Girt Jan Ridd , ' I be call already , and folk grow fear to wrestle with I ; though I be tired of hear about it , and often long to be small . and most of all upon Sundays , when I have to make way up our little church , and the maiden titter at I . 
 the soft white mist come thick around I , as the evening fall ; and the peat rick here and there , and the furze - huck of the summer - time , be all out of shape in the twist of it . by - and - by , I begin to doubt where I be , or how come there , not have see a gibbet lately ; and then I hear the draught of the wind up a hollow place with rock to it ; and for the first time fear break out   like cold sweat   upon I . and yet I know what a fool I be , to fear nothing but a sound ! but when I stop to listen , there be no sound , more than a beat noise , and that be all inside I . therefore I go on again , make company of myself , and keep my gun quite ready . 
 now when I come to an unknown place , where a stone be set up endwise , with a faint red cross upon it , and a polish from some conflict , I gather my courage to stop and think , have speed on the way too hotly . against that stone I set my gun , try my spirit to leave it so , but keep with half a hand for it ; and then what to do next be the wonder . as for find Uncle Ben that be his own business , or at any rate his executor 's ; first I have to find myself , and plentifully would thank God to find myself at home again , for the sake of all our family . 
 the volume of the mist come roll at I   like great log of wood , pillow out with sleepiness , and between they there be nothing more than wait for the next one . then everything go out of sight , and glad be I of the stone behind I , and view of mine own shoe . then a distant noise go by I , as of many horse gallop , and in my fright I set my gun and say , ' God send something to shoot at . ' yet nothing come , and my gun fall back , without my will to lower it . 
 but presently , while I be think ' what a fool I be ! ' arise as if from below my foot , so that the great stone tremble , that long , lament lonesome sound , as of an evil spirit not know what to do with it . for the moment I stand like a root , without either hand or foot to help I , and the hair of my head begin to crawl , lift my hat , as a snail lift his house ; and my heart like a shuttle go to and fro . but find no harm to come of it , neither visible form approach , I wipe my forehead , and hop for the good , and resolve to run every step of the way , till I draw our own latch behind I . 
 yet here again I be disappoint , for no soon be I come to the cross - way by the black pool in the hole , but I hear through the patter of my own foot a rough low sound very close in the fog , as of a hobbled sheep a - coughing . I listen , and fear , and yet listen again , though I want not to hear it . for be in haste of the homeward road , and all my heart have heel to it , loath I be to stop in the dusk for the sake of an aged wether . yet partly my love of all animal , and partly my fear of the farmer 's disgrace , compel I to go to the succour , and the noise be come near . a dry short wheezing sound it be , bar with cough and want of breath ; but thus I make the meaning of it . 
 ' Lord have mercy upon I ! o Lord , upon my soul have mercy ! an if I cheat Sam Hicks last week , Lord know how well he deserve it , and lie in every stocking 's mouth oh Lord , where be I a - go ? ' 
 these word , with many jog between they , come to I through the darkness , and then a long groan and a choking . I make towards the sound , as nigh as ever I could guess , and presently be meet , point - blank , by the head of a mountain - pony . upon its back lie a man bind down , with his foot on the neck and his head to the tail , and his arm fall down like stirrup . the wild little nag be scared of its life by the unaccustomed burden , and have be toss and roll hard , in desire to get ease of it . 
 before the little horse could turn , I catch he , jade as he be , by his wet and grizzle forelock , and he see that it be vain to struggle , but strove to bite I none the less , until I smite he upon the nose . 
 ' good and worthy sir , ' I say to the man who be rid so roughly ; ' fear nothing ; no harm shall come to thee . ' 
 ' help , good friend , whoever thou art , ' he gasp , but could not look at I , because his neck be jerk so ; ' God hath send thee , and not to rob I , because it be do already . ' 
 ' what , Uncle Ben ! ' I cry , let go the horse in amazement , that the rich man in Dulverton ' Uncle Ben here in this plight ! what , Mr. Reuben Huckaback ! ' 
 ' an honest hosier and draper , serge and longcloth warehouseman ' he groan from rib to rib ' at the sign of the Gartered Kitten in the loyal town of Dulverton . for God 's sake , let I down , good fellow , from this accursed marrow - bone ; and a groat of good money will I pay thee , safe in my house to Dulverton ; but take notice that the horse be mine , no less than the nag they rob from I . ' 
 ' what , Uncle Ben , dost thou not know I , thy dutiful nephew John Ridd ? ' 
 not to make a long story of it , I cut the thong that bind he , and set he astride on the little horse ; but he be too weak to stay so . therefore I mount he on my back , turn the horse into horse - step , and lead the pony by the cord which I fasten around his nose , set out for Plover 's barrow . 
 Uncle Ben go fast asleep on my back , be jade and shake beyond his strength , for a man of three - score and five ; and as soon he feel assure of safety he would talk no more . and to tell the truth he snore so loudly , that I could almost believe that fearful noise in the fog every night come all the way from Dulverton . 
 now as soon as ever I bring he in , we set he up in the chimney - corner , comfortable and handsome ; and it be no little delight to I to get he off my back ; for , like his own fortune , Uncle Ben be of a good round figure . he give his long coat a shake or two , and he stamp about in the kitchen , until he be sure of his whereabouts , and then he fall asleep again until supper should be ready . 
 ' he shall marry Ruth , ' he say by - and - by to himself , and not to I ; ' he shall marry Ruth for this , and have my little saving , soon as they be worth the having . very little as yet , very little indeed ; and ever so much go to - day along of they rascal robber . ' 
 my mother make a dreadful stir , of course , about Uncle Ben be in such a plight as this ; so I leave he to her care and Annie 's , and soon they feed he rarely , while I go out to see to the comfort of the capture pony . and in truth he be worth the catching , and serve we very well afterwards , though Uncle Ben be inclined to claim he for his business at Dulverton , where they have cart and that like . ' but , ' I say , ' you shall have he , sir , and welcome , if you will only ride he home as first I find you rid he . ' and with that he drop it . 
 a very strange old man he be , short in his manner , though long of body , glad to do the contrary thing to what any one expect of he , and always look sharp at people , as if he fear to be cheat . this surprise I much at first , because it show his ignorance of what we farmer be an upright race , as you may find , scarcely ever cheat indeed , except upon market - day , and even then no more than may be help by reason of buyer expect it . now our simple way be a puzzle to he , as I tell he very often ; but he only laugh , and rub his mouth with the back of his dry shin hand , and I think he shortly begin to languish for want of some one to higgle with . I have a great mind to give he the pony , because he think himself cheat in that case ; only he would conclude that I do it with some view to a legacy . 
 of course , the Doones , and nobody else , have rob good Uncle Reuben ; and then they grow sportive , and take his horse , an especially sober nag , and bind the master upon the wild one , for a little change as they tell he . for two or three hour they have fine enjoyment chase he through the fog , and make much sport of his groaning ; and then wax hungry , they go their way , and leave he to opportunity . now Mr. Huckaback grow able to walk in a few day ' time , become thereupon impatient , and could not be bring to understand why he should have be rob at all . 
 ' I have never deserve it , ' he say to himself , not know much of Providence , except with a small p to it ; ' I have never deserve it , and will not stand it in the name of our lord the King , not I ! ' at other time he would burst forth thus : ' three - score year and five have I live an honest and laborious life , yet never be I rob before . and now to be rob in my old age , to be rob for the first time now ! ' 
 thereupon of course we would tell he how truly thankful he ought to be for never have be rob before , in spite of live so long in this world , and that he be take a very ungrateful , not to say ungracious , view , in thus repine , and feel aggrieve ; when anyone else would have kneel and thank God for enjoy so long an immunity . but say what we would , it be all as one . Uncle Ben stick fast to it , that he have nothing to thank God for . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 a motion which end in a mull 

 instead of mind his New - Year pudding , Master Huckaback carry on so about his mighty grievance , that at last we begin to think there must be something in it , after all ; especially as he assure we that choice and costly present for the young people of our household be among the good divest . but mother tell he her child have plenty , and want no gold and silver , and little Eliza speak up and say , ' you can give we the pretty thing , Uncle Ben , when we come in the summer to see you . ' 
 our mother reprove Eliza for this , although it be the heel of her own foot ; and then to satisfy our uncle , she promise to call Farmer Nicholas Snowe , to be of our council that evening , ' and if the young maiden would kindly come , without take thought to smoothe themselves , why it would be all the merry , and who know but what Uncle Huckaback might bless the day of his robbery , etc . , etc . and thorough good honest girl they be , fit helpmate either for shop or farm . ' all of which be mean for I ; but I stick to my platter and answer not . 
 in the evening Farmer Snowe come up , lead his daughter after he , like filly trim for a fair ; and Uncle Ben , who have not see they on the night of his mishap   because word have be send to stop they , be mightily pleased and very pleasant , accord to his town breed way . the damsel have see good company , and soon get over their fear of his wealth , and play he a number of merry prank , which make our mother quite jealous for Annie , who be always shy and diffident . however , when the hot cup be do , and before the mulled wine be ready , we pack all the maiden in the parlour and turn the key upon they ; and then we draw near to the kitchen fire to hear Uncle Ben 's proposal . Farmer Snowe sit up in the corner , care little to bear about anything , but smoke slowly , and nod backward like a sheep - dog dreaming . mother be in the settle , of course , knit hard , as usual ; and Uncle Ben take to a three - legged stool , as if all but that have be thieve from he . Howsoever , he keep his breath from speech , give privilege , as be due , to mother . 
 ' Master Snowe , you be well assured , ' say mother , colour like the furze as it take the flame and fall over , ' that our kinsman here hath receive rough harm on his peaceful journey from Dulverton . the time be bad , as we all know well , and there be no sign of better they , and if I could see our Lord the King I might say thing to move he ! nevertheless , I have have so much of my own account to vex for ' 
 ' you be fly out of the subject , Sarah , ' say Uncle Ben , see tear in her eye , and tired of that matter . 
 ' Zettle the pralimbinarie , ' speak Farmer Snowe , on appeal from we , ' virst zettle the pralimbinarie ; and then we know what be drivin ' at . ' 
 ' preliminary be damned , sir , ' cry Uncle Ben , lose his temper . ' what preliminary be there when I be rob ; I should like to know ? rob in this parish as I can prove , to the eternal disgrace of Oare and the scandal of all England . and I hold this parish to answer for it , sir ; this parish shall make it good , be a nest of foul thief as it be ; ay , farmer , and yeoman , and all of you . I will beggar every man in this parish , if they be not beggar already , ay , and sell your old church up before your eye , but what I will have back my tarlatan , time - piece , saddle , and dove - tail nag . ' 
 Mother look at I , and I look at Farmer Snowe , and we all be sorry for Master Huckaback , put our hand up one to another , that nobody should browbeat he ; because we all know what our parish be , and none the bad for strong language , however rich the man might be . but Uncle Ben take it in a different way . he think that we all be afraid of he , and that Oare parish be but as Moab or Edom , for he to cast his shoe over . 
 ' Nephew Jack , ' he cry , look at I when I be think what to say , and find only emptiness , ' you be a heavy lout , sir ; a bumpkin , a clodhopper ; and I shall leave you nothing , unless it be my boot to grease . ' 
 ' well , uncle , ' I make answer , ' I will grease your boot all the same for that , so long as you be our guest , sir . ' 
 now , that answer , make without a thought , stand I for two thousand pound , as you shall see , by - and - by , perhaps . 
 ' as for the parish , ' my mother cry , be too hard set to contain herself , ' the parish can defend itself , and we may leave it to do so . but our Jack be not like that , sir ; and I will not have he speak of . leave he indeed ! who want you to do more than to leave he alone , sir ; as he might have do you the other night ; and as no one else would have dare to do . and after that , to think so meanly of I , and of my child ! ' 
 ' Hoity , toity , Sarah ! your child , I suppose , be the same as other people 's . ' 
 ' that they be not ; and never will be ; and you ought to know it , Uncle Reuben , if any one in the world ought . other people 's child ! ' 
 ' well , well ! ' Uncle Reuben answer , ' I know very little of child ; except my little Ruth , and she be nothing wonderful . ' 
 ' I never say that my child be wonderful Uncle Ben ; nor do I ever think it . but as for be good ' 
 here mother fetch out her handkerchief , be overcome by our goodness ; and I tell she , with my hand to my mouth , not to notice he ; though he might be worth ten thousand time ten thousand pound . 
 but Farmer Snowe come forward now , for he have some sense sometimes ; and he think it be high time for he to say a word for the parish . 
 ' Maister Huckaback , ' he begin , point with his pipe at he , the end that be do in sealing - wax , ' tooching of what you be plaize to zay 'bout this here parish , and no oother , mind I no oother parish but thee , I use the vreedom , zur , for to tell ' e , that thee be a laiar . ' 
 then Farmer Nicholas Snowe fold his arm across with the bowl of his pipe on the upper one , and give I a nod , and then one to mother , to testify how he have do his duty , and recke not what might come of it . however , he get little thank from we ; for the parish be nothing at all to my mother , compare with her child 's interest ; and I think it hard that an uncle of mine , and an old man too , should be call a liar , by a visitor at our fireplace . for we , in our rude part of the world , count it one of the bad disgrace that could befall a man , to receive the lie from any one . but Uncle Ben , as it seem be use to it , in the way of trade , just as people of fashion be , by a style of courtesy . 
 therefore the old man only look with pity at Farmer Nicholas ; and with a sort of sorrow too , reflect how much he might have make in a bargain with such a customer , so ignorant and hot - headed . 
 ' now let we bandy word no more , ' say mother , very sweetly ; ' nothing be easy than sharp word , except to wish they unspoken ; as I do many and many be the time , when I think of my good husband . but now let we hear from Uncle Reuben what he would have we do to remove this disgrace from amongst we , and to satisfy he of his good . ' 
 ' I care not for my good , woman , ' Master Huckaback answer grandly ; ' although they be of large value , about they I say nothing . but what I demand be this , the punishment of those scoundrel . ' 
 ' Zober , man , zober ! ' cry Farmer Nicholas ; ' we be too naigh Badgery ' ood , to spake like that of they doonese . ' 
 ' pack of coward ! ' say Uncle Reuben , look first at the door , however ; ' much chance I see of get redress from the valour of this Exmoor ! and you , Master Snowe , the very man whom I look to to raise the country , and take the lead as churchwarden why , my young shopman would match his ell against you . Pack of coward , ' cry Uncle Ben , rise and shake his lappet at we ; ' do not   pretend to answer I . shake you all off , that I do nothing more to do with you ! ' 
 we know it useless to answer he , and convey our knowledge to one another , without anything to vex he . however , when the mulled wine be come , and a good deal of it go   the season be Epiphany , Uncle Reuben begin to think that he might have be too hard with we . moreover , he be begin now to respect Farmer Nicholas bravely , because of the way he have smoke his pipe , and the little noise make over they . and Lizzie and Annie be do their good for now we have let the girl out to wake more lightsome uproar ; also young Faith Snowe be toward to keep the old man 's cup aflow , and hansel they to their liking . 
 so at the close of our entertainment , when the girl be go away to fetch and light their lanthorn   over which they make rare noise , blow each the other be out for counting of the spark to come , Master Huckaback stand up , without much aid from the crock - saw , and look at mother and all of we . 
 ' let no one leave this place , ' say he , ' until I have say what I want to say ; for save of ill - will among we ; and growth of cheer and comfort . may be I have carry thing too far , even to the bound of churlishness , and beyond the bound of good manner . I will not unsay one word I have say , have never yet do so in my life ; but I would alter the manner of it , and set it forth in this light . if you folk upon Exmoor here be loath and wary at fighting , yet you be brave at well stuff ; the good and kind I ever know , in the matter of feed . ' 
 here he sit down with tear in his eye , and call for a little mulled bastard . all the maid , who be now come back , race to get it for he , but Annie of course be foremost . and herein end the expedition , a perilous and a great one , against the Doones of Bagworthy ; an enterprise over which we have all talk plainly more than be good for we . for my part , I sleep well that night , feel myself at home again , now that the fighting be put aside , and the fear of it turn to the comfort of talk what we would have do . 




 CHAPTER XV 

 MASTER HUCKABACK fails of warrant 

 on the following day Master Huckaback , with some show of mystery , demand from my mother an escort into a dangerous part of the world , to which his business compel he . my mother make answer to this that he be kindly welcome to take our John Fry with he ; at which the good clothier laugh , and say that John be nothing like big enough , but another John must serve his turn , not only for his size , but because if he be carry away , no stone would be leave unturned upon Exmoor , until he should be bring back again . Hereupon my mother grow very pale , and find fifty reason against my going , each of they weighty than the true one , as Eliza   who be jealous of I   manage to whisper to Annie . on the other hand , I be quite resolve   directly the thing be mention   to see Uncle Reuben through with it ; and it add much to my self - esteem to be the guard of so rich a man . therefore I soon persuade mother , with her head upon my breast , to let I go and trust in God ; and after that I be greatly vex to find that this dangerous enterprise be nothing more than a visit to the Baron de Whichehalse , to lay an information , and sue a warrant against the Doones , and a posse to execute it . 
 Stupid as I always have be , and must ever be no doubt , I could well have tell Uncle Reuben that his journey be no wise than that of the man of Gotham ; that he never would get from Hugh de Whichehalse a warrant against the Doones ; moreover , that if he do get one , his own wig would be sing with it . but for diver reason I hold my peace , partly from youth and modesty , partly from desire to see whatever please God I should see , and partly from other cause . 
 we ride by way of Brendon town , Illford Bridge , and Babbrook , to avoid the great hill above Lynmouth ; and the day be fine and clear again , I laugh in my sleeve at Uncle Reuben for all his fine precaution . when we arrive at Ley Manor , we be show very civilly into the hall , and refresh with good ale and collared head , and the back of a Christmas pudding . I have never be under so fine a roof   unless it be of a church   before ; and it please I greatly to be so kindly entreat by high - bear folk . but Uncle Reuben be vex a little at be set down side by side with a man in a very small way of trade , who be come upon some business there , and who make bold to drink his health after finish their horn of ale . 
 ' Sir , ' say Uncle Ben , look at he , ' my health would fare much well , if you would pay I three pound and twelve shilling , which you have owe I these five year back ; and now we be meet at the Justice 's , the opportunity be good , sir . ' 
 after that , we be call to the Justice - room , where the Baron himself be sit with Colonel Harding , another Justiciary of the King 's peace , to help he . I have see the Baron de Whichehalse before , and be not at all afraid of he , have be at school with his son as he know , and it make he very kind to I . and indeed he be kind to everybody , and all our people speak well of he ; and so much the more because we know that the house be in decadence . for the first De Whichehalse have come from Holland , where he have be a great nobleman , some hundred and fifty year agone . be persecute for his religion , when the spanish power be everything , he flee to England with all he could save , and buy large estate in Devonshire . since then his descendant have intermarry with ancient county family , cottwell , and marwood , and Walronds , and welse of Pylton , and Chichesters of Hall ; and several of the lady bring they large increase of property . and so about fifty year before the time of which I be write , there be few name in the West of England think more of than De Whichehalse . but now they have lose a great deal of land , and therefore of that which go with land , as surely as fame belong to earth I mean big reputation . how they have lose it , none could tell ; except that as the first descendant have a manner of amass , so the later one be gift with a power of scatter . whether this come of good Devonshire blood open the sluice of Low Country vein , be beyond both my province and my power to inquire . anyhow , all people love this last strain of De Whichehalse far more than the name have be like a hundred year agone . 
 Hugh de Whichehalse , a white - haired man , of very noble presence , with friendly blue eye and a sweet smooth forehead , and aquiline nose quite beautiful   as you might expect in a lady of birth , and thin lip curve delicately , this gentleman rise as we enter the room ; while Colonel Harding turn on his chair , and strike one spur against the other . I be sure that , without know aught of either , we must have reverence more of the two the one who show respect to we . and yet nine gentleman out of ten make this dull mistake when deal with the class below they ! 
 Uncle Reuben make his very good scrape , and then walk up to the table , try to look as if he do not know himself to be wealthy than both the gentleman put together . of course he be no stranger to they , any more than I be ; and , as it prove afterwards , Colonel Harding owe he a lump of money , upon very good security . of he Uncle Reuben take no notice , but address himself to De Whichehalse . 
 the Baron smile very gently , so soon as he learn the cause of this visit , and then he reply quite reasonably . 
 ' a warrant against the Doones , Master Huckaback . which of the Doones , so please you ; and the christian name , what be they ? ' 
 ' my lord , I be not their godfather ; and most like they never have any . but we all know old Sir Ensor 's name , so that may be no obstacle . ' 
 ' Sir Ensor Doone and his son so be it . how many son , Master Huckaback , and what be the name of each one ? ' 
 ' how can I tell you , my lord , even if I have know they all as well as my own shop - boy ? nevertheless there be seven of they , and that should be no obstacle . ' 
 ' a warrant against Sir Ensor Doone , and seven son of Sir Ensor Doone , christian name unknown , and doubt if they have any . so far so good Master Huckaback . I have it all down in writing . Sir Ensor himself be there , of course , as you have give in evidence ' 
 ' no , no , my lord , I never say that : I never say ' 
 ' if he can prove that he be not there , you may be indict for perjury . but as for those seven son of his , of course you can swear that they be his son and not his nephew , or grandchild , or even no Doones at all ? ' 
 ' my lord , I can swear that they be Doones . moreover , I can pay for any mistake I make . therein need be no obstacle . ' 
 ' oh , yes , he can pay ; he can pay well enough , ' say Colonel Harding shortly . 
 ' I be heartily glad to hear it , ' reply the Baron pleasantly ; ' for it prove after all that this robbery   if robbery there have be   be not so very ruinous . sometimes people think they be rob , and then it be very sweet afterwards to find that they have not be so ; for it add to their joy in their property . now , be you quite convinced , good sir , that these people   if there be any   stole , or take , or even borrow anything at all from you ? ' 
 ' my lord , do you think that I be drunk ? ' 
 ' not for a moment , Master Huckaback . although excuse might be make for you at this time of the year . but how do you know that your visitor be of this particular family ? ' 
 ' because it could be nobody else . because , in spite of the fog ' 
 ' Fog ! ' cry Colonel Harding sharply . 
 ' Fog ! ' say the Baron , with emphasis . ' ah , that explain the whole affair . to be sure , now I remember , the weather have be too thick for a man to see the head of his own horse . the Doones   if still there be any Doones   could never have come abroad ; that be as sure as simony . Master Huckaback , for your good sake , I be heartily glad that this charge have miscarry . I thoroughly understand it now . the fog explain the whole of it . ' 
 ' go back , my good fellow , ' say Colonel Harding ; ' and if the day be clear enough , you will find all your thing where you leave they . I know , from my own experience , what it be to be catch in an Exmoor fog . ' 
 Uncle Reuben , by this time , be so put out , that he hardly know what he be say . 
 ' my lord , Sir Colonel , be this your justice ! if I go to London myself for it , the King shall know how his commission how a man may be rob , and the justice prove that he ought to be hang at back of it ; that in his good shire of Somerset ' 
 ' your pardon a moment , good sir , ' De Whichehalse interrupt he ; ' but I be about   have hear your case   to mention what need be an obstacle , and , I fear , would prove a fatal one , even if satisfactory proof be afford of a felony . the mal - feasance   if any   be lay in Somerset ; but we , two humble servant of his Majesty , be in commission of his peace for the county of Devon only , and therefore could never deal with it . ' 
 ' and why , in the name of God , ' cry Uncle Reuben now carry at last fairly beyond himself , ' why could you not say as much at first , and save I all this waste of time and worry of my temper ? gentleman , you be all in league ; all of you stick together . you think it fair sport for an honest trader , who make no sham as you do , to be rob and wellnigh murder , so long as they who do it win the high birthright of felony . if a poor sheep stealer , to save his child from die of starvation , have dare to look at a two - month lamb , he would swing on the Manor gallow , and all of you cry " good riddance ! " but now , because good birth and bad manner ' here poor Uncle Ben , not be so strong as before the Doones have play with he , begin to foam at the mouth a little , and his tongue go into the hollow where his short grey whisker be . 
 I forget how we come out of it , only I be greatly shock at beard of the gentry so , and mother scarce could see her way , when I tell she all about it . ' depend upon it you be wrong , John , ' be all I could get out of she ; though what have I do but listen , and touch my forelock , when call upon . ' John , you may take my word for it , you have not do as you should have do . your father would have be shock to think of go to Baron de Whichehalse , and in his own house insult he ! and yet it be very brave of you John . just like you , all over . and   as none of the man be here , dear John   I be proud of you for do it . ' 
 all throughout the homeward road , Uncle Ben have be very silent , feel much displeased with himself and still more so with other people . but before he go to bed that night , he just say to I , ' Nephew Jack , you have not behave so badly as the rest to I . and because you have no gift of talk , I think that I may trust you . now , mark my word , this villain job shall not have end here . I have another card to play . ' 
 ' you mean , sir , I suppose , that you will go to the justice of this shire , Squire Maunder , or Sir Richard Blewitt , or ' 
 ' Oaf , I mean nothing of the sort ; they would only make a laughing - stock , as those Devonshire people do , of I . no , I will go to the King himself , or a man who be big than the king , and to whom I have ready access . I will not tell thee his name at present , only if thou art bring before he , never wilt thou forget it . ' that be true enough , by the bye , as I discover afterwards , for the man he mean be Judge Jeffreys . 
 ' and when be you likely to see he , sir ? ' 
 ' maybe in the spring , maybe not until summer , for I can not go to London on purpose , but when my business take I there . only remember my word , Jack , and when you see the man I mean , look straight at he , and tell no lie . he will make some of your zany squire shake in their shoe , I reckon . now , I have be in this lonely hole far long than I intend , by reason of this outrage ; yet I will stay here one day more upon a certain condition . ' 
 ' upon what condition , Uncle Ben ? I grieve that you find it so lonely . we will have Farmer Nicholas up again , and the singer , and ' 
 ' the fashionable milkmaid . I thank you , let I be . the wench be too loud for I . your nanny be enough . nanny be a good child , and she shall come and visit I . ' Uncle Reuben would always call she ' nanny ' ; he say that ' Annie ' be too fine and frenchify for we . ' but my condition be this , Jack that you shall guide I to - morrow , without a word to any one , to a place where I may well descry the dwelling of these scoundrel Doones , and learn the good way to get at they , when the time shall come . can you do this for I ? I will pay you well , boy . ' 
 I promise very readily to do my good to serve he , but , of course , would take no money for it , not be so poor as that come to . accordingly , on the day follow , I manage to set the man at work on the other side of the farm , especially that inquisitive and busybody John Fry , who would pry out almost anything for the pleasure of tell his wife ; and then , with Uncle Reuben mount on my ancient Peggy , I make foot for the westward , directly after breakfast . Uncle Ben refuse to go unless I would take a loaded gun , and indeed it be always wise to do so in those day of turbulence ; and none the less because of late more than usual of our sheep have leave their skin behind they . this , as I need hardly say , be not to be charge to the appetite of the Doones , for they always say that they be not butcher   although upon that subject might well be two opinion ; and their practice be to make the shepherd kill and skin , and quarter for they , and sometimes carry to the Doone - gate the prime among the fatling , for fear of any bruising , which spoil the look at table . but the bad of it be that ignorant folk , unaware of their fastidiousness , score to they the sheep they lose by lower - bear marauder , and so be afraid to speak of it : and the issue of this error be that a farmer , with five or six hundred sheep , could never command , on his wedding - day , a prime saddle of mutton for dinner . 
 to return now to my Uncle Ben and indeed he would not let I go more than three land - yard from he there be very little say between we along the lane and across the hill , although the day be pleasant . I could see that he be half amiss with his mind about the business , and not so full of security as an elderly man should keep himself . therefore , out I spake , and say , 
 ' Uncle Reuben , have no fear . I know every inch of the ground , sir ; and there be no danger nigh we . ' 
 ' fear , boy ! who ever think of fear ? ' tis the last thing would come across I . pretty thing those primrose . ' 
 at once I think of Lorna Doone , the little maid of six year back , and how my fancy go with she . could Lorna ever think of I ? be I not a lout go by , only fit for loach - sticking ? have I ever see a face fit to think of near she ? the sudden flash , the quickness , the bright desire to know one 's heart , and not withhold her own from it , the soft withdrawal of rich eye , the longing to love somebody , anybody , anything , not imbrue with wickedness 
 my uncle interrupt I , mislike so much silence now , with the naked wood fall over we . for we be come to Bagworthy forest , the black and the lonely place of all that keep the sun out . even now , in winter - time , with most of the wood unriddled , and the rest of it pinch brown , it hang around we like a cloak contain little comfort . I keep quite close to Peggy 's head , and Peggy keep quite close to I , and prick her ear at everything . however , we see nothing there , except a few old owl and hawk , and a magpie sit all alone , until we come to the bank of the hill , where the pony could not climb it . Uncle Ben be very loath to get off , because the pony seem company , and he think he could gallop away on she , if the bad come to the bad , but I persuade he that now he must go to the end of it . therefore he make Peggy fast , in a place where we could find she , and speak cheerfully as if there be nothing to be afraid of , he take his staff , and I my gun , to climb the thick ascent . 
 there be now no path of any kind ; which add to our courage all it lessen of our comfort , because it prove that the robber be not in the habit of pass there . and we know that we could not go astray , so long as we breast the hill before we ; inasmuch as it form the rampart , or side - fence of Glen Doone . but in truth I use the right word there for the manner of our ascent , for the ground come forth so steep against we , and withal so woody , that to make any way we must throw ourselves forward , and labour as at a breast - plough . rough and loamy rung of oak - root bulge here and there above our head ; brier need must speak with we , use more of tooth than tongue ; and sometimes bulk of rugged stone , like great sheep , stand across we . at last , though very loath to do it , I be force to leave my gun behind , because I require one hand to drag myself up the difficulty , and one to help Uncle Reuben . and so at last we gain the top , and look forth the edge of the forest , where the ground be very stony and like the crest of a quarry ; and no more tree between we and the brink of cliff below , three hundred yard below it might be , all strong slope and gliddery . and now for the first time I be amazed at the appearance of the Doones 's stronghold , and understand its nature . for when I have be even in the valley , and climb the cliff to escape from it , about seven year agone , I be no more than a stripling boy , note little , as boy do , except for their present purpose , and even that soon do with . but now , what with the fame of the Doones , and my own recollection , and Uncle Ben 's insistence , all my attention be call forth , and the end be simple astonishment . 
 the chine of highland , whereon we stand , curve to the right and leave of we , keep about the same elevation , and crown with tree and brushwood . at about half a mile in front of we , but look as if we could throw a stone to strike any man upon it , another crest just like our own bow around to meet it ; but fail by reason of two narrow cleft of which we could only see the brink . one of these cleft be the Doone - gate , with a portculli of rock above it , and the other be the chasm by which I have once make entrance . betwixt they , where the hill fall back , as in a perfect oval , traverse by the wind water , lie a bright green valley , rim with sheer black rock , and seem to have sink bodily from the bleak rough height above . it look as if no frost could enter neither wind go ruffle ; only spring , and hope , and comfort , breathe to one another . even now the ray of sunshine dwelt and fall back on one another , whenever the cloud lift ; and the pale blue glimpse of the grow day seem to find young encouragement . 
 but for all that , Uncle Reuben be none the bad nor well . he look down into Glen Doone first , and sniff as if he be smell it , like a sample of good from a wholesale house ; and then he look at the hill over yonder , and then he star at I . 
 ' see what a pack of fool they be ? ' 
 ' of course I do , Uncle Ben . " all rogue be fool , " be my first copy , begin of the alphabet . ' 
 ' pack of stuff lad . though true enough , and very good for young people . but see you not how this great Doone valley may be take in half an hour ? ' 
 ' yes , to be sure I do , uncle ; if they like to give it up , I mean . ' 
 ' three culverin on yonder hill , and three on the top of this one , and we have they under a pestle . ah , I have see the war , my lad , from Keinton up to Naseby ; and I might have be a general now , if they have take my advice ' 
 but I be not attend to he , be draw away on a sudden by a sight which never strike the sharp eye of our General . for I have long ago descry that little opening in the cliff through which I make my exit , as before relate , on the other side of the valley . no big than a rabbit - hole it seem from where we stand ; and yet of all the scene before I , that   from my remembrance perhaps   have the most attraction . now gaze at it with full thought of all that it have cost I , I see a little figure come , and pause , and pass into it . something very light and white , nimble , smooth , and elegant , go almost before I know that any one have be there . and yet my heart come to my rib , and all my blood be in my face , and pride within I fight with shame , and vanity with self - contempt ; for though seven year be go , and I from my boyhood come to manhood , and all must have forget I , and I have half - forget ; at that moment , once for all , I feel that I be face to face with fate   however poor it might be , weal or woe , in Lorna Doone . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 lorna grow FORMIDABLE 

 have reconnoitre thus the position of the enemy , Master Huckaback , on the homeward road , cross - examine I in a manner not at all desirable . for he have note my confusion and eager gaze at something unseen by he in the valley , and thereupon he make up his mind to know everything about it . in this , however , he partly fail ; for although I be no hand at fence , and would not tell he a falsehood , I manage so to hold my peace that he put himself upon the wrong track , and continue thereon with many vaunt of his shrewdness and experience , and some chuckle at my simplicity . thus much however , he learn aright , that I have be in the Doone valley several year before , and might be bring upon strong inducement to venture there again . but as to the mode of my get in , the thing I see , and my thought upon they , he not only fail to learn the truth , but certify himself into an obstinacy of error , from which no after - knowledge be able to deliver he . and this he do , not only because I happen to say very little , but forasmuch as he disbelieve half of the truth I tell he , through his own too great sagacity . 
 upon one point , however , he succeed more easily than he expect , viz . in make I promise to visit the place again , as soon as occasion offer , and to hold my own counsel about it . but I could not help smile at one thing , that accord to his point of view my own counsel mean my own and Master Reuben Huckaback 's . 
 now he be go , as he go next day , to his favourite town of Dulverton , and leave behind he shadowy promise of the mountain he would do for I , my spirit begin to burn and pant for something to go on with ; and nothing show a braver hope of movement and adventure than a lonely visit to Glen Doone , by way of the perilous passage discover in my boyhood . therefore I wait for nothing more than the slow arrival of new small - clothe make by a good tailor at Porlock , for I be wishful to look my good ; and when they be come and approve , I start , regardless of the expense , and forget   like a fool   how badly they would take the water . 
 what with urging of the tailor , and my own misgiving , the time be now come round again to the high - day of St. Valentine , when all our maid be full of lover , and all the lad look foolish . and none of they more sheepish or innocent than I myself , albeit twenty - one year old , and not afraid of man much , but terrify of woman , at least , if they be comely . and what of all thing scar I most be the thought of my own size , and knowledge of my strength , which come like knot upon I daily . in honest truth I tell this thing ,   which often since hath puzzle I , when I come to mix with man more , I be to that degree ashamed of my thickness and my stature , in the presence of a woman , that I would not put a trunk of wood on the fire in the kitchen , but let Annie scold I well , with a smile to follow , and with her own plump hand lift up a little log , and fuel it . many a time I long to be no big than John Fry be ; whom now   when insolent   I take with my left hand by the waist - stuff , and set he on my hat , and give he little chance to tread it ; until he speak of his family , and request to come down again . 
 now take for good oman this , that I be a seven - year Valentine , though much too big for a Cupidon , I choose a seven - foot staff of ash , and fix a loach - fork in it , to look as I have look before ; and leave word upon matter of business , out of the back door I go , and so through the little orchard , and down the brawl Lynn - brook . not be now so much afraid , I strike across the thicket land between the meeting water , and come upon the Bagworthy stream near the great black whirlpool . nothing amaze I so much as to find how shallow the stream now look to I , although the pool be still as black and greedy as it use to be . and still the great rocky slide be dark and difficult to climb ; though the water , which once have take my knee , be satisfied now with my ankle . after some labour , I reach the top ; and halt to look about I well , before trust to broad daylight . 
 the winter   as I say before   have be a very mild one ; and now the spring be toward so that bank and bush be touch with it . the valley into which I gaze be fair with early promise , have shelter from the wind and take all the sunshine . the willow - bush over the stream hang as if they be angle with tasseled float of gold and silver , burst like a bean - pod . between they come the water laughing , like a maid at her own dancing , and spread with that young blue which never live beyond the April . and on either bank , the meadow ruffle as the breeze come by , open   through new tuft , of green   daisy - bud or celandine , or a shy glimpse now and then of the love - lorn primrose . 
 though I be so blank of wit , or perhaps for that same reason , these little thing come and dwell with I , and I be happy about they , and long for nothing well . I feel with every blade of grass , as if it have a history ; and make a child of every bud as though it know and love I . and be so , they seem to tell I of my own delusion , how I be no more than they , except in self - importance . 
 while I be forget much of many thing that harm one , and letting of my thought go wild to sound and sight of nature , a sweet note than thrush or ouzel ever woo a mate in , float on the valley breeze at the quiet turn of sundown . the word be of an ancient song , fit to laugh or cry at . 
 Love , an if there be one , come my love to be , my love be for the one love unto I . 
 not for I the show , love , of a gild bliss ; only thou must know , love , what my value be . 
 if in all the earth , love , Thou hast none but I , this shall be my worth , love : to be cheap to thee . 
 but , if so thou ever Strivest to be free , ' twill be my endeavour to be dear to thee . 
 so shall I have plea , love , be thy heart andbreath cling still to thee , love , in the doom of death . 
 all this I take in with great eagerness , not for the sake of the meaning   which be no doubt an allegory , but for the power and richness , and softness of the singing , which seem to I well than we ever have even in Oare church . but all the time I keep myself in a black niche of the rock , where the fall of the water begin , lest the sweet singer   espy I   should be alarm , and flee away . but presently I venture to look forth where a bush be ; and then I behold the lovely sight one glimpse of which be enough to make I kneel in the cold water . 
 by the side of the stream she be come to I , even among the primrose , as if she love they all ; and every flower look the brighter , as her eye be on they , I could not see what her face be , my heart so awake and tremble ; only that her hair be flow from a wreath of white violet , and the grace of her come be like the appearance of the first wind - flower . the pale gleam over the western cliff throw a shadow of light behind she , as if the sun be linger . never do I see that light from the closing of the west , even in these my aged day , without think of she . ah I , if it come to that , what do I see of earth or heaven , without think of she ? 
 the tremulous thrill of her song be hang on her open lip ; and she glance around , as if the bird be accustom to make answer . to I it be a thing of terror to behold such beauty , and feel myself the while to be so very low and common . but scarcely know what I do , as if a rope be draw I , I come from the dark mouth of the chasm ; and stand , afraid to look at she . 
 she be turn to fly , not know I , and frighten , perhaps , at my stature , when I fall on the grass   as I fall before her seven year agone that day , and I just say , ' Lorna Doone ! ' 
 she know I at once , from my manner and way , and a smile break through her trembling , as sunshine come through aspen - leaf ; and be so clever , she see , of course , that she need not to fear I . 
 ' oh , indeed , ' she cry , with a feint of anger   because she have show she cowardice , and yet in her heart she be laugh ; ' oh , if you please , who be you , sir , and how do you know my name ? ' 
 ' I be John Ridd , ' I answer ; ' the boy who give you those beautiful fish , when you be only a little thing , seven year ago to - day . ' 
 ' yes , the poor boy who be frightened so , and oblige to hide here in the water . ' 
 ' and do you remember how kind you be , and save my life by your quickness , and go away rid upon a great man 's shoulder , as if you have never see I , and yet look back through the willow - tree ? ' 
 ' oh , yes , I remember everything ; because it be so rare to see any except I mean because I happen to remember . but you seem not to remember , sir , how perilous this place be . ' 
 for she have keep her eye upon I ; large eye of a softness , a brightness , and a dignity which make I feel as if I must for ever love and yet for ever know myself unworthy . unless themselves should fill with love , which be the spring of all thing . and so I could not answer she , but be overcome with thinking and feeling and confusion . neither could I look again ; only wait for the melody which make every word like a poem to I , the melody of her voice . but she have not the least idea of what be go on with I , any more than I myself have . 
 ' I think , Master Ridd , you can not know , ' she say , with her eye take from I , ' what the danger of this place be , and the nature of the people . ' 
 ' yes , I know enough of that ; and I be frighten greatly , all the time , when I do not look at you . ' 
 she be too young to answer I in the style some maiden would have use ; the manner , I mean , which now we call from a foreign word ' coquettish . ' and more than that , she be tremble from real fear of violence , lest strong hand might be lay on I , and a miserable end of it . and to tell the truth , I grow afraid ; perhaps from a kind of sympathy , and because I know that evil come more readily than good to we . 
 therefore , without more ado , or take any advantage although I would have be glad at heart , if need have be , to kiss she   without any thought of rudeness   it strike I that I have well go , and have no more to say to she until next time of come . so would she look the more for I and think the more about I , and not grow weary of my word and the want of change there be in I . for , of course , I know what a churl I be compare to her birth and appearance ; but meanwhile I might improve myself and learn a musical instrument . ' the wind hath a draw after fly straw ' be a saying we have in Devonshire , make , peradventure , by somebody who have see the way of woman . 
 ' Mistress Lorna , I will depart ' mark you , I think that a powerful word ' in fear of cause disquiet . if any rogue shoot I it would grieve you ; I make bold to say it , and it would be the death of mother . few mother have such a son as I . try to think of I now and then , and I will bring you some new - lay egg , for our young blue hen be begin . ' 
 ' I thank you heartily , ' say Lorna ; ' but you need not come to see I . you can put they in my little bower , where I be almost always I mean whither daily I repair to read and to be away from they . ' 
 ' only show I where it be . Thrice a day I will come and stop ' 
 ' Nay , Master Ridd , I would never show thee never , because of peril only that so happen it thou hast find the way already . ' 
 and she smile with a light that make I care to cry out for no other way , except to her dear heart . but only to myself I cry for anything at all , have enough of man in I to be bashful with young maiden . so I touch her white hand softly when she give it to I , and   fancy that she have sigh   be touch at heart about it , and resolve to yield she all my good , although my mother be live ; and then grow angry with myself   for a mile or more of walk   to think she would condescend so ; and then , for the rest of the homeward road , be mad with every man in the world who would dare to think of have she . 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 JOHN be CLEARLY bewitch 

 to forget one 's luck of life , to forget the cark of care and wither of young finger ; not to feel , or not be move by , all the change of thought and heart , from large young heat to the sinewy line and dry bone of old age this be what I have to do ere ever I can make you know   even as a dream be know   how I love my Lorna . I myself can never know ; never can conceive , or treat it as a thing of reason , never can behold myself dwell in the midst of it , and think that this be I ; neither can I wander far from perpetual thought of it . perhaps I have two farrow of pig ready for the chapman ; perhaps I have ten stone of wool wait for the factor . it be all the same . I look at both , and what I say to myself be this : ' which would Lorna choose of they ? ' of course , I be a fool for this ; any man may call I so , and I will not quarrel with he , unless he guess my secret . of course , I fetch my wit , if it be worth the fetching , back again to business . but there my heart be and must be ; and all who like to try can cheat I , except upon parish matter . 
 that week I could do little more than dream and dream and rove about , seek by perpetual change to find the way back to myself . I care not for the people round I , neither take delight in victual ; but make believe to eat and drink and blush at any question . and be call the master now , head - farmer , and chief yeoman , it irk I much that any one should take advantage of I ; yet everybody do so as soon as ever it be know that my wit be go moon - rake . for that be the way they look at it , not be able to comprehend the greatness and the loftiness . neither do I blame they much ; for the wise thing be to laugh at people when we can not understand they . I , for my part , take no notice ; but in my heart despise they as being of a less nature , who never have see Lorna . yet I be vex , and rub myself , when John Fry spread all over the farm , and even at the shoeing forge , that a mad dog have come and bitten I , from the other side of Mallond . 
 this seem little to I now ; and so it might to any one ; but , at the time , it work I up to a fever of indignity . to make a mad dog of Lorna , to compare all my imagining   which be strange , I do assure you the faculty not be apt to work , to count the raising of my soul no more than hydrophobia ! all this act on I so , that I give John Fry the sound thresh that ever a sheaf of good corn deserve , or a bundle of tare be bless with . afterwards he go home , too tired to tell his wife the meaning of it ; but it prove of service to both of they , and an example for their child . 
 now the climate of this country be so far as I can make of it to throw no man into extreme ; and if he throw himself so far , to pluck he back by change of weather and the need of look after thing . lest we should be like the Southerns , for whom the sky do everything , and man sit under a wall and watch both food and fruit come beckon . their sky be a mother to they ; but our a good stepmother to we fear to hurt by indulgence , and know that severity and change of mood be wholesome . 
 the spring be now too forward , a check to it be needful ; and in the early part of March there come a change of weather . all the young growth be arrest by a dry wind from the east , which make both face and finger burn when a man be do ditching . the lilac and the woodbine , just crowd forth in little tuft , close kernel their blossom , be ruffle back , like a sleeve turn up , and nick with brown at the corner . in the hedge any man , unless his eye be very dull , could see the mischief do . the russet of the young elm - bloom be fain to be in its scale again ; but have push forth , there must be , and turn to a tawny colour . the hanger of the hazel , too , have shed their dust to make the nut , do not spread their little comb and dry they , as they ought to do ; but shrivel at the base and fall , as if a knife have cut they . and more than all to notice be   at least about the hedge   the shuddering of everything and the shiver sound among they toward the feeble sun ; such as we make to a poor fireplace when several door be open . sometimes I put my face to warm against the soft , rough maple - stem , which feel like the foot of a red deer ; but the pitiless east wind come through all , and take and shake the caved hedge aback till its knee be knock together , and nothing could be shelter . then would any one have blood , and try to keep at home with it , run to a sturdy tree and hope to eat his food behind it , and look for a little sun to come and warm his foot in the shelter . and if it do he might strike his breast , and try to think he be warmer . 
 but when a man come home at night , after long day 's labour , know that the day increase , and so his care should multiply ; still he find enough of light to show he what the day have do against he in his garden . every ridge of new - turn earth look like an old man 's muscle , honeycomb , and stand out void of spring , and powdery . every plant that have rejoice in pass such a winter now be cower , turn away , unfit to meet the consequence . flow sap have stop its course ; fluted line show want of food , and if you pinch the topmost spray , there be no rebound or firmness . 
 we think a good deal , in a quiet way , when people ask we about they of some fine , upstande pear - tree , graft by my grandfather , who have be very greatly respect . and he get those graft by shelter a poor italian soldier , in the time of James the First , a man who never could do enough to show his grateful memory . how he come to our place be a very difficult story , which I never understand rightly , have hear it from my mother . at any rate , there the pear - tree be , and there they be to this very day ; and I wish every one could taste their fruit , old as they be , and rugge . 
 now these fine tree have take advantage of the west wind , and the moisture , and the promise of the spring time , so as to fill the tip of the spray - wood and the rowel all up the branch with a crowd of eager blossom . not that they be yet in bloom , nor even show whiteness , only that some of the cone be open at the side of the cap which pinch they ; and there you might count perhaps , a dozen nob , like very little button , but groove , and line , and huddle close , to make room for one another . and among these bud be gray - green blade , scarce big than a hair almost , yet curve so as if their purpose be to shield the blossom . 
 other of the spur - point , stand on the old wood where the sap be not so eager , have not burst their tunic yet , but be flay and flake with light , cast off the husk of brown in three - cornered patch , as I have see a Scotchman 's plaid , or as his leg show through it . these bud , at a distance , look as if the sky have be rain cream upon they . 
 now all this fair delight to the eye , and good promise to the palate , be mar and baffle by the wind and cutting of the night - frost . the opening cone be strike with brown , in between the button bud , and on the scape that shield they ; while the foot part of the cover hang like rag , peel back , and quivering . and there the little stalk of each , which might have be a pear , God willing , have a ring around its base , and seek a chance to drop and die . the other which have not open comb , but only prepare to do it , be a little well off , but still very brown and unkid , and shrivel in doubt of health , and neither peart nor lusty . 
 now this I have not tell because I know the way to do it , for that I do not , neither yet have see a man who do know . it be wonderful how we look at thing , and never think to notice they ; and I be as bad as anybody , unless the thing to be observe be a dog , or a horse , or a maiden . and the last of those three I look at , somehow , without know that I take notice , and greatly afraid to do it , only I know afterwards   when the time of life be in I , not indeed , what the maiden be like , but how she differ from other . 
 yet I have speak about the spring , and the failure of fair promise , because I take it to my heart as token of what would come to I in the budding of my year and hope . and even then , be much possess , and full of a foolish melancholy , I feel a sad delight at be doom to blight and loneliness ; not but that I manage still   when mother be urgent upon I   to eat my share of victual , and cuff a man for laziness , and see that a ploughshare make no leap , and sleep of a night without dream . and my mother half - believe , in her fondness and affection , that what the parish say be true about a mad dog have bite I , and yet argue that it must be false   because God would have prevent he , my mother give I little rest , when I be in the room with she . not that she worry I with question , nor openly regard I with any unusual meaning , but that I know she be watch slyly whenever I take a spoon up ; and every hour or so she manage to place a pan of water by I , quite as if by accident , and sometimes even to spill a little upon my shoe or coat - sleeve . but Betty Muxworthy be bad ; for , have no fear about my health , she make a villainous joke of it , and use to rush into the kitchen , bark like a dog , and pant , exclaim that I have bite she , and justice she would have on I , if it cost she a twelvemonth 's wage . and she always take care to do this thing just when I have cross my leg in the corner after supper , and lean my head against the oven , to begin to think of Lorna . 
 however , in all thing there be comfort , if we do not look too hard for it ; and now I have much satisfaction , in my uncouth state , from labour , by the hour together , at the hedging and the ditching , meet the bitter wind face to face , feel my strength increase , and hop that some one would be proud of it . in the rustling rush of every gust , in the graceful bend of every tree , even in the ' lord and lady , ' clump in the scoop of the hedgerow , and most of all in the soft primrose , wring by the wind , but steal back , and smile when the wrath be pass in all of these , and many other there be ache ecstasy , delicious pang of Lorna . 
 but however cold the weather be , and however hard the wind blow , one thing   more than all the rest   worried and perplex I . this be , that I could not settle , turn and twist as I might , how soon I ought to go again upon a visit to Glen Doone . for I like not at all the falseness of it   albeit against murderer , the creeping out of sight , and hiding , and feel as a spy might . and even more than this . I fear how Lorna might regard it ; whether I might seem to she a prone and blunt intruder , a country youth not skilled in manner , as among the quality , even when they rob we . for I be not sure myself , but that it might be very bad manner to go again too early without an invitation ; and my hand and face be chap so badly by the bitter wind , that Lorna might count they unsightly thing , and wish to see no more of they . 
 however , I could not bring myself to consult any one upon this point , at least in our own neighbourhood , nor even to speak of it near home . but the east wind hold through the month , my hand and face grow bad and bad , and it have occur to I by this time that possibly Lorna might have chap , if she come abroad at all , and so might like to talk about they and show her little hand to I , I resolve to take another opinion , so far as might be upon this matter , without disclose the circumstance . 
 now the wise person in all our part be reckon to be a certain wise woman , well know all over Exmoor by the name of Mother Melldrum . her real name be Maple Durham , as I learn long afterwards ; and she come of an ancient family , but neither of Devon nor Somerset . nevertheless she be quite at home with our proper mode of divination ; and know that we like they well as each man do his own religion she would always practise they for the people of the country . and all the while , she would let we know that she keep a high and nobler mode for those who look down upon this one , not have be breed and bear to it . 
 Mother Melldrum have two house , or rather she have none at all , but two home wherein to find she , accord to the time of year . in summer she live in a pleasant cave , face the cool side of the hill , far inland near Hawkridge and close above Tarr - step , a wonderful crossing of Barle river , make   as everybody know   by Satan , for a wager . but throughout the winter , she find sea - air agreeable , and a place where thing could be have on credit , and more occasion of talk . not but what she could have credit   for every one be afraid of she   in the neighbourhood of Tarr - step ; only there be no one handy own thing worth take . 
 therefore , at the fall of the leaf , when the wood grow damp and irksome , the wise woman always set her face to the warm cliff of the Channel ; where shelter be , and dry fern bedding , and folk to be see in the distance , from a bank upon which the sun shine . and there , as I know from our John Fry   who have be to she about rheumatism , and sheep possess with an evil spirit , and wart on the hand of his son , young John , any one who choose might find she , towards the close of a winter day , gather stick and brown fern for fuel , and talk to herself the while , in a hollow stretch behind the cliff ; which foreigner , who come and go without see much of Exmoor , have call the Valley of Rocks . 
 this valley , or goyal , as we term it , be small for a valley , lie to the west of Linton , about a mile from the town perhaps , and away towards Ley Manor . our homefolk always call it the Danes , or the Denes , which be no more , they tell I , than a hollow place , even as the word ' den ' be . however , let that pass , for I know very little about it ; but the place itself be a pretty one , though nothing to frighten anybody , unless he hath live in a gallipot . it be a green rough - sided hollow , bend at the middle , touch with stone at either crest , and dot here and there with slab in and out the bramble . on the right hand be an upward crag , call by some the Castle , easy enough to scale , and give great view of the Channel . face this , from the inland side and the elbow of the valley , a queer old pile of rock arise , bold behind one another , and quite enough to affright a man , if it only be ten time large . this be call the Devil 's cheese - ring , or the Devil 's cheese - knife , which mean the same thing , as our father be use to eat their cheese from a scoop ; and perhaps in old time the upmost rock   which have fall away since I know it   be like to such an implement , if Satan eat cheese untoaste . 
 but all the middle of this valley be a place to rest in ; to sit and think that trouble be not , if we would not make they . to know the sea outside the hill , but never to behold it ; only by the sound of wave to pity sailor labour . then to watch the sheltered sun , come warmly round the turn , like a guest expect , full of gentle glow and gladness , cast shadow far away as a thing to hug itself , and awaken life from dew , and hope from every spread bud . and then to fall asleep and dream that the fern be all asparagus . 
 alas , I be too young in those day much to care for creature comfort , or to let pure palate have thing that would improve it . anything go down with I , as it do with most of we . too late we know the good from bad ; the knowledge be no pleasure then ; be memory 's medicine rather than the wine of hope . 
 now Mother Melldrum keep she winter in this vale of rock , shelter from the wind and rain within the Devil 's Cheese - ring , which add greatly to her fame because all else , for mile around , be afraid to go near it after dark , or even on a gloomy day . under eave of lichene rock she have a winding passage , which none that ever I know of durst enter but herself . and to this place I go to seek she , in spite of all misgiving , upon a Sunday in Lenten season , when the sheep be fold . 
 our parson   as if he have know my intent   have preach a beautiful sermon about the Witch of Endor , and the peril of they that meddle wantonly with the unseen Powers ; and therein he refer especially to the strange noise in the neighbourhood , and upbraid we for want of faith , and many other backsliding . we listen to he very earnestly , for we like to hear from our better about thing that be beyond we , and to be rouse up now and then , like sheep with a good dog after they , who can pull some wool without bite . nevertheless we could not see how our want of faith could have make that noise , especially at night time , notwithstanding which we believe it , and hop to do a little well . 
 and so we all come home from church ; and most of the people din with we , as they always do on Sundays , because of the distance to go home , with only word inside they . the parson , who always sit next to mother , be afraid that he might have vex we , and would not have the good piece of meat , accord to his custom . but soon we put he at his ease , and show he we be proud of he ; and then he make no more to do , but accept the good of the sirloin . 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 WITCHERY lead to WITCHCRAFT 

 although wellnigh the end of March , the wind blow wild and pierce , as I go on foot that afternoon to Mother Melldrum 's dwelling . it be safe not to take a horse , lest   if anything vex she   she should put a spell upon he ; as have be do to Farmer Snowe 's stable by the wise woman of Simonsbath . 
 the sun be low on the edge of the hill by the time I enter the valley , for I could not leave home till the cattle be tend , and the distance be seven mile or more . the shadow of rock fall far and deep , and the brown dead fern be flutter , and bramble with their sere leaf hang , sway their tatter to and fro , with a red look on they . in patch underneath the crag , a few wild goat be browse ; then they toss their horn , and flee , and leap on ledge , and star at I . moreover , the sound of the sea come up , and go the length of the valley , and there it lap on a butt of rock , and murmur like a shell . 
 take thing one with another , and feel all the lonesomeness , and have no stick with I , I be much inclined to go briskly back , and come at a well season . and when I behold a tall grey shape , of something or another , move at the low end of the valley , where the shade be , it give I such a stroke of fear , after many other , that my thumb which lie in mother 's Bible   bring in my big pocket for the sake of safety   shake so much that it come out , and I could not get it in again . ' this serve I right , ' I say to myself , ' for tamper with Beelzebub . oh that I have listen to parson ! ' 
 and thereupon I strike aside ; not like to run away quite , as some people might call it ; but seek to look like a wanderer who be come to see the valley , and have see almost enough of it . Herein I should have succeed , and go home , and then be angry at my want of courage , but that on the very turn and bending of my footstep , the woman in the distance lift up her staff to I , so that I be bind to stop . 
 and now , be bring face to face , by the will of God   as one might say   with anything that might come of it , I keep myself quite straight and stiff , and thrust away all white feather , trust in my Bible still , hop that it would protect I , though I have disobey it . but upon that remembrance , my conscience take I by the leg , so that I could not go forward . 
 all this while , the fearful woman be come near and more near to I ; and I be glad to sit down on a rock because my knee be shake so . I try to think of many thing , but none of they would come to I ; and I could not take my eye away , though I pray God to be near I . 
 but when she be come so nigh to I that I could descry her feature , there be something in her countenance that make I not dislike she . she look as if she have be visit by many trouble , and have feel they one by one , yet hold enough of kindly nature still to grieve for other . long white hair , on either side , be fall down below her chin ; and through her wrinkle clear bright eye seem to spread themselves upon I . though I have plenty of time to think , I be take by surprise no less , and unable to say anything ; yet eager to hear the silence break , and long for a noise or two . 
 ' thou art not come to I , ' she say , look through my simple face , as if it be but glass , ' to be strike for bone - shave , nor to be bless for barn - gun . give I forth thy hand , John Ridd ; and tell why thou art come to I . ' 
 but I be so much amazed at she know my name and all about I , that I fear to place my hand in her power , or even my tongue by speak . 
 ' have no fear of I , my son ; I have no gift to harm thee ; and if I have , it should be idle . now , if thou hast any wit , tell I why I love thee . ' 
 ' I never have any wit , mother , ' I answer in our Devonshire way ; ' and never set eye on thee before , to the furth of my knowledge . ' 
 ' and yet I know thee as well , John , as if thou wert my grandson . remember you the old Oare oak , and the bog at the head of Exe , and the child who would have die there , but for thy strength and courage , and most of all thy kindness ? that be my granddaughter , John ; and all I have on earth to love . ' 
 now that she come to speak of it , with the place and that , so clearly , I remember all about it   a thing that happen last August , and think how stupid I must have be not to learn more of the little girl who have fall into the black pit , with a basketful of whortleberry , and who might have be gulfe if her little dog have not spy I in the distance . I carry she on my back to mother ; and then we dress she all anew , and take she where she order we ; but she do not tell we who she be , nor anything more than her christian name , and that she be eight year old , and fond of fried batatas . and we do not seek to ask she more ; as our manner be with visitor . 
 but think of this little story , and see how she look at I , I lose my fear of Mother Melldrum , and begin to like she ; partly because I have help she grandchild , and partly that if she be so wise , no need would have be for I to save the little thing from drown . therefore I stand up and say , though scarcely yet establish in my power against her , 
 ' good mother , the shoe she lose be in the mire , and not with we . and we could not match it , although we give she a pair of sister Lizzie 's . ' 
 ' my son , what care I for her shoe ? how simple thou art , and foolish ! accord to the thought of some . now tell I , for thou canst not lie , what have bring thee to I . ' 
 be so ashamed and bashful , I be half - inclined to tell she a lie , until she say that I could not do it ; and then I know that I could not . 
 ' I be come to know , ' I say , look at a rock the while , to keep my voice from shake , ' when I may go to see Lorna Doone . ' 
 no more could I say , though my mind be charge to ask fifty other question . but although I look away , it be plain that I have ask enough . I feel that the wise woman gaze at I in wrath as well as sorrow ; and then I grow angry that any one should seem to make light of Lorna . 
 ' John Ridd , ' say the woman , observe this   for now I face she bravely , ' of whom art thou speak ? be it a child of the man who slay your father ? ' 
 ' I can not tell , mother . how should I know ? and what be that to thee ? ' 
 ' it be something to thy mother , John , and something to thyself , I trow ; and nothing bad could befall thee . ' 
 I wait for she to speak again , because she have speak so sadly that it take my breath away . 
 ' John Ridd , if thou hast any value for thy body or thy soul , thy mother , or thy father 's name , have nought to do with any Doone . ' 
 she gaze at I in earnest so , and raise her voice in say it , until the whole valley , curve like a great bell echo ' Doone , ' that it seem to I my heart be go for every one and everything . if it be God 's will for I to have no more of Lorna , let a sign come out of the rock , and I would try to believe it . but no sign come , and I turn to the woman , and long that she have be a man . 
 ' you poor thing , with bone and blade , pail of water , and door - key , what know you about the destiny of a maiden such as Lorna ? chilblain you may treat , and bone - shave , ringworm , and the scalding ; even scabby sheep may limp the well for your striking . John the Baptist and his cousin , with the wool and hyssop , be for mare , and ail dog , and fowl that have the jaundice . look at I now , Mother Melldrum , be I like a fool ? ' 
 ' that thou art , my son . alas that it be any other ! now behold the end of that ; John Ridd , mark the end of it . ' 
 she point to the castle - rock , where upon a narrow shelf , betwixt we and the come star , a bitter fight be rag . a fine fat sheep , with an honest face , have clomb up very carefully to browse on a bit of juicy grass , now the dew of the land be upon it . to he , from an upper crag , a lean black goat come hurry , with leap , and skirmish of the horn , and an angry noise in his nostril . the goat have graze the place before , to the utmost of his liking , crop in and out with jerk , as their manner be of feed . nevertheless he fall on the sheep with fury and great malice . 
 the simple wether be much inclined to retire from the contest , but look around in vain for any way to peace and comfort . his enemy stand between he and the last leap he have take ; there be nothing leave he but to fight , or be hurl into the sea , five hundred foot below . 
 ' lie down , lie down ! ' I shout to he , as if he be a dog , for I have see a battle like this before , and know that the sheep have no chance of life except from his great weight , and the difficulty of move he . 
 ' lie down , lie down , John Ridd ! ' cry Mother Melldrum , mock I , but without a sign of smile . 
 the poor sheep turn , upon my voice , and look at I so piteously that I could look no long ; but run with all my speed to try and save he from the combat . he see that I could not be in time , for the goat be buck to leap at he , and so the good wether stoop his forehead , with the harmless horn curl aside of it ; and the goat fling his heel up , and rush at he , with quick sharp jump and trick of movement , and the point of his long horn always foremost , and his little scut cock like a gun - hammer . 
 as I run up the steep of the rock , I could not see what they be do , but the sheep must have fight very bravely at last , and yield his ground quite slowly , and I hop almost to save he . but just as my head top the platform of rock , I see he fling from it backward , with a sad low moan and a gurgle . his body make quite a short noise in the air , like a bucket throw down a well shaft , and I could not tell when it strike the water , except by the echo among the rock . so wroth be I with the goat at the moment   be somewhat scant of breath and unable to consider , that I catch he by the right hind - leg , before he could turn from his victory , and hurl he after the sheep , to learn how he like his own compulsion . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 another DANGEROUS INTERVIEW 

 although I leave the Denes at once , have little heart for further question of the wise woman , and be afraid to visit her house under the Devil 's cheese - ring   to which she kindly invite I , and although I run most part of the way , it be very late for farm - house time upon a Sunday evening before I be back at Plover 's barrow . my mother have great desire to know all about the matter ; but I could not reconcile it with my respect so to frighten she . therefore I try to sleep it off , keep my own counsel ; and when that prove of no avail , I strove to work it away , it might be , by heavy outdoor labour , and weariness , and good feeding . these indeed have some effect , and help to pass a week or two , with more pain of hand than heart to I . 
 but when the weather change in earnest , and the frost be go , and the south - west wind blow softly , and the lamb be at play with the daisy , it be more than I could do to keep from thought of Lorna . for now the field be spread with growth , and the water clothe with sunshine , and light and shadow , step by step , wander over the furzy clef . all the side of the hilly wood be gather in and out with green , silver - grey , or russet point , accord to the several manner of the tree begin . and if one stand beneath an elm , with any heart to look at it , lo ! all the ground be strew with flake   too small to know their meaning , and all the spray above be rasp and tremble with a redness . and so I stop beneath the tree , and carve L.D. upon it , and wonder at the bud of thought that seem to swell inside I . 
 the upshot of it all be this , that as no Lorna come to I , except in dream or fancy , and as my life be not worth live without constant sign of she , forth I must again to find she , and say more than a man can tell . therefore , without wait long for the moving of the spring , dress I be in grand attire   so far as I have get it , and think my appearance good , although with doubt about it   be force to dress in the hay - tallat , round the corner of the wood - stack go I very knowingly for Lizzie 's eye be wondrous sharp and then I be sure of meet none who would care or dare to speak of I . 
 it lie upon my conscience often that I have not make dear Annie secret to this history ; although in all thing I could trust she , and she love I like a lamb . many and many a time I try , and more than once begin the thing ; but there come a dryness in my throat , and a knock under the roof of my mouth , and a longing to put it off again , as perhaps might be the wise . and then I would remember too that I have no right to speak of Lorna as if she be common property . 
 this time I long to take my gun , and be half resolve to do so ; because it seem so hard a thing to be shoot at and have no chance of shooting ; but when I come to remember the steepness and the slippery nature of the waterslide , there seem but little likelihood of keep dry the powder . therefore I be arm with nothing but a good stout holly staff , season well for many a winter in our back - kitchen chimney . 
 although my heart be leap high with the prospect of some adventure , and the fear of meet Lorna , I could not but be gladden by the softness of the weather , and the welcome way of everything . there be that power all round , that power and that goodness , which make we come , as it be , outside our bodily self , to share they . over and beside we breathe the joy of hope and promise ; under foot be trouble past ; in the distance bower newness tempt we ever forward . we quicken with largesse of life , and spring with vivid mystery . 
 and , in good sooth , I have to spring , and no mystery about it , ere ever I get to the top of the rift lead into Doone - glade . for the stream be rush down in strength , and rave at every corner ; a mort of rain have fall last night and no wind come to wipe it . however , I reach the head ere dark with more difficulty than danger , and sit in a place which comfort my back and leg desirably . 
 Hereupon I grow so happy at be on dry land again , and come to look for Lorna , with pretty tree around I , that what do I do but fall asleep with the holly - stick in front of I , and my good coat sink in a bed of moss , with water and wood - sorrel . Mayhap I have not do so , nor yet enjoy the spring so much , if so be I have not take three part of a gallon of cider at home , at Plover 's barrow , because of the lowness and sink ever since I meet Mother Melldrum . 
 there be a little runnel go softly down beside I , fall from the upper rock by the mean of moss and grass , as if it fear to make a noise , and have a mother sleep . now and then it seem to stop , in fear of its own dropping , and wait for some order ; and the blade of grass that straighten to it turn their point a little way , and offer their allegiance to wind instead of water . yet before their carkle edge bent more than a drive saw , down the water come again with heavy drop and pat of run , and bright anger at neglect . 
 this be very pleasant to I , now and then , to gaze at , blink as the water blink , and fall back to sleep again . suddenly my sleep be break by a shade cast over I ; between I and the low sunlight Lorna Doone be stand . 
 ' Master Ridd , be you mad ? ' she say , and take my hand to move I . 
 ' not mad , but half asleep , ' I answer , feign not to notice she , that so she might keep hold of I . 
 ' come away , come away , if you care for life . the patrol will be here directly . be quick , Master Ridd , let I hide thee . ' 
 ' I will not stir a step , ' say I , though be in the great fright that might be well imagine , ' unless you call I " John . " ' 
 ' well , John , then Master John Ridd , be quick , if you have any to care for you . ' 
 ' I have many that care for I , ' I say , just to let she know ; ' and I will follow you , Mistress Lorna , albeit without any hurry , unless there be peril to more than I . ' 
 without another word she lead I , though with many timid glance towards the upper valley , to , and into , her little bower , where the inlet through the rock be . I be almost sure that I speak before   though I can not now go seek for it , and my memory be but a wear - out tub   of a certain deep and perilous pit , in which I be like to drown myself through hurry and fright of boyhood . and even then I wonder greatly , and be vex with Lorna for send I in that heedless manner into such an entrance . but now it be clear that she have be right and the fault mine own entirely ; for the entrance to the pit be only to be find by seek it . inside the niche of native stone , the plain thing of all to see , at any rate by day light , be the stairway hew from rock , and lead up the mountain , by mean of which I have escape , as before related . to the right side of this be the mouth of the pit , still look very formidable ; though Lorna laugh at my fear of it , for she draw her water thence . but on the left be a narrow crevice , very difficult to espy , and have a sweep of grey ivy lay , like a slouching beaver , over it . a man here come from the brightness of the outer air , with eye daze by the twilight , would never think of see this and follow it to its meaning . 
 Lorna raise the screen for I , but I have much ado to pass , on account of bulk and stature . instead of be proud of my size   as it seem to I she ought to be   Lorna laugh so quietly that I be ready to knock my head or elbow against anything , and say no more about it . however , I get through at last without a word of compliment , and break into the pleasant room , the lone retreat of Lorna . 
 the chamber be of unhewn rock , round , as near as might be , eighteen or twenty foot across , and gay with rich variety of fern and moss and lichen . the fern be in its winter still , or coil for the spring - tide ; but moss be in abundant life , some feathering , and some goblete , and some with fringe of red to it . overhead there be no ceiling but the sky itself , flake with little cloud of April whitely wander over it . the floor be make of soft low grass , mix with moss and primrose ; and in a niche of shelter move the delicate wood - sorrel . here and there , around the side , be ' chair of live stone , ' as some latin writer say , whose name have quite escape I ; and in the midst a tiny spring arise , with crystal bead in it , and a soft voice as of a laugh dream , and dimple like a sleeping babe . then , after go round a little , with surprise of daylight , the water overwelle the edge , and softly go through line of light to shadow and an untold bourne . 
 while I be gaze at all these thing with wonder and some sadness , Lorna turn upon I lightly   as her manner be   and say , 
 ' where be the new - lay egg , Master Ridd ? or hath blue hen cease lay ? ' 
 I do not altogether like the way in which she say it with a sort of dialect , as if my speech could be laugh at . 
 ' here be some , ' I answer , speak as if in spite of she . ' I would have bring thee twice as many , but that I fear to crush they in the narrow way , Mistress Lorna . ' 
 and so I lay she out two dozen upon the moss of the rock - ledge , unwind the wisp of hay from each as it come safe out of my pocket . Lorna look with grow wonder , as I add one to one ; and when I have place they side by side , and bid she now to tell they , to my amazement what do she do but burst into a flood of tear . 
 ' what have I do ? ' I ask , with shame , scarce dare even to look at she , because her grief be not like Annie 's a thing that could be coax away , and leave a joy in go ' oh , what have I do to vex you so ? ' 
 ' it be nothing do by you , Master Ridd , ' she answer , very proudly , as if nought I do could matter ; ' it be only something that come upon I with the scent of the pure true clover - hay . moreover , you have be too kind ; and I be not use to kindness . ' 
 some sort of awkwardness be on I , at her word and weeping , as if I would like to say something , but fear to make thing bad perhaps than they be already . therefore I abstain from speech , as I would in my own pain . and as it happen , this be the way to make she tell I more about it . not that I be curious , beyond what pity urge I and the strange affair around she ; and now I gaze upon the floor , lest I should seem to watch she ; but none the less for that I know all that she be do . 
 Lorna go a little way , as if she would not think of I nor care for one so careless ; and all my heart give a sudden jump , to go like a mad thing after she ; until she turn of her own accord , and with a little sigh come back to I . her eye be soft with trouble 's shadow , and the proud lift of her neck be go , and beauty 's vanity bear down by woman 's want of sustenance . 
 ' Master Ridd , ' she say in the soft voice that ever flow between two lip , ' have I do aught to offend you ? ' 
 Hereupon it go hard with I , not to catch she up and kiss she , in the manner in which she be look ; only it smite I suddenly that this would be a low advantage of her trust and helplessness . she seem to know what I would be at , and to doubt very greatly about it , whether as a child of old she might permit the usage . all sort of thing go through my head , as I make myself look away from she , for fear of be tempt beyond what I could bear . and the upshot of it be that I say , within my heart and through it , ' John Ridd , be on thy very good manner with this lonely maiden . ' 
 Lorna like I all the well for my good forbearance ; because she do not love I yet , and have not think about it ; at least so far as I know . and though her eye be so beauteous , so very soft and kindly , there be   to my apprehension   some great power in they , as if she would not have a thing , unless her judgment leap with it . 
 but now her judgment leap with I , because I have behave so well ; and be of quick urgent nature such as I delight in , for the change from mine own slowness she , without any let or hindrance , sit over against I , now raise and now drop fringe over those sweet eye that be the road - light of her tongue , Lorna tell I all about everything I wish to know , every little thing she know , except indeed that point of point , how Master Ridd stand with she . 
 although it weary I no whit , it might be wearisome for folk who can not look at Lorna , to hear the story all in speech , exactly as she tell it ; therefore let I put it shortly , to the good of my remembrance . 
 Nay , pardon I , whosoever thou art , for seem fickle and rude to thee ; I have try to do as first propose , to tell the tale in my own word , as of another 's fortune . but , lo ! I be beset at once with many heavy obstacle , which grow as I go onward , until I know not where I be , and mingle past and present . and two of these difficulty only be enough to stop I ; the one that I must coldly speak without the force of pity , the other that I , off and on , confuse myself with Lorna , as might be well expect . 
 therefore let she tell the story , with her own sweet voice and manner ; and if ye find it wearisome , seek in yourself the weariness . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 LORNA begin she STORY 

 ' I can not go through all my thought so as to make they clear to you , nor have I ever dwelt on thing , to shape a story of they . I know not where the beginning be , nor where the middle ought to be , nor even how at the present time I feel , or think , or ought to think . if I look for help to those around I , who should tell I right and wrong   be old and much wise , I meet sometimes with laughter , and at other time with anger . 
 ' there be but two in the world who ever listen and try to help I ; one of they be my grandfather , and the other be a man of wisdom , whom we call the Counsellor . my grandfather , Sir Ensor Doone , be very old and harsh of manner   except indeed to I ; he seem to know what be right and wrong , but not to want to think of it . the Counsellor , on the other hand , though full of life and subtlety , treat my question as of play , and not gravely worth his while to answer , unless he can make wit of they . 
 ' and among the woman there be none with whom I can hold converse , since my Aunt Sabina die , who take such pain to teach I . she be a lady of high repute and lofty way , and learning , but grieve and harass more and more by the coarseness , and the violence , and the ignorance around she . in vain she strove , from year to year , to make the young man hearken , to teach they what become their birth , and give they sense of honour . it be her favourite word , poor thing ! and they call she " Old Aunt Honour . " very often she use to say that I be her only comfort , and I be sure she be my only one ; and when she die it be more to I than if I have lose a mother . 
 ' for I have no remembrance now of father or of mother , although they say that my father be the eld son of Sir Ensor Doone , and the brave and the good of they . and so they call I heiress to this little realm of violence ; and in sorry sport sometimes , I be their Princess or their queen . 
 ' many people live here , as I be force to do , would perhaps be very happy , and perhaps I ought to be so . we have a beauteous valley , shelter from the cold of winter and power of the summer sun , untroubled also by the storm and mist that veil the mountain ; although I must acknowledge that it be apt to rain too often . the grass moreover be so fresh , and the brook so bright and lively , and flower of so many hue come after one another that no one need be dull , if only leave alone with they . 
 ' and so in the early day perhaps , when morning breathe around I , and the sun be go upward , and light be play everywhere , I be not so far beside they all as to live in shadow . but when the evening gather down , and the sky be spread with sadness , and the day have spend itself ; then a cloud of lonely trouble fall , like night , upon I . I can not see the thing I quest for of a world beyond I ; I can not join the peace and quiet of the depth above I ; neither have I any pleasure in the brightness of the star . 
 ' what I want to know be something none of they can tell I what be I , and why set here , and when shall I be with they ? I see that you be surprised a little at this my curiosity . perhaps such question never spring in any wholesome spirit . but they be in the depth of mine , and I can not be quit of they . 
 ' meantime , all around I be violence and robbery , coarse delight and savage pain , reckless joke and hopeless death . be it any wonder that I can not sink with these , that I can not so forget my soul , as to live the life of brute , and die the death more horrible because it dream of wake ? there be none to lead I forward , there be none to teach I right ; young as I be , I live beneath a curse that last for ever . ' 
 here Lorna break down for awhile , and cry so very piteously , that doubt of my knowledge , and of any power to comfort , I do my good to hold my peace , and try to look very cheerful . then think that might be bad manner , I go to wipe her eye for she . 
 ' Master Ridd , ' she begin again , ' I be both ashamed and vex at my own childish folly . but you , who have a mother , who think   you say   so much of you , and sister , and a quiet home ; you can not tell   it be not likely   what a lonely nature be . how it leap in mirth sometimes , with only heaven touch it ; and how it fall away desponding , when the dreary weight creep on . 
 ' it do not happen many time that I give way like this ; more shame now to do so , when I ought to entertain you . sometimes I be so full of anger , that I dare not trust to speech , at thing they can not hide from I ; and perhaps you would be much surprised that reckless man would care so much to elude a young girl 's knowledge . they use to boast to Aunt Sabina of pillage and of cruelty , on purpose to enrage she ; but they never boast to I . it even make I smile sometimes to see how awkwardly they come and offer for temptation to I shin packet , half conceal , of ornament and finery , of ring , or chain , or jewel , lately belong to other people . 
 ' but when I try to search the past , to get a sense of what befell I ere my own perception form ; to feel back for the line of childhood , as a trace of gossamer , then I only know that nought live long than God will it . so may after sin go by , for we be child always , as the Counsellor have tell I ; so may we , beyond the cloud , seek this infancy of life , and never find its memory . 
 ' but I be talk now of thing which never come across I when any work be toward . it might have be a good thing for I to have have a father to beat these roving out of I ; or a mother to make a home , and teach I how to manage it . for , be leave with none I think ; and nothing ever come of it . nothing , I mean , which I can grasp and have with any surety ; nothing but faint image , and wonderment , and wandering . but often , when I be neither search back into remembrance , nor ask of my parent , but occupy by trifle , something like a sign , or message , or a token of some meaning , seem to glance upon I . whether from the rustle wind , or sound of distant music , or the singing of a bird , like the sun on snow it strike I with a pain of pleasure . 
 ' and often when I wake at night , and listen to the silence , or wander far from people in the grayness of the evening , or stand and look at quiet water have shadow over it , some vague image seem to hover on the skirt of vision , ever change place and outline , ever flit as I follow . this so move and hurry I , in the eagerness and longing , that straightway all my chance be lose ; and memory , scar like a wild bird , fly . or be I as a child perhaps , chase a flown cageling , who among the branch free play and peep at the offer cage   as a home not to be urge on he , and mean to take his time of come , if he come at all ? 
 ' often too I wonder at the odd of fortune , which make I   helpless as I be , and fond of peace and read   the heiress of this mad domain , the sanctuary of unholiness . it be not likely that I shall have much power of authority ; and yet the Counsellor creep up to be my Lord of the Treasury ; and his son aspire to my hand , as of a Royal alliance . well , " honour among thief , " they say ; and mine be the first honour : although among decent folk perhaps , honesty be well . 
 ' we should not be so quiet here , and safe from interruption but that I have beg one privilege rather than command it . this be that the low end , just this narrowing of the valley , where it be most hard to come at , might be look upon as mine , except for purpose of guard . therefore none beside the sentry ever trespass on I here , unless it be my grandfather , or the Counsellor or Carver . 
 ' by your face , Master Ridd , I see that you have hear of Carver Doone . for strength and courage and resource he bear the first repute among we , as might well be expect from the son of the Counsellor . but he differ from his father , in be very hot and savage , and quite free from argument . the Counsellor , who be my uncle , give his son the good advice ; commend all the virtue , with eloquence and wisdom ; yet himself abstain from they accurately and impartially . 
 ' you must be tired of this story , and the time I take to think , and the weakness of my telling ; but my life from day to day show so little variance . among the rider there be none whose safe return I watch for I mean none more than other and indeed there seem no risk , all be now so feared of we . neither of the old man be there whom I can revere or love   except alone my grandfather , whom I love with trembling : neither of the woman any whom I like to deal with , unless it be a little maiden whom I save from starve . 
 ' a little cornish girl she be , and shape in western manner , not so very much less in width than if you take her lengthwise . her father seem to have be a miner , a Cornishman   as she declare   of more than average excellence , and well than any two man to be find in Devonshire , or any four in Somerset . very few thing can have be beyond his power of performance , and yet he leave his daughter to starve upon a peat - rick . she do not know how this be do , and look upon it as a mystery , the meaning of which will some day be clear , and redound to her father 's honour . his name be Simon Carfax , and he come as the captain of a gang from one of the cornish stannarie . Gwenny Carfax , my young maid , well remember how her father be bring up from Cornwall . her mother have be bury , just a week or so before ; and he be sad about it , and have be off his work , and be ready for another job . then people come to he by night , and say that he must want a change , and everybody lose their wife , and work be the way to mend it . so what with grief , and over - think , and the inside of a square bottle , Gwenny say they bring he off , to become a mighty captain , and choose the country round . the last she see of he be this , that he go down a ladder somewhere on the wild of Exmoor , leave she with bread and cheese , and his travel - hat to see to . and from that day to this he never come above the ground again ; so far as we can hear of . 
 ' but Gwenny , hold to his hat , and have eat the bread and cheese   when he come no more to help she , dwelt three day near the mouth of the hole ; and then it be close over , the while that she be sleep . with weakness and with want of food , she lose herself distressfully , and go away for mile or more , and lie upon a peat - rick , to die before the raven . 
 ' that very day I chance to return from Aunt Sabina 's die - place ; for she would not die in Glen Doone , she say , lest the angel fear to come for she ; and so she be take to a cottage in a lonely valley . I be allow to visit she , for even we durst not refuse the wish of the dying ; and if a priest have be desire , we should have make bold with he . return very sorrowful , and care now for nothing , I find this little stray thing lie , her arm upon she , and not a sign of life , except the way that she be bite . black root - stuff be in her mouth , and a piece of dirty sheep 's wool , and at her foot an old egg - shell of some bird of the moorland . 
 ' I try to raise she , but she be too square and heavy for I ; and so I put food in her mouth , and leave she to do right with it . and this she do in a little time ; for the victual be very choice and rare , be what I have take over to tempt poor Aunt Sabina . Gwenny eat they without delay , and then be ready to eat the basket and the ware that contain they . 
 ' Gwenny take I for an angel though I be little like one , as you see , Master Ridd ; and she follow I , expect that I would open wing and fly when we come to any difficulty . I bring she home with I , so far as this can be a home , and she make herself my sole attendant , without so much as ask I . she have beat two or three other girl , who use to wait upon I , until they be afraid to come near the house of my grandfather . she seem to have no kind of fear even of our roughest man ; and yet she look with reverence and awe upon the Counsellor . as for the wickedness , and theft , and revelry around she , she say it be no concern of her , and they know their own business well . by this way of regard man she have win upon our rider , so that she be almost free from all control of place and season , and be allow to pass where none even of the youth may go . be so wide , and short , and flat , she have none to pay her compliment ; and , be there any , she would scorn they , as not be Cornishmen . sometimes she wander far , by moonlight , on the moor and up the river , to give her father   as she say   another chance of find she , and she come back not a wit defeat , or discourage , or depressed , but confident that he be only wait for the proper time . 
 ' Herein she set I good example of a patience and contentment hard for I to imitate . oftentime I be vex by thing I can not meddle with , yet which can not be keep from I , that I be at the point of fly from this dreadful valley , and risk all that can betide I in the unknown outer world . if it be not for my grandfather , I would have do so long ago ; but I can not bear that he should die with no gentle hand to comfort he ; and I fear to think of the conflict that must ensue for the government , if there be a dispute succession . 
 ' ah I ! we be to be pity greatly , rather than condemn , by people whose thing we have take from they ; for I have read , and seem almost to understand about it , that there be place on the earth where gentle peace , and love of home , and knowledge of one 's neighbour prevail , and be , with reason , look for as the usual state of thing . there honest folk may go to work in the glory of the sunrise , with hope of come home again quite safe in the quiet evening , and find all their child ; and even in the darkness they have no fear of lie down , and drop off to slumber , and hearken to the wind of night , not as to an enemy try to find entrance , but a friend who come to tell the value of their comfort . 
 ' of all this golden ease I hear , but never see the like of it ; and , haply , I shall never do so , be bear to turbulence . once , indeed , I have the offer of escape , and kinsman 's aid , and high place in the gay , bright world ; and yet I be not tempt much , or , at least , dare not to trust it . and it end very sadly , so dreadfully that I even shrink from tell you about it ; for that one terror change my life , in a moment , at a blow , from childhood and from thought of play and commune with the flower and tree , to a sense of death and darkness , and a heavy weight of earth . be content now , Master Ridd ask I nothing more about it , so your sleep be sounder . ' 
 but I , John Ridd , be young and new , and very fond of hear thing to make my blood to tingle , have no more of manner than to urge poor Lorna onwards , hop , perhaps , in depth of heart , that she might have to hold by I , when the bad come to the bad of it . therefore she go on again . 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 LORNA end she STORY 

 ' it be not a twelvemonth yet , although it seem ten year agone , since I blow the downy globe to learn the time of day , or set beneath my chin the veining of the varnish buttercup , or fire the fox - glove cannonade , or make a captive of myself with dandelion fetter ; for then I have not very much to trouble I in earnest , but go about , romance gravely , play at bo - peep with fear , make for myself strong hero of gray rock or fir - tree , add to my own importance , as the child love to do . 
 ' as yet I have not truly learn the evil of our living , the scorn of law , the outrage , and the sorrow cause to other . it even be a point with all to hide the roughness from I , to show I but the gallant side , and keep in shade the other . my grandfather , Sir Ensor Doone , have give strictest order , as I discover afterwards , that in my presence all should be seemly , kind , and vigilant . nor be it very difficult to keep most part of the mischief from I , for no Doone ever rob at home , neither do they quarrel much , except at time of gambling . and though Sir Ensor Doone be now so old and grow feeble , his own way he will have still , and no one dare deny he . even our fierce and most mighty swordsman , sear from all sense of right or wrong , yet have plentiful sense of fear , when bring before that white - haired man . not that he be rough with they , or querulous , or rebukeful ; but that he have a strange soft smile , and a gaze they can not answer , and a knowledge deeply far than they have of themselves . under his protection , I be as safe from all those man   some of whom be but little akin to I   as if I sleep beneath the roof of the King 's Lord Justiciary . 
 ' but now , at the time I speak of , one evening of last summer , a horrible thing befell , which take all play of childhood from I . the fifteenth day of last July be very hot and sultry , long after the time of sundown ; and I be pay heed of it , because of the old saying that if it rain then , rain will fall on forty day thereafter . I have be long by the waterside at this low end of the valley , plait a little crown of woodbine crockete with sprig of heath to please my grandfather , who like to see I gay at supper - time . be proud of my tiara , which have cost some trouble , I set it on my head at once , to save the chance of crush , and carry my gray hat , venture by a path not often trod . for I must be home at the supper - time , or grandfather would be exceed wrath ; and the bad of his anger be that he never condescend to show it . 
 ' therefore , instead of the open mead , or the winding of the river , I make short cut through the ash - tree covert which lie in the middle of our vale , with the water skirt or cleave it . you have never be up so far as that at least to the good of my knowledge but you see it like a long gray spot , from the top of the cliff above we . here I be not likely to meet any of our people because the young one be afraid of some ancient tale about it , and the old one have no love of tree where gunshot be uncertain . 
 ' it be more almost than dusk , down below the tree - leaf , and I be eager to go through , and be again beyond it . for the gray dark hang around I , scarcely show shadow ; and the little light that glimmer seem to come up from the ground . for the earth be strow with the winter - spread and coil of last year 's foliage , the lichene claw of chalky twig , and the numberless decay which give a light in its decaying . I , for my part , hasten shyly , ready to draw back and run from hare , or rabbit , or small field - mouse . 
 ' at a sudden turn of the narrow path , where it stop again to the river , a man leap out from behind a tree , and stop I , and seize hold of I . I try to shriek , but my voice be still ; I could only hear my heart . 
 ' " now , Cousin Lorna , my good cousin , " he say , with ease and calmness ; " your voice be very sweet , no doubt , from all that I can see of you . but I pray you keep it still , unless you would give to dusty death your very good cousin and trusty guardian , Alan Brandir of Loch Awe . " 
 ' " you my guardian ! " I say , for the idea be too ludicrous ; and ludicrous thing always strike I first , through some fault of nature . 
 ' " I have in truth that honour , madam , " he answer , with a sweeping bow ; " unless I err in take you for Mistress Lorna Doone . " 
 ' " you have not mistake I . my name be Lorna Doone . " 
 ' he look at I , with gravity , and be inclined to make some claim to close consideration upon the score of kinship ; but I shrunk back , and only say , " yes , my name be Lorna Doone . " 
 ' " then I be your faithful guardian , Alan Brandir of Loch Awe ; call Lord Alan Brandir , son of a worthy peer of Scotland . now will you confide in I ? " 
 ' " I confide in you ! " I cry , look at he with amazement ; " why , you be not old than I be ! " 
 ' " yes I be , three year at least . you , my ward , be not sixteen . I , your worshipful guardian , be almost nineteen year of age . " 
 ' upon hear this I look at he , for that seem then a venerable age ; but the more I look the more I doubt , although he be dress quite like a man . he lead I in a courtly manner , step at his tall to an open place beside the water ; where the light come as in channel , and be make the most of by glance wave and fair white stone . 
 ' " now be I to your liking , cousin ? " he ask , when I have gaze at he , until I be almost ashamed , except at such a stripling . " do my Cousin Lorna judge kindly of her guardian , and her near kinsman ? in a word , be our admiration mutual ? " 
 ' " truly I know not , " I say ; " but you seem good - natured , and to have no harm in you . do they trust you with a sword ? " 
 ' for in my usage among man of stature and strong presence , this pretty youth , so tricked and slender , seem nothing but a doll to I . although he scar I in the wood , now that I see he in good twilight , lo ! he be but little great than my little self ; and so tasselled and so ruffle with a mint of bravery , and a green coat bar with red , and a slim sword hang under he , it be the utmost I could do to look at he half - gravely . 
 ' " I fear that my presence hath scarce enough of ferocity about it , "   he give a jerk to his sword as he speak , and clank it on the brook - stone ; " yet do I assure you , cousin , that I be not without some prowess ; and many a master of defence hath this good sword of mine disarm . now if the bold and big robber in all this charming valley durst so much as breathe the scent of that flower coronal , which doth not adorn but be adorn " here he talk some nonsense " I would cleave he from head to foot , ere ever he could fly or cry . " 
 ' " hush ! " I say ; " talk not so loudly , or thou mayst have to do both thyself , and do they both in vain . " 
 ' for he be quite forget now , in his bravery before I , where he stand , and with whom he speak , and how the summer lightning shine above the hill and down the hollow . and as I gaze on this slight fair youth , clearly one of high birth and breeding   albeit over - boastful , a chill of fear creep over I ; because he have no strength or substance , and would be no more than a pin - cushion before the great sword of the Doones . 
 ' " I pray you be not vex with I , " he answer , in a soft voice ; " for I have travel far and sorely , for the sake of see you . I know right well among whom I be , and that their hospitality be more of the knife than the salt - stand . nevertheless I be safe enough , for my foot be the fleet in Scotland , and what be these hill to I ? tush ! I have see some border foray among wilder spirit and crafty man than these be . once I mind some year agone , when I be quite a stripling lad " 
 ' " worshipful guardian , " I say , " there be no time now for history . if thou art in no haste , I be , and can not stay here idle . only tell I how I be akin and under wardship to thee , and what purpose bring thee here . " 
 ' " in order , cousin all thing in order , even with fair lady . first , I be thy uncle 's son , my father be thy mother 's brother , or at least thy grandmother 's unless I be deceive in that which I have guess , and no other man . for my father , be a lead lord in the council of King Charles the Second , appoint I to learn the law , not for my livelihood , thank God , but because he feel the lack of it in affair of state . but first your leave , young Mistress Lorna ; I can not lay down legal maxim , without aid of smoke . " 
 ' he lean against a willow - tree , and draw from a gild box a little dark thing like a stick , place it between his lip , and then strike a flint on steel make fire and catch it upon touchwood . with this he kindle the tip of the stick , until it glow with a ring of red , and then he breathe forth curl of smoke , blue and smell on the air like spice . I have never see this do before , though acquaint with tobacco - pipe ; and it make I laugh , until I think of the peril that must follow it . 
 ' " Cousin , have no fear , " he say ; " this make I all the safe ; they will take I for a glow - worm , and thee for the flower it shin upon . but to return of law I learn as you may suppose , but little ; although I have capacity . but the thing be far too dull for I . all I care for be adventure , move chance , and hot encounter ; therefore all of law I learn be how to live without it . nevertheless , for amusement 's sake , as I must need be at my desk an hour or so in the afternoon , I take to the sporting branch of the law , the pitfall , and the ambuscade ; and of all the trap to be lay therein , pedigree be the rare . there be scarce a man worth a cross of butter , but what you may find a hole in his shield within four generation . and so I strike our own escutcheon , and it sound hollow . there be a point but hee not that ; enough that be curious now , I follow up the quarry , and I be come to this at last we , even we , the lord of Loch Awe , have an outlaw for our cousin , and I would we have more , if they be like you . " 
 ' " Sir , " I answer , be amuse by his manner , which be new to I   for the Doones be much in earnest , ' surely you count it no disgrace to be of kin to Sir Ensor Doone , and all his honest family ! " 
 ' " if it be so , it be in truth the very high honour and would heal ten hole in our escutcheon . what noble family but spring from a captain among robber ? trade alone can spoil our blood ; robbery purifie it . the robbery of one age be the chivalry of the next . we may start anew , and vie with even the nobility of France , if we can once enrol but half the Doones upon our lineage . " 
 ' " I like not to hear you speak of the Doones , as if they be no more than that , " I exclaim , be now unreasonable ; " but will you tell I , once for all , sir , how you be my guardian ? " 
 ' " that I will do . you be my ward because you be my father 's ward , under the scottish law ; and now my father be so deaf , I have succeed to that right at least in my own opinion under which claim I be here to neglect my trust no long , but to lead you away from scene and deed which   though of good repute and comely   be not the good for young gentlewoman . there speak I not like a guardian ? after that can you mistrust I ? " 
 ' " but , " say I , " good Cousin Alan   if I may so call you , it be not meet for young gentlewoman to go away with young gentleman , though fifty time their guardian . but if you will only come with I , and explain your tale to my grandfather , he will listen to you quietly , and take no advantage of you . " 
 ' " I thank you much , kind Mistress Lorna , to lead the goose into the fox 's den ! but , set by all thought of danger , I have other reason against it . now , come with your faithful guardian , child . I will pledge my honour against all harm , and to bear you safe to London . by the law of the realm , I be now entitle to the custody of your fair person , and of all your chattel . " 
 ' " but , sir , all that you have learn of law , be how to live without it . " 
 ' " fairly meet , fair cousin mine ! your wit will do I credit , after a little sharpening . and there be none to do that well than your aunt , my mother . although she know not of my coming , she be long to receive you . come , and in a few month ' time you shall set the mode at Court , instead of pin here , and weave coronal of daisy . " 
 ' I turn aside , and think a little . although he seem so light of mind , and gay in dress and manner , I could not doubt his honesty ; and see , beneath his jaunty air , true mettle and ripe bravery . Scarce have I think of his project twice , until he speak of my aunt , his mother , but then the form of my dear friend , my sweet Aunt Sabina , seem to come and bid I listen , for this be what she pray for . moreover I feel   though not as now   that Doone Glen be no place for I or any proud young maiden . but while I think , the yellow lightning spread behind a bulk of cloud , three time ere the flash be do , far off and void of thunder ; and from the pile of cloud before it , cut as from black paper , and light to depth of blackness by the blaze behind it , a form as of an aged man , sit in a chair loose - mantle , seem to lift a hand and warn . 
 ' this mind I of my grandfather , and all the care I owe he . moreover , now the storm be rise and I begin to grow afraid ; for of all thing awful to I thunder be the dreadfulest . it doth so growl , like a lion come , and then so roll , and roar , and rumble , out of a thickening darkness , then crack like the last trump overhead through cloven air and terror , that all my heart lie low and quiver , like a weed in water . I listen now for the distant rolling of the great black storm , and hear it , and be hurry by it . but the youth before I wave his roll tobacco at it , and drawl in his dainty tone and manner , 
 ' " the sky be have a smoke , I see , and dropping spark , and grumble . I should have think these Exmoor hill too small to gather thunder . " 
 ' " I can not go , I will not go with you , Lord Alan Brandir , " I answer , be vex a little by those word of his . " you be not grave enough for I , you be not old enough for I . my Aunt Sabina would not have wish it ; nor would I leave my grandfather , without his full permission . I thank you much for come , sir ; but be go at once by the way you come ; and pray how do you come , sir ? " 
 ' " fair cousin , you will grieve for this ; you will mourn , when you can not mend it . I would my mother have be here , soon would she have persuade you . and yet , " he add , with the smile of his accustomed gaiety , " it would have be an unco thing , as we say in Scotland , for her ladyship to have wait upon you , as her graceless son have do , and hop to do again ere long . down the cliff I come , and up they I must make way back again . now adieu , fair Cousin Lorna , I see you be in haste tonight ; but I be right proud of my guardianship . give I just one flower for token " here he kiss his hand to I , and I throw he a truss of woodbine " adieu , fair cousin , trust I well , I will soon be here again . " 
 ' " that thou never shalt , sir , " cry a voice as loud as a culverin ; and Carver Doone have Alan Brandir as a spider hath a fly . the boy make a little shriek at first , with the sudden shock and the terror ; then he look , methought , ashamed of himself , and set his face to fight for it . very bravely he strove and struggle , to free one arm and grasp his sword ; but as well might an infant bury alive attempt to lift his gravestone . Carver Doone , with his great arm wrap around the slim gay body , smile   as I see by the flash from heaven   at the poor young face turn up to he ; then   as a nurse bear off a child , who be loath to go to bed , he lift the youth from his foot , and bear he away into the darkness . 
 ' I be young then . I be old now ; old by ten year , in thought , although it be not a twelvemonth since . if that black deed be do again , I could follow , and could combat it , could throw weak arm on the murderer , and strive to be murder also . I be now at home with violence ; and no dark death surprise I . 
 ' but , be as I be that night , the horror overcome I . the crash of thunder overhead , the last despairing look , the death - piece frame with blaze of lightning my young heart be so affrighted that I could not gasp . my breath go from I , and I know not where I be , or who , or what . only that I lay , and cower , under great tree full of thunder ; and could neither count , nor moan , nor have my foot to help I . 
 ' yet hearken , as a coward do , through the brushing of the wind , and echo of far noise , I hear a sharp sound as of iron , and a fall of heavy wood . no unmanly shriek come with it , neither cry for mercy . Carver Doone know what it be ; and so do Alan Brandir . ' 
 here Lorna Doone could tell no more , be overcome with weeping . only through her tear she whisper , as a thing too bad to tell , that she have see that giant Carver , in a few day afterwards , smoke a little round brown stick , like those of her poor cousin . I could not press she any more with question , or for clearness ; although I long very much to know whether she have speak of it to her grandfather or the Counsellor . but she be now in such condition , both of mind and body , from the force of her own fear multiply by tell it , that I do nothing more than coax she , at a distance humbly ; and so that she could see that some one be at least afraid of she . this   although I know not woman in those day , as now I do , and never shall know much of it , this , I say , so bring she round , that all her fear be now for I , and how to get I safely off , without mischance to any one . and sooth to say , in spite of longing just to see if Master Carver could have serve I such a trick as it grow towards the dusk , I be not well pleased to be there ; for it seem a lawless place , and some of Lorna 's fright stay with I as I talk it away from she . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 after hear that tale from Lorna , I go home in sorry spirit , have add fear for she , and misery about , to all my other ailment . and be it not quite certain now that she , be own full cousin to a peer and lord of Scotland   although he be a dead one , must have nought to do with I , a yeoman 's son , and bind to be the father of more yeoman ? I have be very sorry when first I hear about that poor young popinjay , and would gladly have fight hard for he ; but now it strike I that after all he have no right to be there , prowl   as it be   for Lorna , without any invitation : and we farmer love not trespass . still , if I have see the thing , I must have try to save he . 
 moreover , I be greatly vex with my own hesitation , stupidity , or shyness , or whatever else it be , which have hold I back from say , ere she tell her story , what be in my heart to say , videlicet , that I must die unless she let I love she . not that I be fool enough to think that she would answer I accord to my liking , or begin to care about I for a long time yet ; if indeed she ever should , which I hardly dare to hope . but that I have hear from man more skillful in the matter that it be wise to be in time , that so the maid may begin to think , when they know that they be think of . and , to tell the truth , I have bitter fear , on account of her wondrous beauty , lest some young fellow of high birth and fine part , and finish , might steal in before poor I , and cut I out altogether . think of which , I use to double my great fist , without know it , and keep it in my pocket ready . 
 but the bad of all be this , that in my great dismay and anguish to see Lorna weep so , I have promise not to cause she any further trouble from anxiety and fear of harm . and this , be bring to practice , mean that I be not to show myself within the precinct of Glen Doone , for at least another month . unless indeed   as I contrive to edge into the agreement   anything should happen to increase her present trouble and every day 's uneasiness . in that case , she be to throw a dark mantle , or covering of some sort , over a large white stone which hang within the entrance to her retreat I mean the outer entrance and which , though unseen from the valley itself , be   as I have observe   conspicuous from the height where I stand with Uncle Reuben . 
 now come home so sad and weary , yet try to console myself with the thought that love o'erleapeth rank , and must still be lord of all , I find a shameful thing go on , which make I very angry . for it need must happen that young Marwood de Whichehalse , only son of the Baron , rid home that very evening , from chase of the Exmoor bustard , with his hound and serve - man , should take the short cut through our farmyard , and be dry from his exercise , should come and ask for drink . and it need must happen also that there should be none to give it to he but my sister Annie . I more than suspect that he have hear some report of our Annie 's comeliness , and have a mind to satisfy himself upon the subject . now , as he take the large ox - horn of our quarantine - apple cider   which we always keep apart from the rest , be too good except for the quality , he let his finger dwell on Annie 's , by some sort of accident , while he lift his beaver gallantly , and gaze on her face in the light from the west . then what do Annie do   as she herself tell I afterwards   but make she very well curtsey to he , be pleased that he be pleased with she , while she think what a fine young man he be and so much breeding about he ! and in truth he be a dark , handsome fellow , hasty , reckless , and changeable , with a look of sad destiny in his black eye that would make any woman pity he . what he be think of our Annie be not for I to say , although I may think that you could not have find another such maiden on Exmoor , except   of course   my Lorna . 
 though young Squire Marwood be so thirsty , he spend much time over his cider , or at any rate over the ox - horn , and he make many bow to Annie , and drink health to all the family , and speak of I as if I have be his very good friend at Blundell 's ; whereas he know well enough all the time that we have nought to say to one another ; he be three year old , and therefore of course disdain I . but while he be cast about perhaps for some excuse to stop long , and Annie be begin to fear lest mother should come after she , or Eliza be at the window , or Betty up in pig ' house , suddenly there come up to they , as if from the very heart of the earth , that long , low , hollow , mysterious sound which I speak of in winter . 
 the young man start in his saddle , let the horn fall on the horse - step , and gaze all around in wonder ; while as for Annie , she turn like a ghost , and try to slam the door , but fail through the violence of her trembling ;   for never till now have any one hear it so close at hand as you might say   or in the mere fall of the twilight . and by this time there be no man , at least in our parish , but know for the Parson himself have tell we so that it be the devil groan because the Doones be too many for he . 
 Marwood de Whichehalse be not so alarmed but what he see a fine opportunity . he leap from his horse , and lay hold of dear Annie in a highly comforting manner ; and she never would tell we about it   be so shy and modest , whether in breathe his comfort to she he try to take some from her pure lip . I hope he do not , because that to I would seem not the deed of a gentleman , and he be of good old family . 
 at this very moment , who should come into the end of the passage upon they but the heavy writer of these doing I , John Ridd myself , and walk the fast , it may be , on account of the noise I mention . I enter the house with some wrath upon I at see the gazehound in the yard ; for it seem a cruel thing to I to harass the bird in the breeding - time . and to my amazement there I see Squire Marwood among the milk - pan with his arm around our Annie 's waist , and Annie all blush and coax he off , for she be not come to scold yet . 
 perhaps I be wrong ; God know , and if I be , no doubt I shall pay for it ; but I give he the flat of my hand on his head , and down he go in the thick of the milk - pan . he would have have my fist , I doubt , but for have be at school with I ; and after that it be like enough he would never have speak another word . as it be , he lie stunned , with the cream run on he ; while I take poor Annie up and carry she in to mother , who have hear the noise and be frightened . 
 concern this matter I ask no more , but hold myself ready to bear it out in any form convenient , feel that I have do my duty , and care not for the consequence ; only for several day dear Annie seem frightened rather than grateful . but the odd result of it be that Eliza , who have so despise I , and make very rude verse about I , now come try to sit on my knee , and kiss I , and give I the good of the pan . however , I would not allow it , because I hate sudden change . 
 another thing also astonish I namely , a beautiful letter from Marwood de Whichehalse himself   send by a groom soon afterwards , in which he apologise to I , as if I have be his equal , for his rudeness to my sister , which be not intend in the least , but come of their common alarm at the moment , and his desire to comfort she . also he beg permission to come and see I , as an old schoolfellow , and set everything straight between we , as should be among honest Blundellites . 
 all this be so different to my idea of fight out a quarrel , when once it be upon a man , that I know not what to make of it , but bow to high breeding . only one thing I resolve upon , that come when he would he should not see Annie . and to do my sister justice , she have no desire to see he . 
 however , I be too easy , there be no doubt of that , be very quick to forgive a man , and very slow to suspect , unless he hath once lie to I . moreover , as to Annie , it have always seem to I   much against my wish   that some shrewd love of a waiting sort be between she and Tom Faggus : and though Tom have make his fortune now , and everybody respect he , of course he be not to be compare , in that point of respectability , with those people who hang the robber when fortune turn against they . 
 so young Squire Marwood come again , as though I have never smite he , and speak of it in as light a way as if we be still at school together . it be not in my nature , of course , to keep any anger against he ; and I know what a condescension it be for he to visit we . and it be a very grievous thing , which touch small landowner , to see an ancient family day by day decaying : and when we hear that Ley Barton itself , and all the Manor of Lynton be under a heavy mortgage debt to John Lovering of Weare - Gifford , there be not much , in our little way , that we would not gladly do or suffer for the benefit of De Whichehalse . 
 meanwhile the work of the farm be toward , and every day give we more ado to dispose of what itself be do . for after the long dry skeltering wind of March and part of April , there have be a fortnight of soft wet ; and when the sun come forth again , hill and valley , wood and meadow , could not make enough of he . many a spring have I see since then , but never yet two spring alike , and never one so beautiful . or be it that my love come forth and touch the world with beauty ? 
 the spring be in our valley now ; creep first for shelter shyly in the pause of the bluster wind . there the lamb come bleat to she , and the orchis lift up , and the thin dead leaf of clover lie for the new one to spring through . there the stiff thing that sleep , the stubby oak , and the saplin'd beech , drop their brown defiance to she , and prepare for a soft reply . 
 while her over - eager child   who have start forth to meet she , through the frost and shower of sleet , catkin'd hazel , gold - glove withy , youthful elder , and old woodbine , with all the tribe of good hedge - climber   who must hasten while haste they may   be there one of they that do not claim the merit of come first ? 
 there she stay and hold her revel , as soon as the fear of frost be go ; all the air be a fount of freshness , and the earth of gladness , and the laugh water prattle of the kindness of the sun . 
 but all this make it much hard for we , ply the hoe and rake , to keep the field with room upon they for the corn to tiller . the winter wheat be well enough , be sturdy and strong - sided ; but the spring wheat and the barley and the oats be overrun by ill weed grow fast . therefore , as the old saying be , 
 Farmer , that thy wife may thrive , let not burr and burdock wive ; and if thou wouldst keep thy son , see that bine and gith have none . 
 so we be compel to go down the field and up it , strike in and out with care where the green blade hang together , so that each have space to move in and to spread its root abroad . and I do assure you now , though you may not believe I , it be hard work to keep John Fry , Bill Dadds , and Jem Slocomb all in a line and all move nimbly to the tune of my own tool , than it be to set out in the morning alone , and hoe half an acre by dinner - time . for , instead of keep the good ash move , they would for ever be find something to look at or to speak of , or at any rate , to stop with ; blame the shape of their tool perhaps , or talk about other people 's affair ; or , what be most irksome of all to I , take advantage as married man , and whispering joke of no excellence about my having , or have not , or be ashamed of a sweetheart . and this go so far at last that I be force to take two of they and knock their head together ; after which they work with a well will . 
 when we meet together in the evening round the kitchen chimney - place , after the man have have their supper and their heavy boot be go , my mother and Eliza would do their very utmost to learn what I be think of . not that we keep any fire now , after the crock be empty ; but that we love to see the ash cool , and to be together . at these time Annie would never ask I any crafty question   as Eliza do , but would sit with her hair untwined , and one hand underneath her chin , sometimes look softly at I , as much as to say that she know it all and I be no bad off than she . but strange to say my mother dream not , even for an instant , that it be possible for Annie to be think of such a thing . she be so very good and quiet , and careful of the linen , and clever about the cookery and fowl and bacon - curing , that people use to laugh , and say she would never look at a bachelor until her mother order she . but I   perhaps from my own condition and the sense of what it be   feel no certainty about this , and even have another opinion , as be say before . 
 often I be much inclined to speak to she about it , and put she on her guard against the approach of Tom Faggus ; but I could not find how to begin , and fear to make a breach between we ; know that if her mind be set , no word of mine would alter it ; although they need must grieve she deeply . moreover , I feel that , in this case , a certain homely devonshire proverb would come home to I ; that one , I mean , which record that the crock be call the kettle smutty . not , of course , that I compare my innocent maid to a highwayman ; but that Annie might think she bad , and would be too apt to do so , if indeed she love Tom Faggus . and our Cousin Tom , by this time , be live a quiet and godly life ; have retire almost from the trade   except when he need excitement , or come across public officer , and have win the esteem of all whose purse be in his power . 
 perhaps it be needless for I to say that all this time while my month be run or rather crawl , for never month go so slow as that with I neither weed , nor seed , nor cattle , nor my own mother 's anxiety , nor any care for my sister , keep I from look once every day , and even twice on a Sunday , for any sign of Lorna . for my heart be ever weary ; in the bud valley , and by the crystal water , look at the lamb in fold , or the heifer on the mill , labour in trickle furrow , or among the beaded blade ; halt fresh to see the sun lift over the golden - vapoure ridge ; or doffing hat , from sweat of brow , to watch he sink in the low gray sea ; be it as it would of day , of work , or night , or slumber , it be a weary heart I bore , and fear be on the brink of it . 
 all the beauty of the spring go for happy man to think of ; all the increase of the year be for other eye to mark . not a sign of any sunrise for I from my fount of life , not a breath to stir the dead leaf fall on my heart 's Spring . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 a ROYAL invitation 

 although I have , for the most part , so very stout an appetite , that none but mother see any need of encourage I to eat , I could only manage one true good meal in a day , at the time I speak of . mother be in despair at this , and tempt I with the whole of the rack , and even talk of send to Porlock for a druggist who come there twice in a week ; and Annie spend all her time in cooking , and even Lizzie sing song to I ; for she could sing very sweetly . but my conscience tell I that Betty Muxworthy have some reason upon her side . 
 ' Latt the young ozebird aloun , zay I. Makk zuch ado about un , wi ' hogs'-puddens , and hock - bit , and lambs'-mate , and whaten bradd indade , and brewer ' ale avore dinner - time , and she not to zit wi ' no winder aupen draive I mad ' e doo , the ov'ee , zuch a passel of vooul . do ' un good to starve a bit ; and takk zome on 's wackedness out ov un . ' 
 but mother do not see it so ; and she even send for Nicholas Snowe to bring his three daughter with he , and have ale and cake in the parlour , and advise about what the bee be do , and when a swarm might be look for . be vex about this and have to stop at home nearly half the evening , I lose good manner so much as to ask he   even in our own house !   what he mean by not mend the swing - hurdle where the Lynn stream flow from our land into his , and which he be bind to maintain . but he look at I in a superior manner , and say , ' business , young man , in business time . ' 
 I have other reason for be vex with Farmer Nicholas just now , viz . that I have hear a rumour , after church one Sunday when most of all we sorrow over the sin of one another that Master Nicholas Snowe have be see to gaze tenderly at my mother , during a passage of the sermon , wherein the parson speak well and warmly about the duty of christian love . now , put one thing with another , about the bee , and about some duck , and a bullock with a broken knee - cap , I more than suspect that Farmer Nicholas be cast sheep 's eye at my mother ; not only to save all further trouble in the matter of the hurdle , but to override I altogether upon the difficult question of dam . and I know quite well that John Fry 's wife never come to help at the washing without declare that it be a sin for a well - look woman like mother , with plenty to live on , and only three child , to keep all the farmer for mile around so unsettled in their mind about she . Mother use to answer ' oh fie , Mistress Fry ! be good enough to mind your own business . ' but we always see that she smooth her apron , and do her hair up afterwards , and that Mistress Fry go home at night with a cold pig 's foot or a bowl of drip . 
 therefore , on that very night , as I could not well speak to mother about it , without seem undutiful , after light the three young lady for so in sooth they call themselves all the way home with our stable - lanthorn , I beg good leave of Farmer Nicholas   who have hang some way behind we   to say a word in private to he , before he enter his own house . 
 ' Wi ' all the plaisure in laife , my zon , ' he answer very graciously , think perhaps that I be prepared to speak concern Sally . 
 ' now , Farmer Nicholas Snowe , ' I say , scarce know how to begin it , ' you must promise not to be vex with I , for what I be go to say to you . ' 
 ' vaxed wi ' thee ! Noo , noo , my lad . I ' ave a knowed thee too long for that . and thy veyther be my good friend , afore thee . never wrong his neighbour , never spak an unkind word , never have no maneness in he . tuk a vancy to a nice young ' ooman , and never kep she in doubt about it , though there wadn't   mooch to zettle on she . spak his maind laike a man , he do , and right happy he be wi ' she . ah , well a day ! ah , God knoweth well . I never shall zee his laike again . and he be the good judge of a dung - heap anywhere in this county . ' 
 ' well , Master Snowe , ' I answer he , ' it be very handsome of you to say so . and now I be go to be like my father , I be go to speak my mind . ' 
 ' raight there , lad ; raight enough , I reckon . we have have enough of pralimbinary . ' 
 ' then what I want to say be this I will not   have any one court my mother . ' 
 ' Coortin ' of thy mother , lad ? ' cry Farmer Snowe , with as much amazement as if the thing be impossible ; ' why , who ever hath be dooin ' of it ? ' 
 ' yes , courting of my mother , sir . and you know good who come do it . ' 
 ' wull , wull ! what will boy be up to next ? Zhud a ' think herzelf wor the proper judge . no thank ' ee , lad , no need of thy light . know the wai to my own door , at laste ; and have a raight to goo there . ' and he shut I out without so much as offer I a drink of cider . 
 the next afternoon , when work be over , I have see to the horse , for now it be foolish to trust John Fry , because he have so many child , and his wife have take to scold ; and just as I be say to myself that in five day more my month would be do , and myself free to seek Lorna , a man come rid up from the ford where the road go through the Lynn stream . as soon as I see that it be not Tom Faggus , I go no far to meet he , count that it must be some traveller bind for Brendon or Cheriton , and likely enough he would come and beg for a draught of milk or cider ; and then on again , after ask the way . 
 but instead of that , he stop at our gate , and stand up from his saddle , and halloe as if he be somebody ; and all the time he be flourish a white thing in the air , like the band our parson weareth . so I cross the court - yard to speak with he . 
 ' Service of the king ! ' he saith ; ' service of our lord the King ! come hither , thou great yokel , at risk of fine and imprisonment . ' 
 although not pleased with this , I go to he , as become a loyal man ; quite at my leisure , however , for there be no man bear who can hurry I , though I hasten for any woman . 
 ' Plover Barrows farm ! ' say he ; ' God only know how tired I be . be there any where in this cursed county a curse place call Plover Barrows farm ? for last twenty mile at least they tell I ' twere only half a mile far , or only just round corner . now tell I that , and I fain would thwack thee if thou wert not thrice my size . ' 
 ' Sir , ' I reply , ' you shall not have the trouble . this be Plover 's Barrows farm , and you be kindly welcome . Sheep 's kidney be for supper , and the ale get bright from the tapping . but why do you think ill of we ? we like not to be curse so . ' 
 ' Nay , I think no ill , ' he say ; ' sheep 's kidney be good , uncommon good , if they do they without burn . but I be so gall in the saddle ten day , and never a comely meal of it . and when they hear " King 's service " cry , they give I the bad of everything . all the way down from London , I have a rogue of a fellow in front of I , eat the fat of the land before I , and every one bow down to he . he could go three mile to my one though he never change his horse . he might have rob I at any minute , if I have be worth the trouble . a red mare he rideth , strong in the loin , and point quite small in the head . I shall live to see he hang yet . ' 
 all this time he be rid across the straw of our courtyard , get his weary leg out of the leather , and almost afraid to stand yet . a coarse - grain , hard - faced man he be , some forty year of age or so , and of middle height and stature . he be dress in a dark brown riding suit , none the well for Exmoor mud , but fit he very differently from the fashion of our tailor . across the holster lie his cloak , make of some red skin , and shin from the sweating of the horse . as I look down on his stiff bright head - piece , small quick eye and black needly beard , he seem to despise I   too much , as I think   for a mere ignoramus and country bumpkin . 
 ' Annie , have down the cut ham , ' I shout , for my sister be come to the door by chance , or because of the sound of a horse in the road , ' and cut a few rasher of hung deer 's meat . there be a gentleman come to sup , Annie . and fetch the hop out of the tap with a skewer that it may run more sparkling . ' 
 ' I wish I may go to a place never mean for I , ' say my new friend , now wipe his mouth with the sleeve of his brown riding coat , ' if ever I fall among such good folk . you be the right sort , and no error therein . all this shall go in your favour greatly , when I make deposition . at least , I mean , if it be as good in the eating as in the hearing . ' tis a supper quite fit for Tom Faggus himself , the man who hath steal my victual so . and that hang deer 's meat , now be it of the red deer run wild in these part ? ' 
 ' to be sure it be , sir , ' I answer ; ' where should we get any other ? ' 
 ' right , right , you be right , my son . I have hear that the flavour be marvellous . some of they come and scar I so , in the fog of the morning , that I hunger for they ever since . ha , ha , I see their haunch . but the young lady will not forget art sure she will not forget it ? ' 
 ' you may trust she to forget nothing , sir , that may tempt a guest to his comfort . ' 
 ' in faith , then , I will leave my horse in your hand , and be off for it . half the pleasure of the mouth be in the nose beforehand . but stay , almost I forget my business , in the hurry which thy tongue hath spread through my lately despairing belly . hungry I be , and sore of body , from my heel right upward , and sorest in front of my doublet , yet may I not rest nor bite barley - bread , until I have see and touch John Ridd . God grant that he be not far away ; I must eat my saddle , if it be so . ' 
 ' have no fear , good sir , ' I answer ; ' you have see and touch John Ridd . I be he , and not one likely to go beneath a bushel . ' 
 ' it would take a large bushel to hold thee , John Ridd . in the name of the king , his Majesty , Charles the Second , these present ! ' 
 he touch I with the white thing which I have first see he wave , and which I now behold to be sheepskin , such as they call parchment . it be tie across with cord , and fasten down in every corner with unsightly dab of wax . by order of the messenger   for I be over - frightened now to think of do anything , I break enough of seal to keep an Easter ghost from rise ; and there I see my name in large ; God grant such another shock may never befall I in my old age . 
 ' Read , my son ; read , thou great fool , if indeed thou canst read , ' say the officer to encourage I ; ' there be nothing to kill thee , boy , and my supper will be spoil . stare not at I so , thou fool ; thou art big enough to eat I ; read , read , read . ' 
 ' if you please , sir , what be your name ? ' I ask ; though why I ask he I know not , except from fear of witchcraft . 
 ' Jeremy Stickles be my name , lad , nothing more than a poor apparitor of the worshipful Court of King 's Bench . and at this moment a starve one , and no supper for I unless thou wilt read . ' 
 be compel in this way , I read pretty nigh as follow ; not that I give the whole of it , but only the gist and the emphasis , 
 ' to our good subject , John Ridd , etc . ' describe I ever so much well than I know myself ' by these present , greet . these be to require thee , in the name of our lord the King , to appear in person before the Right Worshipful , the Justices of his Majesty 's Bench at Westminster , lay aside all thine own business , and there to deliver such evidence as be within thy cognisance , touch certain matter whereby the peace of our say lord the King , and the well - being of this realm , be , be , or otherwise may be impeach , impugn , imperille , or otherwise detrimente . as witness these present . ' and then there be four seal , and then a signature I could not make out , only that it begin with a J , and end with some other writing , do almost in a circle . Underneath be add in a different handwriting ' charge will be bear . the matter be full urgent . ' 
 the messenger watch I , while I read so much as I could read of it ; and he seem well pleased with my surprise , because he have expect it . then , not know what else to do , I look again at the cover , and on the top of it I see , ' Ride , Ride , Ride ! on his gracious Majesty 's business ; spur and spare not . ' 
 it may be suppose by all who know I , that I be take hereupon with such a giddiness in my head and noisiness in my ear , that I be force to hold by the crook drive in below the thatch for holding of the hay - rake . there be scarcely any sense leave in I , only that the thing be come by power of Mother Melldrum , because I despise her warning , and have again seek Lorna . but the officer be grieve for I , and the danger to his supper . 
 ' my son , be not afraid , ' he say ; ' we be not go to skin thee . only thou tell all the truth , and it shall be but never mind , I will tell thee all about it , and how to come out harmless , if I find thy victual good , and no delay in serve they . ' 
 ' we do our good , sir , without bargain , ' say I , ' to please our visitor . ' 
 but when my mother see that parchment   for we could not keep it from she   she fall away into her favourite bed of stock gilly - flower , which she have be tend ; and when we bring she round again , do nothing but exclaim against the wickedness of the age and people . ' it be useless to tell she ; she know what it be , and so should all the parish know . the King have hear what her son be , how sober , and quiet , and diligent , and the strong young man in England ; and be himself such a reprobate God forgive she for say so he could never rest till he get poor Johnny , and make he as dissolute as himself . and if he do that ' here mother go off into a fit of crying ; and Annie mind her face , while Lizzie see that her gown be in comely order . 
 but the character of the King improve , when Master Jeremy Stickles   be really move by the look of it , and no bad man after all   lay it clearly before my mother that the King on his throne be unhappy , until he have see John Ridd . that the fame of John have go so far , and his size , and all his virtue that verily by the God who make he , the King be overcome with it . 
 then mother lie back in her garden chair , and smile upon the whole of we , and most of all on Jeremy ; look only shyly on I , and speak through some break of tear . ' his Majesty shall have my John ; his Majesty be very good : but only for a fortnight . I want no title for he . Johnny be enough for I ; and Master John for the work man . ' 
 now though my mother be so willing that I should go to London , expect great promotion and high glory for I , I myself be deeply go into the pit of sorrow . for what would Lorna think of I ? here be the long month just expire , after world of wait ; there would be her lovely self , peep softly down the glen , and fear to encourage I ; yet there would be nobody else , and what an insult to she ! dwell upon this , and see no chance of escape from it , I could not find one wink of sleep ; though Jeremy Stickles   who sleep close by   snore loud enough to spare I some . for I feel myself to be , as it be , in a place of some importance ; in a situation of trust , I may say ; and bind not to depart from it . for who could tell what the King might have to say to I about the Doones and I feel that they be at the bottom of this strange appearance or what his Majesty might think , if after receive a message from he   trusty under so many seal   I be to violate his faith in I as a churchwarden 's son , and falsely spread his word abroad ? 
 perhaps I be not wise in build such a wall of scruple . nevertheless , all that be there , and weigh upon I heavily . and at last I make up my mind to this , that even Lorna must not know the reason of my going , neither anything about it ; but that she might know I be go a long way from home , and perhaps be sorry for it . now how be I to let she know even that much of the matter , without break compact ? 
 puzzle on this , I fall asleep , after the proper time to get up ; nor be I to be see at breakfast time ; and mother   be quite strange to that   be very uneasy about it . but Master Stickles assure she that the King 's writ often have that effect , and the symptom be a good one . 
 ' now , Master Stickles , when must we start ? ' I ask he , as he lounge in the yard gaze at our turkey poult pick and run in the sun to the tune of their father 's gobble . ' your horse be greatly foundered , sir , and be hardly fit for the road to - day ; and Smiler be sled yesterday all up the high Cleve ; and none of the rest can carry I . ' 
 ' in a few more year , ' reply the King 's officer , contemplate I with much satisfaction ; " twill be a cruelty to any horse to put thee on his back , John . ' 
 Master Stickles , by this time , be quite familiar with we , call I ' Jack , ' and Eliza ' Lizzie , ' and what I like the least of all , our pretty Annie ' Nancy . ' 
 ' that will be as God please , sir , ' I answer he , rather sharply ; ' and the horse that suffer will not be thine . but I wish to know when we must start upon our long travel to London town . I perceive that the matter be of great despatch and urgency . ' 
 ' to be sure , so it be , my son . but I see a yearling turkey there , he I mean with the hop in his walk , who   if I know aught of fowl   would roast well to - morrow . Thy mother must have preparation : it be no more than reasonable . now , have that turkey kill to - night   for his fatness make I long for he , and we will have he for dinner to - morrow , with , perhaps , one of his brother ; and a few more collop of red deer 's flesh for supper , and then on the Friday morning , with the grace of God , we will set our face to the road , upon his Majesty 's business . ' 
 ' Nay , but good sir , ' I ask with some trembling , so eager be I to see Lorna ; ' if his Majesty 's business will keep till Friday , may it not keep until Monday ? we have a litter of suck - pig , excellently choice and white , six week old , come Friday . there be too many for the sow , and one of they needeth roasting . think you not it would be a pity to leave the woman to carve it ? ' 
 ' my son Jack , ' reply Master Stickles , ' never be I in such quarter yet : and God forbid that I should be so unthankful to he as to hurry away . and now I think on it , Friday be not a day upon which pious people love to commence an enterprise . I will choose the young pig to - morrow at noon , at which time they be will not to gambol ; and we will celebrate his birthday by carve he on Friday . after that we will gird our loin , and set forth early on Saturday . ' 
 now this be little well to I than if we have set forth at once . Sunday be the very first day upon which it would be honourable for I to enter Glen Doone . but though I try every possible mean with Master Jeremy Stickles , offer he the choice for dinner of every beast that be on the farm , he durst not put off our departure later than the Saturday . and nothing else but love of we and of our hospitality would have so persuade he to remain with we till then . therefore now my only chance of see Lorna , before I go , lie in watch from the cliff and espy she , or a signal from she . 
 this , however , I do in vain , until my eye be weary and often would delude themselves with hope of what they ache for . but though I lie hide behind the tree upon the crest of the stony fall , and wait so quiet that the rabbit and squirrel play around I , and even the keen - eyed weasel take I for a trunk of wood it be all as one ; no cast of colour change the white stone , whose whiteness now be hateful to I ; nor do wreath or skirt of maiden break the loneliness of the vale . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 a safe pass for king 's MESSENGER 

 a journey to London seem to we in those bygone day as hazardous and dark an adventure as could be force on any man . I mean , of course , a poor man ; for to a great nobleman , with ever so many outrider , attendant , and retainer , the risk be not so great , unless the highwayman know of their come beforehand , and so combined against they . to a poor man , however , the risk be not so much from those gentleman of the road as from the more ignoble footpad , and the landlord of the less hostel , and the loose unguarded soldier , over and above the pitfall and the quagmire of the way ; so that it be hard to settle , at the first outgoing whether a man be wise to pray more for his neck or for his head . 
 but nowadays it be very different . not that highway - man be scarce , in this the reign of our good Queen Anne ; for in truth they thrive as well as ever , albeit they deserve it not , be less upright and courteous but that the road be much improve , and the grow use of stage - waggon   some of which will travel as much as forty mile in a summer day   have turn our ancient idea of distance almost upside down ; and I doubt whether God be pleased with our fly so fast away from he . however , that be not my business ; nor do it lie in my mouth to speak very strongly upon the subject , see how much I myself have do towards make of road upon Exmoor . 
 to return to my story   and , in truth , I lose that road too often , it would have take ten King 's messenger to get I away from Plover 's barrow without one goodbye to Lorna , but for my sense of the trust and reliance which his Majesty have repose in I . and now I feel most bitterly how the very arrangement which seem so wise , and indeed ingenious , may by the force of event become our most fatal obstacle . for lo ! I be block entirely from go to see Lorna ; whereas we should have fix it so that I as well might have the power of signal my necessity . 
 it be too late now to think of that ; and so I make up my mind at last to keep my honour on both side , both to the King and to the maiden , although I might lose everything except a heavy heart for it . and indeed , more heart than mine be heavy ; for when it come to the tug of parting , my mother be like , and so be Annie , to break down altogether . but I bade they be of good cheer , and smile in the brisk manner upon they , and say that I should be back next week as one of his Majesty 's great captain , and tell they not to fear I then . upon which they smile at the idea of ever be afraid of I , whatever dress I might have on ; and so I kiss my hand once more , and ride away very bravely . but bless your heart , I could no more have do so than fly all the way to London if Jeremy Stickles have not be there . 
 and not to take too much credit to myself in this matter , I must confess that when we be come to the turn in the road where the moor begin , and whence you see the last of the yard , and the rick and the poultry round they and can   by know the place   obtain a glance of the kitchen window under the walnut - tree , it go so hard with I just here that I even make pretence of a stone in ancient Smiler 's shoe , to dismount , and to bend my head awhile . then , know that those I have leave behind would be watch to see the last of I , and might have false hope of my come back , I mount again with all possible courage , and ride after Jeremy Stickles . 
 Jeremy , see how much I be down , do his good to keep I up with joke , and tale , and light discourse , until , before we have ride a league , I begin to long to see the thing he be describe . the air , the weather , and the thought of go to a wondrous place , add to the fine company at least so Jeremy say it be of a man who know all London , make I feel that I should be ungracious not to laugh a little . and be very simple then I laugh no more a little , but something quite considerable   though free from consideration   at the strange thing Master Stickles tell I , and his strange way of tell they . and so we become very excellent friend , for he be much pleased with my laughing . 
 not wish to thrust myself more forward than need be in this narrative , I have scarcely think it become or right to speak of my own adornment . but now , what with the brave clothe I have on , and the well one still that be pack up in the bag behind the saddle , it be almost beyond I to forbear say that I must have look very pleasing . and many a time I wish , go along , that Lorna could only be here and there , watch behind a furze - bush , look at I , and wonder how much my clothe have cost . for mother would have no stint in the matter , but have assemble at our house , immediately upon knowledge of what be to be about London , every man know to be a good stitcher upon our side of Exmoor . and for three day they have work their good , without stint of beer or cider , accord to the constitution of each . the result , so they all declare , be such as to create admiration , and defy competition in London . and to I it seem that they be quite right ; though Jeremy Stickles turn up his nose , and feign to be deaf in the business . 
 now be that matter as you please for the point be not worth argue certain it be that my appearance be well than it have be before . for be in the good clothe , one try to look and to act   so far as may be   up to the quality of they . not only for the fear of soil they , but that they enlarge a man 's perception of his value . and it strike I that our sin arise , partly from disdain of other , but mainly from contempt of self , both work the despite of God . but man of mind may not be measure by such paltry rule as this . 
 by dinner - time we arrive at Porlock , and din with my old friend , Master Pooke , now grow rich and portly . for though we have plenty of victual with we we be not to begin upon they , until all chance of victual among our friend be leave behind . and during that first day we have no need to meddle with our store at all ; for as have be settle before we leave home , we lay that night at Dunster in the house of a worthy tanner , first cousin to my mother , who receive we very cordially , and undertake to return old Smiler to his stable at Plover 's barrow , after one day 's rest . 
 Thence we hire to Bridgwater ; and from Bridgwater on to Bristowe , break the journey between the two . but although the whole way be so new to I , and such a perpetual source of conflict , that the remembrance still abide with I , as if it be but yesterday , I must not be so long in tell as it be in travel , or you will wish I far ; both because Lorna be nothing there , and also because a man in our neighbourhood have do the whole of it since my time , and feign to think nothing of it . however , one thing , in common justice to a person who have be traduce , I be bind to mention . and this be , that be two of we , and myself of such magnitude , we never could have make our journey without either fight or run , but for the free pass which dear Annie , by some mean   I know not what , have procure from Master Faggus . and when I let it be know , by some hap , that I be the own cousin of Tom Faggus , and honour with his society , there be not a house upon the road but be proud to entertain I , in spite of my fellow - traveller , bear the red badge of the King . 
 ' I will keep this close , my son Jack , ' he say , have strip it off with a carving - knife ; ' your flag be the good to fly . the man who starve I on the way down , the same shall feed I fat go home . ' 
 therefore we pursue our way , in excellent condition , have thrive upon the credit of that very popular highwayman , and be surround with regret that he have leave the profession , and sometimes beg to intercede that he might help the road again . for all the landlord on the road declare that now small ale be drunk , nor much of spirit call for , because the farmer need not prime to meet only common rider , neither be these worth the while to get drunk with afterwards . Master Stickles himself undertake , as an officer of the King 's Justices to plead this case with Squire Faggus   as everybody call he now , and to induce he , for the general good , to return to his proper ministry . 
 it be a long and weary journey , although the road be wondrous good on the farth side of Bristowe , and scarcely any man need be bogge , if he keep his eye well open , save , perhaps , in Berkshire . in consequence of the pass we have , and the vintner 's knowledge of it , we only meet two public rider , one of whom make off straightway when he see my companion 's pistol and the stout carbine I bear ; and the other come to a parley with we , and prove most kind and affable , when he know himself in the presence of the cousin of Squire Faggus . ' God save you , gentleman , ' he cry , lift his hat politely ; ' many and many a happy day I have work this road with he . such time will never be again . but commend I to his love and prayer . King my name be , and King my nature . say that , and none will harm you . ' and so he make off down the hill , be a perfect gentleman , and a very good horse he be rid . 
 the night be fall very thick by the time we be come to Tyburn , and here the King 's officer decide that it would be wise to halt , because the way be unsafe by night across the field to Charing village . I for my part be nothing loth , and prefer to see London by daylight . 
 and after all , it be not worth see , but a very hideous and dirty place , not at all like Exmoor . some of the shop be very fine , and the sign above they fine still , so that I be never weary of stand still to look at they . but in do this there be no ease ; for before one could begin almost to make out the meaning of they , either some of the wayfarer would bustle and scowl , and draw their sword , or the owner , or his apprentice boy , would rush out and catch hold of I , cry , ' buy , buy , buy ! what d'ye lack , what d'ye lack ? buy , buy , buy ! ' at first I mistook the meaning of this for so we pronounce the word ' boy ' upon Exmoor and I answer with some indignation , ' Sirrah , I be no boy now , but a man of one - and - twenty year ; and as for lack , I lack naught from thee , except what thou hast not good manner . ' 
 the only thing that please I much , be the river Thames , and the hall and church of Westminster , where there be brave thing to be see , and braver still to think about . but whenever I wander in the street , what with the noise the people make , the number of the coach , the running of the footman , the swaggering of great courtier , and the thrusting aside of everybody , many and many a time I long to be back among the sheep again , for fear of lose temper . they be welcome to the wall for I , as I take care to tell they , for I could stand without the wall , which perhaps be more than they could do . though I say this with the good intention , mean no discourtesy , some of they be vex at it ; and one young lord , be flush with drink , draw his sword and make at I . but I strike it up with my holly stick , so that it fly on the roof of a house , then I take he by the belt with one hand , and lay he in the kennel . this cause some little disturbance ; but none of the rest see fit to try how the matter might be with they . 
 now this be the year of our Lord 1683 , more than nine year and a half since the death of my father , and the beginning of this history , all London be in a great ferment about the dispute between the Court of the King and the City . the King , or rather perhaps his party   for they say that his Majesty care for little except to have plenty of money and spend it , be quite resolve to be supreme in the appointment of the chief officer of the corporation . but the citizen maintain that   under their charter   this right lie entirely with themselves ; upon which a writ be issue against they for forfeiture of their charter ; and the question be now be try in the court of his Majesty 's bench . 
 this seem to occupy all the attention of the judge , and my case   which have appear so urgent   be put off from time to time , while the Court and the City contend . and so hot be the conflict and hate between they , that a sheriff have be fin by the King in 100,000 pound , and a former lord mayor have even be sentence to the pillory , because he would not swear falsely . hence the courtier and the citizen scarce could meet in the street with patience , or without rail and frequent blow . 
 now although I hear so much of this matter , for nothing else be talk of , and it seem to I more important even than the churchwardenship of Oare , I could not for the life of I tell which side I should take to . for all my sense of position , and of confidence repose in I , and of my father 's opinion , lie heavily in one scale , while all my reason and my heart go down plump against injustice , and seem to win the other scale . even so my father have be , at the breaking out of the civil war , when he be less than my age now , and even less skilled in politic ; and my mother tell I after this , when she see how I myself be doubting , and vex with myself for do so , that my father use to thank God often that he have not be call upon to take one side or other , but might remain obscure and quiet . and yet he always consider himself to be a good , sound Royalist . 
 but now as I stay there , only desirous to be hear and to get away , and scarcely even guess yet what be want of I   for even Jeremy Stickles know not , or pretend not to know , thing come to a dreadful pass between the King and all the people who dare to have an opinion . for about the middle of June , the judge give their sentence , that the City of London have forfeit its charter , and that its franchise should be take into the hand of the king . Scarcely be this judgment forth , and all man hotly talk of it , when a far bad thing befell . news of some great conspiracy be spread at every corner , and that a man in the malting business have try to take up the brewer 's work , and lop the King and the Duke of York . everybody be shock at this , for the King himself be not dislike so much as his adviser ; but everybody be more than shocked , grieve indeed to the heart with pain , at hear that Lord William Russell and Mr. Algernon Sidney have be seize and send to the Tower of London , upon a charge of high treason . 
 have no knowledge of these great man , nor of the matter how far it be true , I have not very much to say about either of they or it ; but this silence be not share   although the ignorance may have be   by the hundred of people around I . such a commotion be astir , such universal sense of wrong , and stern resolve to right it , that each man grasp his fellow 's hand , and lead he into the vintner 's . even I , although at that time give to excess in temperance , and afraid of the name of cordial , be hard set   I do assure you   not to be drunk at interval without coarse discourtesy . 
 however , that   as Betty Muxworthy use to say , when argue down , and ready to take the mop for it   be neither here nor there . I have naught to do with great history and be sorry for those who have to write it ; because they be sure to have both friend and enemy in it , and can not act as they would towards they , without damage to their own conscience . 
 but as great event draw little one , and the rattle of the churn decide the uncertainty of the fly , so this movement of the town , and eloquence , and passion have more than I guess at the time , to do with my own little fortune . for in the first place it be fix   perhaps from down right contumely , because the citizen love he so   that Lord Russell should be try neither at Westminster nor at Lincoln 's Inn , but at the Court of Old Bailey , within the precinct of the city . this keep I hang on much long ; because although the good nobleman be to be try by the Court of Common Pleas , yet the officer of King 's Bench , to whom I daily apply myself , be in counsel with their fellow , and put I off from day to day . 
 now I have hear of the law 's delay , which the great of all great poet   know much of the law himself , as indeed of everything   have specially mention , when not expect , among the many ill of life . but I never think at my year to have such bitter experience of the evil ; and it seem to I that if the lawyer fail to do their duty , they ought to pay people for wait upon they , instead of make they pay for it . but here I be , now in the second month live at my own charge in the house of a worthy fellmonger at the sign of the Seal and Squirrel , abut upon the Strand road which lead from Temple Bar to Charing . here I do very well indeed , have a mattress of good skin - dressing , and plenty to eat every day of my life , but the butter be something to cry ' but ' thrice at   accord to a conceit of our school day , and the milk must have come from cow drive to water . however , these evil be light compare with the heavy bill send up to I every Saturday afternoon ; and know how my mother have pinch to send I nobly to London , and have tell I to spare for nothing , but live bravely with the good of they , the tear very nearly come into my eye , as I think , while I eat , of so rob she . 
 at length , be quite at the end of my money , and see no other help for it , I determine to listen to clerk no more , but force my way up to the Justices , and insist upon be hear by they , or discharge from my recognisance . for so they have term the bond or deed which I have be force to execute , in the presence of a chief clerk or notary , the very day after I come to London . and the purport of it be , that on pain of a heavy fine or escheatment , I would hold myself ready and present , to give evidence when call upon . have deliver I up to sign this , Jeremy Stickles be quit of I , and go upon other business , not but what he be kind and good to I , when his time and pursuit allow of it . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 a great MAN ATTENDS to BUSINESS 

 have see Lord Russell murder in the field of Lincoln 's Inn , or rather have go to see it , but turn away with a sickness and a bitter flood of tear for a whiter and a nobler neck never fall before low beast I stride away towards Westminster , cure of half my indignation at the death of Charles the First . many people hurry past I , chiefly of the more tender sort , revolt at the butchery . in their ghastly face , as they turn they back , lest the sight should be come after they , great sorrow be to be see , and horror , and pity , and some anger . 
 in Westminster Hall I find nobody ; not even the crowd of crawl varlet , who use to be crave evermore for employment or for payment . I knock at three door , one after other , of lobby go out of it , where I have formerly see some officer and people press in and out , but for my trouble I take nothing , except some thump from echo . and at last an old man tell I that all the lawyer be go to see the result of their own work , in the field of Lincoln 's Inn . 
 however , in a few day ' time , I have well fortune ; for the court be sit and full of business , to clear off the arrear of work , before the lawyer ' holiday . as I be wait in the hall for a good occasion , a man with horsehair on his head , and a long blue bag in his left hand , touch I gently on the arm , and lead I into a quiet place . I follow he very gladly , be confident that he come to I with a message from the Justiciaries . but after take pain to be sure that none could overhear we , he turn on I suddenly , and ask , 
 ' now , John , how be your dear mother ? ' 
 ' worshipful sir ' I answer he , after recover from my surprise at his knowledge of our affair , and kindly interest in they , ' it be two month now since I have see she . would to God that I only know how she be fare now , and how the business of the farm go ! ' 
 ' Sir , I respect and admire you , ' the old gentleman reply , with a bow very low and genteel ; ' few young court - gallant of our time be so reverent and dutiful . oh , how I do love my mother ! ' here he turn up his eye to heaven , in a manner that make I feel for he and yet with a kind of wonder . 
 ' I be very sorry for you , sir , ' I answer most respectfully , not mean to trespass on his grief , yet wonder at his mother 's age ; for he seem to be at least threescore ; ' but I be no court - gallant , sir ; I be only a farmer 's son , and learn how to farm a little . ' 
 ' Enough , John ; quite enough , ' he cry , ' I can read it in thy countenance . Honesty be write there , and courage and simplicity . but I fear that , in this town of London , thou art apt to be take in by people of no principle . ah I ! ah I ! the world be bad , and I be too old to improve it . ' 
 then find he so good and kind , and anxious to improve the age , I tell he almost everything ; how much I pay the fellmonger , and all the thing I have be to see ; and how I long to get away , before the corn be ripen ; yet how   despite of these desire   I feel myself bind to walk up and down , be under a thing call ' recognisance . ' in short , I tell he everything ; except the nature of my summon   which I have no right to tell , and that I be out of money . 
 my tale be tell in a little archway , apart from other lawyer ; and the other lawyer seem to I to shift themselves , and to look askew , like sheep through a hurdle , when the rest be feed . 
 ' what ! good God ! ' my lawyer cry , smite his breast indignantly with a roll of something learn ; ' in what country do we live ? under what law be we govern ? no case before the court whatever ; no primary deposition , so far as we be furnish ; not even a King 's writ issue and here we have a fine young man drag from his home and adore mother , during the height of agriculture , at his own cost and charge ! I have hear of many grievance ; but this the very bad of all . nothing short of a Royal Commission could be warranty for it . this be not only illegal , sir , but most gravely unconstitutional . ' 
 ' I have not tell you , worthy sir , ' I answer he , in a low tone , ' if I could have think that your sense of right would be move so painfully . but now I must beg to leave you , sir for I see that the door again be open . I beg you , worshipful sir , to accept ' 
 upon this he put forth his hand and say , ' nay , nay , my son , not two , not two : ' yet look away , that he might not scare I . 
 ' to accept , kind sir , my very good thank , and most respectful remembrance . ' and with that , I lay my hand in his . ' and if , sir , any circumstance of business or of pleasure should bring you to our part of the world , I trust you will not forget that my mother and myself   if ever I get home again   will do our good to make you comfortable with our poor hospitality . ' 
 with this I be haste away from he , but he hold my hand and look round at I . and he speak without cordiality . 
 ' young man , a general invitation be no entry for my fee book . I have spend a good hour of business - time in master thy case , and state my opinion of it . and be a member of the bar , call six - and - thirty year agone by the honourable society of the Inner Temple , my fee be at my own discretion ; albeit an honorarium . for the honour of the profession , and my position in it , I ought to charge thee at least five guinea , although I would have accept one , offer with good will and delicacy . now I will enter it two , my son , and half a crown for my clerk 's fee . ' 
 say this , he draw forth from his deep , blue bag , a red book have clasp to it , and endorse in gold letter ' fee - book ' ; and before I could speak   be frighten so   he have enter on a page of it , ' to consideration of ease as state by John Ridd , and advise thereupon , two guineas . ' 
 ' but sir , good sir , ' I stammer forth , not have two guineas leave in the world , yet grieve to confess it , ' I know not that I be to pay , learn sir . I never think of it in that way . ' 
 ' wound of God ! in what way think you that a lawyer listen to your rigmarole ? ' 
 ' I think that you listen from kindness , sir , and compassion of my grievous case , and a sort of like for I . ' 
 ' a lawyer like thee , young curmudgeon ! a lawyer afford to feel compassion gratis ! either thou art a very deep knave , or the greenest of all greenhorn . well , I suppose , I must let thee off for one guinea , and the clerk 's fee . a bad business , a shocking business ! ' 
 now , if this man have continue kind and soft , as when he hear my story , I would have pawn my clothe to pay he , rather than leave a debt behind , although contract unwittingly . but when he use harsh language so , know that I do not deserve it , I begin to doubt within myself whether he deserve my money . therefore I answer he with some readiness , such as come sometimes to I , although I be so slow . 
 ' Sir , I be no curmudgeon : if a young man have call I so , it would not have be well with he . this money shall be pay , if due , albeit I have no desire to incur the debt . you have advise I that the Court be liable for my expense , so far as they be reasonable . if this be a reasonable expense , come with I now to Lord Justice Jeffreys , and receive from he the two guineas , or   it may be   five , for the counsel you have give I to deny his jurisdiction . ' with these word , I take his arm to lead he , for the door be open still . 
 ' in the name of God , boy , let I go . Worthy sir , pray let I go . my wife be sick , and my daughter die in the name of God , sir , let I go . ' 
 ' Nay , nay , ' I say , have fast hold of he , ' I can not let thee go unpaid , sir . right be right ; and thou shalt have it . ' 
 ' ruin be what I shall have , boy , if you drag I before that devil . he will strike I from the bar at once , and starve I , and all my family . here , lad , good lad , take these two guineas . Thou hast despoil the spoiler . never again will I trust mine eye for knowledge of a greenhorn . ' 
 he slip two guineas into the hand which I have hook through his elbow , and speak in an urgent whisper again , for the people come crowd around we ' for God 's sake let I go , boy ; another moment will be too late . ' 
 ' learn sir , ' I answer he , ' twice you speak , unless I err , of the necessity of a clerk 's fee , as a thing to be lament . ' 
 ' to be sure , to be sure , my son . you have a clerk as much as I have . there it be . now I pray thee , take to the study of the law . possession be nine point of it , which thou hast of I . self - possession be the tenth , and that thou hast more than the other nine . ' 
 be flatter by this , and by the feeling of the two guineas and half - crown , I drop my hold upon Counsellor Kitch   for he be no less a man than that , and he be out of sight in a second of time , wig , blue bag , and family . and before I have time to make up my mind what I should do with his money   for of course I mean not to keep it   the crier of the Court   as they tell I   come out , and want to know who I be . I tell he , as shortly as I could , that my business lie with his Majesty 's bench , and be very confidential ; upon which he take I inside with warning , and show I to an under - clerk , who show I to a high one , and the high clerk to the head one . 
 when this gentleman understand all about my business   which I tell he without complaint   he frown at I very heavily , as if I have do he an injury . 
 ' John Ridd , ' he ask I with a stern glance , ' be it your deliberate desire to be bring into the presence of the Lord Chief Justice ? ' 
 ' surely , sir , it have be my desire for the last two month and more . ' 
 ' then , John , thou shalt be . but mind one thing , not a word of thy long detention , or thou mayst get into trouble . ' 
 ' how , sir ? for be detain against my own wish ? ' I ask he ; but he turn away , as if that matter be not worth his arguing , as , indeed , I suppose it be not , and lead I through a little passage to a door with a curtain across it . 
 ' now , if my Lord cross - question you , ' the gentleman whisper to I , ' answer he straight out truth at once , for he will have it out of thee . and mind , he love not to be contradict , neither can he bear a hang - dog look . take little heed of the other two ; but note every word of the middle one ; and never make he speak twice . ' 
 I thank he for his good advice , as he move the curtain and thrust I in , but instead of enter withdraw , and leave I to bear the brunt of it . 
 the chamber be not very large , though lofty to my eye , and dark , with wooden panel round it . at the further end be some raise seat , such as I have see in church , line with velvet , and have broad elbow , and a canopy over the middle seat . there be only three man sit here , one in the centre , and one on each side ; and all three be do up wonderfully with fur , and robe of state , and curl of thick gray horsehair , crimp and gather , and plait down to their shoulder . each man have an oak desk before he , set at a little distance , and spread with pen and paper . instead of writing , however , they seem to be laugh and talk , or rather the one in the middle seem to be tell some good story , which the other receive with approval . by reason of their great peruke it be hard to tell how old they be ; but the one who be speak seem the young , although he be the chief of they . a thick - set , burly , and bulky man , with a blotchy broad face , and great square jaw , and fierce eye full of blaze ; he be one to be dread by gentle soul , and to be abhor by the noble . 
 between I and the three lord judge , some few lawyer be gather up bag and paper and pen and so forth , from a narrow table in the middle of the room , as if a case have be dispose of , and no other be call on . but before I have time to look round twice , the stout fierce man espy I , and shout out with a flashing stare ' 
 ' how now , countryman , who art thou ? ' 
 ' may it please your worship , ' I answer he loudly , ' I be John Ridd , of Oare parish , in the shire of Somerset , bring to this London , some two month back by a special messenger , whose name be Jeremy Stickles ; and then bind over to be at hand and ready , when call upon to give evidence , in a matter unknown to I , but touch the peace of our lord the King , and the well - being of his subject . three time I have meet our lord the King , but he hath say nothing about his peace , and only hold it towards I , and every day , save Sunday , I have walk up and down the great hall of Westminster , all the business part of the day , expect to be call upon , yet no one hath call upon I . and now I desire to ask your worship , whether I may go home again ? ' 
 ' well , do , John , ' reply his lordship , while I be pant with all this speech ; ' I will go bail for thee , John , thou hast never make such a long speech before ; and thou art a spunky Briton , or thou couldst not have make it now . I remember the matter well , and I myself will attend to it , although it arise before my time ' he be but newly Chief Justice ' but I can not take it now , John . there be no fear of lose thee , John , any more than the Tower of London . I grieve for his Majesty 's exchequer , after keep thee two month or more . ' 
 ' Nay , my lord , I crave your pardon . my mother hath be keep I . not a groat have I receive . ' 
 ' Spank , be it so ? ' his lordship cry , in a voice that shake the cobwebs , and the frown on his brow shake the heart of man , and mine as much as the rest of they , ' Spank , be his Majesty come to this , that he starve his own approver ? ' 
 ' my lord , my lord , ' whisper Mr. Spank , the chief - officer of evidence , ' the thing hath be overlook , my lord , among such grave matter of treason . ' 
 ' I will overlook thy head , foul Spank , on a spike from Temple Bar , if ever I hear of the like again . vile varlet , what art thou pay for ? Thou hast swindle the money thyself , foul Spank ; I know thee , though thou art new to I . Bitter be the day for thee that ever I come across thee . answer I not one word more and I will have thee on a hurdle . ' and he swing himself to and fro on his bench , with both hand on his knee ; and every man wait to let it pass , know well than to speak to he . 
 ' John Ridd , ' say the Lord Chief Justice , at last recover a sort of dignity , yet dare Spank from the corner of his eye to do so much as look at he , ' thou hast be shamefully use , John Ridd . answer I not boy ; not a word ; but go to Master Spank , and let I know how he behave to thee ; ' here he make a glance at Spank , which be worth at least ten pound to I ; ' be thou here again to - morrow , and before any other case be take , I will see justice do to thee . now be off boy ; thy name be Ridd , and we be well rid of thee . ' 
 I be only too glad to go , after all this temp ; as you may well suppose . for if ever I see a man 's eye become two hole for the devil to glare from , I see it that day ; and the eye be those of the Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys . 
 Mr. Spank be in the lobby before I , and before I have recover myself for I be vex with my own terror he come up sidle and fawn to I , with a heavy bag of yellow leather . 
 ' Good Master Ridd , take it all , take it all , and say a good word for I to his lordship . he hath take a strange fancy to thee ; and thou must make the most of it . we never see man meet he eye to eye so , and yet not contradict he , and that be just what he loveth . abide in London , Master Ridd , and he will make thy fortune . his joke upon thy name prove that . and I pray you remember , Master Ridd , that the spank be sixteen in family . ' 
 but I would not take the bag from he , regard it as a sort of bribe to pay I such a lump of money , without so much as ask how great have be my expense . therefore I only tell he that if he would kindly keep the cash for I until the morrow , I would spend the rest of the day in count   which always be sore work with I   how much it have stand I in board and lodging , since Master Stickles have render I up ; for until that time he have bear my expense . in the morning I would give Mr. Spank a memorandum , duly sign , and attest by my landlord , include the breakfast of that day , and in exchange for this I would take the exact amount from the yellow bag , and be very thankful for it . 
 ' if that be thy way of use opportunity , ' say Spank , look at I with some contempt , ' thou wilt never thrive in these time , my lad . even the Lord Chief Justice can be little help to thee ; unless thou know well than that how to help thyself . ' 
 it matter not to I . the word ' approver ' stuck in my gorge , as use by the Lord Chief Justice ; for we look upon an approver as a very low thing indeed . I would rather pay for every breakfast , and even every dinner , eat by I since here I come , than take money as an approver . and indeed I be much disappointed at be take in that light , have understand that I be send for as a trusty subject , and humble friend of his Majesty . 
 in the morning I meet Mr. Spank wait for I at the entrance , and very desirous to see I . I show he my bill , make out in fair copy , and he laugh at it , and say , ' take it twice over , Master Ridd ; once for thine own sake , and once for his Majesty 's ; as all his loyal tradesman do , when they can get any . his Majesty know and be proud of it , for it show their love of his countenance ; and he say , " bis dat qui cito dat , " then how can I grumble at give twice , when I give so slowly ? ' 
 ' Nay , I will take it but once , ' I say ; ' if his Majesty love to be rob , he need not lack of his desire , while the spank be sixteen in family . ' 
 the clerk smile cheerfully at this , be proud of his child 's ability ; and then have pay my account , he whisper , 
 ' he be all alone this morning , John , and in rare good humour . he hath be promise the handling of poor Master Algernon Sidney , and he say he will soon make republic of he ; for his state shall shortly be headless . he be chuckle over his joke , like a pig with a nut ; and that always make he pleasant . John Ridd , my lord ! ' with that he swing up the curtain bravely , and accord to special order , I stand , face to face , and alone with Judge Jeffreys . 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 JOHN be drained and CAST ASIDE 

 his lordship be busy with some letter , and do not look up for a minute or two , although he know that I be there . meanwhile I stand wait to make my bow ; afraid to begin upon he , and wonder at his great bull - head . then he close his letter , well - pleased with their import , and fix his bold broad stare on I , as if I be an oyster open , and he would know how fresh I be . 
 ' may it please your worship , ' I say , ' here I be accord to order , await your good pleasure . ' 
 ' thou art make to weight , John , more than order . how much dost thou tip the scale to ? ' 
 ' only twelvescore pound , my lord , when I be in wrestle trim . and sure I must have lose weight here , fret so long in London . ' 
 ' ha , ha ! much fret be there in thee ! hath his Majesty see thee ? ' 
 ' yes , my lord , twice or even thrice ; and he make some jest concern I . ' 
 ' a very bad one , I doubt not . his humour be not so dainty as mine , but apt to be coarse and unmannerly . now John , or Jack , by the look of thee , thou art more use to be call . ' 
 ' yes , your worship , when I be with old Molly and Betty Muxworthy . ' 
 ' peace , thou forward varlet ! there be a deal too much of thee . we shall have to try short common with thee , and thou art a very long common . ha , ha ! where be that rogue Spank ? Spank must hear that by - and - by . it be beyond thy great thick head , Jack . ' 
 ' not so , my lord ; I have be at school , and have very bad joke make upon I . ' 
 ' ha , ha ! it hath hit thee hard . and faith , it would be hard to miss thee , even with harpoon . and thou lookest like to blubber , now . Capital , in faith ! I have thee on every side , Jack , and thy side be manifold ; many - fold at any rate . thou shalt have double expense , Jack , for the wit thou hast provoke in I . ' 
 ' heavy good lack heavy payment , be a proverb down our way , my lord . ' 
 ' ah , I hurt thee , I hurt thee , Jack . the harpoon hath no tickle for thee . now , Jack Whale , have haul thee hard , we will proceed to examine thee . ' here all his manner be change , and he look with his heavy brow bent upon I , as if he have never laugh in his life , and would allow none else to do so . 
 ' I be ready to answer , my lord , ' I reply , ' if he ask I nought beyond my knowledge , or beyond my honour . ' 
 ' hadst well answer I everything , lump . what hast thou to do with honour ? now be there in thy neighbourhood a certain nest of robber , miscreant , and outlaws , whom all man fear to handle ? ' 
 ' yes , my lord . at least , I believe some of they be robber , and all of they be outlaw . ' 
 ' and what be your high sheriff about , that he doth not hang they all ? or send they up for I to hang , without more to do about they ? ' 
 ' I reckon that he be afraid , my lord ; it be not safe to meddle with they . they be of good birth , and reckless ; and their place be very strong . ' 
 ' good birth ! what be Lord Russell of , Lord Essex , and this Sidney ? ' tis the sure heirship to the block to be the chip of a good one . what be the name of this pestilent race , and how many of they be there ? ' 
 ' they be the Doones of Bagworthy forest , may it please your worship . and we reckon there be about forty of they , beside the woman and child . ' 
 ' Forty Doones , all forty thief ! and woman and child ! thunder of God ! how long have they be there then ? ' 
 ' they may have be there thirty year , my lord ; and indeed they may have be forty . before the great war break out they come , long back than I can remember . ' 
 ' ay , long before thou wast bear , John . good , thou speakest plainly . woe betide a liar , whenso I get hold of he . ye want I on the Western Circuit ; by God , and ye shall have I , when London traitor be spin and swung . there be a family call De Whichehalse live very nigh thee , John ? ' 
 this he say in a sudden manner , as if to take I off my guard , and fix his great thick eye on I . and in truth I be much astonish . 
 ' yes , my lord , there be . at least , not so very far from we . Baron de Whichehalse , of Ley Manor . ' 
 ' Baron , ha ! of the Exchequer eh , lad ? and taketh due instead of his Majesty . somewhat which halt there ought to come a little far , I trow . it shall be see to , as well as the witch which make it so to halt . riotous knave in West England , drunken outlaw , you shall dance , if ever I play pipe for you . John Ridd , I will come to Oare parish , and rout out the Oare of Babylon . ' 
 ' although your worship be so learn , ' I answer see that now he be begin to make thing uneasy ; ' your worship , though be Chief Justice , do little justice to we . we be downright good and loyal folk ; and I have not see , since here I come to this great town of London , any who may better we , or even come anigh we , in honesty , and goodness , and duty to our neighbour . for we be very quiet folk , not prate our own virtue ' 
 ' enough , good John , enough ! know thou not that modesty be the maidenhood of virtue , lose even by her own approval ? now hast thou ever hear or think that De Whichehalse be in league with the Doones of Bagworthy ? ' 
 say these word rather slowly , he skewer his great eye into mine , so that I could not think at all , neither look at he , nor yet away . the idea be so new to I that it set my wit all wander ; and look into I , he see that I be grope for the truth . 
 ' John Ridd , thine eye be enough for I . I see thou hast never dream of it . now hast thou ever see a man whose name be Thomas Faggus ? ' 
 ' yes , sir , many and many a time . he be my own worthy cousin ; and I fear he that hath intention ' here I stop , have no right there to speak about our Annie . 
 ' Tom Faggus be a good man , ' he say ; and his great square face have a smile which show I he have meet my cousin ; ' Master Faggus hath make mistake as to the title to property , as lawyer oftentime may do ; but take he all for all , he be a thoroughly straightforward man ; present his bill , and have it pay , and make no charge for draw it . nevertheless , we must tax his cost , as of any other solicitor . ' 
 ' to be sure , to be sure , my lord ! ' be all that I could say , not understand what all this mean . 
 ' I fear he will come to the gallow , ' say the Lord Chief Justice , sink his voice below the echo ; ' tell he this from I , Jack . he shall never be condemn before I ; but I can not be everywhere , and some of our Justices may keep short memory of his dinner . tell he to change his name , turn parson , or do something else , to make it wrong to hang he . Parson be the good thing , he hath such command of feature , and he might take his tithe on horseback . now a few more thing , John Ridd ; and for the present I have do with thee . ' 
 all my heart leap up at this , to get away from London so : and yet I could hardly trust to it . 
 ' be there any sound round your way of disaffection to his Majesty , his most gracious Majesty ? ' 
 ' no , my lord : no sign whatever . we pray for he in church perhaps , and we talk about he afterwards , hop it may do he good , as it be intend . but after that we have naught to say , not know much about he at least till I get home again . ' 
 ' that be as it should be , John . and the less you say the well . but I have hear of thing in Taunton , and even near to you in Dulverton , and even nigh still upon Exmoor ; thing which be of the pillory kind , and even more of the gallow . I see that you know naught of they . nevertheless , it will not be long before all England hear of they . now , John , I have take a liking to thee , for never man tell I the truth , without fear or favour , more thoroughly and truly than thou hast do . keep thou clear of this , my son . it will come to nothing ; yet many shall swing high for it . even I could not save thee , John Ridd , if thou wert mix in this affair . keep from the Doones , keep from De Whichehalse , keep from everything which lead beyond the sight of thy knowledge . I mean to use thee as my tool ; but I see thou art too honest and simple . I will send a sharp down ; but never let I find thee , John , either a tool for the other side , or a tube for my word to pass through . ' 
 here the Lord Justice give I such a glare that I wish myself well rid of he , though thankful for his warning ; and see how he have make upon I a long abide mark of fear , he smile again in a jocular manner , and say , 
 ' now , get thee go , Jack . I shall remember thee ; and I trow , thou wilt'st not for many a day forget I . ' 
 ' my lord , I be never so glad to go ; for the hay must be in , and the rick unthatche , and none of they can make spar like I , and two man to twist every hay - rope , and mother think it all right , and listen right and leave to lie , and cheat at every pig she kill , and even the skin of the sheep to go ' 
 ' John Ridd , I think none could come nigh your folk in honesty , and goodness , and duty to their neighbour ! ' 
 ' sure enough , my lord ; but by our folk , I mean ourselves , not the man nor woman neither ' 
 ' that will do , John . go thy way . not man , nor woman neither , be well than they need be . ' 
 I wish to set this matter right ; but his worship would not hear I , and only drive I out of court , say that man be thief and liar , no more in one place than another , but all alike all over the world , and woman not far behind they . it be not for I to dispute this point   though I be not yet persuade of it , both because my lord be a Judge , and must know more about it , and also that be a man myself I might seem to be defend myself in an unbecoming manner . therefore I make a low bow , and go ; in doubt as to which have the right of it . 
 but though he have so far dismiss I , I be not yet quite free to go , inasmuch as I have not money enough to take I all the way to Oare , unless indeed I should go afoot , and beg my sustenance by the way , which seem to be below I . therefore I get my few clothe pack , and my few debt pay , all ready to start in half an hour , if only they would give I enough to set out upon the road with . for I doubt not , be young and strong , that I could walk from London to Oare in ten day or in twelve at most , which be not much long than horse - work ; only I have be a fool , as you will say when you hear it . for after receive from Master Spank the amount of the bill which I have deliver less indeed by fifty shilling than the money my mother have give I , for I have spend fifty shilling , and more , in see the town and treat people , which I could not charge to his Majesty I have first pay all my debt thereout , which be not very many , and then suppose myself to be an established creditor of the Treasury for my come need , and already scent the country air , and foresee the joy of my mother , what have I do but spend half my balance , ay and more than three - quarter of it , upon present for mother , and Annie , and Lizzie , John Fry , and his wife , and Betty Muxworthy , Bill Dadds , Jim Slocombe , and , in a word , half of the rest of the people at Oare , include all the Snowe family , who must have thing good and handsome ? and if I must while I be about it , hide nothing from those who read I , I have actually buy for Lorna a thing the price of which quite frighten I , till the shopkeeper say it be nothing at all , and that no young man , with a lady to love he , could dare to offer her rubbish , such as the Jew sell across the way . now the mere idea of beautiful Lorna ever love I , which he talk about as patly   though of course I never mention she   as if it be a settled thing , and he know all about it , that mere idea so drive I abroad , that if he have ask three time as much , I could never have count the money . 
 now in all this I be a fool of course not for remember my friend and neighbour , which a man have a right to do , and indeed be bind to do , when he come from London but for not be certify first what cash I have to go on with . and to my great amazement , when I go with another bill for the victual of only three day more , and a week 's expense on the homeward road reckon very narrowly , Master Spank not only refuse to grant I any interview , but send I out a piece of blue paper , look like a butcher 's ticket , and bear these word and no more , ' John Ridd , go to the devil . he who will not when he may , when he will , he shall have nay . ' from this I conclude that I have lose favour in the sight of Chief Justice Jeffreys . perhaps because my evidence have not prove of any value ! perhaps because he mean to let the matter lie , till cast on he . 
 anyhow , it be a reason of much grief , and some anger to I , and very great anxiety , disappointment , and suspense . for here be the time of the hay go past , and the harvest of small corn come on , and the trout now rise at the yellow Sally , and the blackbird eat our white - heart cherry   I be sure , though I could not see they , and who be to do any good for mother , or stop she from weep continually ? and more than this , what be become of Lorna ? perhaps she have cast I away altogether , as a flouter and a changeling ; perhaps she have drown herself in the black well ; perhaps   and that be bad of all   she be even married , child as she be , to that vile Carver Doone , if the Doones ever care about marry ! that last thought send I down at once to watch for Mr. Spank again , resolve that if I could catch he , spank he I would to a pretty good tune , although sixteen in family . 
 however , there be no such thing as to find he ; and the usher vow   have order I doubt   that he be go to the sea for the good of his health , have sadly overwork himself ; and that none but a poor devil like himself , who never have handling of money , would stay in London this foul , hot weather ; which be likely to bring the plague with it . here be another new terror for I , who have hear of the plague of London , and the horrible thing that happen ; and so go back to my lodging at once , I open my clothe and seek for spot , especially as be so long at a hairy fellmonger 's ; but find none , I fall down and thank God for that same , and vow to start for Oare to - morrow , with my carbine load , come weal come woe , come sun come shower ; though all the parish should laugh at I , for beg my way home again , after the brave thing say of my going , as if I have be the King 's cousin . 
 but I be save in some degree from this lowering of my pride , and what matter more , of mother 's ; for go to buy with my last crown - piece   after all demand be pay   a little shot and powder , more needful on the road almost than even shoe or victual , at the corner of the street I meet my good friend Jeremy Stickles , newly come in search of I . I take he back to my little room mine at least till to - morrow morning and tell he all my story , and how much I feel aggrieve by it . but he surprise I very much , by show no surprise at all . 
 ' it be the way of the world , Jack . they have get all they can from thee , and why should they feed thee far ? we feed not a dead pig , I trow , but baste he well with brine and rue . Nay , we do not victual he upon the day of killing ; which they have do to thee . thou art a lucky man , John ; thou hast get one day 's wage , or at any rate half a day , after thy work be render . God have mercy on I , John ! the thing I see be manifold ; and so be my regard of they . what use to insist on this , or make a special point of that , or hold by something say of old , when a different mood be on ? I tell thee , Jack , all man be liar ; and he be the least one who press not too hard on they for lie . ' 
 this be all quite dark to I , for I never look at thing like that , and never would own myself a liar , not at least to other people , nor even to myself , although I might to God sometimes , when trouble be upon I . and if it come to that , no man have any right to be call a ' liar ' for smooth over thing unwitting , through duty to his neighbour . 
 ' five pound thou shalt have , Jack , ' say Jeremy Stickles suddenly , while I be all abroad with myself as to be a liar or not ; ' five pound , and I will take my chance of wring it from that great rogue Spank . ten I would have make it , John , but for bad luck lately . put back your bit of paper , lad ; I will have no acknowledgment . John Ridd , no nonsense with I ! ' 
 for I be ready to kiss his hand , to think that any man in London   the mean and most suspicious place , upon all God 's earth   should trust I with five pound , without even a receipt for it ! it overcome I so that I sob ; for , after all , though big in body , I be but a child at heart . it be not the five pound that move I , but the way of give it ; and after so much bitter talk , the great trust in my goodness . 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 HOME again AT last 

 it be the beginning of wheat - harvest , when I come to Dunster town , have walk all the way from London , and be somewhat footsore . for though five pound be enough to keep I in food and lodge upon the road , and leave I many a shilling to give to far poor traveller , it would have be nothing for horse - hire , as I know too well by the price Jeremy Stickles have pay upon our way to London . now I never see a pretty town than Dunster look that evening ; for sooth to say , I have almost lose all hope of reach it that night , although the castle be long in view . but be once there , my trouble be go , at least as regard wayfaring ; for mother 's cousin , the worthy tanner   with whom we have sleep on the way to London , be in such indignation at the plight in which I come back to he , afoot , and weary , and almost shoeless not to speak of upper thing that he swear then , by the mercy of God , that if the scheme abrewe round he , against those bloody Papists , should come to any head or shape , and show good chance of succeed , he would risk a thousand pound , as though it be a penny . 
 I tell he not to do it , because I have hear otherwise , but be not at liberty to tell one - tenth of what I know , and indeed have see in London town . but of this he take no heed , because I only nod at he ; and he could not make it out . for it take an old man , or at least a middle - aged one , to nod and wink , with any power on the brain of other man . however , I think I make he know that the bad state in which I come to his town , and the great shame I have work for he among the folk round the card - table at the Luttrell Arms , be not to be , even there , attribute to King Charles the Second , nor even to his counsellor , but to my own speed of travelling , which have beat post - horse . for be much distraught in mind , and desperate in body , I have make all the way from London to Dunster in six day , and no more . it may be one hundred and seventy mile , I can not tell to a furlong or two , especially as I lose my way more than a dozen time ; but at any rate there in six day I be , and most kindly they receive I . the tanner have some excellent daughter , I forget how many ; very pretty damsel , and well set up , and able to make good pastry . but though they ask I many question , and make a sort of lord of I , and offer to darn my stocking   which in truth require it , I fall asleep in the midst of they , although I would not acknowledge it ; and they say , ' poor cousin ! he be weary ' , and lead I to a blessed bed , and kiss I all round like swan 's down . 
 in the morning all the Exmoor hill , the thought of which have frighten I at the end of each day 's travel , seem no more than bushel to I , as I look forth the bedroom window , and thank God for the sight of they . and even so , I have not to climb they , at least by my own labour . for my most worthy uncle   as we oft call a parent 's cousin , find it impossible to keep I for the day , and own indeed that I be right in hastening to my mother , vow that walk I should not , even though he lose his Saturday hide from Minehead and from Watchett . accordingly he send I forth on the very strong nag he have , and the maiden come to wish I God - speed , and kiss their hand at the doorway . it make I proud and glad to think that after see so much of the world , and have hold my own with it , I be come once more among my own people , and find they kind , and more warm - hearted , ay and well look too , than almost any I have happen upon in the mighty city of London . 
 but how shall I tell you the thing I feel , and the swelling of my heart within I , as I draw near , and more near , to the place of all I love and own , to the haunt of every warm remembrance , the nest of all the fledgling hope in a word , to home ? the first sheep I behold on the moor with a great red J.R. on his side   for mother would have they mark with my name , instead of her own as they should have be , I do assure you my spirit leap , and all my sight come to my eye . I shout out , ' Jem , boy ! ' for that be his name , and a rare hand he be at fighting and he know I in spite of the stranger horse ; and I lean over and stroke his head , and swear he should never be mutton . and when I be pass he set off at full gallop , to call the rest of the J.R. 's together , and tell they young master be come home at last . 
 but bless your heart , and my own as well , it would take I all the afternoon to lay before you one - tenth of the thing which come home to I in that one half - hour , as the sun be sink , in the real way he ought to sink . I touch my horse with no spur nor whip , feel that my slow wit would go , if the sight come too fast over they . here be the pool where we wash the sheep , and there be the hollow that ooze away , where I have shoot three wild duck . here be the peat - rick that hide my dinner , when I could not go home for it , and there be the bush with the thyme grow round it , where Annie have find a great swarm of our bee . and now be the corner of the dry stone wall , where the moor give over in earnest , and the partridge whisk from it into the corn land , and call that their supper be ready , and look at our house and the rick as they run , and would wait for that comfort till winter . 
 and there I see but let I go Annie be too much for I . she nearly pull I off my horse , and kiss the very mouth of the carbine . 
 ' I know you would come . oh John ! oh John ! I have wait here every Saturday night ; and I see you for the last mile or more , but I would not come round the corner , for fear that I should cry , John , and then not cry when I get you . now I may cry as much as I like , and you need not try to stop I , John , because I be so happy . but you must not   cry yourself , John ; what will mother think of you ? she will be so jealous of I . ' 
 what mother think I can not tell ; and indeed I doubt if she think at all for more than half an hour , but only manage to hold I tight , and cry , and thank God now and then , but with some fear of his take I , if she should be too grateful . moreover she think it be my own doing , and I ought to have the credit of it , and she even come down very sharply upon John 's wife , Mrs. Fry , for say that we must not be too proud , for all of it be the Lord 's doing . however , dear mother be ashamed of that afterwards , and ask Mrs. Fry 's humble pardon ; and perhaps I ought not to have mention it . 
 Old Smiler have tell they that I be come all the rest , I mean , except Annie for have escape from his halter - ring , he be come out to graze in the lane a bit ; when what should he see but a strange horse come with young master and mistress upon he , for Annie must need get up behind I , there be only sheep to look at she . then Smiler give we a stare and a neigh , with his tail quite stiff with amazement , and then   whether in joy or through indignation   he fling up his hind foot and gallop straight home , and set every dog wild with barking . 
 now , methink , quite enough have be say concern this mighty return of the young John Ridd   which be know up at Cosgate that evening , and feel that I can not describe it , how can I hope that any one else will labour to imagine it , even of the few who be able ? for very few can have travel so far , unless indeed they whose trade it be , or very unsettled people . and even of those who have do so , not one in a hundred can have such a home as I have to come home to . 
 Mother weep again , with grief and some wrath , and so do Annie also , and even little Eliza , and all be unsettle in loyalty , and talk about a republic , when I tell they how I have be leave without money for travel homeward , and expect to have to beg my way , which Farmer Snowe would have hear of . and though I could see they be disappoint at my failure of any promotion , they all declare how glad they be , and how much well they like I to be no more than what they be accustom to . at least , my mother and Annie say so , without wait to hear any more ; but Lizzie do not answer to it , until I have open my bag and show the beautiful present I have for she . and then she kiss I , almost like Annie , and vow that she think very little of captain . 
 for Lizzie 's present be the good of all , I mean , of course , except Lorna 's   which I carry in my breast all the way , hop that it might make her love I , from have lain so long , close to my heart . for I have bring Lizzie something dear , and a precious heavy book it be , and much beyond my understanding ; whereas I know well that to both the other my gift would be dear , for mine own sake . and happy people could not be find than the whole of we be that evening . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 JOHN have hope of LORNA 

 much as I long to know more about Lorna , and though all my heart be yearn , I could not reconcile it yet with my duty to mother and Annie , to leave they on the follow day , which happen to be a Sunday . for lo , before breakfast be out of our mouth , there come all the man of the farm , and their wife , and even the two crow - boy , dress as if go to Barnstaple fair , to inquire how Master John be , and whether it be true that the King have make he one of his body - guard ; and if so , what be to be do with the belt for the championship of the West - Counties wrestling , which I have hold now for a year or more , and none be ready to challenge it . strange to say , this last point seem the most important of all to they ; and none ask who be to manage the farm , or answer for their wage ; but all ask who be to wear the belt . 
 to this I reply , after shake hand twice over all round with all of they , that I mean to wear the belt myself , for the honour of Oare parish , so long as ever God give I strength and health to meet all - comer ; for I have never be ask to be body - guard , and if ask I would never have do it . some of they cry that the King must be maze , not to keep I for his protection , in these violent time of Popery . I could have tell they that the King be not in the least afraid of Papists , but on the contrary , very fond of they ; however , I hold my tongue , remember what Judge Jeffreys bid I . 
 in church , the whole congregation , man , woman , and child   except , indeed , the Snowe girl , who only look when I be not watch , turn on I with one accord , and star so steadfastly , to get some reflection of the King from I , that they forget the time to kneel down and the parson be force to speak to they . if I cough , or move my book , or bow , or even say ' amen , ' glance be exchange which mean ' that he hath learn in London town , and most likely from his Majesty . ' 
 however , all this go off in time , and people become even angry with I for not be sharp   as they say , or smart , or a whit more fashionable , for all the great company I have see , and all the wondrous thing waste upon I . 
 but though I may have be none the wiser by reason of my stay in London , at any rate I be much the well in virtue of come home again . for now I have learn the joy of quiet , and the gratitude for good thing round we , and the love we owe to other   even those who must be kind , for their indulgence to we . all this , before my journey , have be too much as a matter of course to I ; but have miss it now I know that it be a gift , and might be lose . moreover , I have pin so much , in the dust and heat of that great town , for tree , and field , and running water , and the sound of country life , and the air of country wind , that never more could I grow weary of those soft enjoyment ; or at least I think so then . 
 to awake as the summer sun come slant over the hill - top , with hope on every beam adance to the laughter of the morning ; to see the leaf across the window ruffle on the fresh new air , and the tendril of the powdery vine turn from their beaded sleep . then the lustrous meadow far beyond the thatch of the garden - wall , yet see beneath the hanging scollop of the walnut - tree , all awake , dress in pearl , all amazed at their own glistening , like a maid at her own idea . down they troop the low kine , walk each with a step of character   even as man and woman do , yet all alike with toss of horn , and spread of udder ready . from they without a word , we turn to the farm - yard proper , see on the right , and dryly straw from the petty rush of the pitch - paved runnel . round it stand the snug out - building , barn , corn - chamber , cider - press , stable , with a blinker'd horse in every doorway munching , while his driver tighten buckle , whistle and look down the lane , dally to begin his labour till the milkmaid be go by . here the cock come forth at last ; where have he be linger ? egg may tell to - morrow he clap his wing and shout ' cock - a - doodle ' ; and no other cock dare look at he . two or three go sidle off , wait till their spur be grow ; and then the crowd of partlet come , chatter how their lord have dream , and crow at two in the morning , and pray that the old brown rat would only dare to face he . but while the cock be crow still , and the pullet world admire he , who come up but the old turkey - cock , with all his family round he . then the geese at the low end begin to thrust their breast out , and mum their down - bit , and look at the gander and scream shrill joy for the conflict ; while the duck in pond show nothing but tail , in proof of their strict neutrality . 
 while yet we dread for the come event , and the fight which would jar on the morning , behold the grandmother of sow , gruffly grunt right and leave with muzzle which no ring may tame   not be matrimonial , hulk across between the two , move all each side at once , and then all of the other side as if she be chin down the middle , and afraid of spill the salt from she . as this mighty view of lard hide each combatant from the other , gladly each retire and boast how he would have slay his neighbour , but that old sow drive the other away , and no wonder he be afraid of she , after all the chick she have eat . 
 and so it go on ; and so the sun come , strong from his drink of dew ; and the cattle in the byre , and the horse from the stable , and the man from cottage - door , each have have his rest and food , all smell alike of hay and straw , and every one must hie to work , be it drag , or draw , or delve . 
 so think I on the Monday morning ; while my own work lie before I , and I be plot how to quit it , void of harm to every one , and let my love have work a little hard perhaps of all work , and yet as sure as sunrise . I know that my first day 's task on the farm would be strictly watch by every one , even by my gentle mother , to see what I have learn in London . but could I let still another day pass , for Lorna to think I faithless ? 
 I feel much inclined to tell dear mother all about Lorna , and how I love she , yet have no hope of win she . often and often , I have long to do this , and have do with it . but the thought of my father 's terrible death , at the hand of the Doones , prevent I . and it seem to I foolish and mean to grieve mother , without any chance of my suit ever speed . if once Lorna love I , my mother should know it ; and it would be the great happiness to I to have no concealment from she , though at first she be sure to grieve terribly . but I see no more chance of Lorna love I , than of the man in the moon come down ; or rather of the moon come down to the man , as relate in old mythology . 
 now the merriment of the small bird , and the clear voice of the water , and the lowing of cattle in meadow , and the view of no house   except just our own and a neighbour 's , and the knowledge of everybody around , their kindness of heart and simplicity , and love of their neighbour 's doing , all these could not help or please I at all , and many of they be much against I , in my secret depth of longing and dark tumult of the mind . many people may think I foolish , especially after come from London , where many nice maid look at I   on account of my bulk and stature , and I might have be fit up with a sweetheart , in spite of my west - country twang , and the smallness of my purse ; if only I have say the word . but nay ; I have contempt for a man whose heart be like a shirt - stud   such as I see in London card , fit into one to - day , sit bravely on the breast ; pluck out on the morrow morn , and the place that know it , go . 
 now , what do I do but take my chance ; reckless whether any one heed I or not , only crave Lorna 's heed , and time for ten word to she . therefore I leave the man of the farm as far away as might be , after make they work with I   which no man round our part could do , to his own satisfaction , and then know they to be well weary , very unlike to follow I and still more unlike to tell of I , for each have his London present I stride right away , in good trust of my speed , without any more misgiving ; but resolve to face the bad of it , and to try to be home for supper . 
 and first I go , I know not why , to the crest of the break highland , whence I have agree to watch for any mark or signal . and sure enough at last I see   when it be too late to see   that the white stone have be cover over with a cloth or mantle , the sign that something have arise to make Lorna want I . for a moment I stand amazed at my evil fortune ; that I should be too late , in the very thing of all thing on which my heart be set ! then after eye sorrowfully every crick and cranny to be sure that not a single flutter of my love be visible , off I set , with small respect either for my knee or neck , to make the round of the outer cliff , and come up my old access . 
 nothing could stop I ; it be not long , although to I it seem an age , before I stand in the niche of rock at the head of the slippery watercourse , and gaze into the quiet glen , where my foolish heart be dwell . notwithstanding doubt of right , notwithstanding sense of duty , and despite all manly strive , and the great love of my home , there my heart be ever dwell , know what a fool it be , and content to know it . 
 many bird come twitter round I in the gold of August ; many tree show twinkle beauty , as the sun go lower ; and the line of water fall , from wrinkle into dimple . little heeding , there I crouch ; though with sense of everything that afterwards should move I , like a picture or a dream ; and everything go by I softly , while my heart be gaze . 
 at last , a little figure come , not insignificant   I mean , but look very light and slender in the move shadow , gently here and softly there , as if vague of purpose , with a gloss of tender movement , in and out the wealth of tree , and liberty of the meadow . who be I to crouch , or doubt , or look at she from a distance ; what matter if they kill I now , and one tear come to bury I ? therefore I rush out at once , as if shot - gun be unknown yet ; not from any real courage , but from prisone love burst forth . 
 I know not whether my own Lorna be afraid of what I look , or what I might say to she , or of her own thought of I ; all I know be that she look frightened , when I hop for gladness . perhaps the power of my joy be more than maiden like to own , or in any way to answer to ; and to tell the truth , it seem as if I might now forget myself ; while she would take good care of it . this make a man grow thoughtful ; unless , as some low fellow do , he believe all woman hypocrite . 
 therefore I go slowly towards she , take back in my impulse ; and say all I could come to say , with some distress in do it . 
 ' Mistress Lorna , I have hope that you be in need of I . ' 
 ' oh , yes ; but that be long ago ; two month ago , or more , sir . ' and say this she look away , as if it all be over . but I be now so dazed and frighten , that it take my breath away , and I could not answer , feel sure that I be rob and some one else have win she . and I try to turn away , without another word , and go . 
 but I could not help one stupid sob , though mad with myself for allow it , but it come too sharp for pride to stay it , and it tell a world of thing . Lorna hear it , and run to I , with her bright eye full of wonder , pity , and great kindness , as if amazed that I have more than a simple liking for she . then she hold out both hand to I ; and I take and look at they . 
 ' Master Ridd , I do not mean , ' she whisper , very softly , ' I do not mean to vex you . ' 
 ' if you would be loath to vex I , none else in this world can do it , ' I answer out of my great love , but fear yet to look at she , mine eye not be strong enough . 
 ' come away from this bright place , ' she answer , tremble in her turn ; ' I be watch and spy of late . come beneath the shadow , John . ' 
 I would have leap into the valley of the shadow of death   as describe by the late John Bunyan , only to hear she call I ' John ' ; though Apollyon be lurk there , and despair should lock I in . 
 she steal across the silent grass ; but I stride hotly after she ; fear be all beyond I now , except the fear of lose she . I could not but behold her manner , as she go before I , all her grace , and lovely sweetness , and her sense of what she be . 
 she lead I to her own rich bower , which I tell of once before ; and if in spring it be a sight , what be it in summer glory ? but although my mind have notice of its fairness and its wonder , not a heed my heart take of it , neither dwelt it in my presence more than flow water . all that in my presence dwelt , all that in my heart be feel , be the maiden move gently , and afraid to look at I . 
 for now the power of my love be abide on she , new to she , unknown to she ; not a thing to speak about , nor even to think clearly ; only just to feel and wonder , with a pain of sweetness . she could look at I no more , neither could she look away , with a study manner only to let fall her eye , and blush , and be put out with I , and still more with herself . 
 I leave she quite alone ; though close , though tingle to have hold of she . even her right hand be drop and lie among the moss . neither do I try to steal one glimpse below her eyelid . life and death to I be hang on the first glance I should win ; yet I let it be so . 
 after long or short I know not , yet ere I be weary , ere I yet begin to think or wish for any answer Lorna slowly raise her eyelid , with a gleam of dew below they , and look at I doubtfully . any look with so much in it never meet my gaze before . 
 ' darling , do you love I ? ' be all that I could say to she . 
 ' yes , I like you very much , ' she answer , with her eye go from I , and her dark hair fall over , so as not to show I thing . 
 ' but do you love I , Lorna , Lorna ; do you love I more than all the world ? ' 
 ' no , to be sure not . now why should I ? ' 
 ' in truth , I know not why you should . only I hop that you do , Lorna . either love I not at all , or as I love you for ever . ' 
 ' John I love you very much ; and I would not grieve you . you be the brave , and the kind , and the simple of all man I mean of all people I like you very much , Master Ridd , and I think of you almost every day . ' 
 ' that will not do for I , Lorna . not almost every day I think , but every instant of my life , of you . for you I would give up my home , my love of all the world beside , my duty to my dear one , for you I would give up my life , and hope of life beyond it . do you love I so ? ' 
 ' not by any mean , ' say Lorna ; ' no , I like you very much , when you do not talk so wildly ; and I like to see you come as if you would fill our valley up , and I like to think that even Carver would be nothing in your hand but as to like you like that , what should make it likely ? especially when I have make the signal , and for some two month or more you have never even answer it ! if you like I so ferociously , why do you leave I for other people to do just as they like with I ? ' 
 ' to do as they like ! oh , Lorna , not to make you marry Carver ? ' 
 ' no , Master Ridd , be not frightened so ; it make I fear to look at you . ' 
 ' but you have not marry Carver yet ? say quick ! why keep I wait so ? ' 
 ' of course I have not , Master Ridd . should I be here if I have , think you , and allow you to like I so , and to hold my hand , and make I laugh , as I declare you almost do sometimes ? and at other time you frighten I . ' 
 ' do they want you to marry Carver ? tell I all the truth of it . ' 
 ' not yet , not yet . they be not half so impetuous as you be , John . I be only just seventeen , you know , and who be to think of marry ? but they want I to give my word , and be formally betroth to he in the presence of my grandfather . it seem that something frighten they . there be a youth name Charleworth Doone , every one call he " Charlie " ; a headstrong and a gay young man , very gallant in his look and manner ; and my uncle , the Counsellor , choose to fancy that Charlie look at I too much , come by my grandfather 's cottage . ' 
 here Lorna blush so that I be frightened , and begin to hate this Charlie more , a great deal more , than even Carver Doone . 
 ' he have well not , ' say I ; ' I will fling he over it , if he dare . he shall see thee through the roof , Lorna , if at all he see thee . ' 
 ' Master Ridd , you be bad than Carver ! I think you be so kind - hearted . well , they want I to promise , and even to swear a solemn oath   a thing I have never do in my life   that I would we d my eld cousin , this same Carver Doone , who be twice as old as I be , be thirty - five and upwards . that be why I give the token that I wish to see you , Master Ridd . they point out how much it be for the peace of all the family , and for mine own benefit ; but I would not listen for a moment , though the Counsellor be most eloquent , and my grandfather beg I to consider , and Carver smile his pleasantest , which be a truly frightful thing . then both he and his crafty father be for use force with I ; but Sir Ensor would not hear of it ; and they have put off that extreme until he shall be past its knowledge , or , at least , beyond prevent it . and now I be watch , and spy , and follow , and half my little liberty seem to be take from I . I could not be here speak with you , even in my own nook and refuge , but for the aid , and skill , and courage of dear little Gwenny Carfax . she be now my chief reliance , and through she alone I hope to baffle all my enemy , since other have forsake I . ' 
 tear of sorrow and reproach be lurk in her soft dark eye , until in few word I tell she that my seem negligence be nothing but my bitter loss and wretched absence far away ; of which I have so vainly striven to give any tiding without danger to she . when she hear all this , and see what I have bring from London   which be nothing less than a ring of pearl with a sapphire in the midst of they , as pretty as could well be find , she let the gentle tear flow fast , and come and sit so close beside I , that I tremble like a fold sheep at the bleating of her lamb . but recover comfort quickly , without more ado , I raise her left hand and observe it with a nice regard , wonder at the small blue vein , and curve , and taper whiteness , and the point it finish with . my wonder seem to please she much , herself so well accustomed to it , and not fond of watch it . and then , before she could say a word , or guess what I be up to , as quick as ever I turn hand in a bout of wrestling , on her finger be my ring sapphire for the vein of blue , and pearl to match white finger . 
 ' oh , you crafty Master Ridd ! ' say Lorna , look up at I , and blush now a far bright blush than when she speak of Charlie ; ' I think that you be much too simple ever to do this sort of thing . no wonder you can catch the fish , as when first I see you . ' 
 ' have I catch you , little fish ? or must all my life be spend in hopeless angling for you ? ' 
 ' neither one nor the other , John ! you have not catch I yet altogether , though I like you dearly John ; and if you will only keep away , I shall like you more and more . as for hopeless angling , John that all other shall have until I tell you otherwise . ' 
 with the large tear in her eye tear which seem to I to rise partly from her want to love I with the power of my love she put her pure bright lip , half smile , half prone to reply to tear , against my forehead line with trouble , doubt , and eager longing . and then she draw my ring from off that snowy twig her finger , and hold it out to I ; and then , see how my face be fall , thrice she touch it with her lip , and sweetly give it back to I . ' John , I dare not take it now ; else I should be cheat you . I will try to love you dearly , even as you deserve and wish . keep it for I just till then . something tell I I shall earn it in a very little time . perhaps you will be sorry then , sorry when it be all too late , to be love by such as I be . ' 
 what could I do at her mournful tone , but kiss a thousand time the hand which she put up to warn I , and vow that I would rather die with one assurance of her love , than without it live for ever with all beside that the world could give ? upon this she look so lovely , with her dark eyelash tremble , and her soft eye full of light , and the colour of clear sunrise mount on her cheek and brow , that I be force to turn away , be overcome with beauty . 
 ' dearest darling , love of my life , ' I whisper through her cloud of hair ; ' how long must I wait to know , how long must I linger doubt whether you can ever stoop from your birth and wondrous beauty to a poor , coarse hind like I , an ignorant unlettered yeoman ' 
 ' I will not have you revile yourself , ' say Lorna , very tenderly just as I have mean to make she . ' you be not rude and unlettered , John . you know a great deal more than I do ; you have learn both Greek and Latin , as you tell I long ago , and you have be at the very good school in the West of England . none of we but my grandfather , and the Counsellor   who be a great scholar , can compare with you in this . and though I have laugh at your manner of speech , I only laugh in fun , John ; I never mean to vex you by it , nor know that it have do so . ' 
 ' naught you say can vex I , dear , ' I answer , as she lean towards I in her generous sorrow ; ' unless you say " Begone , John Ridd ; I love another more than you . " ' 
 ' then I shall never vex you , John . never , I mean , by say that . now , John , if you please , be quiet ' 
 for I be carry away so much by hear she call I ' John ' so often , and the music of her voice , and the way she bend toward I , and the shadow of soft weeping in the sunlight of her eye , that some of my great hand be creep in a manner not to be imagine , and far less explain , toward the lithesome , wholesome curve underneath her mantle - fold , and out of sight and harm , as I think ; not be her front waist . however , I be dash with that , and pretend not to mean it ; only to pluck some lady - fern , whose elegance do I no good . 
 ' now , John , ' say Lorna , be so quick that not even a lover could cheat she , and observe my confusion more intently than she need have do . ' Master John Ridd , it be high time for you to go home to your mother . I love your mother very much from what you have tell I about she , and I will not have she cheat . ' 
 ' if you truly love my mother , ' say I , very craftily ' the only way to show it be by truly love I . ' 
 upon that she laugh at I in the sweetest manner , and with such provoking way , and such come - and - go of glance , and beginning of quick blush , which she try to laugh away , that I know , as well as if she herself have tell I , by some knowledge   void of reasoning , and the surer for it , I know quite well , while all my heart be burn hot within I , and mine eye be shy of her , and her eye be shy of mine ; for certain and for ever this I know as in a glory that Lorna Doone have now begin and would go on to love I . 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 reap LEADS to revel 

 although I be under interdict for two month from my darling ' one for your sake , one for mine , ' she have whisper , with her head withdraw , yet not so very far from I light heart be not on Exmoor than I bear for half the time , and even for three quarter . for she be safe ; I know that daily by a mode of signal well - contrived between we now , on the strength of our experience . ' I have nothing now to fear , John , ' she have say to I , as we part ; ' it be true that I be spy and watch , but Gwenny be too keen for they . while I have my grandfather to prevent all violence ; and little gwenny to keep watch on those who try to watch I ; and you , above all other , John , ready at a moment , if the bad come to the bad this neglect Lorna Doone be never in such case before . therefore do not squeeze my hand , John ; I be safe without it , and you do not know your strength . ' 
 ah , I know my strength right well . Hill and valley scarcely seem to be step and land for I ; fierce cattle I would play with , make they go backward , and afraid of hurt they , like John Fry with his terrier ; even rooted tree seem to I but as stick I could smite down , except for my love of everything . the love of all thing be upon I , and a softness to they all , and a sense of have something even such as they have . 
 then the golden harvest come , wave on the broad hill - side , and nestle in the quiet nook scoop from out the fringe of wood . a wealth of harvest such as never gladden all our country - side since my father cease to reap , and his sickle hang to rust . there have not be a man on Exmoor fit to work that reaping - hook since the time its owner fall , in the prime of life and strength , before a sterner reaper . but now I take it from the wall , where mother proudly store it , while she watch I , hardly know whether she should smile or cry . 
 all the parish be assemble in our upper courtyard ; for we be to open the harvest that year , as have be settle with Farmer Nicholas , and with Jasper Kebby , who hold the third or little farm . we start in proper order , therefore , as our practice be : first , the parson Josiah Bowden , wear his gown and cassock , with the parish Bible in his hand , and a sickle strap behind he . as he stride along well and stoutly , be a man of substance , all our family come next , I lead mother with one hand , in the other bear my father 's hook , and with a loaf of our own bread and a keg of cider upon my back . behind we Annie and Lizzie walk , wear wreath of corn - flower , set out very prettily , such as mother would have wear if she have be a farmer 's wife , instead of a farmer 's widow . be as she be , she have no adornment , except that her widow 's hood be off , and her hair allow to flow , as if she have be a maiden ; and very rich bright hair it be , in spite of all her trouble . 
 after we , the maidens come , milkmaid and the rest of they , with Betty Muxworthy at their head , scold even now , because they would not walk fitly . but they only laugh at she ; and she know it be no good to scold , with all the man behind they . 
 then the snowe come troop forward ; Farmer Nicholas in the middle , walk as if he would rather walk to a wheatfield of his own , yet content to follow lead , because he know himself the leader ; and sign every now and then to the people here and there , as if I be nobody . but to see his three great daughter , strong and handsome wench , make upon either side , as if somebody would run off with they this be the very thing that teach I how to value Lorna , and her pure simplicity . 
 after the Snowes come Jasper Kebby , with his wife , new - married ; and a very honest pair they be , upon only a hundred acre , and a right of common . after these the man come hotly , without decent order , try to spy the girl in front , and make good joke about they , at which their wife laugh heartily , be jealous when alone perhaps . and after these man and their wife come all the child toddle , pick flower by the way , and chatter and ask question , as the child will . there must have be threescore of we , take one with another , and the lane be full of people . when we be come to the big field - gate , where the first sickle be to be , Parson Bowden heave up the rail with the sleeve of his gown do green with it ; and he say that everybody might hear he , though his breath be short , ' in the name of the Lord , amen ! ' 
 ' amen ! so be it ! ' cry the clerk , who be far behind , be only a shoemaker . 
 then Parson Bowden read some verse from the parish Bible , tell we to lift up our eye , and look upon the field already white to harvest ; and then he lay the Bible down on the square head of the gate - post , and despite his gown and cassock , three good swipe he cut off corn , and lay they right end onwards . all this time the rest be huddle outside the gate , and along the lane , not dare to interfere with parson , but whisper how well he do it . 
 when he have stow the corn like that , mother enter , lean on I , and we both say , ' thank the Lord for all his mercy , and these the first - fruit of his hand ! ' and then the clerk give out a psalm verse by verse , do very well ; although he sneeze in the midst of it , from a beard of wheat thrust up his nose by the rival cobbler at Brendon . and when the psalm be sing , so strongly that the foxglove on the bank be shake , like a chime of bell , at it , Parson take a stoop of cider , and we all fall to at reap . 
 of course I mean the man , not woman ; although I know that up the country , woman be allow to reap ; and right well they reap it , keep row for row with man , comely , and in due order , yet , meseem , the man must ill attend to their own reaping - hook , in fear lest the other cut themselves , be the weak vessel . but in our part , woman do what seem their proper business , follow well behind the man , out of harm of the swing hook , and stoop with their breast and arm up they catch the swathe of corn , where the reaper cast they , and tuck they together tightly with a wisp lay under they , this they fetch around and twist , with a knee to keep it close ; and lo , there be a goodly sheaf , ready to set up in stook ! after these the child come , gather each for his little self , if the farmer be right - minded ; until each hath a bundle make as big as himself and long , and tumble now and again with it , in the deep part of the stubble . 
 we , the man , keep march onwards down the flank of the yellow wall , with knee bent wide , and leave arm bow and right arm flash steel . each man in his several place , keep down the rig or chine , on the right side of the reaper in front , and the left of the man that follow he , each make far sweep and inroad into the golden breadth and depth , each cast leftward his rich clearance on his foregoer 's double track . 
 so like half a wedge of wildfowl , to and fro we sweep the field ; and when to either hedge we come , sickle want whetting , and throat require moistening , and back be in need of easing , and every man have much to say , and woman want praise . then all return to the other end , with reap - hook beneath our arm , and dog leave to mind jacket . 
 but now , will you believe I well , or will you only laugh at I ? for even in the world of wheat , when deep among the varnished crispness of the jointed stalk , and below the feather yielding of the graceful head , even as I grip the swathe and sweep the sickle round they , even as I fling they by to rest on brother stubble , through the whirling yellow world , and eagerness of reap , come the vision of my love , as with downcast eye she wonder at my power of passion . and then the sweet remembrance glow bright than the sun through wheat , through my very depth of heart , of how she raise those beam eye , and ripen in my breast rich hope . even now I could descry , like high wave in the distance , the rounded head and fold shadow of the wood of Bagworthy . perhaps she be walk in the valley , and softly gaze up at they . oh , to be a bird just there ! I could see a bright mist hang just above the Doone Glen . perhaps it be shed its drizzle upon she . oh , to be a drop of rain ! the very breeze which bow the harvest to my bosom gently , might have come direct from Lorna , with her sweet voice laden . ah , the flaw of air that wander where they will around she , fan her bright cheek , play with lash , even revel in her hair and reveal her beauty man be but a breath , we know , would I be such breath as that ! 
 but confound it , while I ponder , with delicious dream suspend , with my right arm hang frustrate and the giant sickle droop , with my left arm bow for clasp something more germane than wheat , and my eye not mind business , but intent on distant wood confound it , what be the man about , and why be I leave vapoure ? they have take advantage of I , the rogue ! they be go to the hedge for the cider - jar ; they have have up the sledd of bread and meat , quite softly over the stubble , and if I can believe my eye   so daze with Lorna 's image , they be sit down to an excellent dinner , before the church clock have go eleven ! 
 ' John Fry , you big villain ! ' I cry , with John hang up in the air by the scruff of his neck - cloth , but hold still by his knife and fork , and a goose - leg in between his lip , ' John Fry , what mean you by this , sir ? ' 
 ' latt I dowun , or I can not   tell ' e , ' John answer with some difficulty . so I let he come down , and I must confess that he have reason on his side . ' plaise your worship ' John call I so , ever since I return from London , firmly believe that the King have make I a magistrate at least ; though I be to keep it secret ' we zeed as how your worship be take with thinkin ' of King 's business , in the middle of the whate - rigg : and so uz ze , " Latt un coom to his zell , we have well zave taime , by takke our dinner " ; and here we be , praise your worship , and hopp no offence with thick iron spoon full of vried tatie . ' 
 I be glad enough to accept the ladle full of fried batata , and to make the good of thing , which be generally do by let man have their own way . therefore I manage to dine with they , although it be so early . 
 for accord to all that I can find , in a long life and a varied one , twelve o'clock be the real time for a man to have his dinner . then the sun be at his noon , call halt to look around , and then the plant and leaf be turn , each with a little leisure time , before the work of the afternoon . then be the balance of east and west , and then the right and leave side of a man be in due proportion , and contribute fairly with harmonious fluid . and the health of this mode of life , and its reclaim virtue be well set forth in our ancient rhyme , 
 Sunrise , breakfast ; sun high , dinner ; Sundown , sup ; make a saint of a sinner . 
 Whish , the wheat fall ! Whirl again ; ye have have good dinner ; give your master and mistress plenty to supply another year . and in truth we do reap well and fairly , through the whole of that afternoon , I not only keep lead , but keep the man up to it . we get through a matter of ten acre , ere the sun between the shock break his light on wheaten plume , then hang his red cloak on the cloud , and fall into grey slumber . 
 see this we wipe our sickle , and our breast and forehead , and soon be on the homeward road , look forward to good supper . 
 of course all the reaper come at night to the harvest - supper , and Parson Bowden to say the grace as well as to help to carve for we . and some help be need there , I can well assure you ; for the reaper have brave appetite , and most of their wife have baby be force to eat as a duty . neither fail they of this duty ; cut and come again be the order of the evening , as it have be of the day ; and I have no time to ask question , but help meat and ladle gravy . all the while our darling Annie , with her sleeve tuck up , and her comely figure panting , be run about with a bucket of tatie mash with lard and cabbage . even Lizzie have leave her book , and be serve out beer and cider ; while mother help plum - pudding largely on pewter - plate with the mutton . and all the time , Betty Muxworthy be grunt in and out everywhere , not have space to scold even , but change the dish , serve the meat , poke the fire , and cook more . but John Fry would not stir a peg , except with his knife and fork , have all the air of a visitor , and his wife to keep he eat , till I think there would be no end of it . 
 then have eat all they could , they prepare themselves , with one accord , for the business now of drinking . but first they lift the neck of corn , dress with ribbon gaily , and set it upon the mantelpiece , each man with his horn a - froth ; and then they sing a song about it , every one shout in the chorus louder than harvest thunderstorm . some be in the middle of one verse , and some at the end of the next one ; yet somehow all manage to get together in the mighty roar of the burden . and if any farmer up the country would like to know Exmoor harvest - song as sing in my time and will be sing long after I be garner home , lo , here I set it down for he , omit only the dialect , which perchance might puzzle he . 

  exmoor harvest - SONG 

  1 

  the corn , oh the corn , ' tis the ripening of the corn ! 
  go unto the door , my lad , and look beneath the moon , 
  thou canst see , beyond the woodrick , how it be yelloon : 
  ' tis the harvesting of wheat , and the barley must be shorn . 

   Chorus 

  the corn , oh the corn , and the yellow , mellow corn ! 
  here be to the corn , with the cup upon the board ! 
  we have   be reap all the day , and we will reap again the morn 
  and fetch it home to mow - yard , and then we will thank the Lord . 

  2 

  the wheat , oh the wheat , ' tis the ripening of the wheat ! 
  all the day it have be hang down its heavy head , 
  bow over on our bosom with a beard of red : 
  ' tis the harvest , and the value make the labour sweet . 

   Chorus 

  the wheat , oh the wheat , and the golden , golden wheat ! 
  here be to the wheat , with the loaf upon the board ! 
  we have   be reap all the day , and we never will be beat , 
  but fetch it all to mow - yard , and then we will thank the Lord . 

  3 

  the barley , oh the barley , and the barley be in prime ! 
  all the day it have be rustle , with its bristle brown , 
  wait with its beard abowing , till it can be mow ! 
  ' tis the harvest and the barley must abide its time . 

   Chorus 

  the barley , oh the barley , and the barley ruddy brown ! 
  here be to the barley , with the beer upon the board ! 
  we will go amowing , soon as ever all the wheat be down ; 
  when all be in the mow - yard , we will stop , and thank the Lord . 

  4 

  the oat , oh the oat , ' tis the ripening of the oats ! 
  all the day they have be dance with their flake of white , 
  wait for the girding - hook , to be the nag ' delight : 
  ' tis the harvest , let they dangle in their skirt coat . 

   Chorus 

  the oat , oh the oat , and the silver , silver oat ! 
  here be to the oats with the blackstone on the board ! 
  we will go among they , when the barley have be lay in rote : 
  when all be home to mow - yard , we will kneel and thank the Lord . 

  5 

  the corn , oh the corn , and the blessing of the corn ! 
  come unto the door , my lad , and look beneath the moon , 
  we can see , on hill and valley , how it be yelloon , 
  with a breadth of glory , as when our Lord be bear . 

   Chorus 

  the corn , oh the corn , and the yellow , mellow corn ! 
  thank for the corn , with our bread upon the board ! 
  so shall we acknowledge it , before we reap the morn , 
  with our hand to heaven , and our knee unto the Lord . 
 now we sing this song very well the first time , have the parish choir to lead we , and the clarionet , and the parson to give we the time with his cup ; and we sing it again the second time , not so but what you might praise it   if you have be with we all the evening , although the parson be go then , and the clerk not fit to compare with he in the matter of keep time . but when that song be in its third singing , I defy any man   however sober   to have make out one verse from the other , or even the burden from the verse , inasmuch as every man present , ay , and woman too , sing as become convenient to they , in utterance both of word and tune . 
 and in truth , there be much excuse for they ; because it be a noble harvest , fit to thank the Lord for , without his think we hypocrite . for we have more land in wheat , that year , than ever we have before , and twice the crop to the acre ; and I could not help now and then remember , in the midst of the merriment , how my father in the churchyard yonder would have glory to behold it . and my mother , who have leave we now , happen to return just then , be call to have her health drunk   for the twentieth time at least , I know by the sadness in her eye that she be think just as I be . presently , therefore , I slip away from the noise , and mirth , and smoke   although of that last there be not much , except from Farmer Nicholas , and cross the courtyard in the moonlight , I go , just to cool myself , as far as my father 's tombstone . 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 ANNIE get the best of it 

 I have long outgrow unwholesome feeling as to my father 's death , and so have Annie ; though Lizzie   who must have love he least   still entertain some evil will , and long for a punishment . therefore I be surprised   and indeed , startle would not be too much to say , the moon be somewhat fleecy , to see our Annie sit there as motionless as the tombstone , and with all her good fallal upon she , after stow away the dish . 
 my nerve , however , be good and strong , except at least in love matter , wherein they always fail I , and when I meet with witch ; and therefore I go up to Annie , although she look so white and pure ; for I have see she before with those thing on , and it strike I who she be . 
 " what be you do here , Annie ? " I inquire rather sternly , be vex with she for have go so very near to frighten I . 
 " nothing at all , " say our Annie shortly . and indeed it be truth enough for a woman . not that I dare to believe that woman be such liar as man say ; only that I mean they often see thing round the corner , and know not which be which of it . and indeed I never have know a woman   though right enough in their meaning   purely and perfectly true and transparent , except only my Lorna ; and even so , I might not have love she , if she have be ugly . 
 ' why , how so ? ' say I ; ' Miss Annie , what business have you here , do nothing at this time of night ? and leave I with all the trouble to entertain our guest ! ' 
 ' you seem not to I to be do it , John , ' Annie answer softly ; ' what business have you here do nothing , at this time of night ? ' 
 I be take so aback with this , and the extreme impertinence of it , from a mere young girl like Annie , that I turn round to march away and have nothing more to say to she . but she jump up , and catch I by the hand , and throw herself upon my bosom , with her face all wet with tear . 
 ' oh , John , I will tell you . I will tell you . only do not   be angry , John . ' 
 ' angry ! no indeed , ' say I ; ' what right have I to be angry with you , because you have your secret ? every chit of a girl think now that she have a right to her secret . ' 
 ' and you have none of your own , John ; of course you have none of your own ? all your go out at night ' 
 ' we will not quarrel here , poor Annie , ' I answer , with some loftiness ; ' there be many thing upon my mind , which girl can have no notion of . ' 
 ' and so there be upon mine , John . oh , John , I will tell you everything , if you will look at I kindly , and promise to forgive I . oh , I be so miserable ! ' 
 now this , though she be behave so badly , move I much towards she ; especially as I long to know what she have to tell I . therefore I allow she to coax I , and to kiss I , and to lead I away a little , as far as the old yew - tree ; for she would not tell I where she be . 
 but even in the shadow there , she be very long before beginning , and seem to have two mind about it , or rather perhaps a dozen ; and she lay her cheek against the tree , and sob till it be pitiful ; and I know what mother would say to she for spoil her good frock so . 
 ' now will you stop ? ' I say at last , hard than I mean it , for I know that she would go on all night , if any one encourage she : and though not well acquainted with woman , I understand my sister ; or else I must be a bear fool except , of course , that I never profess to understand Eliza . 
 ' yes , I will stop , ' say Annie , panting ; ' you be very hard on I , John ; but I know you mean it for the good . if somebody else I be sure I do not   know who , and have no right to know , no doubt , but she must be a wicked thing if somebody else have be take so with a pain all round the heart , John , and no power of tell it , perhaps you would have coax , and kiss she , and come a little nearer , and make opportunity to be very loving . ' 
 now this be so exactly what I have try to do to Lorna , that my breath be almost take away at Annie 's so describe it . for a while I could not say a word , but wonder if she be a witch , which have never be in our family : and then , all of a sudden , I see the way to beat she , with the devil at my elbow . 
 ' from your knowledge of these thing , Annie , you must have have they do to you . I demand to know this very moment who have take such liberty . ' 
 ' then , John , you shall never know , if you ask in that manner . besides , it be no liberty in the least at all , Cousins have a right to do thing and when they be one 's godfather ' here Annie stop quite suddenly have so betray herself ; but meet I in the full moonlight , be resolve to face it out , with a good face put upon it . 
 ' alas , I fear it would come to this , ' I answer very sadly ; ' I know he have be here many a time , without show himself to I . there be nothing mean than for a man to sneak , and steal a young maid 's heart , without her people know it . ' 
 ' you be not do anything of that sort yourself then , dear John , be you ? ' 
 ' only a common highwayman ! ' I answer , without heed she ; ' a man without an acre of his own , and liable to hang upon any common , and no other right of common over it ' 
 ' John , ' say my sister , ' be the Doones privilege not to be hang upon common land ? ' 
 at this I be so thunderstruck , that I leap in the air like a shot rabbit , and rush as hard as I could through the gate and across the yard , and back into the kitchen ; and there I ask Farmer Nicholas Snowe to give I some tobacco , and to lend I a spare pipe . 
 this he do with a grateful manner , be now some five - fourth go ; and so I smoke the very first pipe that ever have enter my lip till then ; and beyond a doubt it do I good , and spread my heart at leisure . 
 meanwhile the reaper be mostly go , to be up betime in the morning ; and some be lead by their wife ; and some have to lead their wife themselves , accord to the capacity of man and wife respectively . but Betty be as lively as ever , bustle about with every one , and look out for the chance of groat , which the well off might be free with . and over the kneading - pan next day , she drop three and sixpence out of her pocket ; and Lizzie could not tell for her life how much more might have be in it . 
 now by this time I have almost finish smoke that pipe of tobacco , and wonder at myself for have so despise it hitherto , and make up my mind to have another trial to - morrow night , it begin to occur to I that although dear Annie have behave so very badly and rudely , and almost take my breath away with the suddenness of her allusion , yet it be not kind of I to leave she out there at that time of night , all alone , and in such distress . any of the reaper go home might be get so far beyond fear of ghost as to venture into the churchyard ; and although they would know a great deal well than to insult a sister of mine when sober , there be no tell what they might do in their present state of rejoice . moreover , it be only right that I should learn , for Lorna 's sake , how far Annie , or any one else , have penetrate our secret . 
 therefore , I go forth at once , bear my pipe in a skilful manner , as I have see Farmer Nicholas do ; and mark , with a new kind of pleasure , how the ring and wreath of smoke hover and flutter in the moonlight , like a lark upon his carol . Poor Annie be go back again to our father 's grave , and there she sit upon the turf , sob very gently , and not wish to trouble any one . so I raise she tenderly , and make much of she , and console she , for I could not scold she there ; and perhaps after all she be not to be blame so much as Tom Faggus himself be . Annie be very grateful to I , and kiss I many time , and beg my pardon ever so often for her rudeness to I . and then have go so far with it , and find I so complaisant , she must need try to go a little far , and to lead I away from her own affair , and into mine concern Lorna . but although it be clever enough of she she be not deep enough for I there ; and I soon discover that she know nothing , not even the name of my darling ; but only suspect from thing she have see , and put together like a woman . upon this I bring she back again to Tom Faggus and his doing . 
 ' my poor Annie , have you really promise he to be his wife ? ' 
 ' then after all you have no reason , John , no particular reason , I mean , for slight poor Sally Snowe so ? ' 
 ' without even ask mother or I ! oh , Annie , it be wrong of you ! ' 
 ' but , darling , you know that mother wish you so much to marry Sally ; and I be sure you could have she to - morrow . she dot on the very ground ' 
 ' I dare say he tell you that , Annie , that he dot on the ground you walk upon but do you believe he , child ? ' 
 ' you may believe I , I assure you , John , and half the farm to be settle upon she , after the old man 's time ; and though she give herself little air , it be only do to entice you ; she have the very good hand in the dairy John , and the light at a turn - over cake ' 
 ' now , Annie , do not   talk nonsense so . I wish just to know the truth about you and Tom Faggus . do you mean to marry he ? ' 
 ' I to marry before my brother , and leave he with none to take care of he ! who can do he a red deer collop , except Sally herself , as I can ? come home , dear , at once , and I will do you one ; for you never eat a morsel of supper , with all the people you have to attend upon . ' 
 this be true enough ; and see no chance of anything more than cross question and crooked purpose , at which a girl be sure to beat I , I even allow she to lead I home , with the thought of the collop uppermost . but I never count upon be beat so thoroughly as I be ; for know I now to be off my guard , the young hussy stop at the farmyard gate , as if with a bri entangle she , and while I be stoop to take it away , she look I full in the face by the moonlight , and jerk out quite suddenly , 
 ' can your love do a collop , John ? ' 
 ' no , I should hope not , ' I answer rashly ; ' she be not a mere cook - maid I should hope . ' 
 ' she be not half so pretty as Sally Snowe ; I will answer for that , ' say Annie . 
 ' she be ten thousand time as pretty as ten thousand Sally Snowes , ' I reply with great indignation . 
 ' oh , but look at Sally 's eye ! ' cry my sister rapturously . 
 ' look at Lorna Doone 's , ' say I ; ' and you would never look again at Sally 's . ' 
 ' oh Lorna Doone . Lorna Doone ! ' exclaim our Annie half - frightened , yet clap her hand with triumph , at have find I out so : ' Lorna Doone be the lovely maiden , who have steal poor somebody 's heart so . ah , I shall remember it ; because it be so queer a name . but stop , I have well write it down . lend I your hat , poor boy , to write on . ' 
 ' I have a great mind to lend you a box on the ear , ' I answer she in my vexation , ' and I would , if you have not be cry so , you sly good - for - nothing baggage . as it be , I shall keep it for Master Faggus , and add interest for keep . ' 
 ' oh no , John ; oh no , John , ' she beg I earnestly , be sober in a moment . ' your hand be so terribly heavy , John ; and he never would forgive you ; although he be so good - hearted , he can not put up with an insult . promise I , dear John , that you will not strike he ; and I will promise you faithfully to keep your secret , even from mother , and even from Cousin Tom himself . ' 
 ' and from Lizzie ; most of all , from Lizzie , ' I answer very eagerly , know too well which of my relation would be hard with I . 
 ' of course from little Lizzie , ' say Annie , with some contempt ; ' a young thing like she can not be keep too long , in my opinion , from the knowledge of such subject . and besides , I should be very sorry if Lizzie have the right to know your secret , as I have , dearest John . not a soul shall be the wiser for your have trust I , John ; although I shall be very wretched when you be late away at night , among those dreadful people . ' 
 ' well , ' I reply , ' it be no use cry over spilt milk Annie . you have my secret , and I have your ; and I scarcely know which of the two be likely to have the bad time of it , when it come to mother 's ear . I could put up with perpetual scolding but not with mother 's sad silence . ' 
 ' that be exactly how I feel , John . ' and as Annie say it she brighten up , and her soft eye shine upon I ; ' but now I shall be much happy , dear ; because I shall try to help you . no doubt the young lady deserve it , John . she be not after the farm , I hope ? ' 
 ' she ! ' I exclaim ; and that be enough , there be so much scorn in my voice and face . 
 ' then , I be sure , I be very glad , ' Annie always make the good of thing ; ' for I do believe that Sally Snowe have take a fancy to our dairy - place , and the pattern of our cream - pan ; and she ask so much about our meadow , and the colour of the milk ' 
 ' then , after all , you be right , dear Annie ; it be the ground she dot upon . ' 
 ' and the thing that walk upon it , ' she answer I with another kiss ; ' Sally have take a wonderful fancy to our good cow , " nipple - pin . " but she never shall have she now ; what a consolation ! ' 
 we enter the house quite gently thus , and find Farmer Nicholas Snowe asleep , little dream how his plan have be overset between we . and then Annie say to I very slyly , between a smile and a blush , 
 ' do not   you wish Lorna Doone be here , John , in the parlour along with mother ; instead of those two fashionable milkmaid , as Uncle Ben will call they , and poor stupid Mistress Kebby ? ' 
 ' that indeed I do , Annie . I must kiss you for only thinking of it . dear I , it seem as if you have know all about we for a twelvemonth . ' 
 ' she love you , with all her heart , John . no doubt about that of course . ' and Annie look up at I , as much as to say she would like to know who could help it . 
 ' that be the very thing she will not   do , ' say I , know that Annie would love I all the more for it , ' she be only begin to like I , Annie ; and as for love , she be so young that she only love her grandfather . but I hope she will come to it by - and - by . ' 
 ' of course she must , ' reply my sister , ' it will be impossible for she to help it . ' 
 ' ah well ! I do not   know , ' for I want more assurance of it . ' Maidens be such wondrous thing ! " 
 ' not a bit of it , ' say Annie , cast her bright eye downward : ' love be as simple as milking , when people know how to do it . but you must not let she alone too long ; that be my advice to you . what a simpleton you must have be not to tell I long ago . I would have make Lorna wild about you , long before this time , Johnny . but now you go into the parlour , dear , while I do your collop . faith Snowe be not come , but Polly and Sally . Sally have make up her mind to conquer you this very blessed evening , John . only look what a thing of a scarf she have on ; I should be quite ashamed to wear it . but you will not   strike poor Tom , will you ? ' 
 ' not i , my darling , for your sweet sake . ' 
 and so dear Annie , have grow quite brave , give I a little push into the parlour , where I be quite abash to enter after all I have hear about Sally . and I make up my mind to examine she well , and try a little courting with she , if she should lead I on , that I might be in practice for Lorna . but when I perceive how grandly and richly both the young damsel be apparelle ; and how , in their curtsey to I , they retreat , as if I be make up to they , in a way they have learn from Exeter ; and how they begin to talk of the Court , as if they have be there all their life , and the late mode of the Duchess of this , and the profile of the Countess of that , and the last good saying of my Lord something ; instead of butter , and cream , and egg , and thing which they understand ; I know there must be somebody in the room besides Jasper Kebby to talk at . 
 and so there be ; for behind the curtain draw across the window - seat no less a man than Uncle Ben be sit half asleep and weary ; and by his side a little girl very quiet and very watchful . my mother lead I to Uncle Ben , and he take my hand without rise , mutter something not over - polite , about my be big than ever . I ask he heartily how he be , and he say , ' well enough , for that matter ; but none the well for the noise you great clod have be make . ' 
 ' I be sorry if we have disturb you , sir , ' I answer very civilly ; ' but I know not that you be here even ; and you must allow for harvest time . ' 
 ' so it seem , ' he reply ; ' and allow a great deal , include waste and drunkenness . now   if you can see so small a thing , after empty flagon much large   this be my granddaughter , and my heiress ' here he glance at mother ' my heiress , little Ruth Huckaback . ' 
 ' I be very glad to see you , Ruth , ' I answer , offer she my hand , which she seem afraid to take , ' welcome to Plover 's barrow , my good cousin Ruth . ' 
 however , my good cousin Ruth only arise , and make I a curtsey , and lift her great brown eye at I , more in fear , as I think , than kinship . and if ever any one look unlike the heiress to great property , it be the little girl before I . 
 ' come out to the kitchen , dear , and let I chuck you to the ceiling , ' I say , just to encourage she ; ' I always do it to little girl ; and then they can see the ham and bacon . ' but Uncle Reuben burst out laugh ; and Ruth turn away with a deep rich colour . 
 ' do you know how old she be , you numskull ? ' say Uncle Ben , in his dry drawl ; ' she be seventeen last July , sir . ' 
 ' on the first of July , grandfather , ' Ruth whisper , with she back still to I ; ' but many people will not believe it . ' 
 here mother come up to my rescue , as she always love to do ; and she say , ' if my son may not dance Miss Ruth , at any rate he may dance with she . we have only be wait for you , dear John , to have a little harvest dance , with the kitchen door throw open . you take Ruth ; Uncle Ben take Sally ; Master Debby pair off with Polly ; and neighbour Nicholas will be good enough , if I can awake he , to stand up with fair Mistress Kebby . Lizzie will play we the virginal . will not   you , Lizzie dear ? ' 
 ' but who be to dance with you , madam ? ' Uncle Ben ask , very politely . ' I think you must rearrange your figure . I have not dance for a score of year ; and I will not dance now , while the mistress and the owner of the harvest sit aside neglect . ' 
 ' Nay , Master Huckaback , ' cry Sally Snowe , with a saucy toss of her hair ; ' Mistress Ridd be too kind a great deal , in hand you over to I . you take she ; and I will fetch Annie to be my partner this evening . I like dance very much well with girl , for they never squeeze and rumple one . oh , it be so much nicer ! ' 
 ' have no fear for I , my dear , ' our mother answer smile : ' Parson Bowden promise to come back again ; I expect he every minute ; and he intend to lead I off , and to bring a partner for Annie too , a very pretty young gentleman . now begin ; and I will join you . ' 
 there be no disobeying she , without rudeness ; and indeed the girl ' foot be already jig ; and Lizzie give herself wonderful air with a roll of learn music ; and even while Annie be do my collop , her pretty round instep be arch itself , as I could see from the parlour - door . so I take little Ruth , and I spin she around , as the sound of the music come lively and ringing ; and after we come all the rest with much laughter , beg I not to jump over she ; and anon my grave partner begin to smile sweetly , and look up at I with the bright of eye , and drop I the prettiest curtsey ; till I think what a great stupe I must have be to dream of put she in the cheese - rack . but one thing I could not at all understand ; why mother , who use to do all in her power to throw I across Sally Snowe , should now do the very opposite ; for she would not allow I one moment with Sally , not even to cross in the dance , or whisper , or go anywhere near a corner   which as I say , I intend to do , just by way of practice , while she keep I , all the evening , as close as possible with Ruth Huckaback , and come up and praise I so to Ruth , time and again , that I declare I be quite ashamed . although of course I know that I deserve it all , but I could not well say that . 
 then Annie come sail down the dance , with her beautiful hair flow round she ; the light figure in all the room , and the sweetest , and the lovely . she be blush , with her fair cheek red beneath her dear blue eye , as she meet my glance of surprise and grief at the partner she be lean on . it be Squire Marwood de Whichehalse . I would soon have see she with Tom Faggus , as indeed I have expect , when I hear of Parson Bowden . and to I it seem that she have no right to be dance so with any other ; and to this effect I contrive to whisper ; but she only say , ' see to yourself , John . no , but let we both enjoy ourselves . you be not dance with Lorna , John . but you seem uncommonly happy . ' 
 ' tush , ' I say ; ' could I flip about so , if I have my love with I ? ' 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 JOHN FRY 'S ERRAND 

 we keep up the dance very late that night , mother be in such wonderful spirit , that she would not hear of our go to bed : while she glance from young Squire Marwood , very deep in his talk with our Annie , to I and Ruth Huckaback who be begin to be very pleasant company . alas , poor mother , so proud as she be , how little she dream that her good scheme already be hopelessly go awry ! 
 be force to be up before daylight next day , in order to begin right early , I would not go to my bedroom that night for fear of disturb my mother , but determine to sleep in the tallat awhile , that place be cool , and airy , and refresh with the smell of sweet hay . moreover , after my dwelling in town , where I have feel like a horse on a lime - kiln , I could not for a length of time have enough of country life . the mooing of a calf be music , and the chuckle of a fowl be wit , and the snore of the horse be news to I . 
 ' Wult have thee own wai , I reckon , ' say Betty , be cross with sleepiness , for she have wash up everything ; ' slape in hog - pound , if thee laike , Jan. ' 
 let she have the last word of it   as be the due of woman   I stand in the court , and wonder awhile at the glory of the harvest moon , and the yellow world it shine upon . then I see , as sure as ever I be stand there in the shadow of the stable , I see a short wide figure glide across the foot of the courtyard , between I and the six - bar gate . instead of run after it , as I should have do , I begin to consider who it could be , and what on earth be do there , when all our people be in bed , and the reaper go home , or to the linhay close against the wheatfield . 
 have make up my mind at last , that it could be none of our people though not a dog be bark and also that it must have be either a girl or a woman , I run down with all speed to learn what might be the meaning of it . but I come too late to learn , through my own hesitation , for this be the low end of the courtyard , not the approach from the parish highway , but the end of the sledd - way , across the field where the brook go down to the Lynn stream , and where Squire Faggus have save the old drake . and of course the dry channel of the brook , be scarcely any water now , afford plenty of place to hide , lead also to a little coppice , beyond our cabbage - garden , and so far on to the parish highway . 
 I see at once that it be vain to make any pursuit by moonlight ; and resolve to hold my own counsel about it   though puzzle not a little   and to keep watch there another night , back I return to the tallatt - ladder , and sleep without leave off till morning . 
 now many people may wish to know , as indeed I myself do very greatly , what have bring Master Huckaback over from Dulverton , at that time of year , when the clothing business be most active on account of harvest wage , and when the new wheat be begin to sample from the early part up the country   for he meddle as well in corn - dealing   and when we could not attend to he properly by reason of our occupation . and yet more surprising it seem to I that he should have bring his granddaughter also , instead of the troop of dragoon , without which he have vow he would never come here again . and how he have manage to enter the house together with his granddaughter , and be sit quite at home in the parlour there , without any knowledge or even suspicion on my part . that last question be easily solve , for mother herself have admit they by mean of the little passage , during a chorus of the harvest - song which might have drown an earthquake : but as for his meaning and motive , and apparent neglect of his business , none but himself could interpret they ; and as he do not see fit to do so , we could not be rude enough to inquire . 
 he seem in no hurry to take his departure , though his visit be so inconvenient to we , as himself indeed must have notice : and presently Lizzie , who be the sharp among we , say in my hearing that she believe he have purposely time his visit so that he might have liberty to pursue his own object , whatsoever it be , without interruption from we . Mother gaze hard upon Lizzie at this , have form a very different opinion ; but Annie and myself agree that it be worth look into . 
 now how could we look into it , without watch Uncle Reuben , whenever he go abroad , and try to catch he in his speech , when he be take his ease at night . for , in spite of all the disgust with which he have speak of harvest wassailing , there be not a man come into our kitchen who like it well than he do ; only in a quiet way , and without too many witness . now to endeavour to get at the purpose of any guest , even a treacherous one   which we have no right to think Uncle Reuben   by mean of observe he in his cup , be a thing which even the low of people would regard with abhorrence . and to my mind it be not clear whether it would be fair - play at all to follow a visitor even at a distance from home and clear of our premise ; except for the purpose of fetch he back , and give he more to go on with . nevertheless we could not but think , the time be wild and disjoint , that Uncle Ben be not use fairly the part of a guest in our house , to make long expedition we know not whither , and involve we in trouble we know not what . 
 for his mode be directly after breakfast to pray to the Lord a little   which use not to be his practice , and then to go forth upon dolly , the which be our Annie 's pony , very quiet and respectful , with a bag of good victual hang behind he , and two great cavalry pistol in front . and he always wear his mean clothe as if expect to be rob , or to disarm the temptation thereto ; and he never take his golden chronometer neither his bag of money . so much the girl find out and tell I   for I be never at home myself by day ; and they very craftily spur I on , have less noble idea perhaps , to hit upon Uncle Reuben 's track , and follow , and see what become of he . for he never return until dark or more , just in time to be in before we , who be come home from the harvest . and then dolly always seem very weary , and stain with a muck from beyond our parish . 
 but I refuse to follow he , not only for the loss of a day 's work to myself , and at least half a day to the other man , but chiefly because I could not think that it would be upright and manly . it be all very well to creep warily into the valley of the Doones , and heed everything around I , both because they be public enemy , and also because I risk my life at every step I take there . but as to track a feeble old man   however subtle he might be , a guest moreover of our own , and a relative through my mother . ' once for all , ' I say , ' it be below I , and I will not   do it . ' 
 thereupon , the girl , know my way , cease to torment I about it : but what be my astonishment the very next day to perceive that instead of fourteen reaper , we be only thirteen left , directly our breakfast be do with or mower rather I should say , for we be go into the barley now . 
 ' who have be and leave his scythe ? ' I ask ; ' and here be a tin cup never be handle ! ' 
 ' Whoy , dudn't   ee knaw , Maister Jan , ' say Bill Dadds , look at I queerly , ' as Jan Vry wur gane avore braxvass . ' 
 ' oh , very well , ' I answer , ' John know what he be do . ' for John Fry be a kind of foreman now , and it would not do to say anything that might lessen his authority . however , I make up my mind to rope he , when I should catch he by himself , without peril to his dignity . 
 but when I come home in the evening , late and almost weary , there be no Annie cook my supper , nor Lizzie by the fire reading , nor even little Ruth Huckaback watch the shadow and ponder . upon this , I go to the girl ' room , not in the very good of temper , and there I find all three of they in the little place set apart for Annie , eagerly listen to John Fry , who be tell some great adventure . John have a great jug of ale beside he , and a horn well drain ; and he clearly look upon himself as a hero , and the maid seem to be of the same opinion . 
 ' well do , John , ' my sister be say , ' capitally do , John Fry . how very brave you have be , John . now quick , let we hear the rest of it . ' 
 ' what do all this nonsense mean ? ' I say , in a voice which frighten they , as I could see by the light of our own mutton candle : ' John Fry , you be off to your wife at once , or you shall have what I owe you now , instead of to - morrow morning . ' 
 John make no answer , but scratch his head , and look at the maiden to take his part . 
 ' it be you that must be off , I think , ' say Lizzie , look straight at I with all the impudence in the world ; ' what right have you to come in here to the young lady ' room , without an invitation even ? ' 
 ' very well , Miss Lizzie , I suppose mother have some right here . ' and with that , I be go away to fetch she , know that she always take my side , and never would allow the house to be turn upside down in that manner . but Annie catch hold of I by the arm , and little Ruth stand in the doorway ; and Lizzie say , ' do not   be a fool , John . we know thing of you , you know ; a great deal more than you dream of . ' 
 upon this I glance at Annie , to learn whether she have be tell , but her pure true face reassure I at once , and then she say very gently , 
 ' Lizzie , you talk too fast , my child . no one know anything of our John which he need be ashamed of ; and work as he do from light to dusk , and earn the living of all of we , he be entitle to choose his own good time for go out and for come in , without consult a little girl five year young than himself . now , John , sit down , and you shall know all that we have do , though I doubt whether you will approve of it . ' 
 upon this I kiss Annie , and so do Ruth ; and John Fry look a deal more comfortable , but Lizzie only make a face at we . then Annie begin as follow : 
 ' you must know , dear John , that we have be extremely curious , ever since Uncle Reuben come , to know what he be come for , especially at this time of year , when he be at his busy . he never vouchsafe any explanation , neither give any reason , true or false , which show his entire ignorance of all feminine nature . if Ruth have know , and refuse to tell we , we should have be much easy , because we must have get it out of Ruth before two or three day be over . but darling Ruth know no more than we do , and indeed I must do she the justice to say that she have be quite as inquisitive . well , we might have put up with it , if it have not be for his take dolly , my own pet dolly , away every morning , quite as if she belong to he , and keep she out until close upon dark , and then bring her home in a frightful condition . and he even have the impudence , when I tell he that dolly be my pony , to say that we owe he a pony , ever since you take from he that little horse upon which you find he strap so snugly ; and he mean to take dolly to Dulverton with he , to run in his little cart . if there be law in the land he shall not . surely , John , you will not let he ? ' 
 ' that I will not , ' say I , ' except upon the condition which I offer he once before . if we owe he the pony , we owe he the strap . ' 
 Sweet Annie laugh , like a bell , at this , and then she go on with her story . 
 ' well , John , we be perfectly miserable . you can not understand it , of course ; but I use to go every evening , and hug poor dolly , and kiss she , and beg she to tell I where she have be , and what she have see , that day . but never have belong to Balaam , darling dolly be quite unsuccessful , though often she strove to tell I , with her ear down , and both eye roll . then I make John Fry tie her tail in a knot , with a piece of white ribbon , as if for adornment , that I might trace she among the hill , at any rate for a mile or two . but Uncle Ben be too deep for that ; he cut off the ribbon before he start , say he would have no Doones after he . and then , in despair , I apply to you , know how quick of foot you be , and I get Ruth and Lizzie to help I , but you answer we very shortly ; and a very poor supper you have that night , accord to your desert . 
 ' but though we be dash to the ground for a time , we be not wholly discomfited . our determination to know all about it seem to increase with the difficulty . and Uncle Ben 's manner last night be so dry , when we try to romp and to lead he out , that it be much bad than Jamaica ginger grate into a poor spray finger . so we send he to bed at the early moment , and hold a small council upon he . if you remember you , John , have now take to smoke   which be a hateful practice , have go forth grumble about your bad supper and not take it as a good lesson . ' 
 ' why , Annie , ' I cry , in amazement at this , ' I will never trust you again for a supper . I think you be so sorry . ' 
 ' and so I be , dear ; very sorry . but still we must do our duty . and when we come to consider it , Ruth be the cleverest of we all ; for she say that surely we must have some man we could trust about the farm to go on a little errand ; and then I remember that old John Fry would do anything for money . ' 
 ' not for money , plaize , miss , ' say John Fry , take a pull at the beer ; ' but for the love of your swate face . ' 
 ' to be sure , John ; with the king 's behind it . and so Lizzie run for John Fry at once , and we give he full direction , how he be to slip out of the barley in the confusion of the breakfast , so that none might miss he ; and to run back to the black combe bottom , and there he would find the very same pony which Uncle Ben have be tie upon , and there be no fast upon the farm . and then , without wait for any breakfast unless he could eat it either run or trot , he be to travel all up the black combe , by the track Uncle Reuben have take , and up at the top to look forward carefully , and so to trace he without be see . ' 
 ' ay ; and raight wull a doo'd un , ' John cry , with his mouth in the bullock 's horn . 
 ' well , and what do you see , John ? ' I ask , with great anxiety ; though I mean to have show no interest . 
 ' John be just at the very point of it , ' Lizzie answer I sharply , ' when you choose to come in and stop he . ' 
 ' then let he begin again , ' say I ; ' thing be go so far , it be now my duty to know everything , for the sake of you girl and mother . ' 
 ' Hem ! ' cry Lizzie , in a nasty way ; but I take no notice of she , for she be always bad to deal with . therefore John Fry begin again , be heartily glad to do so , that his story might get out of the tumble which all our talk have make in it . but as he could not tell a tale in the manner of my Lorna   although he tell it very well for those who understand he   I will take it from his mouth altogether , and state in brief what happen . 
 when John , upon his forest pony , which he have much ado to hold   its mouth be like a bucket , be come to the top of the long black combe , two mile or more from Plover 's barrow , and wind to the southward , he stop his little nag short of the crest , and get off and look ahead of he , from behind a tump of whortle . it be a long flat sweep of moorland over which he be gaze , with a few bog here and there , and brushy place round they . of course , John Fry , from his shepherd life and reclaim of stray cattle , know as well as need be where he be , and the spread of the hill before he , although it be beyond our beat , or , rather , I should say , beside it . not but what we might have graze there have it be our pleasure , but that it be not worth our while , and scarcely worth Jasper Kebby 's even ; all the land be crop   as one might say   with desolation . and nearly all our knowledge of it spring from the unaccountable trick of cow who have young calf with they ; at which time they have wild desire to get away from the sight of man , and keep calf and milk for one another , although it be in a barren land . at least , our cow have get this trick , and I have hear other people complain of it . 
 John Fry , as I say , know the place well enough , but he like it none the more for that , neither do any of our people ; and , indeed , all the neighbourhood of Thomshill and Larksborough , and most of all Black Barrow Down lie under grave imputation of have be enchant with a very evil spell . moreover , it be know , though folk be loath to speak of it , even on a summer morning , that Squire Thom , who have be murder there , a century ago or more , have be see by several shepherd , even in the middle day , walk with his severed head carry in his left hand , and his right arm lift towards the sun . 
 therefore it be very bold in John   as I acknowledge   to venture across that moor alone , even with a fast pony under he , and some whisky by his side . and he would never have do so   of that I be quite certain , either for the sake of Annie 's sweet face , or of the golden guinea , which the three maiden have subscribe to reward his skill and valour . but the truth be that he could not resist his own great curiosity . for , carefully spy across the moor , from behind the tuft of whortle , at first he could discover nothing have life and motion , except three or four wild cattle rove in vain search for nourishment , and a diseased sheep banish hither , and some carrion crow keep watch on she . but when John be take his very last look , be only too glad to go home again , and acknowledge himself baffle , he think he see a figure move in the farth distance upon Black Barrow down , scarcely a thing to be sure of yet , on account of the want of colour . but as he watch , the figure pass between he and a naked cliff , and appear to be a man on horseback , make his way very carefully , in fear of bog and serpent . for all about there it be adder ' ground , and large black serpent dwell in the marsh , and can swim as well as crawl . 
 John know that the man who be rid there could be none but Uncle Reuben , for none of the Doones ever pass that way , and the shepherd be afraid of it . and now it seem an unkind place for an unarmed man to venture through , especially after an armed one who might not like to be spy upon , and must have some dark object in visit such drear solitude . nevertheless John Fry so ache with unbearable curiosity to know what an old man , and a stranger , and a rich man , and a peaceable could possibly be after in that mysterious manner . moreover , John so throb with hope to find some wealthy secret , that come what would of it he resolve to go to the end of the matter . 
 therefore he only wait awhile for fear of be discover , till Master Huckaback turn to the left and enter a little gully , whence he could not survey the moor . then John remount and cross the rough land and the stony place , and pick his way among the morass as fast as ever he dare to go ; until , in about half an hour , he draw nigh the entrance of the gully . and now it behove he to be most wary ; for Uncle Ben might have stop in there , either to rest his horse or have reach the end of his journey . and in either case , John have little doubt that he himself would be pistol , and nothing more ever hear of he . therefore he make his pony come to the mouth of it sideways , and lean over and peer in around the rocky corner , while the little horse crop at the briar . 
 but he soon perceive that the gully be empty , so far at least as its course be straight ; and with that he hasten into it , though his heart be not work easily . when he have trace the wind hollow for half a mile or more , he see that it fork , and one part lead to the leave up a steep red bank , and the other to the right , be narrow and slightly tend downward . some yellow sand lie here and there between the starve grass , and this he examine narrowly for a trace of Master Huckaback . 
 at last he see that , beyond all doubt , the man he be pursue have take the course which lead down hill ; and down the hill he must follow he . and this John do with deep misgiving , and a hearty wish that he have never start upon so perilous an errand . for now he know not where he be , and scarcely dare to ask himself , have hear of a horrible hole , somewhere in this neighbourhood , call the Wizard 's Slough . therefore John ride down the slope , with sorrow , and great caution . and these grow more as he go onward , and his pony rear against he , be scar , although a native of the roughest moorland . and John have just make up his mind that God mean this for a warning , as the passage seem dark and deep , when suddenly he turn a corner , and see a scene which stop he . 
 for there be the Wizard 's Slough itself , as black as death , and bubble , with a few scant yellow reed in a ring around it . outside these , bright water - grass of the lively green be creep , tempt any unwary foot to step , and plunge , and founder . and on the marge be blue campanula , sundew , and forget - I - not , such as no child could resist . on either side , the hill fall back , and the ground be break with tuft of rush , and flag , and mare - tail , and a few rough alder - tree overclogged with water . and not a bird be see or hear , neither rail nor water - hen , wag - tail nor reed - warbler . 
 of this horrible quagmire , the bad upon all Exmoor , John have hear from his grandfather , and even from his mother , when they want to keep he quiet ; but his father have fear to speak of it to he , be a man of piety , and up to the trick of the evil one . this make John the more desirous to have a good look at it now , only with his girth well up , to turn away and flee at speed , if anything should happen . and now he prove how well it be to be wary and wide - awake , even in lonesome place . for at the other side of the Slough , and a few land - yard beyond it , where the ground be less noisome , he have observe a felled tree lie over a great hole in the earth , with stave of wood , and slab of stone , and some yellow gravel around it . but the flag of reed around the morass partly screen it from his eye , and he could not make out the meaning of it , except that it mean no good , and probably be witchcraft . yet dolly seem not to be harm by it , for there she be as large as life , tie to a stump not far beyond , and flip the fly away with her tail . 
 while John be tremble within himself , lest dolly should get scent of his pony , and neigh and reveal their presence , although she could not see they , suddenly to his great amazement something white arise out of the hole , under the brown trunk of the tree . see this his blood go back within he , yet he be not able to turn and flee , but root his face in among the loose stone , and keep his quivering shoulder back , and pray to God to protect he . however , the white thing itself be not so very awful , be nothing more than a long - coned night - cap with a tassel on the top , such as criminal wear at hang - time . but when John see a man 's face under it , and a man 's neck and shoulder slowly rise out of the pit , he could not doubt that this be the place where the murderer come to life again , accord to the Exmoor story . he know that a man have be hang last week , and that this be the ninth day after it . 
 therefore he could bear no more , thoroughly brave as he have be , neither do he wait to see what become of the gallow - man ; but climb on his horse with what speed he might , and ride away at full gallop . neither do he dare go back by the way he come , fear to face Black Barrow down ! therefore he strike up the other track lead away towards Cloven Rocks , and after rid hard for an hour and drink all his whisky , he luckily fall in with a shepherd , who lead he on to a public - house somewhere near Exeford . and here he be so unmanned , the excitement be over , that nothing less than a gallon of ale and half a gammon of bacon , bring he to his right mind again . and he take good care to be home before dark , have follow a well - know sheep track . 
 when John Fry finish his story at last , after many exclamation from Annie , and from Lizzie , and much praise of his gallantry , yet some little disappointment that he have not stay there a little long , while he be about it , so as to be able to tell we more , I say to he very sternly , 
 ' now , John , you have dream half this , my man . I firmly believe that you fall asleep at the top of the black combe , after drink all your whisky , and never go on the moor at all . you know what a liar you be , John . ' 
 the girl be exceedingly angry at this , and lay their hand before my mouth ; but I wait for John to answer , with my eye fix upon he steadfastly . 
 ' bain't   for I to denai , ' say John , look at I very honestly , ' but what a maight tull a lai , now and awhile , zame as other man doth , and most of arl they as spak again it ; but this here be no lai , Maister Jan. I wush to God it wor , boy : a maight slape this naight the well . ' 
 ' I believe you speak the truth , John ; and I ask your pardon . now not a word to any one , about this strange affair . there be mischief brewing , I can see ; and it be my place to attend to it . several thing come across I now only I will not tell you . ' 
 they be not at all content with this ; but I would give they no well ; except to say , when they plague I greatly , and vow to sleep at my door all night , 
 ' now , my dear , this be foolish of you . too much of this matter be know already . it be for your own dear sake that I be bind to be cautious . I have an opinion of my own ; but it may be a very wrong one ; I will not ask you to share it with I ; neither will I make you inquisitive . ' 
 Annie pout , and Lizzie frown , and Ruth look at I with her eye wide open , but no other mark of regard I . and I see that if any one of the three   for John Fry be go home with the tremble   could be trust to keep a secret , that one be Ruth Huckaback . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 feeding of the pigs 

 the story tell by John Fry that night , and my conviction of its truth , make I very uneasy , especially as follow upon the warning of Judge Jeffreys , and the hint receive from Jeremy Stickles , and the outburst of the tanner at Dunster , as well as sundry tale and rumour , and sign of secret understanding , see and hear on market - day , and at place of entertainment . we know for certain that at Taunton , Bridgwater , and even Dulverton , there be much disaffection towards the king , and regret for the day of the Puritans . albeit I have tell the truth , and the pure and simple truth , when , upon my examination , I have assure his lordship , that to the good of my knowledge there be nothing of the sort with we . 
 but now I be begin to doubt whether I might not have be mistake ; especially when we hear , as we do , of arm be land at Lynmouth , in the dead of the night , and of the tramp of man have reach some one 's ear , from a hill where a famous echo be . for it must be plain to any conspirator   without the example of the Doones   that for the secret muster of man and the stowing of unlawful arm , and communication by beacon light , scarcely a fitter place could be find than the wild of Exmoor , with deep ravine run far inland from an unwatched and mostly a sheltered sea . for the Channel from Countisbury Foreland up to Minehead , or even far , though rocky , and gusty , and full of current , be safe from great roller and the sweeping power of the south - west storm , which prevail with we more than all the other , and make sad work on the opposite coast . 
 but even suppose it probable that something against King Charles the Second   or rather against his roman adviser , and especially his brother   be now in preparation amongst we , be it likely that Master Huckaback , a wealthy man , and a careful one , know moreover to the Lord Chief Justice , would have anything to do with it ? to this I could make no answer ; Uncle Ben be so close a man , so avaricious , and so revengeful , that it be quite impossible to say what course he might pursue , without know all the chance of gain , or rise , or satisfaction to he . that he hat the Papists I know full well , though he never speak much about they ; also that he have follow the march of Oliver Cromwell 's army , but more as a suttler   people say   than as a real soldier ; and that he would go a long way , and risk a great deal of money , to have his revenge on the Doones ; although their name never pass his lip during the present visit . 
 but how be it likely to be as to the Doones themselves ? which side would they probably take in the come movement , if movement indeed it would be ? so far as they have any religion at all , by birth they be Roman Catholics so much I know from Lorna ; and indeed it be well know all around , that a priest have be fetch more than once to the valley , to soothe some poor outlaw 's departure . on the other hand , they be not likely to entertain much affection for the son of the man who have banish they and confiscate their property . and it be not at all impossible that desperate man , such as they be , have nothing to lose , but estate to recover , and not be hold by religion much , should cast away all regard for the birth from which they have be cast out , and make common cause with a protestant rise , for the chance of revenge and replacement . 
 however I do not mean to say that all these thing occur to I as clearly as I have set they down ; only that I be in general doubt , and very sad perplexity . for mother be so warm , and innocent , and kind so to every one , that know some little by this time of the english constitution , I fear very greatly lest she should be punish for harbouring malcontent . as well as possible I know , that if any poor man come to our door , and cry , ' officer be after I ; for God 's sake take and hide I , ' mother would take he in at once , and conceal , and feed he , even though he have be very violent ; and , to tell the truth , so would both my sister , and so indeed would I do . whence it will be clear that we be not the sort of people to be safe among disturbance . 
 before I could quite make up my mind how to act in this difficulty , and how to get at the right of it   for I would not spy after Uncle Reuben , though I feel no great fear of the Wizard 's Slough , and none of the man with the white night - cap , a difference come again upon it , and a change of chance . for Uncle Ben go away as suddenly as he first have come to we , give no reason for his departure , neither claim the pony , and indeed leave something behind he of great value to my mother . for he beg she to see to his young grand - daughter , until he could find opportunity of fetch she safely to Dulverton . Mother be overjoy at this , as she could not help display ; and Ruth be quite as much delighted , although she durst not show it . for at Dulverton she have to watch and keep such ward on the victual , and the in and out of the shopman , that it go entirely against her heart , and she never could enjoy herself . truly she be an altered girl from the day she come to we ; catch our unsuspicious manner , and our free goodwill , and hearty noise of laugh . 
 by this time , the harvest be do , and the thatch of the rick make sure against south - western tempest , and all the reaper be go , with good money and thankfulness , I begin to burn in spirit for the sight of Lorna . I have beg my sister Annie to let Sally Snowe know , once for all , that it be not in my power to have any thing more to do with she . of course our Annie be not to grieve Sally , neither to let it appear for a moment that I suspect her kind view upon I , and her strong regard for our dairy : only I think it right upon our part not to waste Sally 's time any long , be a handsome wench as she be , and many young fellow glad to marry she . 
 and Annie do this uncommonly well , as she herself tell I afterwards , have take Sally in the sweetest manner into her pure confidence , and open half her bosom to she , about my very sad love affair . not that she let Sally know , of course , who it be , or what it be ; only that she make she understand , without hint at any desire of it , that there be no chance now of have I . Sally change colour a little at this , and then go on about a red cow which have pass seven needle at milk time . 
 Inasmuch as there be two sort of month well recognise by the calendar , to wit the lunar and the solar , I make bold to regard both my month , in the absence of any provision , as intend to be strictly lunar . therefore upon the very day when the eight week be expire forth I go in search of Lorna , take the pearl ring hopefully , and all the new - lay egg I could find , and a dozen and a half of small trout from our brook . and the pleasure it give I to catch those trout , think as every one come forth and dance upon the grass , how much she would enjoy he , be more than I can now describe , although I well remember it . and it strike I that after accept my ring , and say how much she love I , it be possible that my queen might invite I even to stay and sup with she : and so I arrange with dear Annie beforehand , who be now the great comfort to I , to account for my absence if I should be late . 
 but alas , I be utterly disappoint ; for although I wait and wait for hour , with an equal amount both of patience and peril , no Lorna ever appear at all , nor even the faint sign of she . and another thing occur as well , which vex I more than it need have do , for so small a matter . and this be that my little offering of the trout and the new - lay egg be carry off in the cool manner by that vile Carver Doone . for think to keep they the fresher and nice , away from so much handling , I lay they in a little bed of reed by the side of the water , and place some dog - leaf over they . and when I have quite forget about they , and be watch from my hiding - place beneath the willow - tree   for I like not to enter Lorna 's bower , without her permission ; except just to peep that she be not there , and while I be turn the ring in my pocket , have just see the new moon , I become aware of a great man come eisurely down the valley . he have a broad - brim hat , and a leather jerkin , and heavy jack - boot to his middle thigh , and what be bad of all for I , on his shoulder he bear a long carbine . have nothing to meet he withal but my staff , and desire to avoid disturbance , I retire promptly into the chasm , keep the tree betwixt we that he might not descry I , and watch from behind the jut of a rock , where now I have scrap myself a neat little hole for the purpose . 
 presently the great man reappear , be now within fifty yard of I , and the light still good enough , as he draw near for I to descry his feature : and though I be not a judge of man 's face , there be something in his which turn I cold , as though with a kind of horror . not that it be an ugly face ; nay , rather it seem a handsome one , so far as mere form and line might go , full of strength , and vigour , and will , and steadfast resolution . from the short black hair above the broad forehead , to the long black beard descend below the curt , bold chin , there be not any curve or glimpse of weakness or of afterthought . nothing playful , nothing pleasant , nothing with a track of smile ; nothing which a friend could like , and laugh at he for have . and yet he might have be a good man   for I have know very good man so fortified by their own strange idea of God : I say that he might have seem a good man , but for the cold and cruel hankering of his steel - blue eye . 
 now let no one suppose for a minute that I see all this in a moment ; for I be very slow , and take a long time to digest thing ; only I like to set down , and have do with it , all the result of my knowledge , though they be not manifold . but what I say to myself , just then , be no more than this : ' what a fellow to have Lorna ! ' have my sense of right so outraged   although , of course , I would never allow she to go so far as that , I almost long that he might thrust his head in to look after I . for there I be , with my ash staff club , ready to have at he , and not ill incline to do so ; if only he would come where strength , not firearm , must decide it . however , he suspect nothing of my dangerous neighbourhood , but walk his round like a sentinel , and turn at the brink of the water . 
 then as he march back again , along the margin of the stream , he espy my little hoard , cover up with dog - leaf . he see that the leaf be upside down , and this of course draw his attention . I see he stoop , and lie bare the fish , and the egg set a little way from they and in my simple heart , I think that now he know all about I . but to my surprise , he seem well - pleased ; and his harsh short laughter come to I without echo , 
 ' ha , ha ! Charlie boy ! Fisherman Charlie , have I catch thee set bait for Lorna ? now , I understand thy fishing , and the robbing of Counsellor 's hen roost . may I never have good roasting , if I have it not to - night and roast thee , Charlie , afterwards ! ' 
 with this he calmly pack up my fish , and all the good of dear Annie 's egg ; and go away chuckle steadfastly , to his home , if one may call it so . but I be so thoroughly grieve and mortify by this most impudent robbery , that I start forth from my rocky screen with the intention of pursue he , until my well sense arrest I , barely in time to escape his eye . for I say to myself , that even suppose I could contend unarmed with he , it would be the great folly in the world to have my secret access know , and perhaps a fatal barrier place between Lorna and myself , and I know not what trouble bring upon she , all for the sake of a few egg and fish . it be well to bear this trifling loss , however ignominious and goad to the spirit , than to risk my love and Lorna 's welfare , and perhaps be shoot into the bargain . and I think that all will agree with I , that I act for the wise , in withdraw to my shelter , though deprive of egg and fish . 
 have wait   as I say   until there be no chance whatever of my love appear , I hasten homeward very sadly ; and the wind of early autumn moan across the moorland . all the beauty of the harvest , all the gaiety be go , and the early fall of dusk be like a weight upon I . nevertheless , I go every evening thenceforward for a fortnight ; hop , every time in vain to find my hope and comfort . and meanwhile , what perplex I most be that the signal be replace , in order as agree upon , so that Lorna could scarcely be restrain by any rigour . 
 one time I have a narrow chance of be shoot and settle with ; and it befell I thus . I be wait very carelessly , be now a little desperate , at the entrance to the glen , instead of watch through my sight - hole , as the proper practice be . suddenly a ball go by I , with a whizz and whistle , pass through my hat and sweep it away all fold up . my soft hat flutter far down the stream , before I have time to go after it , and with the help of both wind and water , be fifty yard go in a moment . at this I have just enough mind leave to shrink back very suddenly , and lurk very still and closely ; for I know what a narrow escape it have be , as I hear the bullet , hard set by the powder , sing mournfully down the chasm , like a drone banish out of the hive . and as I peer through my little cranny , I see a wreath of smoke still float where the thickness be of the withy - bed ; and presently Carver Doone come forth , have stop to reload his piece perhaps , and run very swiftly to the entrance to see what he have shoot . 
 sore trouble have I to keep close quarter , from the slipperiness of the stone beneath I with the water slide over it . my foe come quite to the verge of the fall , where the river begin to comb over ; and there he stop for a minute or two , on the utmost edge of dry land , upon the very spot indeed where I have fall senseless when I clomb it in my boyhood . I could hear he breathe hard and grunt , as in doubt and discontent , for he stand within a yard of I , and I keep my right fist ready for he , if he should discover I . then at the foot of the waterslide , my black hat suddenly appear , toss in white foam , and flutter like a raven wound . now I have doubt which hat to take , when I leave home that day ; till I think that the black become I good , and might seem kind to Lorna . 
 ' have I kill thee , old bird , at last ? ' my enemy cry in triumph ; " tis the third time I have shoot at thee , and thou wast beginning to mock I . no more of thy cursed croaking now , to wake I in the morning . ha , ha ! there be not many who get three chance from Carver Doone ; and none ever go beyond it . ' 
 I laugh within myself at this , as he stride away in his triumph ; for be not this his third chance of I , and he no whit the wiser ? and then I think that perhaps the chance might some day be on the other side . 
 for to tell the truth , I be heartily tired of lurk and play bo - peep so long ; to which nothing could have reconcile I , except my fear for Lorna . and here I see be a man of strength fit for I to encounter , such as I have never meet , but would be glad to meet with ; have find no man of late who need not my mercy at wrestling , or at single - stick . and grow more and more uneasy , as I find no Lorna , I would have try to force the Doone Glen from the upper end , and take my chance of get back , but for Annie and her prayer . 
 now that same night I think it be , or at any rate the next one , that I notice Betty Muxworthy go on most strangely . she make the queer sign to I , when nobody be look , and lay her finger on her lip , and point over her shoulder . but I take little heed of she , be in a kind of dudgeon , and oppress with evil luck ; believe too that all she want be to have some little grumble about some petty grievance . 
 but presently she poke I with the heel of a fire - bundle , and pass close to my ear whisper , so that none else could hear she , ' Larna Doo - un . ' 
 by these word I be so startled , that I turn round and star at she ; but she pretend not to know it , and begin with all her might to scour an empty crock with a besom . 
 ' oh , Betty , let I help you ! that work be much too hard for you , ' I cry with a sudden chivalry , which only win rude answer . 
 ' zeed I adooe of thic , every naight last ten year , Jan , wiout vindin ' out how hard it wor . but if zo bee thee want to help , carr peg 's bucket for I . Massy , if I be not   forget to fade the peg till now . ' 
 favour I with another wink , to which I now pay the keen heed , Betty go and fetch the lanthorn from the hook inside the door . then when she have kindle it , not allow I any time to ask what she be after , she go outside , and point to the great bock of wash , and riddling , and brown hulkage   for we ground our own corn always , and though she know that Bill Dadds and Jem Slocombe have full work to carry it on a pole   with another to help to sle it , she say to I as quietly as a maiden might ask one to carry a glove , ' Jan Ridd , carr thic thing for I . ' 
 so I carry it for she , without any word ; wonder what she be up to next , and whether she have ever hear of be too hard on the willing horse . and when we come to hog - pound , she turn upon I suddenly , with the lanthorn she be bear , and see that I have the bock by one hand very easily . 
 ' Jan Ridd , ' she say , ' there be no other man in England cud a ' dood it . now thee shalt have Larna . ' 
 while I be wonder how my chance of have Lorna could depend upon my power to carry pig 's wash , and how Betty could have any voice in the matter   which seem to depend upon her decision , and in short , while I be all abroad as to her knowledge and everything , the pig , who have be fast asleep and dream in their emptiness , awake with one accord at the goodness of the smell around they . they have resign themselves , as even pig do , to a kind of fast , hop to break their fast more sweetly on the morrow morning . but now they tumble out all headlong , pig below and pig above , pig point - blank and pig across , pig courant and pig rampant , but all alike prepare to eat , and all in good cadence squeaking . 
 ' tak smarl boocket , and bale un out ; wad ' e waste sich stoof as thic here be ? ' so Betty set I to feed the pig , while she hold the lanthorn ; and know what she be , I see that she would not tell I another word until all the pig be serve . and in truth no man could well look at they , and delay to serve they , they be all express appetite in so forcible a manner ; some run to and fro , and rub , and squealing as if from starvation , some rush down to the oaken trough , and poke each other away from they ; and the kind of all put up their fore - foot on the top - rail on the hog - pound , and blink their little eye , and grunt prettily to coax we ; as who would say , ' I trust you now ; you will be kind , I know , and give I the first and the very good of it . ' 
 ' Oppen ge - at now , wull ' e , Jan ? Maind , young sow wi ' the baible back arlway hath first toorn of it , 'cos I bring she up on my lap , I do . Zuck , zuck , zuck ! how her stickth her tail up ; do I good to zee un ! now thiccy trough , thee zany , and tak thee girt leg out o ' the wai . wish they wud gie thee a good baite , mak thee hop a bit vaster , I reckon . hit that there girt ozebird over 's back wi ' the broomstick , he be rob of my young zow . Choog , choog , choog ! and a drap more left in the dripping - pail . ' 
 ' come now , Betty , ' I say , when all the pig be at it suck , swill , munching , guzzling , thrusting , and oust , and spill the food upon the back of their brother   as great man do with their charity , ' come now , Betty , how much long be I to wait for your message ? surely I be as good as a pig . ' 
 ' dunno as thee be , Jan. no straikiness in thy bakkon . and now I come to think of it , Jan , thee ze , a wake agone last Vriday , as how I have get a girt be - ard . wull ' e stick to that now , Maister Jan ? ' 
 ' no , no , Betty , certainly not ; I make a mistake about it . I should have say a become mustachio , such as you may well be proud of . ' 
 ' then thee be a laiar , Jan Ridd . Zay so , laike a man , lad . ' 
 ' not exactly that , Betty ; but I make a great mistake ; and I humbly ask your pardon ; and if such a thing as a crown - piece , Betty ' 
 ' no fai , no fai ! ' say Betty , however she put it into her pocket ; ' now tak my advice , Jan ; thee marry Zally Snowe . ' 
 ' not with all England for her dowry . oh , Betty , you know well . ' 
 ' ah 's I ! I know much bad , Jan. Break thy poor mother 's heart it will . and to think of arl the danger ! dost love Larna now so much ? ' 
 ' with all the strength of my heart and soul . I will have she , or I will die , Betty . ' 
 ' wull . Thee will die in either case . but it baint for I to argify . and do her love thee too , Jan ? ' 
 ' I hope she do , Betty I hope she do . what do you think about it ? ' 
 ' ah , then I may hold my tongue to it . Knaw what boy and maiden be , as well as I know young peg . I myzell be o ' that zort one taime every bit so well as you be . ' and Betty hold the lanthorn up , and defy I to deny it ; and the light through the horn show a gleam in her eye , such as I have never seer there before . ' no odd , no odd about that , ' she continue ; ' mak a fool of myzell to spake of it . Arl go into churchyard . but it be a lucky foolery for thee , my boy , I can tull ' ee . for I love to see the love in thee . Coom'th over I as the spring do , though I be naigh three score . now , Jan , I will tell thee one thing , can not   abear to zee thee vrette so . Hould thee head down , same as they peg do . ' 
 so I bent my head quite close to she ; and she whisper in my ear , ' Goo of a marning , thee girt soft . she can not   get out of an avening now , her hath zent word to I , to tull ' ee . ' 
 in the glory of my delight at this , I bestow upon Betty a chaste salute , with all the pig for witness ; and she take it not amiss , consider how long she have be out of practice . but then she fall back , like a broom on its handle , and star at I , feign anger . 
 ' oh fai , oh fai ! Lunnon impudence , I doubt . I vear thee hast go on zadly , Jan. ' 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 an early morning call 

 of course I be up the very next morning before the October sunrise , and away through the wild and the woodland towards the Bagworthy water , at the foot of the long cascade . the rise of the sun be noble in the cold and warmth of it ; peep down the spread of light , he raise his shoulder heavily over the edge of grey mountain , and waver length of upland . beneath his gaze the dew - fog dip , and creep to the hollow place ; then steal away in line and column , hold skirt , and cling subtly at the shelter corner , where rock hang over grass - land ; while the brave line of the hill come forth , one beyond other gliding . 
 then the wood arise in fold , like drapery of awakened mountain , stately with a depth of awe , and memory of the tempest . Autumn 's mellow hand be on they , as they own already , touch with gold , and red , and olive ; and their joy towards the sun be less to a bridegroom than a father . 
 yet before the float impress of the wood could clear itself , suddenly the gladsome light leap over hill and valley , cast amber , blue , and purple , and a tint of rich red rise ; accord to the scene they light on , and the curtain fling around ; yet all alike dispel fear and the cloven hoof of darkness , all on the wing of hope advance , and proclaim , ' God be here . ' then life and joy sprang reassure from every crouch hollow ; every flower , and bud , and bird , have a fluttering sense of they ; and all the flashing of God 's gaze merge into soft beneficence . 
 so perhaps shall break upon we that eternal morning , when crag and chasm shall be no more , neither hill and valley , nor great unvintaged ocean ; when glory shall not scare happiness , neither happiness envy glory ; but all thing shall arise and shine in the light of the Father 's countenance , because itself be rise . 
 who maketh his sun to rise upon both the just and the unjust . and surely but for the save clause , Doone Glen have be in darkness . now , as I stand with scanty breath for few man could have win that climb at the top of the long defile , and the bottom of the mountain gorge all of myself , and the pain of it , and the cark of my discontent fall away into wonder and rapture . for I can not help see thing now and then , slow - witted as I have a right to be ; and perhaps because it come so rarely , the sight dwell with I like a picture . 
 the bar of rock , with the water - cleft breaking steeply through it , stand bold and bare , and dark in shadow , grey with red gully down it . but the sun be begin to glisten over the comb of the eastern highland , and through an archway of the wood hang with old nest and ivy . the line of many a lean tree be throw , from the cliff of the foreland , down upon the sparkle grass at the foot of the western crag . and through the dewy meadow 's breast , fringe with shade , but touch on one side with the sun - smile , run the crystal water , curve in its brightness like divert hope . 
 on either bank , the blade of grass , make their last autumn growth , prick their spear and crisp their tufting with the pearly purity . the tenderness of their green appear under the glaucous mantle ; while that grey suffusion , which be the blush of green life , spread its damask chastity . even then my soul be lift , worry though my mind be : who can see such large kind doing , and not be ashamed of human grief ? 
 not only unashamed of grief , but much abash with joy , be I , when I see my Lorna come , purer than the morning dew , than the sun more bright and clear . that which make I love she so , that which lift my heart to she , as the Spring wind lift the cloud , be the gayness of her nature , and its inborn playfulness . and yet all this with maiden shame , a conscious dream of thing unknown , and a sense of fate about they . 
 down the valley still she come , not witte that I look at she , have cease   through my own misprison   to expect I yet awhile ; or at least she tell herself so . in the joy of awakened life and brightness of the morning , she have cast all care away , and seem to float upon the sunrise , like a buoyant silver wave . suddenly at sight of I , for I leap forth at once , in fear of seem to watch her unawares , the bloom upon her cheek be deepen , and the radiance of her eye ; and she come to meet I gladly . 
 ' at last then , you be come , John . I think you have forget I . I could not make you understand they have keep I prisoner every evening : but come into my house ; you be in danger here . ' 
 meanwhile I could not answer , be overcome with joy , but follow to her little grotto , where I have be twice before . I know that the crown moment of my life be come that Lorna would own her love for I . 
 she make for awhile as if she dream not of the meaning of my gaze , but try to speak of other thing , falter now and then , and mantle with a rich damask below her long eyelash . 
 ' this be not what I come to know , ' I whisper very softly , ' you know what I be come to ask . ' 
 ' if you be come on purpose to ask anything , why do you delay so ? ' she turn away very bravely , but I see that her lip be tremble . 
 ' I delay so long , because I fear ; because my whole life hang in balance on a single word ; because what I have near I now may never more be near I after , though more than all the world , or than a thousand world , to I . ' as I speak these word of passion in a low soft voice , Lorna tremble more and more ; but she make no answer , neither yet look up at I . 
 ' I have love you long and long , ' I pursue , be reckless now , ' when you be a little child , as a boy I worship you : then when I see you a comely girl , as a stripling I adore you : now that you be a full - grown maiden all the rest I do , and more I love you more than tongue can tell , or heart can hold in silence . I have wait long and long ; and though I be so far below you I can wait no long ; but must have my answer . ' 
 ' you have be very faithful , John , ' she murmur to the fern and moss ; ' I suppose I must reward you . ' 
 ' that will not do for I , ' I say ; ' I will not have reluctant liking , nor assent for pity 's sake ; which only mean endurance . I must have all love , or none , I must have your heart of heart ; even as you have mine , Lorna . ' 
 while I speak , she glance up shyly through her flutter lash , to prolong my doubt one moment , for her own delicious pride . then she open wide upon I all the glorious depth and softness of her love eye , and fling both arm around my neck , and answer with her heart on mine , 
 ' darling , you have win it all . I shall never be my own again . I be your , my own one , for ever and for ever . ' 
 I be sure I know not what I do , or what I say thereafter , be overcome with transport by her word and at her gaze . only one thing I remember , when she raise her bright lip to I , like a child , for I to kiss , such a smile of sweet temptation meet I through her flow hair , that I almost forget my manner , give she no time to breathe . 
 ' that will do , ' say Lorna gently , but violently blush ; ' for the present that will do , John . and now remember one thing , dear . all the kindness be to be on my side ; and you be to be very distant , as behove to a young maiden ; except when I invite you . but you may kiss my hand , John ; oh , yes , you may kiss my hand , you know . ah to be sure ! I have forget ; how very stupid of I ! ' 
 for by this time I have take one sweet hand and gaze on it , with the pride of all the world to think that such a lovely thing be mine ; and then I slip my little ring upon the wedding finger ; and this time Lorna keep it , and look with fondness on its beauty , and clung to I with a flood of tear . 
 ' every time you cry , ' say I , draw she close to I ' I shall consider it an invitation not to be too distant . there now , none shall make you weep . darling , you shall sigh no more , but live in peace and happiness , with I to guard and cherish you : and who shall dare to vex you ? ' but she draw a long sad sigh , and look at the ground with the great tear roll , and press one hand upon the trouble of her pure young breast . 
 ' it can never , never be , ' she murmur to herself alone : ' who be I , to dream of it ? something in my heart tell I it can be so never , never . ' 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 two negative make an AFFIRMATIVE 

 there be , however , no possibility of depress I at such a time . to be love by Lorna , the sweet , the pure , the playful one , the fair creature on God 's earth and the most enchanting , the lady of high birth and mind ; that I , a mere clumsy , blunder yeoman , without wit , or wealth , or lineage , should have win that love heart to be my own for ever , be a thought no fear could lessen , and no chance could steal from I . 
 therefore at her own entreaty take a very quick adieu , and by her own invitation an exceed kind one , I hurry home with deep exulting , yet some sad misgiving , for Lorna have make I promise now to tell my mother everything ; as indeed I always mean to do , when my suit should be go too far to stop . I know , of course , that my dear mother would be greatly move and vex , the heirship of Glen Doone not be a very desirable dower , but in spite of that , and all disappointment as to little Ruth Huckaback , feel my mother 's tenderness and deep affection to I , and forgiving nature , I doubt not that before very long she would view the matter as I do . moreover , I feel that if once I could get she only to look at Lorna , she would so love and glory in she , that I should obtain all praise and thank , perchance without deserve they . 
 unluckily for my design , who should be sit down at breakfast with my mother and the rest but Squire Faggus , as everybody now begin to entitle he . I notice something odd about he , something uncomfortable in his manner , and a lack of that ease and humour which have be will not to distinguish he . he take his breakfast as it come , without a single joke about it , or preference of this to that ; but with sly soft look at Annie , who seem unable to sit quiet , or to look at any one steadfastly . I fear in my heart what be come on , and feel truly sorry for poor mother . after breakfast it become my duty to see to the ploughing of a barley - stubble ready for the sowing of a french grass , and I ask Tom Faggus to come with I , but he refuse , and I know the reason . be resolve to allow he fair field to himself , though with great displeasure that a man of such illegal repute should marry into our family , which have always be count so honest , I carry my dinner upon my back , and spend the whole day with the furrow . 
 when I return , Squire Faggus be go ; which appear to I but a sorry sign , inasmuch as if mother have take kindly to he and his intention , she would surely have make he remain awhile to celebrate the occasion . and presently no doubt be leave : for Lizzie come run to meet I , at the bottom of the woodrick , and cry , 
 ' oh , John , there be such a business . mother be in such a state of mind , and Annie cry her eye out . what do you think ? you would never guess , though I have suspect it , ever so long . ' 
 ' no need for I to guess , ' I reply , as though with some indifference , because of her self - important air ; ' I know all about it long ago . you have not be cry much , I see . I should like you well if you have . ' 
 ' why should I cry ? I like Tom Faggus . he be the only one I ever see with the spirit of a man . ' 
 this be a cut , of course , at I . Mr. Faggus have win the goodwill of Lizzie by his hatred of the Doones , and vow that if he could get a dozen man of any courage to join he , he would pull their stronghold about their ear without any more ado . this malice of his seem strange to I , as he have never suffer at their hand , so far at least as I know ; be it to be attribute to his jealousy of outlaws who excel he in his business ? not be good at repartee , I make no answer to Lizzie , have find this course more irksome to she than the very good invective : and so we enter the house together ; and mother send at once for I , while I be try to console my darling sister Annie . 
 ' oh , John ! speak one good word for I , ' she cry with both hand lay in mine , and her tearful eye look up at I . 
 ' not one , my pet , but a hundred , ' I answer , kindly embrace she : ' have no fear , little sister : I be go to make your case so bright , by comparison , I mean , that mother will send for you in five minute , and call you her good , her most dutiful child , and praise Cousin Tom to the sky , and send a man on horseback after he ; and then you will have a hard task to intercede for I , my dear . ' 
 ' oh , John , dear John , you will not   tell she about Lorna oh , not to - day , dear . ' 
 ' yes , to - day , and at once , Annie . I want to have it over , and be do with it . ' 
 ' oh , but think of she , dear . I be sure she could not bear it , after this great shock already . ' 
 ' she will bear it all the well , ' say I ; ' the one will drive the other out . I know exactly what mother be . she will be desperately savage first with you , and then with I , and then for a very little while with both of we together ; and then she will put one against the other   in her mind I mean   and consider which be most to blame ; and in do that she will be compel to find the good in either 's case , that it may beat the other ; and so as the plea come before her mind , they will gain upon the charge , both of we be her child , you know : and before very long   particularly if we both keep out of the way   she will begin to think that after all she have be a little too hasty , and then she will remember how good we have always be to she ; and how like our father . upon that , she will think of her own love - time , and sigh a good bit , and cry a little , and then smile , and send for both of we , and beg our pardon , and call we her two darling . ' 
 ' now , John , how on earth can you know all that ? ' exclaim my sister , wipe her eye , and gaze at I with a soft bright smile . ' who on earth can have tell you , John ? People to call you stupid indeed ! why , I feel that all you say be quite true , because you describe so exactly what I should do myself ; I mean I mean if I have two child , who have behave as we have do . but tell I , darling John , how you learn all this . ' 
 ' never you mind , ' I reply , with a nod of some conceit , I fear : ' I must be a fool if I do not know what mother be by this time . ' 
 now inasmuch as the thing befell accord to my prediction , what need for I to dwell upon it , after say how it would be ? moreover , I would regret to write down what mother say about Lorna , in her first surprise and tribulation ; not only because I be grieve by the gross injustice of it , and frighten mother with her own word   repeat deeply after she ; but rather because it be not well , when people repent of hasty speech , to enter it against they . 
 that be say to be the angel ' business ; and I doubt if they can attend to it much , without do injury to themselves . 
 however , by the afternoon , when the sun begin to go down upon we , our mother sit on the garden bench , with her head on my great otter - skin waistcoat   which be waterproof , and her right arm round our Annie 's waist , and scarcely know which of we she ought to make the most of , or which deserve most pity . not that she have forgive yet the rival to her love Tom Faggus , I mean , and Lorna but that she be begin to think a tattle well of they now , and a vast deal well of her own child . 
 and it help she much in this regard , that she be not think half so well as usual of herself , or rather of her own judgment ; for in good truth she have no self , only as it come home to she , by no very distant road , but by way of her child . a well mother never live ; and can I , after search all thing , add another word to that ? 
 and indeed poor Lizzie be not so very bad ; but behave   on the whole   very well for she . she be much to be pity , poor thing , and great allowance make for she , as belong to a well - grow family , and a very comely one ; and feel her own shortcoming . this make her leap to the other extreme , and reassert herself too much , endeavour to exalt the mind at the expense of the body ; because she have the invisible one   so far as can be decide   in well share than the visible . not but what she have her point , and very comely point of body ; lovely eye to wit , and very beautiful hand and foot   almost as good as Lorna 's , and a neck as white as snow ; but Lizzie be not gifted with our gait and port , and bound health . 
 now , while we sit on the garden bench , under the great ash - tree , we leave dear mother to take her own way , and talk at her own pleasure . child almost always be more wide - awake than their parent . the father and the mother laugh ; but the young one have the good of they . and now both Annie know , and I , that we have get the good of mother ; and therefore we let she lay down the law , as if we have be two dolly . 
 ' Darling John , ' my mother say , ' your case be a very hard one . a young and very romantic girl God send that I be right in my charitable view of she have meet an equally simple boy , among great danger and difficulty , from which my son have save she , at the risk of his life at every step . of course , she become attach to he , and look up to he in every way , as a superior being ' 
 ' come now , mother , ' I say ; ' if you only see Lorna , you would look upon I as the low dirt ' 
 ' no doubt I should , ' my mother answer ; ' and the king and queen , and all the royal family . well , this poor angel , have make up her mind to take compassion upon my son , when he have save her life so many time , persuade he to marry she out of pure pity , and throw his poor mother overboard . and the sad part of it all be this ' 
 ' that my mother will never , never , never understand the truth , ' say I. 
 ' that be all I wish , ' she answer ; ' just to get at the simple truth from my own perception of it . John , you be very wise in kiss I ; but perhaps you would not be so wise in bring Lorna for an afternoon , just to see what she think of I . there be a good saddle of mutton now ; and there be some very good sausage leave , on the blue dish with the anchor , Annie , from the last little sow we kill . ' 
 ' as if Lorna would eat sausage ! ' say I , with appearance of high contempt , though rejoice all the while that mother seem to have her name so pat ; and she pronounce it in a manner which make my heart leap to my ear : ' Lorna to eat sausage ! ' 
 ' I do not   see why she should not , ' my mother answer smile , ' if she mean to be a farmer 's wife , she must take to farmer 's way , I think . what do you say , Annie ? ' 
 ' she will eat whatever John desire , I should hope , ' say Annie gravely ; ' particularly as I make they . ' 
 ' oh that I could only get the chance of try she ! ' I answer , ' if you could once behold she , mother , you would never let she go again . and she would love you with all her heart , she be so good and gentle . ' 
 ' that be a lucky thing for I ' ; say this my mother weep , as she have be do off and on , when no one seem to look at she ; ' otherwise I suppose , John , she would very soon turn I out of the farm , have you so completely under her thumb , as she seem to have . I see now that my time be over . Lizzie and I will seek our fortune . it be wise so . ' 
 ' now , mother , ' I cry ; ' will you have the kindness not to talk any nonsense ? everything belong to you ; and so , I hope , your child do . and you , in turn , belong to we ; as you have prove ever since oh , ever since we can remember . why do you make Annie cry so ? you ought to know well than that . ' 
 mother upon this go over all the thing she have do before ; how many time I know not ; neither do it matter . only she seem to enjoy it more , every time of do it . and then she say she be an old fool ; and Annie   like a thorough girl   pull her one grey hair out . 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 ruth be not like LORNA 

 although by our mother 's reluctant consent a large part of the obstacle between Annie and her lover appear to be remove , on the other hand Lorna and myself gain little , except as regard comfort of mind , and some ease to the conscience . moreover , our chance of frequent meeting and delightful converse be much impaired , at least for the present ; because though mother be not aware of my narrow escape from Carver Doone , she make I promise never to risk my life by needless visit . and upon this point , that be to say , the necessity of the visit , she be well content , as she say , to leave I to my own good sense and honour ; only beg I always to tell she of my intention beforehand . this pledge , however , for her own sake , I decline to give ; know how wretched she would be during all the time of my absence ; and , on that account , I promise instead , that I would always give she a full account of my adventure upon return . 
 now my mother , as might be expect , begin at once to cast about for some mean of relieve I from all further peril , and herself from great anxiety . she be full of plan for fetch Lorna , in some wonderful manner , out of the power of the Doones entirely , and into her own hand , where she be to remain for at least a twelve - month , learn all mother and Annie could teach she of dairy business , and farm - house life , and the good mode of packing butter . and all this arise from my happen to say , without mean anything , how the poor dear have long for quiet , and a life of simplicity , and a rest away from violence ! bless thee , mother now long in heaven , there be no need to bless thee ; but it often make a dimness now in my well - wear eye , when I think of thy love - kindness , warmth , and romantic innocence . 
 as to steal my beloved from that vile Glen Doone , the deed itself be not impossible , nor beyond my daring ; but in the first place would she come , leave her old grandfather to die without her tendence ? and even if , through fear of Carver and that wicked Counsellor , she should consent to fly , would it be possible to keep she without a regiment of soldier ? would not the Doones at once ride forth to scour the country for their queen , and find she   as they must do , burn our house , and murder we , and carry she back triumphantly ? 
 all this I lay before my mother , and to such effect that she acknowledge , with a sigh that nothing else remain for I   in the present state of matter   except to keep a careful watch upon Lorna from safe distance , observe the policy of the Doones , and wait for a tide in their affair . meanwhile I might even fall in love   as mother unwisely hint   with a certain more peaceful heiress , although of inferior blood , who would be daily at my elbow . I be not sure but what dear mother herself would have be disappoint , have I prove myself so fickle ; and my disdain and indignation at the mere suggestion do not so much displease she ; for she only smile and answer , 
 ' well , it be not for I to say ; God know what be good for we . liking will not come to order ; otherwise I should not be where I be this day . and of one thing I be rather glad ; Uncle Reuben well deserve that his pet scheme should miscarry . he who call my boy a coward , an ignoble coward , because he would not join some crack - brain plan against the valley which shelter his beloved one ! and all the time this dreadful " coward " risk his life daily there , without a word to any one ! how glad I be that you will not have , for all her miserable money , that little dwarfish granddaughter of the insolent old miser ! ' 
 she turn , and by her side be stand poor Ruth Huckaback herself , white , and sad , and look steadily at my mother 's face , which become as red as a plum while her breath desert she . 
 ' if you please , madam , ' say the little maiden , with her large calm eye unwavere , ' it be not my fault , but God Almighty 's , that I be a little dwarfish creature . I know not that you regard I with so much contempt on that account ; neither have you tell my grandfather , at least within my hearing , that he be an insolent old miser . when I return to Dulverton , which I trust to do to - morrow   for it be too late to - day , I shall be careful not to tell he your opinion of he , lest I should thwart any scheme you may have upon his property . I thank you all for your kindness to I , which have be very great , far more than a little dwarfish creature could , for her own sake , expect . I will only add for your further guidance one more little truth . it be by no mean certain that my grandfather will settle any of his miserable money upon I . if I offend he , as I would in a moment , for the sake of a brave and straightforward man ' here she give I a glance which I scarcely know what to do with ' my grandfather , upright as he be , would leave I without a shilling . and I often wish it be so . so many misery come upon I from the miserable money ' here she break down , and burst out cry , and run away with a faint good - bye ; while we three look at one another , and feel that we have the bad of it . 
 ' impudent little dwarf ! ' say my mother , recover her breath after ever so long . ' oh , John , how thankful you ought to be ! what a life she would have lead you ! ' 
 ' well , I be sure ! ' say Annie , throw her arm around poor mother : ' who could have think that little atomy have such an outrageous spirit ! for my part I can not think how she can have be sly enough to hide it in that crafty manner , that John might think she an angel ! ' 
 ' well , for my part , ' I answer , laugh , ' I never admire Ruth Huckaback half , or a quarter so much before . she be rare stuff . I would have be glad to have marry she to - morrow , if I have never see my Lorna . ' 
 ' and a nice nobody I should have be , in my own house ! ' cry mother : ' I never can be thankful enough to darle Lorna for save I . do you see how her eye flash ? ' 
 ' that I do ; and very fine they be . now nine maiden out of ten would have feign not to have hear one word that be say , and have bear black malice in their heart . come , Annie , now , would not you have do so ? ' 
 ' I think , ' say Annie , ' although of course I can not tell , you know , John , that I should have be ashamed at hear what be never mean for I , and should have be almost as angry with myself as anybody . ' 
 ' so you would , ' reply my mother ; ' so any daughter of mine would have do , instead of rail and revile . however , I be very sorry that any word of mine which the poor little thing choose to overhear should have make she so forget herself . I shall beg her pardon before she go , and I shall expect she to beg mine . ' 
 ' that she will never do , ' say I ; ' a more resolute little maiden never yet have right upon her side ; although it be a mere accident . I might have say the same thing myself , and she be hard upon you , mother dear . ' 
 after this , we say no more , at least about that matter ; and little Ruth , the next morning , leave we , in spite of all that we could do . she vow an everlasting friendship to my young sister Eliza ; but she look at Annie with some resentment , when they say good - bye , for be so much tall . at any rate so Annie fancy , but she may have be quite wrong . I ride beside the little maid till far beyond Exeford , when all danger of the moor be past , and then I leave she with John Fry , not wish to be too particular , after all the talk about her money . she have tear in her eye when she bid I farewell , and she send a kind message home to mother , and promise to come again at Christmas , if she could win permission . 
 upon the whole , my opinion be that she have behave uncommonly well for a maid whose self - love be outraged , with spirit , I mean , and proper pride ; and yet with a great endeavour to forgive , which be , meseem , the hard of all thing to a woman , outside of her own family . 
 after this , for another month , nothing worthy of notice happen , except of course that I find it needful , accord to the strict good sense and honour , to visit Lorna immediately after my discourse with mother , and to tell she all about it . my beauty give I one sweet kiss with all her heart   as she always do , when she kiss at all , and I beg for one more to take to our mother , and before leave , I obtain it . it be not for I to tell all she say , even suppose   what be not likely   that any one care to know it , be more and more peculiar to ourselves and no one else . but one thing that she say be this , and I take good care to carry it , word for word , to my mother and Annie : 
 ' I never can believe , dear John , that after all the crime and outrage work by my reckless family , it ever can be mean for I to settle down to peace and comfort in a simple household . with all my heart I long for home ; any home , however dull and wearisome to those use to it , would seem a paradise to I , if only free from brawl and tumult , and such as I could call my own . but even if God would allow I this , in lieu of my wild inheritance , it be quite certain that the Doones never can and never will . ' 
 again , when I tell she how my mother and Annie , as well as myself , long to have she at Plover 's barrow , and teach she all the quiet duty in which she be sure to take such delight , she only answer with a bright blush , that while her grandfather be live she would never leave he ; and that even if she be free , certain ruin be all she should bring to any house that receive she , at least within the utmost reach of her amiable family . this be too plain to be deny , and see my dejection at it , she tell I bravely that we must hope for well time , if possible , and ask how long I would wait for she . 
 ' not a day if I have my will , ' I answer very warmly ; at which she turn away confused , and would not look at I for awhile ; ' but all my life , ' I go on to say , ' if my fortune be so ill . and how long would you wait for I , Lorna ? ' 
 ' till I could get you , ' she answer slyly , with a smile which be bright to I than the bright wit could be . ' and now , ' she continue , ' you bind I , John , with a very beautiful ring to you , and when I dare not wear it , I carry it always on my heart . but I will bind you to I , you dearest , with the very poor and plainest thing that ever you set eye on . I could give you fifty fair one , but they would not be honest ; and I love you for your honesty , and nothing else of course , John ; so do not   you be conceited . look at it , what a queer old thing ! there be some ancient mark upon it , very grotesque and wonderful ; it look like a cat in a tree almost , but never mind what it look like . this old ring must have be a giant 's ; therefore it will fit you perhaps , you enormous John . it have be on the front of my old glass necklace   which my grandfather find they take away , and very soon make they give back again   ever since I can remember ; and long before that , as some woman tell I . now you seem very greatly amazed ; pray what think my lord of it ? ' 
 ' that be worth fifty of the pearl thing which I give you , you darling ; and that I will not take it from you . ' 
 ' then you will never take I , that be all . I will have nothing to do with a gentleman ' 
 ' no gentleman , dear a yeoman . ' 
 ' very well , a yeoman nothing to do with a yeoman who will not accept my love - gage . so , if you please , give it back again , and take your lovely ring back . ' 
 she look at I in such a manner , half in earnest , half in jest , and three time three in love , that in spite of all good resolution , and her own faint protest , I be force to abandon all firm idea , and kiss she till she be quite ashamed , and her head hang on my bosom , with the night of her hair shed over I . then I place the pearl ring back on the soft elastic bend of the finger she hold up to scold I ; and on my own small finger draw the heavy hoop she have give I . I consider this with satisfaction , until my darling recover herself ; and then I begin very gravely about it , to keep she   if I could   from chide I : 
 ' Mistress Lorna , this be not the ring of any giant . it be nothing more nor less than a very ancient thumb - ring , such as once in my father 's time be plough up out of the ground in our farm , and send to learn doctor , who tell we all about it , but keep the ring for their trouble . I will accept it , my own one love ; and it shall go to my grave with I . ' and so it shall , unless there be villain who would dare to rob the dead . 
 now I have speak about this ring   though I scarcely mean to do so , and would rather keep to myself thing so very holy   because it hold an important part in the history of my Lorna . I ask she where the glass necklace be from which the ring be fasten , and which she have wear in her childhood , and she answer that she hardly know , but remember that her grandfather have beg she to give it up to he , when she be ten year old or so , and have promise to keep it for she until she could take care of it ; at the same time give she back the ring , and fasten it from her pretty neck , and tell she to be proud of it . and so she always have be , and now from her sweet breast she take it , and it become John Ridd 's delight . 
 all this , or at least great part of it , I tell my mother truly , accord to my promise ; and she be greatly pleased with Lorna for have be so good to I , and for speak so very sensibly ; and then she look at the great gold ring , but could by no mean interpret it . only she be quite certain , as indeed I myself be , that it must have belong to an ancient race of great consideration , and high rank , in their time . upon which I be for take it off , lest it should be degrade by a common farmer 's finger . but mother say ' no , ' with tear in her eye ; ' if the common farmer have win the great lady of the ancient race , what be ring and old - world trinket , when compare to the live jewel ? ' be quite of her opinion in this , and love the ring   which have no gem in it   as the token of my priceless gem , I resolve to wear it at any cost , except when I should be plough , or do thing likely to break it ; although I must own that it feel very queer   for I never have throttle a finger before , and it look very queer , for a length of time , upon my great hard - work hand . 
 and before I get use to my ring , or people could think that it belong to I   plain and ungarnished though it be , and before I go to see Lorna again , have fail to find any necessity , and remember my duty to mother , we all have something else to think of , not so pleasant , and more puzzling . 




 CHAPTER XXXVI 

 JOHN return to business 

 now November be upon we , and we have keep Allhallowmass , with roasting of skewered apple   like so many shuttlecock , and after that the day of Fawkes , as become good protestant , with merry bonfire and burn batata , and plenty of good feeding in honour of our religion ; and then while we be at wheat - sowing , another visitor arrive . 
 this be Master Jeremy Stickles , who have be a good friend to I   as describe before   in London , and have earn my mother 's gratitude , so far as ever he choose to have it . and he seem inclined to have it all ; for he make our farm - house his headquarter , and keep we quite at his beck and call , go out at any time of the evening , and come back at any time of the morning , and always expect we to be ready , whether with horse , or man , or maiden , or fire , or provision . we know that he be employ somehow upon the service of the king , and have at different station certain trooper and orderly quite at his disposal ; also we know that he never go out , nor even sleep in his bedroom , without heavy firearm well load , and a sharp sword nigh his hand ; and that he hold a great commission , under royal signet , require all good subject , all officer of whatever degree , and especially justice of the peace , to aid he to the utmost , with person , beast , and chattel , or to answer it at their peril . 
 now Master Jeremy Stickles , of course , know well what woman be , durst not open to any of they the nature of his instruction . but , after awhile , perceive that I could be rely upon , and that it be a great discomfort not to have I with he , he take I aside in a lonely place , and tell I nearly everything ; have bind I first by oath , not to impart to any one , without his own permission , until all be over . 
 but at this present time of writing , all be over long ago ; ay and forget too , I ween , except by those who suffer . therefore may I tell the whole without any breach of confidence . Master Stickles be go forth upon his usual night journey , when he meet I come home , and I say something half in jest , about his zeal and secrecy ; upon which he look all round the yard , and lead I to an open space in the clover field adjoining . 
 ' John , ' he say , ' you have some right to know the meaning of all this , be trust as you be by the Lord Chief Justice . but he find you scarcely supple enough , neither gift with due brain . ' 
 ' thank God for that same , ' I answer , while he tap his head , to signify his own much large allowance . then he make I bind myself , which in an evil hour I do , to retain his secret ; and after that he go on solemnly , and with much importance , 
 ' there be some people fit to plot , and other to be plot against , and other to unravel plot , which be the high gift of all . this last hath fall to my share , and a very thankless gift it be , although a rare and choice one . much of peril too attend it ; dare courage and great coolness be as needful for the work as ready wit and spotless honour . therefore his Majesty 's adviser have choose I for this high task , and they could not have choose a well man . although you have be in London , Jack , much long than you wish it , you be wholly ignorant , of course , in matter of state , and the public weal . ' 
 ' well , ' say I , ' no doubt but I be , and all the well for I . although I hear a deal of they ; for everybody be talk , and ready to come to blow ; if only it could be do without danger . but one say this , and one say that ; and they talk so much about Birminghams , and tantivie , and Whigs and Tories , and protestant flail and such like , that I be only too glad to have my glass and clink my spoon for answer . ' 
 ' right , John , thou art right as usual . let the King go his own gait . he hath too many mistress to be ever England 's master . nobody need fear he , for he be not like his father : he will have his own way , ' tis true , but without stop other folk of theirs : and well he know what woman be , for he never ask they question . now hear you much in London town about the Duke of Monmouth ? ' 
 ' not so very much , ' I answer ; ' not half so much as in Devonshire : only that he be a hearty man , and a very handsome one , and now be banish by the Tories ; and most people wish he be come back , instead of the Duke of York , who be try boot in Scotland . ' 
 ' thing be change since you be in town . the whig be get up again , through the folly of the Tories kill poor Lord Russell ; and now this Master Sidney   if my Lord condemn he   will make it bad again . there be much disaffection everywhere , and it must grow to an outbreak . the King hath many troop in London , and meaneth to bring more from Tangier ; but he can not command these country place ; and the train band can not help he much , even if they would . now , do you understand I , John ? ' 
 ' in truth , not I. I see not what Tangier hath to do with Exmoor ; nor the Duke of Monmouth with Jeremy Stickles . ' 
 ' thou great clod , put it the other way . Jeremy Stickles may have much to do about the Duke of Monmouth . the whig have fail of Exclusion , and have be punish bitterly for the blood they shed , be ripe for any violence . and the turn of the balance be now to they . see - saw be the fashion of England always ; and the Whigs will soon be the top - sawyer . ' 
 ' but , ' say I , still more confused , ' " the King be the top - sawyer , " accord to our proverb . how then can the Whigs be ? ' 
 ' thou art a hopeless ass , John . well to sew with a chestnut than to teach thee the constitution . let it be so , let it be . I have see a boy of five year old more apt at politic than thou . Nay , look not offend , lad . it be my fault for be over - deep to thee . I should have consider thy intellect . ' 
 ' Nay , Master Jeremy , make no apology . it be I that should excuse myself ; but , God know , I have no politic . ' 
 ' stick to that , my lad , ' he answer ; ' so shalt thou die easy . now , in ten word   without party , or try thy poor brain too much , I be here to watch the gathering of a secret plot , not so much against the King as against the due succession . ' 
 ' now I understand at last . but , Master Stickles , you might have say all that an hour ago almost . ' 
 ' it would have be well , if I have , to thee , ' he reply with much compassion ; ' thy hat be nearly off thy head with the swelling of brain I have give thee . blow , blow , be thy business , Jack . there thou art in thine element . and , haply , this business will bring thee plenty even for thy great head to take . now hearken to one who wish thee well , and plainly see the end of it stick thou to the win side , and have naught to do with the other one . ' 
 ' that , ' say I , in great haste and hurry , ' be the very thing I want to do , if I only know which be the win side , for the sake of Lorna that be to say , for the sake of my dear mother and sister , and the farm . ' 
 ' ha ! ' cry Jeremy Stickles , laugh at the redness of my face ' Lorna , saidst thou ; now what Lorna ? be it the name of a maiden , or a light - o'-love ? ' 
 ' keep to your own business , ' I answer , very proudly ; ' spy as much as e'er thou wilt , and use our house for do it , without ask leave or telling ; but if I ever find thee spy into my affair , all the King 's lifeguard in London , and the dragoon thou bringest hither , shall not save thee from my hand or one finger be enough for thee . ' 
 be carry beyond myself by his insolence about Lorna , I look at Master Stickles so , and spake in such a voice , that all his dare courage and his spotless honour quail within he , and he shrink as if I would strike so small a man . 
 then I leave he , and go to work at the sack upon the corn - floor , to take my evil spirit from I before I should see mother . for   to tell the truth   now my strength be full , and trouble be gather round I , and people take advantage so much of my easy temper , sometimes when I be over - try , a sudden heat run over I , and a glowing of all my muscle , and a tingling for a mighty throw , such as my utmost self - command , and fear of hurt any one , could but ill refrain . afterwards , I be always very sadly ashamed of myself , know how poor a thing bodily strength be , as compare with power of mind , and that it be a coward 's part to misuse it upon weak folk . for the present there be a little breach between Master Stickles and I , for which I blame myself very sorely . but though , in full memory of his kindness and faithfulness in London , I ask his pardon many time for my foolish anger with he , and offer to undergo any penalty he would lay upon I , he only say it be no matter , there be nothing to forgive . when people say that , the truth often be that they can forgive nothing . 
 so for the present a breach be make between Master Jeremy and myself , which to I seem no great loss , inasmuch as it relieve I from any privity to his dealing , for which I have small liking . all I fear be lest I might , in any way , be ungrateful to he ; but when he would have no more of I , what could I do to help it ? however , in a few day ' time I be of good service to he , as you shall see in its proper place . 
 but now my own affair be throw into such disorder that I could think of nothing else , and have the great difficulty in hide my uneasiness . for suddenly , without any warning , or a word of message , all my Lorna 's signal cease , which I have be accustom to watch for daily , and as it be to feed upon they , with a glowing heart . the first time I stand on the woode crest , and find no change from yesterday , I could hardly believe my eye , or think at least that it must be some great mistake on the part of my love . however , even that oppress I with a heavy heart , which grow heavy , as I find from day to day no token . 
 three time I go and wait long at the bottom of the valley , where now the stream be brown and angry with the rain of autumn , and the weeping tree hang leafless . but though I wait at every hour of day , and far into the night , no light footstep come to meet I , no sweet voice be in the air ; all be lonely , drear , and drench with sodden desolation . it seem as if my love be dead , and the wind be at her funeral . 
 once I seek far up the valley , where I have never be before , even beyond the copse where Lorna have find and lose her brave young cousin . follow up the river channel , in shelter of the evening fog , I gain a corner within stone 's throw of the last outlying cot . this be a gloomy , low , square house , without any light in the window , roughly build of wood and stone , as I see when I draw nearer . for know it to be Carver 's dwelling   or at least suspect so , from some word of Lorna 's , I be lead by curiosity , and perhaps by jealousy , to have a close look at it . therefore , I creep up the stream , lose half my sense of fear , by reason of anxiety . and in truth there be not much to fear , the sky be now too dark for even a shooter of wild fowl to make good aim . and nothing else but gun could hurt I , as in the pride of my strength I think , and in my skill of single - stick . 
 nevertheless , I go warily , be now almost among this nest of cockatrice . the back of Carver 's house abut on the wave of the rush stream ; and see a loop - hole , vacant for musket , I look in , but all be quiet . so far as I could judge by listen , there be no one now inside , and my heart for a moment leap with joy , for I have fear to find Lorna there . then I take a careful survey of the dwelling , and its window , and its door , and aspect , as if I have be a robber meaning to make privy entrance . it be well for I that I do this , as you will find hereafter . 
 have impress upon my mind   a slow but , perhaps retentive mind , all the bearing of the place , and all its opportunity , and even the curve of the stream along it , and the bush near the door , I be much inclined to go far up , and understand all the village . but a bar of red light across the river , some forty yard on above I , and cross from the opposite side like a chain , prevent I . in that second house there be a gathering of loud and merry outlaw , make as much noise as if they have the law upon their side . some , indeed , as I approach , be lay down both right and wrong , as purely , and with as high a sense , as if they know the difference . cold and trouble as I be , I could hardly keep from laugh . 
 before I betook myself home that night , and ease dear mother 's heart so much , and make her pale face spread with smile , I have resolve to penetrate Glen Doone from the upper end , and learn all about my Lorna . not but what I might have enter from my unsuspected channel , as so often I have do ; but that I see fearful need for know something more than that . here be every sort of trouble gather upon I , here be Jeremy Stickles steal upon every one in the dark ; here be Uncle Reuben plot Satan only could tell what ; here be a white night - cap man come bodily from the grave ; here be my own sister Annie commit to a highwayman , and mother in distraction ; most of all here , there , and where be my Lorna steal , dungeone , perhaps outraged . it be no time for shilly shally , for the balance of this and that , or for a man with blood and muscle to pat his nose and ponder . if I leave my Lorna so ; if I let those black - soul'd villain work their pleasure on my love ; if the heart that clave to mine could find no vigour in it then let maidens cease from man , and rest their faith in tabby - cat . 
 rudely roll these idea in my heavy head and brain I resolve to let the morrow put they into form and order , but not contradict they . and then , as my constitution will   be like that of England , I sleep , and there be no stop I . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 a very desperate venture 

 that the enterprise now resolve upon be far more dangerous than any hitherto attempt by I , need no further proof than this : I go and make my will at Porlock , with a middling honest lawyer there ; not that I have much to leave , but that none could say how far the farm , and all the farming stock , might depend on my disposition . it make I smile when I remember how particular I be , and how for the life of I I be puzzle to bequeath most part of my clothe , and hat , and thing altogether my own , to Lorna , without the shrewd old lawyer know who she be and where she live . at last , indeed , I flatter myself that I have baffle old Tape 's curiosity ; but his wrinkle smile and his speech at part make I again uneasy . 
 ' a very excellent will , young sir . an admirably just and virtuous will ; all your effect to your near of kin ; filial and fraternal duty thoroughly exemplified ; nothing divert to alien channel , except a small token of esteem and reverence to an elderly lady , I presume : and which may or may not be valid , or invalid , on the ground of uncertainty , or the absence of any legal status on the part of the legatee . ha , ha ! yes , yes ! few young man be so free from exceptionable entanglement . two guineas be my charge , sir : and a rare good will for the money . very prudent of you , sir . do you credit in every way . well , well ; we all must die ; and often the young before the old . ' 
 not only do I think two guineas a great deal too much money for a quarter of an hour 's employment , but also I dislike particularly the word with which he conclude ; they sound , from his grating voice , like the evil omen of a croak raven . nevertheless I still abode in my fix resolve to go , and find out , if I die for it , what be become of Lorna . and herein I lay no claim to courage ; the matter be simply a choice between two evil , of which by far the great one be , of course , to lose my darling . 
 the journey be a great deal long to fetch around the southern hill , and enter by the Doone - gate , than to cross the low land and steal in by the water - slide . however , I durst not take a horse   for fear of the Doones who might be abroad upon their usual business , but start betime in the evening , so as not to hurry , or waste any strength upon the way . and thus I come to the robber ' highway , walk circumspectly , scan the sky - line of every hill , and search the fold of every valley , for any move figure . 
 although it be now well on towards dark , and the sun be down an hour or so , I could see the robber ' road before I , in a trough of the wind hill , where the brook plough down from the high barrow , and the cove bank be roof with furze . at present , there be no one pass , neither post nor sentinel , so far as I could descry ; but I think it safe to wait a little , as twilight melt into night ; and then I creep down a seam of the highland , and stand upon the Doone - track . 
 as the road approach the entrance , it become more straight and strong , like a channel cut from rock , with the water brawl darkly along the naked side of it . not a tree or bush be leave , to shelter a man from bullet : all be stern , and stiff , and rugge , as I could not help perceive , even through the darkness , and a smell as of churchyard mould , a sense of be box in and coope , make I long to be out again . 
 and here I be , or seem to be , particularly unlucky ; for as I draw near the very entrance , lightly of foot and warily , the moon   which have often be my friend   like an enemy break upon I , top the eastward ridge of rock , and fill all the open space with the play of waver light . I shrink back into the shadowy quarter on the right side of the road ; and gloomily employ myself to watch the triple entrance , on which the moonlight fall askew . 
 all across and before the three rude and beetle archway hang a felled oak overhead , black , and thick , and threaten . this , as I hear before , could be let fall in a moment , so as to crush a score of man , and bar the approach of horse . behind this tree , the rocky mouth be span , as by a gallery with brushwood and pile timber , all upon a ledge of stone , where thirty man might lurk unseen , and fire at any invader . from that rampart it would be impossible to dislodge they , because the rock fall sheer below they twenty foot , or it may be more ; while overhead it tower three hundred , and so jut over that nothing could be cast upon they ; even if a man could climb the height . and the access to this portculli place if I may so call it , be no portculli there be through certain rocky chamber know to the tenant only . 
 but the cleverest of their device , and the most puzzling to an enemy , be that , instead of one mouth only , there be three to choose from , with nothing to betoken which be the proper access ; all be pretty much alike , and all unfenced and yawning . and the common rumour be that in time of any danger , when any force be know to be on muster in their neighbourhood , they change their entrance every day , and divert the other two , by mean of slide door to the chasm and dark abyss . 
 now I could see those three rough arch , jagged , black , and terrible ; and I know that only one of they could lead I to the valley ; neither give the river now any further guidance ; but dive underground with a sullen roar , where it meet the cross - bar of the mountain . have no mean at all of judging which be the right way of the three , and know that the other two would lead to almost certain death , in the ruggedness and darkness , for how could a man , among precipice and bottomless depth of water , without a ray of light , have any chance to save his life ? I do declare that I be half inclined to go away , and have do with it . 
 however , I know one thing for certain , to wit , that the long I stay debate the more would the enterprise pall upon I , and the less my relish be . and it strike I that , in time of peace , the middle way be the likeliest ; and the other diverge right and leave in their farth part might be make to slide into it   not far from the entrance , at the pleasure of the warder . also I take it for good oman that I remember   as rarely happen   a very fine line in the Latin grammar , whose emphasis and meaning be ' middle road be safe . ' 
 therefore , without more hesitation , I plunge into the middle way , hold a long ash staff before I , shodden at the end with iron . presently I be in black darkness grope along the wall , and feel a deal more fear than I wish to feel ; especially when upon look back I could no long see the light , which I have forsake . then I stumble over something hard , and sharp , and very cold , moreover so grievous to my leg that it need my very good doctrine and humour to forbear from swear , in the manner they use in London . but when I arise and feel it , and know it to be a culverin , I be somewhat reassure thereby , inasmuch as it be not likely that they would plant this engine except in the real and true entrance . 
 therefore I go on again , more painfully and wearily , and presently find it to be good that I have receive that knock , and bear it with such patience ; for otherwise I might have blunder full upon the sentry , and be shoot without more ado . as it be , I have barely time to draw back , as I turn a corner upon they ; and if their lanthorn have be in its place , they could scarce have fail to descry I , unless indeed I have see the gleam before I turn the corner . 
 there seem to be only two of they , of size indeed and stature as all the Doones must be , but I need not have fear to encounter they both , have they be unarmed , as I be . it be plain , however , that each have a long and heavy carbine , not in his hand   as it should have be , but stand close beside he . therefore it behove I now to be exceedingly careful , and even that might scarce avail , without luck in proportion . so I keep well back at the corner , and lay one cheek to the rock face , and keep my outer eye round the jut , in the wary mode I could compass , watch my opportunity : and this be what I see . 
 the two villain look very happy which villain have no right to be , but often be , meseemeth they be sit in a niche of rock , with the lanthorn in the corner , quaff something from glass measure , and play at push - pin , or shepherd 's chess , or basset ; or some trivial game of that sort . each be smoke a long clay pipe , quite of new London shape , I could see , for the shadow be throw out clearly ; and each would laugh from time to time , as he fancy he get the well of it . one be sit with his knee up , and leave hand on his thigh ; and this one have his back to I , and seem to be the stouter . the other lean more against the rock , half sit and half astraddle , and wear leathern overall , as if newly come from rid . I could see his face quite clearly by the light of the open lanthorn , and a handsomer or a bold face I have seldom , if ever , set eye upon ; insomuch that it make I very unhappy to think of his be so near my Lorna . 
 ' how long be I to stand crouch here ? ' I ask of myself , at last , be tired of hear they cry , ' score one , ' ' score two , ' ' no , by , Charlie , ' ' by , I say it be , Phelps . ' and yet my only chance of slip by they unperceive be to wait till they quarrel more , and come to blow about it . presently , as I make up my mind to steal along towards they   for the cavern be pretty wide , just there , Charlie , or Charleworth Doone , the young and tall man , reach forth his hand to seize the money , which he swear he have win that time . upon this , the other jerk his arm , vow that he have no right to it ; whereupon Charlie fling at his face the content of the glass he be sip , but miss he and hit the candle , which sputter with a flare of blue flame   from the strength perhaps of the spirit   and then go out completely . at this , one swore , and the other laugh ; and before they have settle what to do , I be past they and round the corner . 
 and then , like a giddy fool as I be , I need must give they a startler the whoop of an owl , do so exactly , as John Fry have teach I , and echo by the roof so fearfully , that one of they drop the tinder box ; and the other catch up his gun and cock it , at least as I judge by the sound they make . and then , too late , I know my madness , for if either of they have fire , no doubt but what all the village would have rise and rush upon I . however , as the luck of the matter go , it prove for my advantage ; for I hear one say to the other , 
 ' curse it , Charlie , what be that ? it scar I so , I have drop my box ; my flint be go , and everything . will the brimstone catch from your pipe , my lad ? ' 
 ' my pipe be out , Phelps , ever so long . damn it , I be not afraid of an owl , man . give I the lanthorn , and stay here . I be not half do with you yet , my friend . ' 
 ' well say , my boy , well say ! go straight to Carver 's , mind you . the other sleepy head be snore , as there be nothing up to - night . no dally now under Captain 's window . Queen will have nought to say to you ; and Carver will punch your head into a new wick for your lanthorn . ' 
 ' will he though ? two can play at that . ' and so after some rude jest , and laughter , and a few more oath , I hear Charlie   or at any rate somebody   come toward I , with a loose and not too sober footfall . as he reel a little in his gait , and I would not move from his way one inch , after his talk of Lorna , but only long to grasp he   if common sense permit it , his braid coat come against my thumb , and his leathern gaiter brush my knee . if he have turn or notice it , he would have be a dead man in a moment ; but his drunkenness save he . 
 so I let he reel on unharmed ; and thereupon it occur to I that I could have no well guide , pass as he would exactly where I wish to be ; that be to say under Lorna 's window . therefore I follow he without any especial caution ; and soon I have the pleasure of see his form against the moonlit sky . down a steep and winding path , with a handrail at the corner   such as they have at Ilfracombe , Master Charlie trip along and indeed there be much tripping , and he must have be an active fellow to recover as he do and after he walk I , much hop   for his own poor sake   that he might not turn and espy I . 
 but Bacchus   of whom I read at school , with great wonder about his meaning and the same I may say of Venus   that great deity preserve Charlie , his pious worshipper , from regard consequence . so he lead I very kindly to the top of the meadow land , where the stream from underground break forth , seethe quietly with a little hiss of bubble . hence I have fair view and outline of the robber ' township , spread with bush here and there , but not heavily overshadow . the moon , approach now the full , bring the form in manner forth , clothe each with character , as the moon   more than the sun   do , to an eye accustom . 
 I know that the Captain 's house be first , both from what Lorna have say of it , and from my mother 's description , and now again from see Charlie halt there for a certain time , and whistle on his finger , and hurry on , fear consequence . the tune that he whistle be strange to I , and linger in my ear , as have something very new and striking , and fantastic in it . and I repeat it softly to myself , while I mark the position of the house and the beauty of the village . for the stream , in lieu of any street , pass between the house , and afford perpetual change , and twinkle , and reflection moreover by its sleepy murmur soothe all the dweller there , this and the snugness of the position , wall with rock and spread with herbage , make it look , in the quiet moonlight , like a little paradise . and to think of all the inmate there , sleep with good conscience , have ply their useful trade of make other work for they , enjoy life without much labour , yet with great renown . 
 Master Charlie go down the village , and I follow he carefully , keep as much as possible in the shadowy place , and watch the window of every house , lest any light should be burn . as I pass Sir Ensor 's house , my heart leap up , for I spy a window , high than the rest above the ground , and with a faint light move . this could hardly fail to be the room wherein my darling lie ; for here that impudent young fellow have gaze while he be whistle . and here my courage grow tenfold , and my spirit fear no evil for lo , if Lorna have be surrender to that scoundrel , Carver , she would not have be at her grandfather 's house , but in Carver 's accursed dwelling . 
 warm with this idea , I hurry after Charleworth Doone , be resolve not to harm he now , unless my own life require it . and while I watch from behind a tree , the door of the farth house be open ; and sure enough it be Carver 's self , who stand bareheade , and half undressed in the doorway . I could see his great black chest , and arm , by the light of the lamp he bear . 
 ' who want I this time of night ? ' he grumble , in a deep gruff voice ; ' any young scamp prowl after the maid shall have sore bone for his trouble . ' 
 ' all the fair maid be for thee , be they , Master Carver ? ' Charlie answer , laugh ; ' we young scamp must be well - content with coarser stuff than thou wouldst have . ' 
 ' would have ? ay , and will have , ' the great beast mutter angrily . ' I bide my time ; but not very long . only one word for thy good , Charlie . I will fling thee senseless into the river , if ever I catch thy girl - face there again . ' 
 ' Mayhap , Master Carver , it be more than thou couldst do . but I will not keep thee ; thou art not pleasant company to - night . all I want be a light for my lanthorn , and a glass of schnapp , if thou hast it . ' 
 ' what be become of thy light , then ? good for thee I be not on duty . ' 
 ' a great owl fly between I and Phelps , as we watch beside the culvern , and so scared be he at our fierce bright eye that he fall and knock the light out . ' 
 ' likely tale , or likely lie , Charles ! we will have the truth to - morrow . here take thy light , and be go with thee . all virtuous man be in bed now . ' 
 ' then so will I be , and why art thou not ? ha , have I earn my schnapps now ? ' 
 ' if thou hast , thou hast pay a bad debt ; there be too much in thee already . be off ! my patience be do with . ' 
 then he slam the door in the young man 's face , have kindle his lanthorn by this time : and Charlie go up to the watchplace again , mutter as he pass I , ' bad look - out for all of we , when that surly old beast be Captain . no gentle blood in he , no hospitality , not even pleasant language , nor a good new oath in his frowsy pate ! I have   a mind to cut the whole of it ; and but for the girl I would so . ' 
 my heart be in my mouth , as they say , when I stand in the shade by Lorna 's window , and whisper her name gently . the house be of one story only , as the other be , with pine - end stand forth the stone , and only two rough window upon that western side of it , and perhaps both of they be Lorna 's . the Doones have be their own builder , for no one should know their in and out ; and of course their work be clumsy . as for their window , they steal they mostly from the house round about . but though the window be not very close , I might have whisper long enough , before she would have answer I ; frighten as she be , no doubt by many a rude overture . and I durst not speak aloud because I see another watchman post on the western cliff , and command all the valley . and now this man   have no companion for drinking or for gambling   espy I against the wall of the house , and advance to the brink , and challenge I . 
 ' who be you there ? Answer ! one , two , three ; and I fire at thee . ' 
 the nozzle of his gun be point full upon I , as I could see , with the moonlight strike on the barrel ; he be not more than fifty yard off , and now he begin to reckon . be almost desperate about it , I begin to whistle , wonder how far I should get before I lose my windpipe : and as luck would have it , my lip fall into that strange tune I have practise last ; the one I have hear from Charlie . my mouth would scarcely frame the note , be parch with terror ; but to my surprise , the man fall back , drop his gun , and salute . oh , sweetest of all sweet melody ! 
 that tune be Carver Doone 's passport   as I hear long afterwards , which Charleworth Doone have imitate , for decoy of Lorna . the sentinel take I for that vile Carver ; who be like enough to be prowl there , for private talk with Lorna ; but not very likely to shout forth his name , if it might be avoid . the watchman , perceive the danger perhaps of intrude on Carver 's privacy , not only retire along the cliff , but withdraw himself to good distance . 
 meanwhile he have do I the kind service ; for Lorna come to the window at once , to see what the cause of the shout be , and draw back the curtain timidly . then she open the rough lattice ; and then she watch the cliff and tree ; and then she sigh very sadly . 
 ' oh , Lorna , do not   you know I ? ' I whisper from the side , be afraid of startle she by appear over suddenly . 
 quick though she always be of thought , she know I not from my whisper , and be shut the window hastily when I catch it back , and show myself . 
 ' John ! ' she cry , yet with sense enough not to speak aloud : ' oh , you must be mad , John . ' 
 ' as mad as a March hare , ' say I , ' without any news of my darling . you know I would come : of course you do . ' 
 ' well , I think , perhaps you know : now , John , you need not eat my hand . do you see they have put iron bar across ? ' 
 ' to be sure . do you think I should be content , even with this lovely hand , but for these vile iron bar . I will have they out before I go . now , darling , for one moment just the other hand , for a change , you know . ' 
 so I get the other , but be not honest ; for I keep they both , and feel their delicate beauty trembling , as I lay they to my heart . 
 ' oh , John , you will make I cry directly ' she have be cry long ago ' if you go on in that way . you know we can never have one another ; every one be against it . why should I make you miserable ? try not to think of I any more . ' 
 ' and will you try the same of I , Lorna ? ' 
 ' oh yes , John ; if you agree to it . at least I will try to try it . ' 
 ' then you will not   try anything of the sort , ' I cry with great enthusiasm , for her tone be so nice and melancholy : ' the only thing we will try to try , be to belong to one another . and if we do our good , Lorna , God alone can prevent we . ' 
 she cross herself , with one hand draw free as I speak so boldly ; and something swell in her little throat , and prevent she from answer . 
 ' now tell I , ' I say ; ' what mean all this ? why be you so pen up here ? why have you give I no token ? have your grandfather turn against you ? be you in any danger ? ' 
 ' my poor grandfather be very ill : I fear that he will not live long . the Counsellor and his son be now the master of the valley ; and I dare not venture forth , for fear of anything they might do to I . when I go forth , to signal for you , Carver try to seize I ; but I be too quick for he . little Gwenny be not allow to leave the valley now ; so that I could send no message . I have be so wretched , dear , lest you should think I false to you . the tyrant now make sure of I . you must watch this house , both night and day , if you wish to save I . there be nothing they would shrink from ; if my poor grandfather oh , I can not bear to think of myself , when I ought to think of he only ; die without a son to tend he , or a daughter to shed a tear . ' 
 ' but surely he have son enough ; and a deal too many , ' I be go to say , but stop myself in time : ' why do none of they come to he ? ' 
 ' I know not . I can not tell . he be a very strange old man ; and few have ever love he . he be black with wrath at the Counsellor , this very afternoon but I must not keep you here you be much too brave , John ; and I be much too selfish : there , what be that shadow ? ' 
 ' nothing more than a bat , darling , come to look for his sweetheart . I will not stay long ; you tremble so : and yet for that very reason , how can I leave you , Lorna ? ' 
 ' you must you must , ' she answer ; ' I shall die if they hurt you . I hear the old nurse move . Grandfather be sure to send for I . keep back from the window . ' 
 however , it be only Gwenny Carfax , Lorna 's little handmaid : my darling bring she to the window and present she to I , almost laugh through her grief . 
 ' oh , I be so glad , John ; Gwenny , I be so glad you come . I have want long to introduce you to my " young man , " as you call he . it be rather dark , but you can see he . I wish you to know he again , Gwenny . ' 
 ' Whoy ! ' cry Gwenny , with great amazement , stand on tiptoe to look out , and star as if she be weigh I : ' she be big nor any Doone ! Heared as she have bate our cornish champion awrastle . ' twadn't   fair play nohow : no , no ; do not   tell I , ' twadn't   fair play nohow . ' 
 ' true enough , Gwenny , ' I answer she ; for the play have be very unfair indeed on the side of the Bodmin champion ; ' it be not a fair bout , little maid ; I be free to acknowledge that . ' by that answer , or rather by the construction she put upon it , the heart of the cornish girl be win , more than by gold and silver . 
 ' I shall knoo thee again , young man ; no fear of that , ' she answer , nod with an air of patronage . ' now , missis , gae on coortin ' , and I wall gae outside and watch for ' ee . ' Though express not over delicately , this proposal arise , no doubt , from Gwenny 's sense of delicacy ; and I be very thankful to she for take her departure . 
 ' she be the good little thing in the world , ' say Lorna , softly laugh ; ' and the queer , and the true . nothing will bribe she against I . if she seem to be on the other side , never , never doubt she . now no more of your " coortin ' , " John ! I love you far too well for that . yes , yes , ever so much ! if you will take a mean advantage of I . and as much as ever you like to imagine ; and then you may double it , after that . only go , do go , good John ; kind , dear , darling John ; if you love I , go . ' 
 ' how can I go without settle anything ? ' I ask very sensibly . ' how shall I know of your danger now ? Hit upon something ; you be so quick . anything you can think of ; and then I will go , and not frighten you . ' 
 ' I have be think long of something , ' Lorna answer rapidly , with that peculiar clearness of voice which make every syllable ring like music of a several note , ' you see that tree with the seven rook ' nest bright against the cliff there ? can you count they , from above , do you think ? from a place where you will be safe , dear ' 
 ' no doubt , I can ; or if I can not , it will not take I long to find a spot , whence I can do it . ' 
 ' Gwenny can climb like any cat . she have be up there in the summer , watch the young bird , day by day , and dare the boy to touch they . there be neither bird , nor egg there now , of course , and nothing do . if you see but six rook ' nest ; I be in peril and want you . if you see but five , I be carry off by Carver . ' 
 ' Good God ! ' say I , at the mere idea ; in a tone which frighten Lorna . 
 ' fear not , John , ' she whisper sadly , and my blood grow cold at it : ' I have mean to stop he ; or at least to save myself . if you can come within one day of that man 's get hold of I , you will find I quite unharmed . after that you will find I dead , or alive , accord to circumstance , but in no case such that you need blush to look at I . ' 
 her dear sweet face be full of pride , as even in the gloom I see : and I would not trespass on her feeling by such a thing , at such a moment , as an attempt at any caress . I only say , ' God bless you , darling ! ' and she say the same to I , in a very low sad voice . and then I steal below Carver 's house , in the shadow from the eastern cliff ; and know enough of the village now to satisfy all necessity , betook myself to my well - know track in return from the valley ; which be neither down the waterslide   a course I fear in the darkness   nor up the cliff at Lorna 's bower ; but a way of my own inventing , which there be no need to dwell upon . 
 a weight of care be off my mind ; though much of trouble hang there still . one thing be quite certain if Lorna could not have John Ridd , no one else should have she . and my mother , who sit up for I , and with I long time afterwards , agree that this be comfort . 




 CHAPTER xxxviii 

 a good turn for JEREMY 

 John Fry have now six shilling a week of regular and permanent wage , besides all harvest and shearing money , as well as a cottage rent - free , and enough of garden - ground to rear pot - herb for his wife and all his family . now the wage appoint by our justice , at the time of session , be four - and - sixpence a week for summer , and a shilling less for the winter - time ; and we could be fin , and perhaps imprison , for give more than the sum so fix . therefore John Fry be look upon as the rich man upon Exmoor , I mean of course among labourer , and there be many joke about rob he , as if he be the mint of the king ; and Tom Faggus promise to try his hand , if he come across John on the highway , although he have cease from business , and be seek a Royal pardon . 
 now be it accord to human nature , or be it a thing contradictory   as I would fain believe ? but anyhow , there be , upon Exmoor , no more discontented man , no man more sure that he have not his worth , neither half so sore about it , than , or as , John Fry be . and one thing he do which I could not wholly   or indeed I may say , in any measure   reconcile with my sense of right , much as I labour to do John justice , especially because of his roguery ; and this be , that if we say too much , or accuse he at all of laziness   which he must have know to be in he , he regularly turn round upon we , and quite compel we to hold our tongue , by threaten to lay information against we for pay he too much wage ! 
 now I have not mention all this of John Fry , from any disrespect for his memory   which be green and honest amongst we , far less from any desire to hurt the feeling of his grandchild ; and I will do they the justice , once for all , to avow , thus publicly , that I have know a great many big rogue , and most of themselves in the number . but I have refer , with moderation , to this little flaw in a worthy character   or foible , as we call it , when a man be dead   for this reason only that without it there be no explain John 's dealing with Jeremy Stickles . 
 Master Jeremy , be full of London and Norwich experience , fall into the error of suppose that we clod and yokel be the simple of the simple , and could be cheat at his good pleasure . now this be not so : when once we suspect that people have that idea of we , we indulge they in it to the top of their bent , and grieve that they should come out of it , as they do at last in amazement , with less money than before , and the laugh now set against they . 
 ever since I have offend Jeremy , by threaten he   as before relate   in case of his meddling with my affair , he have more and more ally himself with simple - minded John , as he be pleased to call he . John Fry be everything : it be ' run and fetch my horse , John ' ' John , be my pistol prim well ? ' ' I want you in the stable , John , about something very particular ' , until except for the rudeness of it , I be long to tell Master Stickles that he ought to pay John 's wage . John for his part be not backward , but give himself the most wonderful air of secrecy and importance , till half the parish begin to think that the affair of the nation be in his hand , and he scorn the sight of a dungfork . 
 it be not likely that this should last ; and be the only man in the parish with any knowledge of politic , I give John Fry to understand that he must not presume to talk so freely , as if he be at least a constable , about the constitution ; which could be no affair of his , and might bring we all into trouble . at this he only toss his nose , as if he have be in London at least three time for my one ; which vex I so that I promise he the thick end of the plough - whip if even the name of a knight of the shire should pass his lip for a fortnight . 
 now I do not suspect in my stupid noddle that John Fry would ever tell Jeremy Stickles about the sight at the Wizard 's Slough and the man in the white nightcap ; because John have swear on the blade of his knife not to breathe a word to any soul , without my full permission . however , it appear that John relate , for a certain consideration , all that he have see , and doubtless more which have accrue to it . upon this Master Stickles be much astonish at Uncle Reuben 's proceeding , have always account he a most loyal , keen , and wary subject . 
 all this I learn upon recover Jeremy 's good grace , which come to pass in no other way than by the saving of his life . be bind to keep the strict watch upon the seven rook ' nest , and yet not bear to be idle and to waste my mother 's store , I contrive to keep my work entirely at the western corner of our farm , which be near to Glen Doone , and whence I could easily run to a height command the view I covet . 
 one day Squire Faggus have drop in upon we , just in time for dinner ; and very soon he and King 's messenger be as thick as need be . Tom have bring his beloved mare to show she off to Annie , and he mount his pretty sweetheart upon she , after give Winnie notice to be on her very good behaviour . the squire be in great spirit , have just accomplish a purchase of land which be worth ten time what he give for it ; and this he do by a merry trick upon old Sir Roger Bassett , who never suppose he to be in earnest , as not possess the money . the whole thing be do on a bumper of claret in a tavern where they meet ; and the old knight have once pledge his word , no lawyer could hold he back from it . they could only say that Master Faggus , be attaint of felony , be not a capable grantee . ' I will soon cure that , ' quoth Tom , ' my pardon have be ready for month and month , so soon as I care to sue it . ' 
 and now he be tell our Annie , who listen very rosily , and believe every word he say , that , have be ruin in early innocence by the mean of lawyer , it be only just , and fair turn for turn , that have become a match for they by long practice upon the highway , he should reinstate himself , at their expense , in society . and now he would go to London at once , and sue out his pardon , and then would his lovely darling Annie , etc . , etc . thing which I have no right to hear , and in which I be not want . 
 therefore I stride away up the lane to my afternoon 's employment , sadly compare my love with theirs   which now appear so prosperous , yet heartily glad for Annie 's sake ; only remember now and then the old proverb ' wrong never come right . ' 
 I work very hard in the copse of young ash , with my billhook and a shearing - knife ; cut out the sapling where they stool too close together , make spar to keep for thatch , wall - crook to drive into the cob , stile for close sheep hurdle , and handle for rake , and hoe , and two - bill , of the large and straighter stuff . and all the less I bind in faggot , to come home on the sledd to the woodrick . it be not to be suppose that I do all this work , without many peep at the seven rook ' nest , which prove my Lorna 's safety . indeed , whenever I want a change , either from cleave , or hew too hard , or stoop too much at bind , I be up and away to the ridge of the hill , instead of stand and do nothing . 
 soon I forget about Tom and Annie ; and fall to thinking of Lorna only ; and how much I would make of she ; and what I should call our child ; and how I would educate they , to do honour to her rank ; yet all the time I work none the bad , by reason of meditation . fresh - cut spar be not so good as those of a little seasoning ; especially if the sap be not go down at the time of cut . therefore we always find it needful to have plenty still in stock . 
 it be very pleasant there in the copse , slop to the west as it be , and the sun descend brightly , with rock and bank to dwell upon . the stem of mottled and dimpled wood , with twig come out like elbow , hang and clung together closely , with a mode of bend in , as child do at some danger ; overhead the shrunken leaf quiver and rustle ripely , have many point like star , and rise and fall delicately , as finger play sad music . along the bed of the slanting ground , all between the stool of wood , there be heap of dead brown leaf , and shelter mat of lichen , and drift of spot stick go rotten , and tuft of rush here and there , full of fray and feathering . 
 all by the hedge run a little stream , a thing that could barely name itself , flow scarce more than a pint in a minute , because of the sunny weather . yet have this rill little crook and cranny dark and bravely bearded , and a gallant rush through a reeden pipe the stem of a flag that be ground ; and here and there divide thread , from the point of a branching stick , into mighty pool of rock   as large as a grown man 's hat almost   nap with moss all around the side and hang with cord grass . along and down the tiny bank , and nod into one another , even across main channel , hang the brown arcade of fern ; some with gold tongue languish ; some with countless ear - drop jerking , some with great quille rib uprising and long saw aflappe ; other cup , and fan over with the grace of yield , even as a hollow fountain spread by wind that have lose their way . 
 deeply each beyond other , plume , stoop , glancing , glistening , weave soft pillow lace , coye to the wind and water , when their fleeting image dance , or by which their beauty move , God have make no lovelier thing ; and only he take heed of they . 
 it be time to go home to supper now , and I feel very friendly towards it , have be hard at work for some hour , with only the voice of the little rill , and some hare and a pheasant for company . the sun be go down behind the black wood on the farth cliff of Bagworthy , and the russet of the tuft and spear - bed be become gray , while the greyness of the saple ash grow brown against the sky ; the hollow curve of the little stream become black beneath the grass and the fairy fan innumerable , while outside the hedge our clover be crimp its leaf in the dewfall , like the cocked hat of wood - sorrel , when , thank God for all this scene , because my love have gift I with the key to all thing lovely , I prepare to follow their example , and to rest from labour . 
 therefore I wipe my bill - hook and shearing - knife very carefully , for I hate to leave tool dirty ; and be doubt whether I should try for another glance at the seven rook ' nest , or whether it would be too dark for it . it be now a quarter of an hour mayhap , since I have make any chop noise , because I have be assort my spar , and tie they in bundle , instead of ply the bill - hook ; and the gentle tinkle of the stream be loud than my doing . to this , no doubt , I owe my life , which then   without my dream it   be in no little jeopardy . 
 for , just as I be twist the bine of my very last faggot , before tuck the cleft tongue under , there come three man outside the hedge , where the western light be yellow ; and by it I could see that all three of they carry firearm . these man be not walk carelessly , but follow down the hedge - trough , as if to stalk some enemy : and for a moment it strike I cold to think it be I they be look for . with the swiftness of terror I conclude that my visit to Glen Doone be know , and now my life be the forfeit . 
 it be a most lucky thing for I , that I hear their clothe catch in the bramble , and see their hat under the rampart of ash , which be make by what we call ' splashing , ' and lucky , for I that I stand in a goyal , and have the dark coppice behind I . to this I have no time to fly , but with a sort of instinct , throw myself flat in among the thick fern , and hold my breath , and lie still as a log . for I have see the light gleam on their gun - barrel , and know the fault of the neighbourhood , would fain avoid swell their number . then the three man come to the gap in the hedge , where I have be in and out so often ; and stand up , and look in over . 
 it be all very well for a man to boast that , in all his life , he have never be frightened , and believe that he never could be so . there may be man of that nature I will not dare to deny it ; only I have never know they . the fright I be now in be horrible , and all my bone seem to creep inside I ; when lie there helpless , with only a billet and the comb of fern to hide I , in the dusk of early evening , I see three face in the gap ; and what be bad , three gun - muzzle . 
 ' somebody be at work here ' it be the deep voice of Carver Doone ; ' jump up , Charlie , and look about ; we must have no witness . ' 
 ' give I a hand behind , ' say Charlie , the same handsome young Doone I have see that night ; ' this bank be too devilish steep for I . ' 
 ' nonsense , man ! ' cry Marwood de Whichehalse , who to my amazement be the third of the number ; ' only a hind cutting faggot ; and of course he hath go home long ago . blind man 's holiday , as we call it . I can see all over the place ; and there be not even a rabbit there . ' 
 at that I draw my breath again , and thank God I have get my coat on . 
 ' squire be right , ' say Charlie , who be stand up high   on a root perhaps , ' there be nobody there now , captain ; and lucky for the poor devil that he keepeth workman 's hour . even his chopper be go , I see . ' 
 ' no dog , no man , be the rule about here , when it come to coppice work , ' continue young de Whichehalse ; there be not a man would dare work there , without a dog to scare the pixy . ' 
 ' there be a big young fellow upon this farm , ' Carver Doone mutter sulkily , ' with whom I have an account to settle , if ever I come across he . he hath a cursed spite to we , because we shoot his father . he be go to bring the lumper upon we , only he be afeare , last winter . and he hath be in London lately , for some traitorous job , I doubt . ' 
 ' oh , you mean that fool , John Ridd , ' answer the young squire ; ' a very simple clod - hopper . no treachery in he I warrant ; he hath not the head for it . all he care about be wrestle . as strong as a bull , and with no more brain . ' 
 ' a bullet for that bull , ' say Carver ; and I could see the grin on his scornful face ; ' a bullet for ballast to his brain , the first time I come across he . ' 
 ' nonsense , captain ! I will not   have he shoot , for he be my old school - fellow , and hath a very pretty sister . but his cousin be of a different mould , and ten time as dangerous . ' 
 ' we shall see , lad , we shall see , ' grumble the great black - bearded man . ' Ill bode for the fool that would hinder I . but come , let we onward . no lingering , or the viper will be in the bush from we . body and soul , if he give we the slip , both of you shall answer it . ' 
 ' no fear , captain , and no hurry , ' Charlie answer gallantly , ' would I be as sure of live a twelvemonth as he be of die within the hour ! extreme unction for he in my bullet patch . remember , I claim to be his confessor , because he hath insult I . ' 
 ' thou art welcome to the job for I , ' say Marwood , as they turn away , and keep along the hedge - row ; ' I love to meet a man sword to sword ; not to pop at he from a foxhole . ' 
 what answer be make I could not hear , for by this time the stout ashen hedge be between we , and no other gap to be find in it , until at the very bottom , where the corner of the copse be . yet I be not quit of danger now ; for they might come through that second gap , and then would be sure to see I , unless I creep into the uncut thicket , before they could enter the clearing . but in spite of all my fear , I be not wise enough to do that . and in truth the word of Carver Doone have fill I with such anger , know what I do about he and his pretence to Lorna ; and the sight of Squire Marwood , in such outrageous company , have so move my curiosity , and their threat against some unknown person so arouse my pity , that much of my prudence be forget , or at least the well part of courage , which love danger at long distance . 
 therefore , hold fast my bill - hook , I drop myself very quietly into the bed of the runnel , be resolve to take my chance of their entrance at the corner , where the water dive through the hedge - row . and so I follow they down the fence , as gently as a rabbit go , only I be inside it , and they on the outside ; but yet so near that I hear the branch rustle as they push they . 
 perhaps I have never love fern so much as when I come to the end of that little gully , and stoop betwixt two patch of they , now my chief shelter , for cattle have be through the gap just there , in quest of fodder and coolness , and have leave but a mound of trodden earth between I and the outlaws . I mean at least on my left hand   upon which side they be , for in front where the brook run out of the copse be a good stiff hedge of holly . and now I pray Heaven to lead they straight on ; for if they once turn to their right , through the gap , the muzzle of their gun would come almost against my forehead . 
 I hear they , for I durst not look ; and could scarce keep still for trembling I hear they trample outside the gap , uncertain which track they should follow . and in that fearful moment , with my soul almost look out of my body , expect notice to quit it , what do you think I do ? I count the thread in a spider 's web , and the fly he have lately eat , as their skeleton shake in the twilight . 
 ' we shall see he well in there , ' say Carver , in his horrible gruff voice , like the creaking of the gallow chain ; ' sit there , behind holly hedge , lad , while he cometh down yonder hill ; and then our good - evening to he ; one at his body , and two at his head ; and good aim , lest we baulk the devil . ' 
 ' I tell you , captain , that will not do , ' say Charlie , almost whispering : ' you be very proud of your skill , we know , and can hit a lark if you see it : but he may not come until after dark , and we can not be too nigh to he . this holly hedge be too far away . he cross down here from Slocomslade , not from Tibbacot , I tell you ; but along that track to the left there , and so by the foreland to Glenthorne , where his boat be in the cove . do you think I have track he so many evening , without know his line to a hair ? will you fool away all my trouble ? ' 
 ' come then , lad , we will follow thy lead . thy life for his , if we fail of it . ' 
 ' after I then , right into the hollow ; thy leg be grow stiff , captain . ' 
 ' so shall thy body be , young man , if thou leadest I astray in this . ' 
 I hear they stumble down the hill , which be steep and rocky in that part ; and peer through the hedge , I see they enter a covert , by the side of the track which Master Stickles follow , almost every evening , when he leave our house upon business . and then I know who it be they be come on purpose to murder a thing which I might have guess long before , but for terror and cold stupidity . 
 ' oh that God , ' I think for a moment , wait for my blood to flow ; ' oh that God have give I brain , to meet such cruel dastard accord to their villainy ! the power to lie , and the love of it ; the stealth to spy , and the glory in it ; above all , the quiet relish for blood , and joy in the death of an enemy these be what any man must have , to contend with the Doones upon even term . and yet , I thank God that I have not any of these . ' 
 it be no time to dwell upon that , only to try , if might be , to prevent the crime they be bind upon . to follow the armed man down the hill would have be certain death to I , because there be no covert there , and the last light hang upon it . it seem to I that my only chance to stop the mischief pende be to compass the round of the hill , as fast as foot could be lay to ground ; only keep out of sight from the valley , and then down the rock , and across the brook , to the track from slocombslade : so as to stop the King 's messenger from travel any far , if only I could catch he there . 
 and this be exactly what I do ; and a terrible run I have for it , fear at every step to hear the echo of shot in the valley , and drop down the scrubby rock with tear and violent scratching . then I cross Bagworthy stream , not far below Doone - valley , and breast the hill towards Slocombslade , with my heart very heavily pant . why Jeremy choose to ride this way , instead of the more direct one   which would have be over Oare - hill , be more than I could account for : but I have nothing to do with that ; all I want be to save his life . 
 and this I do by about a minute ; and   which be the hard thing of all   with a great horse - pistol at my head as I seize upon his bridle . 
 ' Jeremy , Jerry , ' be all I could say , be so fearfully short of breath ; for I have cross the ground quick than any horse could . 
 ' speak just in time , John Ridd ! ' cry Master Stickles , still however point the pistol at I : ' I might have know thee by thy size , John . what art do here ? ' 
 ' come to save your life . for God 's sake , go no far . three man in the covert there , with long gun , wait for thee . ' 
 ' ha ! I have be watch of late . that be why I point at thee , John . back round this corner , and get thy breath , and tell I all about it . I never see a man so hurried . I could beat thee now , John . ' 
 Jeremy Stickles be a man of courage , and presence of mind , and much resource : otherwise he would not have be appoint for this business ; nevertheless he tremble greatly when he hear what I have to tell he . but I take good care to keep back the name of young Marwood de Whichehalse ; neither do I show my knowledge of the other man ; for reason of my own not very hard to conjecture . 
 ' we will let they cool their heel , John Ridd , ' say Jeremy , after think a little . ' I can not fetch my musketeer either from Glenthorne or Lynmouth , in time to seize the fellow . and three desperate Doones , well - arm , be too many for you and I . one result this attempt will have , it will make we attack they soon than we have intend . and one more it will have , good John , it will make I thy friend for ever . shake hand my lad , and forgive I freely for have be so cold to thee . Mayhap , in the trouble come , it will help thee not a little to have do I this good turn . ' 
 upon this he shake I by the hand , with a pressure such as we feel not often ; and have learn from I how to pass quite beyond view of his enemy , he ride on to his duty , whatever it might be . for my part I be inclined to stay , and watch how long the three fusilier would have the patience to lie in wait ; but see less and less use in that , as I grow more and more hungry , I swing my coat about I , and go home to Plover 's barrow . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 trouble state and a foolish joke 

 Stickles take I aside the next day , and open all his business to I , whether I would or not . but I give he clearly to understand that he be not to be vex with I , neither to regard I as in any way dishonest , if I should use for my own purpose , or for the benefit of my friend , any part of the knowledge and privity thus enforce upon I . to this he agree quite readily ; but upon the express provision that I should do nothing to thwart his scheme , neither unfold they to any one ; but otherwise be allow to act accord to my own conscience , and as consist with the honour of a loyal gentleman for so he be pleased to term I . now what he say lay in no great compass and may be sum in small still ; especially as people know the chief part of it already . disaffection to the king , or rather dislike to his brother James , and fear of roman ascendancy , have exist now for several year , and of late be spread rapidly ; partly through the downright arrogance of the Tory faction , the cruelty and austerity of the Duke of York , the corruption of justice , and confiscation of ancient right and charter ; partly through jealousy of the french king , and his potent voice in our affair ; and partly   or perhaps one might even say , mainly   through that natural tide in all political channel , which verily move as if it have the moon itself for its mistress . no soon be a thing do and fix , be set far in advance perhaps of all that be do before   like a new mole in the sea , but immediately the water retire , lest they should undo it ; and every one say how fine it be , but leave other people to walk on it . then after awhile , the vague endless ocean , have retire and lain still without a breeze or murmur , fret and heave again with impulse , or with lash lay on it , and in one great surge advance over every rampart . 
 and so there be at the time I speak of , a great surge in England , not roll yet , but seething ; and one which a thousand Chief Justices , and a million Jeremy Stickles , should never be able to stop or turn , by string up man in front of it ; any more than a rope of onion can repulse a volcano . but the bad of it be that this great movement take a wrong channel at first ; not only miss legitimate line , but roar out that the back ditchway be the true and establish course of it . 
 against this rash and random current nearly all the ancient mariner of the State be set ; not to allow the brave ship to drift there , though some little boat might try it . for the present there seem to be a pause , with no open onset , but people on the shore expecting , each accord to his wish , and the feel of his own finger , whence the rush of wind should come which might direct the water . 
 now , to reduce high figure of speech into our own little numeral , all the town of Somersetshire and half the town of Devonshire be full of push eager people , ready to swallow anything , or to make other swallow it . whether they believe the folly about the black box , and all that stuff , be not for I to say ; only one thing I know , they pretend to do so , and persuade the ignorant rustic . Taunton , Bridgwater , Minehead , and Dulverton take the lead of the other town in utterance of their discontent , and threat of what they mean to do if ever a Papist dare to climb the protestant throne of England . on the other hand , the Tory leader be not as yet under apprehension of an immediate outbreak , and fear to damage their own cause by premature coercion , for the struggle be not very likely to begin in earnest during the life of the present king ; unless he should   as some people hop   be so far embolden as to make public profession of the faith which he hold   if any . so the Tory policy be to watch , not indeed permit their opponent to gather strength , and muster in armed force or with order , but be well apprised of all their scheme and intended movement , to wait for some bold overt act , and then to strike severely . and as a Tory watchman or spy , as the Whigs would call he Jeremy Stickles be now among we ; and his duty be threefold . 
 first , and most ostensibly , to see to the levying of poundage in the little haven of Lynmouth , and far up the coast , which be now become a place of resort for the folk whom we call smuggler , that be to say , who land their good without regard to King 's revenue as by law establish . and indeed there have be no officer appoint to take toll , until one have be send to Minehead , not so very long before . the excise as well   which have be order in the time of the Long Parliament   have be little heed by the people hereabouts . 
 second , his duty be   though only the Doones have discover it   to watch those outlaw narrowly , and report of their manner   which be scanty , doing   which be too manifold , reputation   which be execrable , and politic , whether true to the King and the Pope , or otherwise . 
 Jeremy Stickles ' third business be entirely political ; to learn the temper of our people and the gentle family , to watch the movement of the train band   which could not always be trust , to discover any collecting of arm and drilling of man among we , to prevent   if need be , by open force   any importation of gunpowder , of which there have be some rumour ; in a word , to observe and forestall the enemy . 
 now in provide for this last - mention service , the Government have make a great mistake , doubtless through their anxiety to escape any public attention . for all the disposable force at their emissary 's command amount to no more than a score of musketeer , and these so divide along the coast as scarcely to suffice for the duty of sentinel . he hold a commission , it be true , for the employment of the train - band , but upon the understanding that he be not to call upon they   except as a last resource , for any political object ; although he might use they against the Doones as private criminal , if find needful ; and suppose that he could get they . 
 ' so you see , John , ' he say in conclusion , ' I have more work than tool to do it with . I be heartily sorry I ever accept such a mixed and meagre commission . at the bottom of it lie   I be well convinced   not only the desire to keep thing quiet , but the paltry jealousy of the military people . because I be not a Colonel , forsooth , or a captain in his Majesty 's service , it would never do to trust I with a company of soldier ! and yet they would not send either Colonel or Captain , for fear of a stir in the rustic mind . the only thing that I can do with any chance of success , be to rout out these vile Doone fellow , and burn their house over their head . now what think you of that , John Ridd ? ' 
 ' destroy the town of the Doones , ' I say , ' and all the Doones inside it ! surely , Jeremy , you would never think of such a cruel act as that ! ' 
 ' a cruel act , John ! it would be a mercy for at least three county . no doubt you folk , who live so near , be well accustomed to they , and would miss your liveliness in come home after nightfall , and the joy of find your sheep and cattle right , when you not expect it . but after awhile you might get use to the dullness of be safe in your bed , and not lose your sister and sweetheart . surely , on the whole , it be as pleasant not to be rob as to be rob . ' 
 ' I think we should miss they very much , ' I answer after consideration ; for the possibility of have no Doones have never yet occur to I , and we all be so thoroughly use to they , and allow for it in our year 's reckoning ; ' I be sure we should miss they very sadly ; and something bad would come of it . ' 
 ' thou art the staunch of all staunch Tories , ' cry Stickles , laugh , as he shake my hand ; ' thou believest in the divine right of robber , who be good enough to steal thy own fat sheep . I be a jolly Tory , John , but thou art ten time jolly : oh ! the grief in thy face at the thought of be rob no long ! ' 
 he laugh in a very unseemly manner ; while I descry nothing to laugh about . for we always like to see our way ; and a sudden change upset we . and unless it be in the loss of the farm , or the death of the king , or of Betty Muxworthy , there be nothing that could so unsettle our mind as the loss of the Doones of Bagworthy . 
 and beside all this , I be think , of course , and think more than all the rest , about the trouble that might ensue to my own beloved Lorna . if an attack of Glen Doone be make by savage soldier and rude train - band , what might happen , or what might not , to my delicate , innocent darling ? therefore , when Jeremy Stickles again place the matter before I , commend my strength and courage and skill   to flatter I of the high , and finish by say that I would be worth at least four common man to he , I cut he short as follow : 
 ' Master Stickles , once for all , I will have naught to do with it . the reason why be no odd of thine , nor in any way disloyal . only in thy plan remember that I will not strike a blow , neither give any counsel , neither guard any prisoner . ' 
 ' not strike a blow , ' cry Jeremy , ' against thy father 's murderer , John ! ' 
 ' not a single blow , Jeremy ; unless I know the man who do it , and he glory in his sin . it be a foul and dastard deed , yet not do in cold blood ; neither in cold blood will I take God 's task of avenge it . ' 
 ' very well , John , ' answer Master Stickles , ' I know thine obstinacy . when thy mind be make up , to argue with thee be pelt a rock with peppercorn . but thou hast some other reason , lad , unless I be much mistaken , over and above thy merciful nature and christian forgiveness . anyhow , come and see it , John . there will be good sport , I reckon ; especially when we thrust our claw into the nest of the raven . many a yeoman will find his daughter , and some of the Porlock lad their sweetheart . a nice young maiden , now , for thee , John ; if indeed , any ' 
 ' no more of this ! ' I answer very sternly : ' it be no business of thine , Jeremy ; and I will have no joking upon this matter . ' 
 ' good , my lord ; so be it . but one thing I tell thee in earnest . we will have thy old double - deal uncle , Huckaback of Dulverton , and march he first to assault Doone Castle , sure as my name be Stickles . I hear that he hath often vow to storm the valley himself , if only he could find a dozen musketeer to back he . now , we will give he chance to do it , and prove his loyalty to the King , which lie under some suspicion of late . ' 
 with regard to this , I have nothing to say ; for it seem to I very reasonable that Uncle Reuben should have first chance of recover his steal good , about which he have make such a sad to - do , and promise himself such vengeance . I make bold , however , to ask Master Stickles at what time he intend to carry out this great and hazardous attempt . he answer that he have several thing require first to be set in order , and that he must make an inland journey , even as far as Tiverton , and perhaps Crediton and Exeter , to collect his force and ammunition for they . for he mean to have some of the yeomanry as well as of the train band , so that if the Doones should sally forth , as perhaps they would , on horseback , cavalry might be there to meet they , and cut they off from return . 
 all this make I very uncomfortable , for many and many reason , the chief and foremost be of course my anxiety about Lorna . if the attack succeed , what be to become of she ? who would rescue she from the brutal soldier , even suppose that she escape from the hand of her own people , during the danger and ferocity ? and in small way , I be much put out ; for instance , who would ensure our corn - rick , sheep , and cattle , ay , and even our fat pig , now come on for bacon , against the spread all over the country of unlicensed marauder ? the Doones have their right , and understand they , and take they accord to prescription , even as the parson have , and the lord of manor , and the King himself , God save he ! but how be these low soldiering fellow   half - starve at home very likely , and only too glad of the fat of the land , and ready , accord to our proverb , to burn the paper they fry in , who be they to come hectoring and heroing over we , and Heliogabalising , with our pretty sister to cook for they , and be chuck under chin perhaps afterwards ? there be nothing England hat so much , accord to my sense of it , as that fellow take from plough - tail , cart - tail , pot - house and parish - stock , should be hoist and foist upon we   after a few month ' drilling , and their lying shape into truckle   as defender of the public weal , and hero of the universe . 
 in another way I be vex , moreover for after all we must consider the opinion of our neighbour namely , that I know quite well how everybody for ten mile round   for my fame must have be at least that wide , after all my wrestling , would lift up hand and cry out thus ' black shame on John Ridd , if he let they go without he ! ' 
 put all these thing together , as well as many other , which your own wit will suggest to you , it be impossible but what you will freely acknowledge that this unfortunate John Ridd be now in a cloven stick . there be Lorna , my love and life , bind by her duty to that old vil nay , I mean to her good grandfather , who could now do little mischief , and therefore deserve all praise Lorna bind , at any rate , by her womanly feeling , if not by sense of duty , to remain in the thick danger , with nobody to protect she , but everybody to covet she , for beauty and position . here be all the country rouse with violent excitement , at the chance of snap at the Doones ; and not only get tit for tat ; but every young man promise his sweetheart a gold chain , and his mother at least a shilling . and here be our own mow - yard , well fill than we could remember , and perhaps every sheaf in it destine to be burn or steal , before we have finish the bread we have bake . 
 among all these trouble , there be , however , or seem to be , one comfort . Tom Faggus return from London very proudly and very happily , with a royal pardon in black and white , which everybody admire the more , because no one could read a word of it . the squire himself acknowledge cheerfully that he could soon take fifty purse than read a single line of it . some people indeed go so far as to say that the parchment be make from a sheep Tom have steal , and that be why it prevaricate so in give he a character . but I , know something by this time , of lawyer , be able to contradict they ; affirm that the wolf have more than the sheep to do with this matter . 
 for , accord to our old saying , the three learn profession live by roguery on the three part of a man . the doctor maul our body ; the parson starve our soul , but the lawyer must be the adroit knave , for he have to ensnare our mind . therefore he take a careful delight in cover his trap and engine with a spread of dead - leaf word , whereof himself know little more than half the way to spell they . 
 but now Tom Faggus , although have wit to gallop away on his strawberry mare , with the speed of terror , from lawyer   have pay they with money too honest to stop , yet fall into a reckless adventure , ere ever he come home , from which any lawyer would have save he , although he ought to have need none beyond common thought for dear Annie . now I be , and ever have be , so vex about this story that I can not tell it pleasantly   as I try to write in general   in my own word and manner . therefore I will let John Fry   whom I have rob of another story , to which he be more entitle , and whom I have rob of many speech   which he think very excellent , lest I should grieve any one with his lack of education , the last lack he ever feel , by the bye , now with your good leave , I will allow poor John to tell this tale , in his own word and style ; which he have a perfect right to do , have be the first to tell we . for Squire Faggus keep it close ; not trust even Annie with it   or at least she say so ; because no man know much of his sweetheart 's tongue , until she have bear he a child or two . 
 only before John begin his story , this I would say , in duty to he , and in common honesty , that I dare not write down some few of his word , because they be not convenient , for dialect or other cause ; and that I can not find any way of spelling many of the word which I do repeat , so that people , not bear on Exmoor , may know how he pronounce they ; even if they could bring their lip and their leg to the proper attitude . and in this I speak advisedly ; have observe some thousand time that the manner a man have of spread his leg , and bend his knee , or stiffening , and even the way he will set his heel , make all the difference in his tone , and time of cast his voice aright , and power of come home to you . 
 we always like John 's story , not for any wit in they ; but because we laugh at the man , rather than the matter . the way he hold his head be enough , with his chin fix hard like a certainty   especially during his big lie , not a sign of a smile in his lip or nose , but a power of not laugh ; and his eye not turn to anybody , unless somebody have too much of it   as young girl always do   and go over the brink of laughter . thereupon it be good to see John Fry ; how he look gravely first at the laughter , as much as to ask , ' what be it now ? ' then if the fool go laugh more , as he or she be sure to do upon that dry inquiry , John would look again , to be sure of it , and then at somebody else to learn whether the laugh have company ; then if he get another grin , all his mirth come out in glory , with a sudden break ; and he wipe his lip , and be grave again . 
 now John , be too much encourage by the girl   of which I could never break they , come into the house that December evening , with every inch of he full of a tale . Annie see it , and Lizzie , of course ; and even I , in the gloom of great evil , perceive that John be a loaded gun ; but I do not care to explode he . now nothing prim he so hotly as this : if you want to hear all John Fry have hear , the sure of all sure way to it be , to pretend not to care for a word of it . 
 ' I wor over to Exeford in the morning , ' John begin from the chimney - corner , look straight at Annie ; ' for to zee a little calve , Jan , as we cuddn't   get thee to lave houze about . Meesus have get a quare vancy vor un , from wutt she have heer'd of the brade . now zit quite , wull ' e Miss Luzzie , or a ' wunt goo on no vurder . vaine little tayl I will tull ' ee , if so be thee zit quite . wull , as I coom down the hill , I zeed a saight of volk astappe of the ro - udwai . arl on them wi ' girt goon , or two man out of dree wi ' them . rackon there wor dree score on them , tak smarl and beg togather laike ; latt aloun the woman and chiller ; zum on em wi ' match blow , tother wi ' flint - lack . " Wutt be up now ? " I say to Bill Blacksmith , as have knowledge of I : " be the King acoomin ? if she be , do ' ee want to shutt ' un ? " 
 ' " Thee not knaw ! " say Bill Blacksmith , just the zame as I be a tullin of it : " whai , man , we expex Tam Faggus , and zum on us mane to shutt ' un . " 
 ' " Shutt ' un wi'out a warrant ! " say I : ' sure ' ee knaw well nor thic , Bill ! a man may not   shutt to another man , wi'out have a warrant , Bill . warship ze so , last taime I zeed un , and nothing to the contrairy . " 
 ' " haw , haw ! never frout about that , " saith Bill , zame as I be tullin you ; " we have warrant and warship enow , dree or vour on them . and more nor a dizzen warranty ; fro'ut I know to contrairy . Shutt ' un , we mane ; and shutt ' un , we will " Whai , Miss Annie , good Lord , whuttiver mak ' ee stear so ? ' 
 ' nothing at all , John , ' our Annie answer ; ' only the horrible ferocity of that miserable blacksmith . ' 
 ' that be nayther here nor there , ' John continue , with some wrath at his own interruption : ' Blacksmith knawe whutt the Squire have be ; and veare to lose his own custom , if Squire tuk to shooin ' again . Shutt any man I would myzell as intervared wi ' my trade laike . " lucky for thee , " say Bill Blacksmith , " as thee bee'st so shart and fat , Jan. Dree on we wor a gooin ' to shutt ' ee , till we zeed how fat thee waz , Jan. " 
 ' " Lor now , Bill ! " I answer ' un , wi ' a girt cold swat upon I : ' shutt I , Bill ; and my own waife niver drame of it ! " ' 
 here John Fry look round the kitchen ; for he have never say anything of the kind , I doubt ; but now make it part of his discourse , from think that Mistress Fry be come , as she generally do , to fetch he . 
 ' wull do then , Jan Vry , ' say the woman , who have enter quietly , but be only our old Molly . ' Wutt handsome manner thee hast gat , Jan , to spake so well of thy waife laike ; after arl the laife she lead thee ! ' 
 ' putt thee pot on the fire , old ' ooman , and bile thee own bakkon , ' John answer she , very sharply : ' nobody no raight to meddle wi ' a man 's bad ooman but himzell . Wull , here be all these here man awaitin ' , zum wi ' harse , zum wi'out ; the common volk wi ' long girt gun , and tha quarlity wi ' girt broad - sword . who wor there ? Whay latt I zee . there wor Squire Maunder , ' here John assume his full historical key , ' he wi ' the pot to his vittle - place ; and Sir Richard Blewitt shake over the zaddle , and Squaire Sandford of Lee , he wi ' the long nose and one eye , and Sir Gronus Batchildor over to Ninehead Court , and ever so many more on them , tulle up how they be arl gooin ' to be promote , for kitching of Tom Faggus . 
 ' " hope to God , " say I to myzell , " poor Tom wun't   coom here to - day : arl up with she , if ' a doeth : and who be there to suckzade ' un ? " mark I now , all these charps be good to shutt ' un , as her coom crass the watter ; the watter be waide enow there and stony , but no deep than my knee - place . 
 ' " Thee cas'n goo no vurder , " Bill Blacksmith saith to I : " nawbody ' low to crass the vord , until such time as Faggus coom ; plaise God we may mak sure of ' un . " 
 ' " amen , zo be it , " say I ; " God knoweth I be never in any hurry , and would zooner stop nor goo on most taime . " 
 ' Wi ' that I pull my vittle out , and zat a horsebarck , atin ' of them , and oncommon good they be . " will not   we have ' un this taime just , " saith Tim Potter , as keepeth the bull there ; " and yet I be zorry for ' un . but a man must kape the law , she must ; zo be she can only learn it . and now poor Tom will swing as high as the top of they girt hash there . " 
 ' " just thee kitch ' un virst , " say I ; " maisure rope , wi ' the body to maisure by . " 
 ' " Hurrah ! here be another now , " saith Bill Blacksmith , grin ; " another coom to help we . what a grave gentleman ! a warship of the pace , at laste ! " 
 ' for a gentleman , on a cue - ball horse , be come slowly down the hill on tother zide of watter , look at we in a friendly way , and with a long papper stand forth the lining of his coat laike . horse stappe to drink in the watter , and gentleman spak to ' un kindly , and then they coom raight on to ussen , and the gentleman 's face wor so long and so grave , we veare ' a wor gooin ' to prache to we . 
 ' " coort o ' King 's Bench , " saith one man ; " Checker and play , " saith another ; " Spishal Commission , I doubt , " saith Bill Blacksmith ; " back by the Mayor of Taunton . " 
 ' " any Justice of the King 's Peace , good people , to be find near here ? " say the gentleman , lift his hat to we , and very gracious in his manner . 
 ' " your honour , " saith Bill , with his hat off his head ; " there be sax or zeven warship here : arl on them very wise ' un . Squaire Maunder there be the zinnyer . " 
 ' so the gentleman ride up to Squire Maunder , and raise his cocked hat in a manner that take the squire out of countenance , for he could not do the like of it . 
 ' " Sir , " say he , " good and worshipful sir , I be here to claim your good advice and valour ; for purpose of justice . I hold his Majesty 's commission , to make to cease a notorious rogue , whose name be Thomas Faggus . " with that he offer his commission ; but Squire Maunder tell the truth , that he could not rade even word in print , much less write karakter .   then the other magistrate ride up , and put their head together , how to meet the London gentleman without loss of importance . there wor one of them as could rade purty vair , and she make out King 's mark upon it : and he bow upon his horse to the gentleman , and he lay his hand on his heart and say , " worshipful sir , we , as have the honour of his gracious Majesty 's commission , be entirely at your service , and crave instruction from you . " 
    Lest I seem to under - rate the erudition of Devonshire 
  magistrate , I venture to offer copy of a letter from a 
  Justice of the Peace to his bookseller , circa 1810 A.D. , now 
  in my possession : 

  ' sur . ' plez to zen I the ak relatting to A - GUSTUS - paks , ' 
  Ed . of L. D. 
 ' then a waving of hat begin , and a bowing , and making of leg to wan anather , sich as nayver wor zeed afore ; but none of them arl , for air and brading , cud coom anaigh the gentleman with the long grave face . 
 ' " your warship have post the man right well , " saith he with anather bow all round ; ' surely that big rogue will have no chance leave among so many valiant musketeer . ha ! what see I there , my friend ? rust in the pan of your gun ! that gun would never go off , sure as I be the King 's Commissioner . and I see another just as bad ; and lo , there the third ! pardon I , gentleman , I have be so used to his Majesty 's ordnance - yard . but I fear that bold rogue would ride through all of you , and laugh at your worship 's beard , by George . " 
 ' " but what shall we do ? " Squire Maunder ax ; " I vear there be no oil here . " 
 ' " discharge your piece , gentleman , and let the man do the same ; or at least let we try to discharge they , and load again with fresh powder . it be the fog of the morning hath spoil the priming . that rogue be not in sight yet : but God know we must not be asleep with he , or what will his Majesty say to I , if we let he slip once more ? " 
 ' " excellent , wondrous well say , good sir , " Squire Maunder answer he ; " I never should have think of that now . Bill Blacksmith , tell all the man to be ready to shoot up into the air , directly I give the word . now , be you ready there , Bill ? " 
 ' " all ready , your worship , " saith Bill , salute like a soldier . 
 ' " then , one , two , dree , and shutt ! " cry Squire Maunder , stand up in the iron of his stirrup . 
 ' thereupon they all blaze out , and the noise of it go all round the hill ; with a girt thick cloud arise , and all the air smelling of powder . before the cloud be go so much as ten yard on the wind , the gentleman on the cue - bald horse shut up his face like a pair of nut - crack , as wide as it be long before , and out he pull two girt pistol longside of zaddle , and clap'th one to Squire Maunder 's head , and tother to Sir Richard Blewitt 's . 
 ' " hand forth your money and all your warrant , " he saith like a clap of thunder ; " gentleman , have you now the wit to apprehend Tom Faggus ? " 
 ' Squire Maunder swear so that he ought to be fin ; but he pull out his purse none the slow for that , and so do Sir Richard Blewitt . 
 ' " first man I see go to load a gun , I will gi'e ' un the bullet to do it with , " say Tom ; for you see it be he and no other , look quietly round upon all of they . then he rob all the rest of their warship , as pleasant as might be ; and he saith , " now , gentleman , do your duty : serve your warrant afore you imprison I ; " with that he make they give up all the warrant , and he stick they in the band of his hat , and then he make a bow with it . 
 ' " good morning to your warship now , and a merry Christmas all of you ! and the merry both for rich and poor , when gentleman see their almsgiving . lest you deny yourself the pleasure , I will aid your warship . and to save you the trouble of follow I , when your gun be load this be my strawberry mare , gentleman , only with a little cream on she . gentleman all , in the name of the king , I thank you . " 
 ' all this while he be cast their money among the poor folk by the handful ; and then he spak kaindly to the red mare , and wor over the back of the hill in two zecond , and good part of two maile away , I reckon , afore ever a gun wor load . ' 
    the truth of this story be well establish by first - rate 
  tradition . 




 CHAPTER XL 

 two FOOLS together 

 that story of John Fry 's , instead of cause any amusement , give we great disquietude ; not only because it show that Tom Faggus could not resist sudden temptation and the delight of wildness , but also that we greatly fear lest the King 's pardon might be annul , and all his kindness cancel , by a reckless deed of that sort . it be true   as Annie insist continually , even with tear , to wear in her argument   that Tom have not bring away anything , except the warrant , which be of no use at all , after receipt of the pardon ; neither have he use any violence , except just to frighten people ; but could it be establish , even towards Christmas - time , that Tom have a right to give alm , right and leave , out of other people 's money ? 
 Dear Annie appear to believe that it could ; say that if the rich continually choose to forget the poor , a man who force they to remember , and so to do good to themselves and to other , be a public benefactor , and entitle to every blessing . but I know , and so Lizzie know John Fry be now out of hear that this be not sound argument . for , if it come to that , any man might take the King by the throat , and make he cast away among the poor the money which he want sadly for her grace the Duchess , and the beautiful Countess , of this , and of that . Lizzie , of course , know nothing about his Majesty 's diversion , which be not fit for a young maid 's thought ; but I now put the form of the argument as it occur to I . 
 therefore I say , once for all   and both my sister always listen when I use the deep voice from my chest : 
 ' Tom Faggus hath do wrong herein ; wrong to himself , and to our Annie . all he need have do be to show his pardon , and the magistrate would have rejoice with he . he might have lead a most godly life , and have be respect by everybody ; and know how brave Tom be , I think that he would have do as much . now if I be in love with a maid ' I put it thus for the sake of poor Lizzie ' never would I so imperil my life , and her fortune in life along with I , for the sake of a poor diversion . a man 's first duty be to the woman , who be force to hang upon he ' 
 ' oh , John , not that horrible word , ' cry Annie , to my great surprise , and serious interruption ; ' oh , John , any word but that ! ' and she burst forth cry terribly . 
 ' what word , Lizzie ? what do the wench mean ? ' I ask , in the sad vexation ; see no good to ask Annie at all , for she carry on most dreadfully . 
 ' do not   you know , you stupid lout ? ' say Lizzie , complete my wonderment , by the scorn of her quick intelligence ; ' if you do not   know , axe about ? ' 
 and with that , I be force to be content ; for Lizzie take Annie in such a manner   on purpose to vex I , as I could see   with her head droop down , and her hair come over , and tear and sob rise and fall , to boot , without either order or reason , that see no good for a man to do   since neither of they be Lorna , I even go out into the courtyard , and smoke a pipe , and wonder what on earth be the meaning of woman . 
 now in this I be wrong and unreasonable   as all woman will acknowledge ; but sometimes a man be so put out , by the way they take on about nothing , that he really can not help think , for at least a minute , that woman be a mistake for ever , and hence be for ever mistaken . nevertheless I could not see that any of these great thought and idea apply at all to my Lorna ; but that she be a different being ; not woman enough to do anything bad , yet enough of a woman for man to adore . 
 and now a thing come to pass which test my adoration pretty sharply , inasmuch as I would far liefer face Carver Doone and his father , nay , even the roar lion himself with his hoof and flame nostril , than have meet , in cold blood , Sir Ensor Doone , the founder of all the colony , and the fear of the very fierce . 
 but that I be force to do at this time , and in the manner follow . when I go up one morning to look for my seven rook ' nest , behold there be but six to be see ; for the topmost of they all be go , and the most conspicuous . I look , and look , and rub my eye , and turn to try they by other sight ; and then I look again ; yes , there could be no doubt about it ; the signal be make for I to come , because my love be in danger . for I to enter the valley now , during the broad daylight , could have bring no comfort , but only harm to the maiden , and certain death to myself . yet it be more than I could do to keep altogether at distance ; therefore I run to the near place where I could remain unseen , and watch the glen from the woode height , for hour and hour , impatiently . 
 however , no impatience of mine make any difference in the scene upon which I be gaze . in the part of the valley which I could see , there be nothing move , except the water , and a few steal cow , go sadly along , as if know that they have no honest right there . it sink very heavily into my heart , with all the bed of dead leaf around it , and there be nothing I care to do , except blow on my finger , and long for more wit . 
 for a frost be begin , which make a great difference to Lorna and to myself , I trow ; as well as to all the five million people who dwell in this island of England ; such a frost as never I see before ,   neither hope ever to see again ; a time when it be impossible to milk a cow for icicle , or for a man to shave some of his beard   as I like to do for Lorna 's sake , because she be so smooth   without blunt his razor on hard gray ice . no man could ' keep yatt '   as we say , even though he abandon his work altogether , and thump himself , all on the chest and the front , till his frozen hand would have be bleed except for the cold that keep still all his vein . 
    if John Ridd live until the year 1740   as so strong a man 
  be bind to do , he must have see almost a hard frost ; 
  and perhaps it put an end to he ; for then he would be some 
  fourscore year old . but tradition make he ' keep yatt , ' 
  as he say , up to fivescore year . ED . 
 however , at present there be no frost , although for a fortnight threatening ; and I be too young to know the meaning of the way the dead leaf hung , and the worm - cast prickle like woman 's comb , and the leaden tone upon everything , and the dead weight of the sky . will Watcombe , the old man at Lynmouth , who have be half over the world almost , and who talk so much of the Gulf - stream , have   as I afterwards call to mind   foretold a very bitter winter this year . but no one would listen to he because there be not so many hip and haw as usual ; whereas we have all learn from our grandfather that Providence never send very hard winter , without have furnish a large supply of berry for the bird to feed upon . 
 it be lucky for I , while I wait here , that our very good sheep - dog , old Watch , have choose to accompany I that day . for otherwise I must have have no dinner , be unpersuade , even by that , to quit my survey of the valley . however , by aid of poor Watch , I contrive to obtain a supply of food ; for I send he home with a note to Annie fasten upon his chest ; and in less than an hour back he come , proud enough to wag his tail off , with his tongue hang out from the speed of his journey , and a large lump of bread and of bacon fasten in a napkin around his neck . I have not tell my sister , of course , what be toward ; for why should I make she anxious ? 
 when it grow towards dark , I be just begin to prepare for my circuit around the hill ; but suddenly Watch give a long low growl ; I keep myself close as possible , and order the dog to be silent , and presently see a short figure approach from a thickly - woode hollow on the left side of my hiding - place . it be the same figure I have see once before in the moonlight , at Plover 's barrow ; and prove , to my great delight , to be the little maid Gwenny Carfax . she start a moment , at see I , but more with surprise than fear ; and then she lay both her hand upon mine , as if she have know I for twenty year . 
 ' young man , ' she say , ' you must come with I . I be gwain ' all the way to fetch thee . old man be die ; and she can not   die , or at least she will not , without first consider thee . ' 
 ' consider I ! ' I cry ; ' what can Sir Ensor Doone want with consider I ? have Mistress Lorna tell he ? ' 
 ' all concern thee , and thy doing ; when she know old man be so near his end . that vex he be about thy low blood , a ' think she would come to life again , on purpose for to bate ' ee . but after all , there can not   be scarcely such bad luck as that . now , if her strook thee , thou must take it ; there be no denaying of un . Fire I have see afore , hot and red , and rag ; but I never see cold fire afore , and it maketh I burn and shiver . ' 
 and in truth , it make I both burn and shiver , to know that I must either go straight to the presence of Sir Ensor Doone , or give up Lorna , once for all , and rightly be despise by she . for the first time of my life , I think that she have not act fairly . why not leave the old man in peace , without vex he about my affair ? but presently I see again that in this matter she be right ; that she could not receive the old man 's blessing   suppose that he have one to give , which even a bad man might suppose , while she deceive he about herself , and the life she have undertake . 
 therefore , with great misgiving of myself , but no ill thought of my darling , I send Watch home , and follow Gwenny ; who lead I along very rapidly , with her short broad form glide down the hollow , from which she have first appear . here at the bottom , she enter a thicket of gray ash stub and black holly , with rock around it gnarl with root , and hang with mask of ivy . here in a dark and lonely corner , with a pixie ring before it , she come to a narrow door , very brown and solid , look like a trunk of wood at a little distance . this she open , without a key , by stoop down and press it , where the threshold meet the jamb ; and then she run in very nimbly , but I be force to be bent in two , and even so without comfort . the passage be close and difficult , and as dark as any black pitch ; but it be not long   be it as it might , and in that there be some comfort . we come out soon at the other end , and be at the top of Doone valley . in the chilly dusk air , it look most untempting , especially during that state of mind under which I be labour . as we cross towards the Captain 's house , we meet a couple of great Doones lounge by the waterside . Gwenny say something to they , and although they star very hard at I , they let I pass without hindrance . it be not too much to say that when the little maid open Sir Ensor 's door , my heart thump , quite as much with terror as with hope of Lorna 's presence . 
 but in a moment the fear be go , for Lorna be tremble in my arm , and my courage rise to comfort she . the darling fear , beyond all thing else , lest I should be offend with she for what she have say to her grandfather , and for drag I into his presence ; but I tell she almost a falsehood   the first , and the last , that ever I do tell she , to wit , that I care not that much and show she the tip of my thumb as I say it for old Sir Ensor , and all his wrath , so long as I have his granddaughter 's love . 
 now I try to think this as I say it , so as to save it from be a lie ; but somehow or other it do not answer , and I be vex with myself both way . but Lorna take I by the hand as bravely as she could , and lead I into a little passage where I could hear the river moaning and the branch rustle . 
 here I pass as long a minute as fear ever cheat time of , say to myself continually that there be nothing to be frighten at , yet grow more and more afraid by reason of so reasoning . at last my Lorna come back very pale , as I see by the candle she carry , and whisper , ' now be patient , dearest . never mind what he say to you ; neither attempt to answer he . look at he gently and steadfastly , and , if you can , with some show of reverence ; but above all thing , no compassion ; it drive he almost mad . now come ; walk very quietly . ' 
 she lead I into a cold , dark room , rough and very gloomy , although with two candle burn . I take little heed of the thing in it , though I mark that the window be open . that which I heed be an old man , very stern and comely , with death upon his countenance ; yet not lie in his bed , but set upright in a chair , with a loose red cloak throw over he . upon this his white hair fall , and his pallid finger lie in a ghastly fashion without a sign of life or movement or of the power that keep he up ; all rigid , calm , and relentless . only in his great black eye , fix upon I solemnly , all the power of his body dwelt , all the life of his soul be burn . 
 I could not look at he very nicely , be afeare of the death in his face , and most afeared to show it . and to tell the truth , my poor blue eye fall away from the blackness of his , as if it have be my coffin - plate . therefore I make a low obeisance , and try not to shiver . only I groan that Lorna think it good manner to leave we two together . 
 ' ah , ' say the old man , and his voice seem to come from a cavern of skeleton ; ' be you that great John Ridd ? ' 
 ' John Ridd be my name , your honour , ' be all that I could answer ; ' and I hope your worship be well . ' 
 ' child , have you sense enough to know what you have be do ? ' 
 ' yes , I know right well , ' I answer , ' that I have set mine eye far above my rank . ' 
 ' be you ignorant that Lorna Doone be bear of the old family remain in North Europe ? ' 
 ' I be ignorant of that , your worship ; yet I know of her high descent from the Doones of Bagworthy . ' 
 the old man 's eye , like fire , probe I whether I be jest ; then perceive how grave I be , and think that I could not laugh   as many people suppose of I , he take on himself to make good the deficiency with a very bitter smile . 
 ' and know you of your own low descent from the Ridds of Oare ? ' 
 ' Sir , ' I answer , be as yet unaccustomed to this style of speech , ' the Ridds , of Oare , have be honest man twice as long as the Doones have be rogue . ' 
 ' I would not answer for that , John , ' Sir Ensor reply , very quietly , when I expect fury . ' if it be so , thy family be the very old in Europe . now hearken to I , boy , or clown , or honest fool , or whatever thou art ; hearken to an old man 's word , who have not many hour to live . there be nothing in this world to fear , nothing to revere or trust , nothing even to hope for ; least of all , be there aught to love . ' 
 ' I hope your worship be not quite right , ' I answer , with great misgiving ; ' else it be a sad mistake for anybody to live , sir . ' 
 ' therefore , ' he continue , as if I have never speak , ' though it may seem hard for a week or two , like the loss of any other toy , I deprive you of nothing , but add to your comfort , and   if there be such a thing   to your happiness , when I forbid you ever to see that foolish child again . all marriage be a wretched farce , even when man and wife belong to the same rank of life , have temper well assorted , similar like and dislike , and about the same pittance of mind . but when they be not so match , the farce would become a long , dull tragedy , if anything be worth lament . there , I have reason enough with you ; I be not in the habit of reasoning . though I have little confidence in man 's honour , I have some reliance in woman 's pride . you will pledge your word in Lorna 's presence never to see or to seek she again ; never even to think of her more . now call she , for I be weary . ' 
 he keep his great eye fix upon I with their icy fire   as if he scorn both life and death , and on his haughty lip some slight amusement at my trouble ; and then he raise one hand   as if I be a poor dumb creature , and point to the door . although my heart rebel and kindle at his proud disdain , I could not disobey he freely ; but make a low salute , and go straightway in search of Lorna . 
 I find my love   or not my love ; accord as now she should behave ; for I be very desperate , be put upon so sadly ; Lorna Doone be cry softly at a little window , and listen to the river 's grief . I lay my heavy arm around she , not with any air of claim or of force her thought to I , but only just to comfort she , and ask what she be think of . to my arm she make no answer , neither to my seek eye ; but to my heart , once for all , she speak with her own upon it . not a word , nor sound between we ; not even a kiss be interchange ; but man , or maid , who have ever love hath learn our understanding . 
 therefore it come to pass , that we see fit to enter Sir Ensor 's room in the follow manner . Lorna , with her right hand swallow entirely by the palm of mine , and her waist retire from view by mean of my left arm . all one side of her hair come down , in a way to be remember , upon the left and fairest part of my favourite otter - skin waistcoat ; and her head as well would have lain there doubtless , but for the danger of walk so . I , for my part , be too far go to lag behind in the matter ; but carry my love bravely , fear neither death nor hell , while she abode beside I . 
 Old Sir Ensor look much astonish . for forty year he have be obey and fear by all around he ; and he know that I have fear he vastly , before I get hold of Lorna . and indeed I be still afraid of he ; only for love Lorna so , and have to protect she . 
 then I make he a bow , to the very good of all I have learn both at Tiverton and in London ; after that I wait for he to begin , as become his age and rank in life . 
 ' Ye two fool ! ' he say at last , with a depth of contempt which no word may express ; ' ye two fool ! ' 
 ' may it please your worship , ' I answer softly ; ' maybe we be not such fool as we look . but though we be , we be well content , so long as we may be two fool together . ' 
 ' why , John , ' say the old man , with a spark , as of smile in his eye ; ' thou art not altogether the clumsy yokel , and the clod , I take thee for . ' 
 ' oh , no , grandfather ; oh , dear grandfather , ' cry Lorna , with such zeal and flashing , that her hand go forward ; ' nobody know what John Ridd be , because he be so modest . I mean , nobody except I , dear . ' and here she turn to I again , and rise upon tiptoe , and kiss I . 
 ' I have see a little o ' the world , ' say the old man , while I be half ashamed , although so proud of Lorna ; ' but this be beyond all I have see , and nearly all I have hear of . it be more fit for southern climate than for the fog of Exmoor . ' 
 ' it be fit for all the world , your worship ; with your honour 's good leave , and will , ' I answer in humility , be still ashamed of it ; ' when it happen so to people , there be nothing that can stop it , sir . ' 
 now Sir Ensor Doone be lean back upon his brown chair - rail , which be build like a triangle , as in old farmhouse   from one of which it have come , no doubt , free from expense or gratitude ; and as I speak he cough a little ; and he sigh a good deal more ; and perhaps his die heart desire to open time again , with such a lift of warmth and hope as he descry in our eye , and arm . I could not understand he then ; any more than a baby play with his grandfather 's spectacle ; nevertheless I wonder whether , at his time of life , or rather on the brink of death , he be think of his youth and pride . 
 ' fool you be ; be fool for ever , ' say Sir Ensor Doone , at last ; while we fear to break his thought , but let each other know our own , with little way of pressure ; ' it be the good thing I can wish you ; boy and girl , be boy and girl , until you have grandchild . ' 
 partly in bitterness he speak , and partly in pure weariness , and then he turn so as not to see we ; and his white hair fall , like a shroud , around he . 




 CHAPTER XLI 

 COLD COMFORT 

 all thing be full of flaw , all thing be full of hole , the strength of all thing be in shortness . if Sir Ensor Doone have dwell for half an hour upon himself , and an hour perhaps upon Lorna and I , we must both have weary of he , and require change of air . but now I long to see and know a great deal more about he , and hop that he might not go to Heaven for at least a week or more . however , he be too good for this world   as we say of all people who leave it ; and I verily believe his heart be not a bad one , after all . 
 evil he have do , no doubt , as evil have be do to he ; yet how many have do evil , while receive only good ! be that as it may ; and not vex a question   settle for ever without our vote , let we own that he be , at least , a brave and courteous gentleman . 
 and his loss arouse great lamentation , not among the Doones alone , and the woman they have carry off , but also of the general public , and many even of the magistrate , for several mile round Exmoor . and this , not only from fear lest one more wicked might succeed he   as appear indeed too probable , but from true admiration of his strong will , and sympathy with his misfortune . 
 I will not deceive any one , by say that Sir Ensor Doone give   in so many word   his consent to my resolve about Lorna . this he never do , except by his speech last write down ; from which as he mention grandchild , a lawyer perhaps might have argue it . not but what he may have mean to bestow on we his blessing ; only that he die next day , without take the trouble to do it . 
 he call indeed for his box of snuff , which be a very high thing to take ; and which he never take without be in very good humour , at least for he . and though it would not go up his nostril , through the failure of his breath , he be pleased to have it there , and not to think of die . 
 ' will your honour have it wipe ? ' I ask he very softly , for the brown appearance of it spoil   to my idea   his white mostacchio ; but he seem to shake his head ; and I think it keep his spirit up . I have never before see any one do , what all of we have to do some day ; and it greatly keep my spirit down , although it do not so very much frighten I . 
 for it take a man but a little while , his instinct being of death perhaps , at least as much as of life   which account for his slay his fellow man so , and every other creature , it do not take a man very long to enter into another man 's death , and bring his own mood to suit it . he know that his own be sure to come ; and nature be fond of the practice . hence it come to pass that I , after ease my mother 's fear , and see a little to business , return   as if draw by a polar needle   to the death - bed of Sir Ensor . 
 there be some little confusion , people want to get away , and people try to come in , from downright curiosity   of all thing the most hateful , and other make great to - do , and talk of their own time to come , tell their own age , and so on . but every one seem to think , or feel , that I have a right to be there ; because the woman take that view of it . as for Carver and Counsellor , they be mind their own affair , so as to win the succession ; and never find it in their business   at least so long as I be there   to come near the die man . 
 he , for his part , never ask for any one to come near he , not even a priest , nor a monk or friar ; but seem to be go his own way , peaceful , and well content . only the chief of the woman say that from his face she believe and know that he like to have I at one side of his bed , and Lorna upon the other . an hour or two ere the old man die , when only we two be with he , he look at we both very dimly and softly , as if he wish to do something for we , but have leave it now too late . Lorna hop that he want to bless we ; but he only frown at that , and let his hand drop downward , and crook one knot finger . 
 ' he want something out of the bed , dear , ' Lorna whisper to I ; ' see what it be , upon your side , there . ' 
 I follow the bent of his poor shrunken hand , and seek among the piling ; and there I feel something hard and sharp , and draw it forth and give it to he . it flash , like the spray of a fountain upon we , in the dark winter of the room . he could not take it in his hand , but let it hang , as daisy do ; only make Lorna see that he mean she to have it . 
 ' why , it be my glass necklace ! ' Lorna cry , in great surprise ; ' my necklace he always promise I ; and from which you have get the ring , John . but grandfather keep it , because the child want to pull it from my neck . may I have it now , dear grandfather ? not unless you wish , dear . ' 
 Darling Lorna weep again , because the old man could not tell she   except by one very feeble nod   that she be do what he wish . then she give to I the trinket , for the sake of safety ; and I stow it in my breast . he seem to I to follow this , and to be well content with it . 
 before Sir Ensor Doone be bury , the great frost of the century have set in , with its iron hand , and step of stone , on everything . how it come be not my business , nor can I explain it ; because I never have watch the sky ; as people now begin to do , when the ground be not to their liking . though of all this I know nothing , and less than nothing I may say   because I ought to know something ; I can hear what people tell I ; and I can see before my eye . 
 the strong man break three good pickax , ere they get through the hard brown sod , streak with little map of gray where old Sir Ensor be to lie , upon his back , await the darkness of the Judgment - day . it be in the little chapel - yard ; I will not tell the name of it ; because we be now such protestant , that I might do it an evil turn ; only it be the little place where Lorna 's Aunt Sabina lay . 
 here be I , remain long , with a little curiosity ; because some people tell I plainly that I must be damn for ever by a Papist funeral ; and here come Lorna , scarcely breathe through the thick of stuff around she , yet with all her little breath steam on the air , like frost . 
 I stand apart from the ceremony , in which of course I be not entitle , either by birth or religion , to bear any portion ; and indeed it would have be wise in I to have keep away altogether ; for now there be no one to protect I among those wild and lawless man ; and both Carver and the Counsellor have vow a fearful vengeance on I , as I hear from Gwenny . they have not dare to meddle with I while the chief lay die ; nor be it in their policy , for a short time after that , to endanger their succession by an open breach with Lorna , whose tender age and beauty hold so many of the youth in thrall . 
 the ancient outlaw 's funeral be a grand and move sight ; more perhaps from the sense of contrast than from that of fitness . to see those dark and mighty man , inure to all of sin and crime , reckless both of man and God , yet now with head devoutly bent , clasped hand , and downcast eye , follow the long black coffin of their common ancestor , to the place where they must join he when their sum of ill be do ; and to see the feeble priest chant , over the dead form , word the living would have laugh at , sprinkle with his little broom drop that could not purify ; while the child , rob in white , swing their smoking censer slowly over the cold and twilight grave ; and after see all , to ask , with a shudder unexpresse , ' be this the end that God intend for a man so proud and strong ? ' 
 not a tear be shed upon he , except from the sweetest of all sweet eye ; not a sigh pursue he home . except in hot anger , his life have be cold , and bitter , and distant ; and now a week have exhaust all the sorrow of those around he , a grief flow less from affection than fear . aged man will show his tombstone ; mother haste with their infant by it ; child shrink from the name upon it , until in time his history shall lapse and be forget by all except the great Judge and God . 
 after all be over , I stride across the moor very sadly ; try to keep the cold away by virtue of quick movement . not a flake of snow have fall yet ; all the earth be cake and hard , with a dry brown crust upon it ; all the sky be bank with darkness , hard , austere , and frown . the fog of the last three week be go , neither do any rime remain ; but all thing have a look of sameness , and a kind of furzy colour . it be freeze hard and sharp , with a pierce wind to back it ; and I have observe that the holy water freeze upon Sir Ensor 's coffin . 
 one thing strike I with some surprise , as I make off for our fireside   with a strong determination to heave an ash - tree up the chimney - place , and that be how the bird be go , rather than fly as they use to fly . all the bird be set in one direction , steadily journey westward , not with any heat of speed , neither fly far at once ; but all   as if on business bind , partly run , partly fly , partly flutter along ; silently , and without a voice , neither prick head nor tail . this movement of the bird go on , even for a week or more ; every kind of thrush pass we , every kind of wild fowl , even plover go away , and crow , and snipe and wood - cock . and before half the frost be over , all we have in the snowy ditch be hare so tame that we could pat they ; partridge that come to hand , with a dry noise in their crop ; heath - poult , make cup of snow ; and a few poor hopping redwing , flip in and out the hedge , have lose the power to fly . and all the time their great black eye , set with gold around they , seem to look at any man , for mercy and for comfort . 
 Annie take a many of they , all that she could find herself , and all the boy would bring she ; and she make a great hutch near the fire , in the back - kitchen chimney - place . here , in spite of our old Betty   who sadly want to roast they , Annie keep some fifty bird , with bread and milk , and raw chop meat , and all the seed she could think of , and lump of rotten apple , place to tempt they , in the corner . some get on , and some die off ; and Annie cry for all that die , and bury they under the woodrick ; but , I do assure you , it be a pretty thing to see , when she go to they in the morning . there be not a bird but know she well , after one day of comfort ; and some would come to her hand , and sit , and shut one eye , and look at she . then she use to stroke their head , and feel their breast , and talk to they ; and not a bird of they all be there but like to have it do to he . and I do believe they would eat from her hand thing unnatural to they , lest she should he grieve and hurt by not know what to do for they . one of they be a noble bird , such as I never have see before , of very fine bright plumage , and large than a missel - thrush . he be the hard of all to please : and yet he try to do his good . I have hear since then , from a man who know all about bird , and beast , and fish , that he must have be a norwegian bird , call in this country a Roller , who never come to England but in the most tremendous winter . 
 another little bird there be , whom I long to welcome home , and protect from enemy , a little bird no native to we , but than any native dearer . but lo , in the very night which follow old Sir Ensor 's funeral , such a storm of snow begin as never have I hear nor read of , neither could have dream it . at what time of night it first begin be more than I can say , at least from my own knowledge , for we all go to bed soon after supper , be cold and not inclined to talk . at that time the wind be moan sadly , and the sky as dark as a wood , and the straw in the yard swirling round and round , and the cow huddle into the great cowhouse , with their chin upon one another . but we , be blinder than they , I suppose , and not have have a great snow for year , make no preparation against the storm , except that the lamb ewe be in shelter . 
 it strike I , as I lay in bed , that we be act foolishly ; for an ancient shepherd have drop in and take supper with we , and foretold a heavy fall and great disaster to live stock . he say that he have know a frost beginning , just as this have do , with a black east wind , after day of raw cold fog , and then on the third night of the frost , at this very time of year   to wit on the 15th of December   such a snow set in as kill half of the sheep and many even of the red deer and the forest pony . it be three - score year agone ,   he say ; and cause he have to remember it , inasmuch as two of his toe have be lose by frost - nip , while he dig out his sheep on the other side of the Dunkery . Hereupon mother nod at he , have hear from her father about it , and how three man have be freeze to death , and how badly their stocking come off from they . 
    the frost of 1625 . 
 remember how the old man look , and his manner of listen to the wind and shake his head very ominously   when Annie give he a glass of schnapps , I grow quite uneasy in my bed , as the room get cold and colder ; and I make up my mind , if it only please God not to send the snow till the morning , that every sheep , and horse , and cow , ay , and even the poultry , should be bring in snug , and with plenty to eat , and fodder enough to roast they . 
 alas what use of man 's resolve , when they come a day too late ; even if they may avail a little , when they be most punctual ! 
 in the bitter morning I arise , to follow out my purpose , know the time from the force of habit , although the room be so dark and gray . an odd white light be on the rafter , such as I never have see before ; while all the length of the room be grisly , like the heart of a mouldy oat - rick . I go to the window at once , of course ; and at first I could not understand what be do outside of it . it face due east   as I may have say , with the walnut - tree partly shelter it ; and generally I could see the yard , and the woodrick , and even the church beyond . 
 but now , half the lattice be quite block up , as if plaster with gray lime ; and little fringe , like fern , come through , where the joining of the lead be ; and in the only undarkened part , countless dot come swarm , cluster , beat with a soft , low sound , then glide down in a slippery manner , not as drop of rain do , but each distinct from his neighbour . inside the iron frame   which fit , not to say too comfortably , and go along the stonework , at least a peck of snow have enter , follow its own bend and fancy ; light as any cobweb . 
 with some trouble , and great care , lest the ancient frame should yield , I spread the lattice open ; and see at once that not a moment must be lose , to save our stock . all the earth be flat with snow , all the air be thick with snow ; more than this no man could see , for all the world be snow . 
 I shut the window and dress in haste ; and when I enter the kitchen , not even Betty , the early of all early bird , be there . I rake the ash together a little , just to see a spark of warmth ; and then set forth to find John Fry , Jem Slocombe , and Bill Dadds . but this be easy thought than do ; for when I open the courtyard door , I be take up to my knee at once , and the power of the drift cloud prevent sight of anything . however , I find my way to the woodrick , and there get hold of a fine ash - stake , cut by myself not long ago . with this I plough along pretty well , and thunder so hard at John Fry 's door , that he think it be the Doones at least , and cock his blunderbuss out of the window . 
 John be very loth to come down , when he see the meaning of it ; for he value his life more than anything else ; though he try to make out that his wife be to blame . but I settle his doubt by tell he , that I would have he on my shoulder naked , unless he come in five minute ; not that he could do much good , but because the other man would be sure to skulk , if he set they the example . with spade , and shovel , and pitch - fork , and a round of roping , we four set forth to dig out the sheep ; and the poor thing know that it be high time . 




 CHAPTER XLII 

 the great WINTER 

 it must have snow most wonderfully to have make that depth of cover in about eight hour . for one of Master Stickles ' man , who have be out all the night , say that no snow begin to fall until nearly midnight . and here it be , block up the door , stop the way , and the water course , and make it very much bad to walk than in a saw - pit newly use . however , we trudge along in a line ; I first , and the other man after I ; try to keep my track , but find leg and strength not up to it . Most of all , John Fry be groan ; certain that his time be come , and send message to his wife , and blessing to his child . for all this time it be snow hard than it ever have snow before , so far as a man might guess at it ; and the leaden depth of the sky come down , like a mine turn upside down on we . not that the flake be so very large ; for I have see much large flake in a shower of March , while sow pea ; but that there be no room between they , neither any relaxing , nor any change of direction . 
 Watch , like a good and faithful dog , follow we very cheerfully , leap out of the depth , which take he over his back and ear already , even in the level place ; while in the drift he might have sink to any distance out of sight , and never find his way up again . however , we help he now and then , especially through the gap and gateway ; and so after a deal of flounder , some laughter , and a little swearing , we come all safe to the low meadow , where most of our flock be hurdle . 
 but behold , there be no flock at all ! none , I mean , to be see anywhere ; only at one corner of the field , by the eastern end , where the snow drive in , a great white billow , as high as a barn , and as broad as a house . this great drift be roll and curl beneath the violent blast , tufte and comb with rustle swirl , and carve   as in pattern of cornice   where the groove chisel of the wind sweep round . ever and again the temp snatch little whiff from the channel edge , twirl they round and make they dance over the chime of the monster pile , then let they lie like herring - bone , or the seam of sand where the tide have be . and all the while from the smothering sky , more and more fiercely at every blast , come the pelting , pitiless arrow , wing with murky white , and point with the barb of frost . 
 but although for people who have no sheep , the sight be a very fine one   so far at least as the weather permit any sight at all ; yet for we , with our flock beneath it , this great mount have but little charm . Watch begin to scratch at once , and to howl along the side of it ; he know that his charge be bury there , and his business take from he . but we four man set to in earnest , dig with all our might and main , shovel away at the great white pile , and fetch it into the meadow . each man make for himself a cave , scoop at the soft , cold flux , which slide upon he at every stroke , and throw it out behind he , in pile of castle fancy . at last we drive our tunnel in   for we work indeed for the life of we , and all converge towards the middle , hold our tool and listen . 
 the other man hear nothing at all ; or declare that they hear nothing , be anxious now to abandon the matter , because of the chill in their foot and knee . but I say , ' go , if you choose all of you . I will work it out by myself , you pie - crust , ' and upon that they grip their shovel , be more or less of Englishmen ; and the least drop of english blood be worth the good of any other when it come to last out . 
 but before we begin again , I lay my head well into the chamber ; and there I hear a faint ' ma - a - ah , ' come through some ell of snow , like a plaintive , bury hope , or a last appeal . I shout aloud to cheer he up , for I know what sheep it be , to wit , the most valiant of all the wether , who have meet I when I come home from London , and be so glad to see I . and then we all fall to again ; and very soon we haul he out . Watch take charge of he at once , with an air of the noble patronage , lie on his frozen fleece , and lick all his face and foot , to restore his warmth to he . then fight Tom jump up at once , and make a little butt at Watch , as if nothing have ever ail he , and then set off to a shallow place , and look for something to nibble at . 
 far in , and close under the bank , where they have huddle themselves for warmth , we find all the rest of the poor sheep pack , as closely as if they be in a great pie . it be strange to observe how their vapour and breath , and the moisture exude from their wool have scoop , as it be , a coved room for they , line with a ribbing of deep yellow snow . also the churn snow beneath their foot be as yellow as gamboge . two or three of the weakly hogget be dead , from want of air , and from pressure ; but more than three - score be as lively as ever ; though cramp and stiff for a little while . 
 ' however shall we get them home ? ' John Fry ask in great dismay , when we have clear about a dozen of they ; which we be force to do very carefully , so as not to fetch the roof down . ' no manner of man to draive ' un , drough all they girt driftnesse . ' 
 ' you see to this place , John , ' I reply , as we lean on our shovel a moment , and the sheep come rub round we ; ' let no more of they out for the present ; they be well where they be . watch , here boy , keep they ! ' 
 Watch come , with his little scut of a tail cock as sharp as duty , and I set he at the narrow mouth of the great snow antre . all the sheep sidle away , and get close , that the other sheep might be bite first , as the foolish thing imagine ; whereas no good sheep - dog even so much as lip a sheep to turn it . 
 then of the outer sheep   all now snow and frizzle like a lawyer 's wig   I take the two fine and heavy , and with one beneath my right arm , and the other beneath my left , I go straight home to the upper sheppey , and set they inside and fasten they . sixty and six I take home in that way , two at a time on each joumey ; and the work grow hard and hard each time , as the drift of the snow be deepen . no other man should meddle with they ; I be resolve to try my strength against the strength of the element ; and try it I do , ay , and prove it . a certain fierce delight burn in I , as the struggle grow hard ; but rather would I die than yield ; and at last I finish it . People talk of it to this day ; but none can tell what the labour be , who have not feel that snow and wind . 
 of the sheep upon the mountain , and the sheep upon the western farm , and the cattle on the upper barrow , scarcely one in ten be save ; do what we would for they , and this be not through any neglect   now that our wit be sharpen , but from the pure impossibility of find they at all . that great snow never cease a moment for three day and night ; and then when all the earth be fill , and the topmost hedge be unseen , and the tree break down with weight   wherever the wind have not lighten they , a brilliant sun break forth and show the loss of all our custom . 
 all our house be quite snow up , except where we have purge a way , by dint of constant shovelling . the kitchen be as dark and dark than the cider - cellar , and long line of furrowed scollop run even up to the chimney - stack . several window fall right inward , through the weight of the snow against they ; and the few that stand , bulge in , and bent like an old bruise lanthorn . we be oblige to cook by candle - light ; we be force to read by candle - light ; as for bake , we could not do it , because the oven be too chill ; and a load of faggot only bring a little wet down the side of it . 
 for when the sun burst forth at last upon that world of white , what he bring be neither warmth , nor cheer , nor hope of soften ; only a clear shaft of cold , from the violet depth of sky . long - draw alley of white haze seem to lead towards he , yet such as he could not come down , with any warmth remain . broad white curtain of the frost - fog loop around the low sky , on the verge of hill and valley , and above the laden tree . only round the sun himself , and the spot of heaven he claim , cluster a bright purple - blue , clear , and calm , and deep . 
 that night such a frost ensue as we have never dream of , neither read in ancient book , or history of Frobisher . the kettle by the fire froze , and the crock upon the hearth - cheek ; many man be kill , and cattle rigid in their head - rope . then I hear that fearful sound , which never I have hear before , neither since have hear   except during that same winter , the sharp yet solemn sound of tree burst open by the frost - blow . our great walnut lose three branch , and have be die ever since ; though grow meanwhile , as the soul do . and the ancient oak at the cross be rent , and many score of ash tree . but why should I tell all this ? the people who have not see it   as I have   will only make face , and disbelieve ; till such another frost come ; which perhaps may never be . 
 this terrible weather keep Tom Faggus from come near our house for week ; at which indeed I be not vex a quarter so much as Annie be ; for I have never half approve of he , as a husband for my sister ; in spite of his purchase from Squire Bassett , and the grant of the Royal pardon . it may be , however , that Annie take the same view of my love for Lorna , and could not augur well of it ; but if so , she hold her peace , though I be not so sparing . for many thing contribute to make I less good - humour now than my real nature be ; and the very least of all these thing would have be enough to make some people cross , and rude , and fractious . I mean the red and painful chapping of my face and hand , from work in the snow all day , and lie in the frost all night . for be of a fair complexion , and a ruddy nature , and pretty plump withal , and feed on plenty of hot victual , and always force by my mother to sit near the fire than I wish , it be wonderful to see how the cold run revel on my cheek and knuckle . and I fear that Lorna   if it should ever please God to stop the snowing   might take this for a proof of low and rustic blood and breeding . 
 and this I say be the small thing ; for it be far more serious that we be lose half our stock , do all we would to shelter they . even the horse in the stable   muster all together for the sake of breath and steaming   have long icicle from their muzzle , almost every morning . but of all thing the very grave , to my apprehension , be the impossibility of hearing , or have any token of or from my love one . not that those three day alone of snow   tremendous as it be   could have block the country so ; but that the sky have never cease , for more than two day at a time , for full three week thereafter , to pour fresh pile of fleecy mantle ; neither have the wind relax a single day from shake they . as a rule , it snow all day , clear up at night , and freeze intensely , with the star as bright as jewel , earth spread out in lustrous twilight , and the sound in the air as sharp and crackling as artillery ; then in the morning , snow again ; before the sun could come to help . 
 it matter not what way the wind be . often and often the vane go round , and we hop for change of weather ; the only change be that it seem   if possible   to grow colder . indeed , after a week or so , the wind would regularly box the compass   as the sailor call it   in the course of every day , follow where the sun should be , as if to make a mock of he . and this of course immensely add to the peril of the drift ; because they shift every day ; and no skill or care might learn they . 
 I believe it be on Epiphany morning , or somewhere about that period , when Lizzie run into the kitchen to I , where I be thaw my goose - grease , with the dog among the ash the live dog , I mean , not the iron one , for they we have give up long ago , and have catch I , by way of wonder   for generally I be out shovel long before my ' young lady ' have her nightcap off , she positively kiss I , for the sake of warm her lip perhaps , or because she have something proud to say . 
 ' you great fool , John , ' say my lady , as Annie and I use to call she , on account of her air and grace ; ' what a pity you never read , John ! ' 
 ' much use , I should think , in read ! ' I answer , though pleased with her condescension ; ' read , I suppose , with roof come in , and only this chimney leave stick out of the snow ! ' 
 ' the very time to read , John , ' say Lizzie , look grander ; ' our bad trouble be the need , whence knowledge can deliver we . ' 
 ' amen , ' I cry out ; ' be you parson or clerk ? whichever you be , good - morning . ' 
 thereupon I be bent on my usual round   a very small one nowadays , but Eliza take I with both hand , and I stop of course ; for I could not bear to shake the child , even in play , for a moment , because her back be tender . then she look up at I with her beautiful eye , so large , unhealthy and delicate , and strangely shadow outward , as if to spread their meaning ; and she say , 
 ' now , John , this be no time to joke . I be almost freeze in bed last night ; and Annie like an icicle . feel how cold my hand be . now , will you listen to what I have read about climate ten time bad than this ; and where none but clever man can live ? ' 
 ' impossible for I to listen now , I have hundred of thing to see to ; but I will listen after breakfast to your foreign climate , child . now attend to mother 's hot coffee . ' 
 she look a little disappointed , but she know what I have to do ; and after all she be not so utterly unreasonable ; although she do read book . and when I have do my morning 's work , I listen to she patiently ; and it be out of my power to think that all she say be foolish . 
 for I know common sense pretty well , by this time , whether it happen to be my own , or any other person 's , if clearly lay before I . and Lizzie have a particular way of set forth very clearly whatever she wish to express and enforce . but the queer part of it all be this , that if she could but have dream for a moment what would be the first application make I by of her lesson , she would rather have bite her tongue off than help I to my purpose . 
 she tell I that in the Arctic Regions , as they call some place , a long way north , where the Great Bear lie all across the heaven , and no sun be up , for whole month at a time , and yet where people will go explore , out of pure contradiction , and for the sake of novelty , and love of be freeze that here they always have such winter as we be have now . it never cease to freeze , she say ; and it never cease to snow ; except when it be too cold ; and then all the air be choke with glitter spike ; and a man 's skin might come off of he , before he could ask the reason . nevertheless the people there   although the snow be fifty foot deep , and all their breath fall behind they frozen , like a log of wood drop from their shoulder , yet they manage to get along , and make the time of the year to each other , by a little cleverness . for see how the snow be spread , lightly over everything , cover up the hill and valley , and the foreskin of the sea , they contrive a way to crown it , and to glide like a flake along . through the sparkle of the whiteness , and the wreath of windy tossing , and the up and down of cold , any man might get along with a boat on either foot , to prevent his sinking . 
 she tell I how these boat be make ; very strong and very light , of rib with skin across they ; five foot long , and one foot wide ; and turn up at each end , even as a canoe be . but she do not tell I , nor do I give it a moment 's think myself , how hard it be to walk upon they without early practice . then she tell I another thing equally useful to I ; although I would not let she see how much I think about it . and this concern the use of sledge , and their power of gliding , and the lightness of their following ; all of which I could see at once , through knowledge of our own farm - sled ; which we employ in lieu of wheel , use in flat district . when I have hear all this from she , a mere chit of a girl as she be , unfit to make a snowball even , or to fry snow pancake , I look down on she with amazement , and begin to wish a little that I have give more time to book . 
 but God shape all our fitness , and give each man his meaning , even as he guide the waver line of snow descending . our Eliza be mean for book ; our dear Annie for love and cooking ; I , John Ridd , for sheep , and wrestling , and the thought of Lorna ; and mother to love all three of we , and to make the good of her child . and now , if I must tell the truth , as at every page I try to do   though God know it be hard enough , I have feel through all this weather , though my life be Lorna 's , something of a satisfaction in so do duty to my kind and good of mother , and to none but she . for   if you come to think of it   a man 's young love be very pleasant , very sweet , and tickling ; and take he through the core of heart ; without his knowing how or why . then he dwell upon it sideways , without people look , and build up all sort of fancy , grow hot with work so at his own imagining . so his love be a crystal Goddess , set upon an obelisk ; and whoever will not bow the knee   yet without glance at she , the lover make it a sacred rite either to kick or to stick he . I be not speak of I and Lorna , but of common people . 
 then   if you come to think again   lo ! or I will not say lo ! for no one can behold it only feel , or but remember , what a real mother be . ever loving , ever soft , ever turn sin to goodness , vice into virtue ; blind to all nine - tenth of wrong ; through a telescope behold   though herself so nigh to they   faintest decimal of promise , even in her vile child . ready to thank God again , as when her babe be bear to she ; leap   as at kingdom - come   at a wandering syllable of Gospel for she lose one . 
 all this our mother be to we , and even more than all of this ; and hence I feel a pride and joy in do my sacred duty towards she , now that the weather compel I . and she be as grateful and delighted as if she have no more claim upon I than a stranger 's sheep might have . yet from time to time I groan within myself and by myself , at thinking of my sad debarment from the sight of Lorna , and of all that might have happen to she , now she have no protection . 
 therefore , I fall to at once , upon that hint from Lizzie , and be use to thatching - work , and the making of trap , and so on , before very long I build myself a pair of strong and light snow - shoe , frame with ash and rib of withy , with half - tan calf - skin stretch across , and an inner sole to support my foot . at first I could not walk at all , but flounder about most piteously , catch one shoe in the other , and both of they in the snow - drift , to the great amusement of the girl , who be come to look at I . but after a while I grow more expert , discover what my error be , and alter the inclination of the shoe themselves , accord to a print which Lizzie find in a book of adventure . and this make such a difference , that I cross the farmyard and come back again   though turn be the bad thing of all   without so much as fall once , or get my staff entangle . 
 but oh , the aching of my ankle , when I go to bed that night ; I be force to help myself upstairs with a couple of mopstick ! and I rub the joint with neatsfoot oil , which comfort they greatly . and likely enough I would have abandon any further trial , but for Lizzie 's ridicule , and pretend sympathy ; ask if the strong John Ridd would have old Betty to lean upon . therefore I set to again , with a fix resolve not to notice pain or stiffness , but to warm they out of I . and sure enough , before dark that day , I could get along pretty freely ; especially improve every time , after leave off and rest . the astonishment of poor John Fry , Bill Dadds , and Jem Slocombe , when they see I come down the hill upon they , in the twilight , where they be clear the furze rick and truss it for cattle , be more than I can tell you ; because they do not let I see it , but run away with one accord , and flounder into a snowdrift . they believe , and so do every one else   especially when I grow able to glide along pretty rapidly , that I have steal Mother Melldrum 's sieve , on which she be say to fly over the foreland at midnight every Saturday . 
 upon the follow day , I hold some council with my mother ; not like to go without her permission , yet scarcely dare to ask for it . but here she disappoint I , on the right side of disappointment ; say that she have see my pining   which she never could have do ; because I have be too hard at work , and rather than watch I grieve so , for somebody or other , who now be all in all to I , I might go upon my course , and God 's protection go with I ! at this I be amazed , because it be not at all like mother ; and know how well I have behave , ever since the time of our snow up , I be a little move to tell she that she could not understand I . however my sense of duty keep I , and my knowledge of the catechism , from say such a thing as that , or even think twice of it . and so I take she at her word , which she be not prepare for ; and tell she how proud I be of her trust in Providence , and how I could run in my new snow - shoe , I take a short pipe in my mouth , and start forth accordingly . 




 CHAPTER XLIII 

 not TOO soon 

 when I start on my road across the hill and valley   which now be pretty much alike , the utmost I could hope to do be to gain the crest of hill , and look into the Doone Glen . hence I might at least descry whether Lorna still be safe , by the six nest still remain , and the view of the Captain 's house . when I be come to the open country , far beyond the shelter homestead , and in the full brunt of the wind , the keen blast of the cold break on I , and the mighty breadth of snow . moor and highland , field and common , cliff and vale , and watercourse , over all the rolling fold of misty white be flung . there be nothing square or jagged left , there be nothing perpendicular ; all the rugged line be ease , and all the breach smoothly fill . curve , and mound , and rounded heaving , take the place of rock and stump ; and all the country look as if a woman 's hand have be on it . 
 through the sparkle breadth of white , which seem to glance my eye away , and outside the hump of laden tree , bow their back like a woodman , I contrive to get along , half - slide and half - walk , in place where a plain - shodden man must have sink , and wait freezing till the thaw should come to he . for although there have be such violent frost , every night , upon the snow , the snow itself , have never thaw , even for an hour , have never coat over . hence it be as soft and light as if all have fall yesterday . in place where no drift have be , but rather off than on to they , three foot be the least of depth ; but where the wind have chase it round , or any draught lead like a funnel , or anything oppose it ; there you might very safely say that it run up to twenty foot , or thirty , or even fifty , and I believe some time a hundred . 
 at last I get to my spy - hill   as I have begin to call it , although I never should have know it but for what it look on . and even to know this last again require all the eye of love , soever sharp and vigilant . for all the beautiful Glen Doone   shape from out the mountain , as if on purpose for the Doones , and look in the summer - time like a sharp cut vase of green   now be besnowe half up the side , and at either end so , that it be more like the white basin wherein we boil plum - pudding . not a patch of grass be there , not a black branch of a tree ; all be white ; and the little river flow beneath an arch of snow ; if it manage to flow at all . 
 now this be a great surprise to I ; not only because I believe Glen Doone to be a place outside all frost , but also because I think perhaps that it be quite impossible to be cold near Lorna . and now it strike I all at once that perhaps her ewer be freeze   as mine have be for the last three week , require ember around it , and perhaps her window would not shut , any more than mine would ; and perhaps she want blanket . this idea work I up to such a chill of sympathy , that see no Doones now about , and doubt if any gun would go off , in this state of the weather , and know that no man could catch I up   except with shoe like mine , I even resolve to slide the cliff , and bravely go to Lorna . 
 it help I much in this resolve , that the snow come on again , thick enough to blind a man who have not spend his time among it , as I have do now for day and day . therefore I take my neatsfoot oil , which now be clog like honey , and rub it hard into my leg - joint , so far as I could reach they . and then I set my back and elbow well against a snowdrift , hang far adown the cliff , and say some of the Lord 's Prayer , throw myself on Providence . before there be time to think or dream , I land very beautifully upon a ridge of run - up snow in a quiet corner . my good shoe , or boot , preserve I from go far beneath it ; though one of they be sadly strain , where a grub have gnaw the ash , in the early summer - time . have set myself aright , and be in good spirit , I make boldly across the valley   where the snow be furrow hard , be now afraid of nobody . 
 if Lorna have look out of the window she would not have know I , with those boot upon my foot , and a well - clean sheepskin over I , bear my own   J.R.   in red , just between my shoulder , but cover now in snow - flake . the house be partly drift up , though not so much as ours be ; and I cross the little stream almost without know that it be under I . at first , be pretty safe from interference from the other hut , by virtue of the blind snow and the difficulty of walk , I examine all the window ; but these be coat so with ice , like fern and flower and dazzle star , that no one could so much as guess what might be inside of they . moreover I be afraid of pry narrowly into they , as it be not a proper thing where a maiden might be ; only I want to know just this , whether she be there or not . 
 take nothing by this movement , I be force , much against my will , to venture to the door and knock , in a hesitate manner , not be sure but what my answer might be the mouth of a carbine . however it be not so , for I hear a pattering of foot and a whispering go on , and then a shrill voice through the keyhole , ask , ' who be there ? ' 
 ' only I , John Ridd , ' I answer ; upon which I hear a little laughter , and a little sobbing , or something that be like it ; and then the door be open about a couple of inch , with a bar behind it still ; and then the little voice go on , 
 ' put thy finger in , young man , with the old ring on it . but mind thee , if it be the wrong one , thou shalt never draw it back again . ' 
 laugh at Gwenny 's mighty threat , I show my finger in the opening ; upon which she let I in , and bar the door again like lightning . 
 ' what be the meaning of all this , Gwenny ? ' I ask , as I slip about on the floor , for I could not stand there firmly with my great snow - shoe on . 
 ' man enough , and bad man too , ' the cornish girl make answer . we be shut in here , and starving , and durstn't   let anybody in upon we . I wish thou wer't good to ate , young man : I could manage most of thee . ' 
 I be so frightened by her eye , full of wolfish hunger , that I could only say ' good God ! ' have never see the like before . then draw I forth a large piece of bread , which I have bring in case of accident , and place it in her hand . she leap at it , as a starve dog leap at sight of his supper , and she set her tooth in it , and then withhold it from her lip , with something very like an oath at her own vile greediness ; and then away round the corner with it , no doubt for her young mistress . I meanwhile be occupy , to the good of my ability , in take my snow - shoe off , yet wonder much within myself why Lorna do not come to I . 
 but presently I know the cause , for Gwenny call I , and I run , and find my darling quite unable to say so much as , ' John , how be you ? ' between the hunger and the cold , and the excitement of my coming , she have faint away , and lie back on a chair , as white as the snow around we . in betwixt her delicate lip , Gwenny be thrust with all her strength the hard brown crust of the rye - bread , which she have snatch from I so . 
 ' get water , or get snow , ' I say ; ' do not   you know what fainting be , you very stupid child ? ' 
 ' never heerd on it , in Cornwall , ' she answer , trust still to the bread ; ' be un the same as bleed ? ' 
 ' it will be directly , if you go on squeeze away with that crust so . eat a piece : I have get some more . leave my darling now to I . ' 
 hear that I have some more , the starve girl could resist no long , but tear it in two , and have swallow half before I have coax my Lorna back to sense , and hope , and joy , and love . 
 ' I never expect to see you again . I have make up my mind to die , John ; and to die without your know it . ' 
 as I repel this fearful thought in a manner highly fortifying , the tender hue flow back again into her famished cheek and lip , and a soft brilliance glisten from the depth of her dark eye . she give I one little shrunken hand , and I could not help a tear for it . 
 ' after all , Mistress Lorna , ' I say , pretend to be gay , for a smile might do she good ; ' you do not love I as Gwenny do ; for she even want to eat I . ' 
 ' and shall , afore I have do , young man , ' Gwenny answer laughing ; ' you come in here with they red chake , and make we think o ' sirloin . ' 
 ' eat up your bit of brown bread , Gwenny . it be not good enough for your mistress . bless her heart , I have something here such as she never taste the like of , be in such appetite . look here , Lorna ; smell it first . I have have it ever since Twelfth Day , and keep it all the time for you . Annie make it . that be enough to warrant it good cooking . ' 
 and then I show my great mince - pie in a bag of tissue paper , and I tell they how the mince - meat be make of golden pippin finely shre , with the undercut of the sirloin , and spice and fruit accordingly and far beyond my knowledge . but Lorna would not touch a morsel until she have thank God for it , and give I the kind kiss , and put a piece in Gwenny 's mouth . 
 I have eat many thing myself , with very great enjoyment , and keen perception of their merit , and some thank to God for they . but I never do enjoy a thing , that have find its way between my own lip , half , or even a quarter as much as I now enjoy behold Lorna , sit proudly upwards   to show that she be faint no more   enter into that mince - pie , and move all her pearl of tooth   inside her little mouth - place   exactly as I tell she . for I be afraid lest she should be too fast in go through it , and cause herself more damage so , than she get of nourishment . but I have no need to fear at all , and Lorna could not help laugh at I for think that she have no self - control . 
 some creature require a deal of food   I myself among the number , and some can do with a very little ; make , no doubt , the good of it . and I have often notice that the plump and most perfect woman never eat so hard and fast as the skinny and three - cornered one . these last be often ashamed of it , and eat most when the man be absent . hence it come to pass that Lorna , be the lovely of all maiden , have as much as she could do to finish her own half of pie ; whereas Gwenny Carfax   though generous more than greedy , eat up her without wink , after finish the brown loaf ; and then I beg to know the meaning of this state of thing . 
 ' the meaning be sad enough , ' say Lorna ; ' and I see no way out of it . we be both to be starve until I let they do what they like with I . 
 ' that be to say until you choose to marry Carver Doone , and be slowly kill by he ? ' 
 ' slowly ! no , John , quickly . I hate he so intensely , that less than a week would kill I . ' 
 ' not a doubt of that , ' say Gwenny ; ' oh , she hat he nicely then ; but not half so much as I do . ' 
 I tell they that this state of thing could be endure no long , on which point they agree with I , but see no mean to help it . for even if Lorna could make up her mind to come away with I and live at Plover 's Barrows farm , under my good mother 's care , as I have urge so often , behold the snow be all around we , heap as high as mountain , and how could any delicate maiden ever get across it ? 
 then I speak with a strange tingle upon both side of my heart , know that this undertaking be a serious one for all , and might burn our farm down , 
 ' if I warrant to take you safe , and without much fright or hardship , Lorna , will you come with I ? ' 
 ' to be sure I will , dear , ' say my beauty , with a smile and a glance to follow it ; ' I have small alternative , to starve , or go with you , John . ' 
 ' Gwenny , have you courage for it ? will you come with your young mistress ? ' 
 ' will I stay behind ? ' cry Gwenny , in a voice that settle it . and so we begin to arrange about it ; and I be much excited . it be useless now to leave it long ; if it could be do at all , it could not be too quickly do . it be the Counsellor who have order , after all other scheme have fail , that his niece should have no food until she would obey he . he have strictly watch the house , take turn with Carver , to ensure that none come nigh it bear food or comfort . but this evening , they have think it needless to remain on guard ; and it would have be impossible , because themselves be busy offer high festival to all the valley , in right of their own commandership . and Gwenny say that nothing make she so nearly mad with appetite as the account she receive from a woman of all the dish prepare . nevertheless she have answer bravely , 
 ' go and tell the Counsellor , and go and tell the Carver , who send you to spy upon we , that we shall have a fine dish than any set before they . ' and so in truth they do , although so little dream it ; for no Doone that be ever bear , however much of a Carver , might vie with our Annie for mince - meat . 
 now while we sit reflect much , and talk a good deal more , in spite of all the cold for I never be in a hurry to go , when I have Lorna with I she say , in her silvery voice , which always lead I so along , as if I be a slave to a beautiful bell , 
 ' now , John , we be waste time , dear . you have praise my hair , till it curl with pride , and my eye till you can not see they , even if they be brown diamond which I have hear for the fiftieth time at least ; though I never see such a jewel . do not   you think it be high time to put on your snow - shoe , John ? ' 
 ' certainly not , ' I answer , ' till we have settle something more . I be so cold when I come in ; and now I be as warm as a cricket . and so be you , you lively soul ; though you be not upon my hearth yet . ' 
 ' remember , John , ' say Lorna , nestle for a moment to I ; ' the severity of the weather make a great difference between we . and you must never take advantage . ' 
 ' I quite understand all that , dear . and the hard it freeze the well , while that understanding continue . now do try to be serious . ' 
 ' I try to be serious ! and I have be try fifty time , and could not bring you to it , John ! although I be sure the situation , as the Counsellor say at the beginning of a speech , the situation , to say the least , be serious enough for anything . come , Gwenny , imitate he . ' 
 Gwenny be fame for her imitation of the Counsellor make a speech ; and she begin to shake her hair , and mount upon a footstool ; but I really could not have this , though even Lorna order it . the truth be that my darling maiden be in such wild spirit , at see I so unexpected , and at the prospect of release , and of what she have never know , quiet life and happiness , that like all warm and love nature , she could scarce control herself . 
 ' come to this frozen window , John , and see they light the stack - fire . they will little know who look at they . now be very good , John . you stay in that corner , dear , and I will stand on this side ; and try to breathe yourself a peep - hole through the lovely spear and banner . oh , you do not   know how to do it . I must do it for you . Breathe three time , like that , and that ; and then you rub it with your finger , before it have time to freeze again . ' 
 all this she do so beautifully , with her lip put up like cherry , and her finger bend half back , as only girl can bend they , and her little waist throw out against the white of the snow - up window , that I make she do it three time over ; and I stop she every time and let it freeze again , that so she might be the long . now I know that all her love be mine , every bit as much as mine be her ; yet I must have she to show it , dwell upon every proof , lengthen out all certainty . perhaps the jealous heart be loath to own a life worth twice its own . be that as it may , I know that we thaw the window nicely . 
 and then I see , far down the stream   or rather down the bed of it , for there be no stream visible , a little form of fire arise , red , and dark , and flickering . presently it catch on something , and go upward boldly ; and then it strike into many fork , and then it fall , and rise again . 
 ' do you know what all that be , John ? ' ask Lorna , smile cleverly at the manner of my staring . 
 ' how on earth should I know ? papist burn Protestants in the flesh ; and protestant burn Papists in effigy , as we mock they . Lorna , be they go to burn any one to - night ? ' 
 ' no , you dear . I must rid you of these thing . I see that you be bigote . the Doones be fire Dunkery beacon , to celebrate their new captain . ' 
 ' but how could they bring it here through the snow ? if they have sledge , I can do nothing . ' 
 ' they bring it before the snow begin . the moment poor grandfather be go , even before his funeral , the young man , have none to check they , begin at once upon it . they have always bear a grudge against it ; not that it ever do they harm ; but because it seem so insolent . " can not   a gentleman go home , without a smoke behind he ? " I have often hear they say . and though they have do it no serious harm , since they throw the fireman on the fire , many , many year ago , they have often promise to bring it here for their candle ; and now they have do it . ah , now look ! the tar be kindle . ' 
 Though Lorna take it so in joke , I look upon it very gravely , know that this heavy outrage to the feeling of the neighbourhood would cause more stir than a hundred sheep steal , or a score of house sack . not of course that the beacon be of the small use to any one , neither stop anybody from steal , nay , rather it be like the parish knell , which begin when all be over , and depress all the survivor ; yet I know that we value it , and be proud , and speak of it as a mighty institution ; and even more than that , our vestry have vote , within the last two year , seven shilling and six - pence to pay for it , in proportion with other parish . and one of the man who attend to it , or at least who be pay for do so , be our Jem Slocombe 's grandfather . 
 however , in spite of all my regret , the fire go up very merrily , blaze red and white and yellow , as it leap on different thing . and the light dance on the snow - drift with a misty lilac hue . I be astonish at its burning in such mighty depth of snow ; but Gwenny say that the wicked man have be three day hard at work , clearing , as it be , a cock - pit , for their fire to have its way . and now they have a mighty pile , which must have cover five land - yard square , heap up to a goodly height , and eager to take fire . 
 in this I see great obstacle to what I wish to manage . for when this pyramid should be kindle thoroughly , and pour light and blaze round , would not all the valley be like a white room full of candle ? think thus , I be half inclined to abide my time for another night : and then my second thought convince I that I would be a fool in this . for lo , what an opportunity ! all the Doones would be drunk , of course , in about three hour ' time , and get more and more in drink as the night go on . as for the fire , it must sink in about three hour or more , and only cast uncertain shadow friendly to my purpose . and then the outlaws must cower round it , as the cold increase on they , help the weight of the liquor ; and in their jollity any noise would be cheer as a false alarm . Most of all , and which decide once for all my action , when these wild and reckless villain should be hot with ardent spirit , what be door , or wall , to stand betwixt they and my Lorna ? 
 this thought quicken I so much that I touch my darling reverently , and tell she in a few short word how I hop to manage it . 
 ' Sweetest , in two hour ' time , I shall be again with you . keep the bar up , and have Gwenny ready to answer any one . you be safe while they be dining , dear , and drinking health , and all that stuff ; and before they have do with that , I shall be again with you . have everything you care to take in a very little compass , and Gwenny must have no baggage . I shall knock loud , and then wait a little ; and then knock twice , very softly . ' 
 with this I fold she in my arm ; and she look frightened at I ; not have perceive her danger ; and then I tell Gwenny over again what I have tell her mistress : but she only nod her head and say , ' young man , go and teach thy grandmother . ' 




 CHAPTER XLIV 

 BROUGHT HOME AT last 

 to my great delight I find that the weather , not often friendly to lover , and lately seem so hostile , have in the most important matter do I a signal service . for when I have promise to take my love from the power of those wretch , the only way of escape apparent lie through the main Doone - gate . for though I might climb the cliff myself , especially with the snow to aid I , I durst not try to fetch Lorna up they , even if she be not half - starve , as well as partly frozen ; and as for Gwenny 's door , as we call it   that be to say , the little entrance from the woode hollow , it be snow up long ago to the level of the hill around . therefore I be at my wit 's end how to get they out ; the passage by the Doone - gate be long , and dark , and difficult , and lead to such a weary circuit among the snowy moor and hill . 
 but now , be homeward - bind by the short possible track , I slip along between the bonfire and the boundary cliff , where I find a caved way of snow behind a sort of avalanche : so that if the Doones have be keep watch   which they be not do , but revel , they could scarcely have discover I . and when I come to my old ascent , where I have often scale the cliff and make across the mountain , it strike I that I would just have a look at my first and painful entrance , to wit , the water - slide . I never for a moment imagine that this could help I now ; for I never have dare to descend it , even in the fine weather ; still I have a curiosity to know what my old friend be like , with so much snow upon he . but , to my very great surprise , there be scarcely any snow there at all , though plenty curl high overhead from the cliff , like bolster over it . probably the sweeping of the north - east wind up the narrow chasm have keep the shower from block it , although the water have no power under the bitter grip of frost . all my water - slide be now less a slide than path of ice ; furrow where the water run over flute ridge ; seam where wind have toss and comb they , even while congeal ; and cross with little step wherever the freezing torrent linger . and here and there the ice be fibre with the trail of sludge - weed , slant from the side , and mat , so as to make resting - place . 
 Lo it be easy track and channel , as if for the very purpose make , down which I could guide my sledge with Lorna sit in it . there be only two thing to be fear ; one lest the roll of snow above should fall in and bury we ; the other lest we should rush too fast , and so be carry headlong into the black whirlpool at the bottom , the middle of which be still unfrozen , and look more horrible by the contrast . against this danger I make provision , by fix a stout bar across ; but of the other we must take our chance , and trust ourselves to Providence . 
 I hasten home at my utmost speed , and tell my mother for God 's sake to keep the house up till my return , and to have plenty of fire blaze , and plenty of water boiling , and food enough hot for a dozen people , and the good bed air with the warming - pan . dear mother smile softly at my excitement , though her own be not much less , I be sure , and enhance by sore anxiety . then I give very strict direction to Annie , and praise she a little , and kiss she ; and I even endeavour to flat Eliza , lest she should be disagreeable . 
 after this I take some brandy , both within and about I ; the former , because I have sharp work to do ; and the latter in fear of whatever might happen , in such great cold , to my comrade . also I carry some other provision , grieve much at their coldness : and then I go to the upper linhay , and take our new light pony - sledd , which have be make almost as much for pleasure as for business ; though God only know how our girl could have find any pleasure in bumping along so . on the snow , however , it run as sweetly as if it have be make for it ; yet I durst not take the pony with it ; in the first place , because his hoof would break through the ever - shift surface of the light and pile snow ; and secondly , because these pony , come from the forest , have a dreadful trick of neighing , and most of all in frosty weather . 
 therefore I gird my own body with a dozen turn of hay - rope , twist both the end in under at the bottom of my breast , and wind the hay on the skew a little , that the hempen thong might not slip between , and so cut I in the drawing . I put a good piece of spare rope in the sledd , and the cross - seat with the back to it , which be stuff with our own wool , as well as two or three fur coat ; and then , just as I be start , out come Annie , in spite of the cold , pant for fear of miss I , and with nothing on her head , but a lanthorn in one hand . 
 ' oh , John , here be the most wonderful thing ! mother have never show it before ; and I can not   think how she could make up her mind . she have get it in a great well of a cupboard , with camphor , and spirit , and lavender . Lizzie say it be a most magnificent sealskin cloak , worth fifty pound , or a farthing . ' 
 ' at any rate it be soft and warm , ' say I , very calmly fling it into the bottom of the sledd . ' tell mother I will put it over Lorna 's foot . ' 
 ' Lorna 's foot ! oh , you great fool , ' cry Annie , for the first time revile I ; ' over her shoulder ; and be proud , you very stupid John . ' 
 ' it be not good enough for her foot , ' I answer , with strong emphasis ; ' but do not   tell mother I say so , Annie . only thank she very kindly . ' 
 with that I draw my trace hard , and set my ashen staff into the snow , and strike out with my good foot foremost   the good one at snow - shoe , I mean , and the sledd come after I as lightly as a dog might follow ; and Annie , with the lanthorn , seem to be leave behind and wait like a pretty lamp - post . 
 the full moon rise as bright behind I as a paten of pure silver , cast on the snow long shadow of the few thing leave above , burden rock , and shaggy foreland , and the labour tree . in the great white desolation , distance be a mocking vision ; hill look nigh , and valley far ; when hill be far and valley nigh . and the misty breath of frost , pierce through the rib of rock , strike to the pith of tree , creep to the heart of man , lie along the hollow place , like a serpent sloughing . even as my own gaunt shadow   travesty as if I be the moonlight 's daddy - longleg , go before I down the slope ; even I , the shadow 's master , who have try in vain to cough , when cough bring good liquorice , feel a pressure on my bosom , and a husking in my throat . 
 however , I go on quietly , and at a very tidy speed ; be only too thankful that the snow have cease , and no wind as yet arise . and from the ring of low white vapour gird all the verge of sky , and from the rosy blue above , and the shaft of starlight set upon a quivering bow , as well as from the moon itself and the light behind it , have learn the sign of frost from its bitter twinge , I know that we should have a night as keen as ever England feel . nevertheless , I have work enough to keep I warm if I manage it . the question be , could I contrive to save my darling from it ? 
 dare not to risk my sledd by any fall from the valley - cliff , I drag it very carefully up the steep incline of ice , through the narrow chasm , and so to the very brink and verge where first I have see my Lorna , in the fishing day of boyhood . as I then have a trident fork , for stick of the loach , so I now have a strong ash stake , to lay across from rock to rock , and break the speed of descend . with this I moor the sledd quite safe , at the very lip of the chasm , where all be now substantial ice , green and black in the moonlight ; and then I set off up the valley , skirt along one side of it . 
 the stack - fire still be burn strongly , but with more of heat than blaze ; and many of the young Doones be play on the verge of it , the child make ring of fire , and their mother watch they . all the grave and reverend warrior have hear of rheumatism , be inside of log and stone , in the two low house , with enough of candle burn to make our list of sheep come short . 
 all these I pass , without the small risk or difficulty , walk up the channel of drift which I speak of once before . and then I cross , with more of care , and to the door of Lorna 's house , and make the sign , and listen , after take my snow - shoe off . 
 but no one come , as I expect , neither could I espy a light . and I seem to hear a faint low sound , like the moaning of the snow - wind . then I knock again more loudly , with a knocking at my heart : and receive no answer , set all my power at once against the door . in a moment it fly inward , and I glide along the passage with my foot still slippery . there in Lorna 's room I see , by the moonlight flow in , a sight which drive I beyond sense . 
 Lorna be behind a chair , crouch in the corner , with her hand up , and a crucifix , or something that look like it . in the middle of the room lie Gwenny Carfax , stupid , yet with one hand clutch the ankle of a struggle man . another man stand above my Lorna , try to draw the chair away . in a moment I have he round the waist , and he go out of the window with a mighty crash of glass ; luckily for he that window have no bar like some of they . then I take the other man by the neck ; and he could not plead for mercy . I bear he out of the house as lightly as I would bear a baby , yet squeeze his throat a little more than I fain would do to an infant . by the bright moonlight I see that I carry Marwood de Whichehalse . for his father 's sake I spar he , and because he have be my schoolfellow ; but with every muscle of my body string with indignation , I cast he , like a skittle , from I into a snowdrift , which close over he . then I look for the other fellow , toss through Lorna 's window , and find he lie stunned and bleed , neither able to groan yet . Charleworth Doone , if his gush blood do not much mislead I . 
 it be no time to linger now ; I fasten my shoe in a moment , and catch up my own darling with her head upon my shoulder , where she whisper faintly ; and tell Gwenny to follow I , or else I would come back for she , if she could not walk the snow , I run the whole distance to my sledd , care not who might follow I . then by the time I have set up Lorna , beautiful and smile , with the seal - skin cloak all over she , sturdy Gwenny come along , have trudge in the track of my snow - shoe , although with two bag on her back . I set she in beside her mistress , to support she , and keep warm ; and then with one look back at the glen , which have be so long my home of heart , I hang behind the sledd , and launch it down the steep and dangerous way . 
 though the cliff be black above we , and the road unseen in front , and a great white grave of snow might at a single word come down , Lorna be as calm and happy as an infant in its bed . she know that I be with she ; and when I tell she not to speak , she touch my hand in silence . Gwenny be in a much great fright , have never see such a thing before , neither know what it be to yield to pure love 's confidence . I could hardly keep she quiet , without make a noise myself . with my staff from rock to rock , and my weight throw backward , I break the sledd 's too rapid way , and bring my grown love safely out , by the selfsame road which first have lead I to her girlish fancy , and my boyish slavery . 
 unpursue , yet look back as if some one must be after we , we skirt round the black whirling pool , and gain the meadow beyond it . here there be hard collar work , the track be all uphill and rough ; and Gwenny want to jump out , to lighten the sledd and to push behind . but I would not hear of it ; because it be now so deadly cold , and I fear that Lorna might get frozen , without have Gwenny to keep she warm . and after all , it be the sweetest labour I have ever know in all my life , to be sure that I be pull Lorna , and pull she to our own farmhouse . 
 Gwenny 's nose be touch with frost , before we have go much far , because she would not keep it quiet and snug beneath the sealskin . and here I have to stop in the moonlight   which be very dangerous   and rub it with a clove of snow , as Eliza have teach I ; and Gwenny scold all the time , as if myself have freeze it . Lorna be now so far oppress with all the trouble of the evening , and the joy that follow they , as well as by the pierce cold and difficulty of breathing , that she lie quite motionless , like fairest wax in the moonlight when we steal a glance at she , beneath the dark fold of the cloak ; and I think that she be fall into the heavy snow - sleep , whence there be no awaking . 
 therefore , I draw my trace tight , and set my whole strength to the business ; and we slip along at a merry pace , although with many jolting , which must have send my darling out into the cold snowdrift but for the short strong arm of Gwenny . and so in about an hour 's time , in spite of many hindrance , we come home to the old courtyard , and all the dog salute we . my heart be quiver , and my cheek as hot as the Doones ' bonfire , with wonder both what Lorna would think of our farm - yard , and what my mother would think of she . upon the former subject my anxiety be waste , for Lorna neither see a thing , nor even open her heavy eye . and as to what mother would think of she , she be certain not to think at all , until she have cry over she . 
 and so indeed it come to pass . even at this length of time , I can hardly tell it , although so bright before my mind , because it move my heart so . the sledd be at the open door , with only Lorna in it ; for Gwenny Carfax have jump out , and hang back in the clearing , give any reason rather than the only true one that she would not be intrude . at the door be all our people ; first , of course , Betty Muxworthy , teach I how to draw the sledd , as if she have be bear in it , and flourish with a great broom , wherever a speck of snow lay . then dear Annie , and old Molly   who be very quiet , and count almost for nobody , and behind they , mother , look as if she want to come first , but doubt how the manner lay . in the distance Lizzie stand , fearful of encouraging , but unable to keep out of it . 
 Betty be go to poke her broom right in under the sealskin cloak , where Lorna lie unconscious , and where her precious breath hang frozen , like a silver cobweb ; but I catch up Betty 's broom , and fling it clean away over the corn chamber ; and then I put the other by , and fetch my mother forward . 
 ' you shall see she first , ' I say : ' be she not your daughter ? hold the light there , Annie . ' 
 dear mother 's hand be quick and tremble , as she open the shin fold ; and there she see my Lorna sleep , with her black hair all dishevel , and she bent and kiss her forehead , and only say , ' God bless she , John ! ' and then she be take with violent weeping , and I be force to hold she . 
 ' Us may tich of she now , I rackon , ' say Betty in her most jealous way ; ' Annie , tak she by the head , and I will tak she by the toesen . no taime to stand here like girt gawk . don'ee tak on zo , missus . Ther be vainer vish in the zea Lor , but , she be a booty ! ' 
 with this , they carry she into the house , Betty chatter all the while , and go on now about Lorna 's hand , and the other crowd round she , so that I think I be not want among so many woman , and should only get the bad of it , and perhaps do harm to my darling . therefore I go and bring Gwenny in , and give she a potful of bacon and pea , and an iron spoon to eat it with , which she do right heartily . 
 then I ask she how she could have be such a fool as to let those two vile fellow enter the house where Lorna be ; and she account for it so naturally , that I could only blame myself . for my agreement have be to give one loud knock   if you happen to remember   and after that two little knock . well these two drunken rogue have come ; and one , be very drunk indeed , have give a great thump ; and then nothing more to do with it ; and the other , be three - quarter drunk , have follow his leader   as one might say   but feebly , and make two of it . whereupon up jump Lorna , and declare that her John be there . 
 all this Gwenny tell I shortly , between the while of eating , and even while she lick the spoon ; and then there come a message for I that my love be sensible , and be seek all around for I . then I tell Gwenny to hold her tongue   whatever she do among we , and not to trust to woman 's word ; and she tell I they all be liar , as she have find out long ago ; and the only thing to believe in be an honest man , when find . thereupon I could have kiss she as a sort of tribute , like to be appreciate ; yet the pea upon her lip make I think about it ; and think be fatal to action . so I go to see my dear . 
 that sight I shall not forget ; till my die head fall back , and my breast can lift no more . I know not whether I be then more blessed , or harrow by it . for in the settle be my Lorna , prop with pillow round she , and her clear hand spread sometimes to the blaze fireplace . in her eye no knowledge be of anything around she , neither in her neck the sense of lean towards anything . only both her lovely hand be entreat something , to spare she , or to love she ; and the line of supplication quiver in her sad white face . 
 ' all go away , except my mother , ' I say very quietly , but so that I would be obey ; and everybody know it . then mother come to I alone ; and she say , ' the frost be in her brain ; I have hear of this before , John . ' ' Mother , I will have it out , ' be all that I could answer she ; ' leave she to I altogether ; only you sit there and watch . ' for I feel that Lorna know I , and no other soul but I ; and that if not interfere with , she would soon come home to I . therefore I sit gently by she , leave nature , as it be , to her own good time and will . and presently the glance that watch I , as at distance and in doubt , begin to flutter and to brighten , and to deepen into kindness , then to beam with trust and love , and then with gather tear to falter , and in shame to turn away . but the small entreating hand find their way , as if by instinct , to my great project palm ; and tremble there , and rest there . 
 for a little while we linger thus , neither wish to move away , neither care to look beyond the presence of the other ; both alike so full of hope , and comfort , and true happiness ; if only the world would let we be . and then a little sob disturb we , and mother try to make believe that she be only cough . but Lorna , guess who she be , jump up so very rashly that she almost set she frock on fire from the great ash log ; and away she run to the old oak chair , where mother be by the clock - case pretend to be knit , and she take the work from mother 's hand , and lay they both upon her head , kneel humbly , and look up . 
 ' God bless you , my fair mistress ! ' say mother , bend nearer , and then as Lorna 's gaze prevail , ' God bless you , my sweet child ! ' 
 and so she go to mother 's heart by the very near road , even as she have come to mine ; I mean the road of pity , smooth by grace , and youth , and gentleness . 




 CHAPTER XLV 

 a CHANGE long NEEDED 

 Jeremy Stickles be go south , ere ever the frost set in , for the purpose of muster force to attack the Doone Glen . but , of course , this weather have put a stop to every kind of movement ; for even if man could have bear the cold , they could scarcely be bring to face the peril of the snow - drift . and to tell the truth I care not how long this weather last , so long as we have enough to eat , and could keep ourselves from freeze . not only that I do not want Master Stickles back again , to make more disturbance ; but also that the Doones could not come prowl after Lorna while the snow lie pile between we , with the surface soft and dry . of course they would very soon discover where their lawful queen be , although the track of sledd and snow - shoe have be quite obliterate by another shower , before the reveller could have grow half as drunk as they intend . but Marwood de Whichehalse , who have be snow up among they   as Gwenny say , after help to strip the beacon , that young squire be almost certain to have recognise I , and to have tell the vile Carver . and it give I no little pleasure to think how mad that Carver must be with I , for rob he of the lovely bride whom he be starve into matrimony . however , I be not pleased at all with the prospect of the consequence ; but set all hand on to thresh the corn , ere the Doones could come and burn the rick . for I know that they could not come yet , inasmuch as even a forest pony could not traverse the country , much less the heavy horse need to carry such man as they be . and hundred of the forest pony die in this hard weather , some be bury in the snow , and more of they starve for want of grass . 
 go through this state of thing , and lay down the law about it   subject to correction , I very soon persuade Lorna that for the present she be safe , and   which make she still more happy   that she be not only welcome , but as gladden to our eye as the flower of May . of course , so far as regard myself , this be not a hundredth part of the real truth ; and even as regard other , I might have say it ten time over . for Lorna have so win they all , by her kind and gentle way , and her mode of hearken to everybody 's trouble , and reply without word , as well as by her beauty , and simple grace of all thing , that I could almost wish sometimes the rest would leave she more to I . but mother could not do enough ; and Annie almost worship she ; and even Lizzie could not keep her bitterness towards she ; especially when she find that Lorna know as much of book as need be . 
 as for John Fry , and Betty , and Molly , they be a perfect plague when Lorna come into the kitchen . for betwixt their curiosity to see a live Doone in the flesh   when certain not to eat they , and their high respect for birth   with or without honesty , and their intense desire to know all about Master John 's sweetheart   drop , as they say , from the snow - cloud , and most of all their admiration of a beauty such as never even their angel could have see betwixt and between all this , I say , there be no get the dinner cook , with Lorna in the kitchen . 
 and the bad of it be that Lorna take the strange of all strange fancy for this very kitchen ; and it be hard to keep she out of it . not that she have any special bent for cooking , as our Annie have ; rather indeed the contrary , for she like to have her food ready cook ; but that she love the look of the place , and the cheerful fire burning , and the rack of bacon to be see , and the richness , and the homeliness , and the pleasant smell of everything . and who know but what she may have like   as the very good of maiden do   to be admire , now and then , between the time of business ? 
 therefore if you want Lorna   as I be always sure to do , God know how many time a day , the very sure place to find she be our own old kitchen . not gossip , I mean , nor loitering , neither seek into thing , but seem to be quite at home , as if she have know it from a child , and seem   to my eye at least   to light it up , and make life and colour out of all the dullness ; as I have see the break sun do among brown shock of wheat . 
 but any one who wish to learn whether girl can change or not , as the thing around they change   while yet their heart be steadfast , and for ever anchor , he should just have see my Lorna , after a fortnight of our life , and freedom from anxiety . it be possible that my company although I be account stupid by folk who do not know my way may have have something to do with it ; but upon this I will not say much , lest I lose my character . and indeed , as regard company , I have all the threshing to see to , and more than half to do myself   though any one would have think that even John Fry must work hard this weather , else I could not hope at all to get our corn into such compass that a good gun might protect it . 
 but to come back to Lorna again   which I always long to do , and must long for ever , all the change between night and day , all the shift of cloud and sun , all the difference between black death and brightsome liveliness , scarcely may suggest or equal Lorna 's transformation . quick she have always be and ' peart '   as we say on Exmoor   and gift with a leap of thought too swift for I to follow ; and hence you may find fault with much , when I report her saying . but through the whole have always run , as a black string go through pearl , something dark and touch with shadow , colour as with an early end . 
 but , now , behold ! there be none of this ! there be no get she , for a moment , even to be serious . all her bright young wit be flash , like a newly - awaken flame , and all her high young spirit leap , as if dance to its fire . and yet she never speak a word which give more pain than pleasure . 
 and even in her outward look there be much of difference . whether it be our warmth , and freedom , and our harmless love of God , and trust in one another ; or whether it be our air , and water , and the pea - feed bacon ; anyhow my Lorna grow rich and more lovely , more perfect and more firm of figure , and more light and buoyant , with every pass day that lay its tribute on her cheek and lip . I be allow one kiss a day ; only one for manner ' sake , because she be our visitor ; and I might have it before breakfast , or else when I come to say ' good - night ! ' accord as I decide . and I decide every night , not to take it in the morning , but put it off till the evening time , and have the pleasure to think about , through all the day of working . but when my darling come up to I in the early daylight , fresh than the daystar , and with no one look ; only her bright eye smile , and sweet lip quite ready , be it likely I could wait , and think all day about it ? for she wear a frock of Annie 's , nicely make to fit she , take in at the waist and curve I never could explain it , not be a mantua - maker ; but I know how her figure look in it , and how it come towards I . 
 but this be neither here nor there ; and I must on with my story . those day be very sacred to I , and if I speak lightly of they , trust I , ' tis with lip alone ; while from heart reproach peep sadly at the flippant trick of mind . 
 although it be the long winter ever know in our part   never have cease to freeze for a single night , and scarcely for a single day , from the middle of December till the second week in March , to I it be the very short and the most delicious ; and verily I do believe it be the same to Lorna . but when the Ides of March be come   of which I do remember something dim from school , and something clear from my favourite writer   lo , there be increase signal of a change of weather . 
 one lead feature of that long cold , and a thing remark by every one   however unobservant   have be the hollow moaning sound ever present in the air , morning , noon , and night - time , and especially at night , whether any wind be stir , or whether it be a perfect calm . our people say that it be a witch curse all the country from the cavern by the sea , and that frost and snow would last until we could catch and drown she . but the land , be thoroughly block with snow , and the inshore part of the sea with ice   float in great field along , Mother Melldrum   if she it be   have the cavern all to herself , for there be no getting at she . and speak of the sea remind I of a thing report to we , and on good authority ; though people might be find hereafter who would not believe it , unless I tell they that from what I myself beheld of the channel I place perfect faith in it : and this be , that a dozen sailor at the beginning of March cross the ice , with the aid of pole from Clevedon to Penarth , or where the Holm rock bar the flotage . 
 but now , about the tenth of March , that miserable moan noise , which have both foregone and accompany the rigour , die away from out the air ; and we , be now so used to it , think at first that we must be deaf . and then the fog , which have hang about   even in full sunshine   vanish , and the shroud hill shine forth with brightness manifold . and now the sky at length begin to come to its true manner , which we have not see for month , a mixture   if I so may speak   of various expression . whereas till now from Allhallows - tide , six week ere the great frost set in , the heavens have wear one heavy mask of ashen gray when cloud , or else one amethystine tinge with a hazy rim , when cloudless . so it be pleasant to behold , after that monotony , the fickle sky which suit our England , though abuse by foreign folk . 
 and soon the dapple soften sky give some earnest of its mood ; for a brisk south wind arise , and the blessed rain come drive , cold indeed , yet most refreshing to the skin , all parch with snow , and the eyeball so long dazzle . neither be the heart more sluggish in its thankfulness to God . People have begin to think , and somebody have prophesy , that we should have no spring this year , no seed - time , and no harvest ; for that the Lord have send a judgment on this country of England , and the nation dwell in it , because of the wickedness of the Court , and the encouragement show to Papists . and this be prove , they say , by what have happen in the town of London ; where , for more than a fortnight , such a chill of darkness lie that no man might behold his neighbour , even across the narrow street ; and where the ice upon the Thames be more than four foot thick , and crush London Bridge in twain . now to these prophet I pay no heed , believe not that Providence would freeze we for other people 's sin ; neither see how England could for many generation have enjoy good sunshine , if Popery mean frost and fog . besides , why could not Providence settle the business once for all by freeze the Pope himself ; even though   accord to our view   he be destine to extreme of heat , together with all who follow he ? 
 not to meddle with that subject , be beyond my judgment , let I tell the thing I see , and then you must believe I . the wind , of course , I could not see , not have the power of a pig ; but I could see the laden branch of the great oak move , hop to shake off the load pack and saddle on they . and hereby I may note a thing which some one may explain perhaps in the after age , when people come to look at thing . this be that in desperate cold all the tree be pull awry , even though the wind have scatter the snow burden from they . of some sort the branch bend downwards , like an archway ; of other sort the bough curve upwards , like a red deer 's frontlet . this I know no reason   for ; but be ready to swear that I see it . 
    the reason be very simple , as all nature 's reason be ; 
  though the subject have not yet be investigate thoroughly . 
  in some tree the vascular tissue be more open on the upper 
  side , in other on the under side , of the spreading 
  branch ; accord to the form of growth , and habit of the 
  sap . hence in very severe cold , when the vessel 
   comparatively empty   be constrict , some have more power 
  of contraction on the upper side , and some upon the under . 
 now when the first of the rain begin , and the old familiar softness spread upon the window glass , and run a little way in channel   though from the coldness of the glass it freeze before reach the bottom , know at once the difference from the short sharp thud of snow , we all run out , and fill our eye and fill our heart with gazing . true , the snow be pile up now all in mountain round we ; true , the air be still so cold that our breath freeze on the doorway , and the rain be turn to ice wherever it strike anything ; nevertheless that it be rain there be no denying , as we watch it across black doorway , and could see no sign of white . Mother , who have make up her mind that the farm be not worth have after all those prophesie , and that all of we must starve , and hole be scratch in the snow for we , and no use to put up a tombstone   for our church have be shut up long ago   mother fall upon my breast , and sob that I be the clever fellow ever bear of woman . and this because I have condemn the prophet for a pack of fool ; not see how business could go on , if people stop to hearken to they . 
 then Lorna come and glorify I , for I have predict a change of weather , more to keep their spirit up , than with real hope of it ; and then come Annie blushing shyly , as I look at she , and say that Winnie would soon have four leg now . this refer to some stupid joke make by John Fry or somebody , that in this weather a man have no leg , and a horse have only two . 
 but as the rain come down upon we from the southwest wind , and we could not have enough of it , even put our tongue to catch it , as little child might do , and begin to talk of primrose ; the very noble thing of all be to hear and see the gratitude of the poor beast yet remain and the few survive bird . from the cowhouse lowing come , more than of fifty milking time ; moo and moo , and a turn - up noise at the end of every bellow , as if from the very heart of kine . then the horse in the stable , pack as closely as they could stick , at the risk of kicking , to keep the warmth in one another , and their spirit up by discourse ; these begin with one accord to lift up their voice , snort , snaffling , whinnying , and neighing , and trot to the door to know when they should have work again . to whom , as if in answer , come the feeble bleating of the sheep , what few , by dint of great care , have keep their fleece on their back , and their four leg under they . 
 neither be it a trifling thing , let whoso will say the contrary , to behold the duck and geese marching forth in handsome order from their bed of fern and straw . what a goodly noise they keep , what a flapping of their wing , and a jerking of their tail , as they stand right up and try with a whistling in their throat to imitate a cockscrow ! and then how daintily they take the wet upon their dusty plume , and duck their shoulder to it , and begin to dress themselves , and lay their groove bill on the snow , and dabble for more ooziness ! 
 Lorna have never see , I dare say , anything like this before , and it be all that we could do to keep she from rush forth with only little lambswool shoe on , and kiss every one of they . ' oh , the dear thing , oh , the dear thing ! ' she keep say continually , ' how wonderfully clever they be ! only look at that one with his foot up , give order to the other , John ! ' 
 ' and I must give order to you , my darling , ' I answer , gaze on her face , so brilliant with excitement ; ' and that be , that you come in at once , with that worrisome cough of your ; and sit by the fire , and warm yourself . ' 
 ' oh , no , John ! not for a minute , if you please , good John . I want to see the snow go away , and the green meadow come forth . and here come our favourite robin , who have live in the oven so long , and sing we a song every morning . I must see what he think of it ! ' 
 ' you will do nothing of the sort , ' I answer very shortly , be only too glad of a cause for have she in my arm again . so I catch she up , and carry she in ; and she look and smile so sweetly at I instead of pout   as I have fear   that I find myself unable to go very fast along the passage . and I set she there in her favourite place , by the sweet - scented wood - fire ; and she pay I porterage without my even ask she ; and for all the beauty of the rain , I be fain to stay with she ; until our Annie come to say that my advice be want . 
 now my advice be never much , as everybody know quite well ; but that be the way they always put it , when they want I to work for they . and in truth it be time for I to work ; not for other , but myself , and   as I always think   for Lorna . for the rain be now come down in earnest ; and the top of the snow be freeze at last , and glaze as hard as a china cup , by mean of the sun and frost afterwards , all the rain run right away from the steep incline , and all the outlet be block with ice set up like table , it threaten to flood everything . already it be ponde up , like a tide advance at the threshold of the door from which we have watch the duck - bird ; both because great pile of snow trend in that direction , in spite of all our scraping , and also that the gulley hole , where the water of the shoot go out   I mean when it be water   now be choke with lump of ice , as big as a man 's body . for the ' shoot , ' as we call our little runnel of everlasting water , never know to freeze before , and always ready for any man either to wash his hand , or drink , where it spout from a trough of bark , set among white flint - stone ; this at last have give in , and its music cease to lull we , as we lay in bed . 
 it be not long before I manage to drain off this threatening flood , by open the old sluice - hole ; but I have much hard work to keep the stable , and the cow - house , and the other shed , from flooding . for we have a sapient practice   and I never see the contrary round about our part , I mean , of keep all room underground , so that you step down to they . we say that thus we keep they warm , both for cattle and for man , in the time of winter , and cool in the summer - time . this I will not contradict , though have my own opinion ; but it seem to I to be a relic of the time when people in the western country live in cave beneath the ground , and block the mouth with neat - skin . 
 let that question still abide , for man who study ancient time to inform I , if they will ; all I know be , that now we have no blessing for the system . if after all their cold and starve , our weak cattle now should have to stand up to their knee in water , it would be certain death to they ; and we have lose enough already to make we poor for a long time ; not to speak of our kind love for they . and I do assure you , I love some horse , and even some cow for that matter , as if they have be my blood - relation ; know as I do their virtue . and some of these be lose to we ; and I could not bear to think of they . therefore I work hard all night to try and save the rest of they . 




 CHAPTER XLVI 

 SQUIRE FAGGUS make some lucky hit 

 through that season of bitter frost the red deer of the forest , have nothing to feed upon , and no shelter to rest in , have grow accustomed to our rick of corn , and hay , and clover . there we might see a hundred of they almost any morning , come for warmth , and food , and comfort , and scarce willing to move away . and many of they be so tame , that they quietly present themselves at our back door , and stand there with their coat quite stiff , and their flank draw in and panting , and icicle sometimes on their chin , and their great eye fasten wistfully upon any merciful person ; crave for a bit of food , and a drink of water ; I suppose that they have not sense enough to chew the snow and melt it ; at any rate , all the spring be frozen , and river hide out of sight , these poor thing suffer even more from thirst than they do from hunger . 
 but now there be no fear of thirst , and more chance indeed of drown ; for a heavy gale of wind arise , with violent rain from the south - west , which last almost without a pause for three night and two day . at first the rain make no impression on the bulk of snow , but run from every slop surface and freeze on every flat one , through the coldness of the earth ; and so it become impossible for any man to keep his leg without the help of a shodden staff . after a good while , however , the air grow very much warm , this state of thing begin to change , and a bad one to succeed it ; for now the snow come thunder down from roof , and rock , and ivie tree , and flood begin to roar and foam in every trough and gulley . the drift that have be so white and fair , look yellow , and smirch , and muddy , and lose their graceful curve , and mould line , and airiness . but the strange sight of all to I be in the bed of stream , and brook , and especially of the Lynn river . it be worth go mile to behold such a thing , for a man might never have the chance again . 
 vast drift of snow have fill the valley , and pile above the river - course , fifty foot high in many place , and in some as much as a hundred . these have freeze over the top , and glance the rain away from they , and be sustain by rock and tree , span the water mightily . but meanwhile the wax flood , swell from every moorland hollow and from every spout crag , have dash away all icy fetter , and be roll gloriously . under white fantastic arch , and long tunnel freak and fret , and between pellucid pillar jag with nodding architrave , the red impetuous torrent rush , and the brown foam whirl and flash . I be half inclined to jump in and swim through such glorious scenery ; for nothing use to please I more than swim in a flooded river . but I think of the rock , and I think of the cramp , and more than all , of Lorna ; and so , between one thing and another , I let it roll on without I . 
 it be now high time to work very hard ; both to make up for the farm - work lose during the month of frost and snow , and also to be ready for a great and vicious attack from the Doones , who would burn we in our bed at the early opportunity . of farm - work there be little yet for even the most zealous man to begin to lay his hand to ; because when the ground appear through the crust of bubble snow   as at last it do , though not as my Lorna have expect , at the first few drop of rain   it be all so soaked and sodden , and as we call it , ' mucksy , ' that to meddle with it in any way be to do more harm than good . nevertheless , there be yard work , and house work , and tendence of stock , enough to save any man from idleness . 
 as for Lorna , she would come out . there be no keep she in the house . she have take up some peculiar notion that we be do more for she than she have any right to , and that she must earn she live by the hard work of her hand . it be quite in vain to tell she that she be expect to do nothing , and far bad than vain   for it make her cry sadly   if any one assure she that she could do no good at all . she even begin upon mother 's garden before the snow be clean go from it , and sow a beautiful row of pea , every one of which the mouse eat . 
 but though it be very pretty to watch she work for her very life , as if the maintenance of the household hang upon her labour , yet I be grieve for many reason , and so be mother also . in the first place , she be too fair and dainty for this rough , rude work ; and though it make her cheek so bright , it surely must be bad for she to get her little foot so wet . moreover , we could not bear the idea that she should labour for her keep ; and again   which be the bad of all thing   mother 's garden lie expose to a dark deceitful coppice , where a man might lurk and watch all the fair gardener 's doing . it be true that none could get at her thence , while the brook which run between pour so great a torrent . still the distance be but little for a gun to carry , if any one could be brutal enough to point a gun at Lorna . I think that none could be find to do it ; but mother , have more experience , be not so certain of mankind . 
 now in spite of the flood , and the slough be out , and the state of the road most perilous , Squire Faggus come at last , rid his famous strawberry mare . there be a great ado between he and Annie , as you may well suppose , after some four month of parting . and so we leave they alone awhile , to coddle over their rapture . but when they be tired of that , or at least have time enough to do so , mother and I go in to know what news Tom have bring with he . though he do not seem to want we yet , he make himself agreeable ; and so we send Annie to cook the dinner while her sweetheart should tell we everything . 
 Tom Faggus have very good news to tell , and he tell it with such force of expression as make we laugh very heartily . he have take up his purchase from old Sir Roger Bassett of a nice bit of land , to the south of the moor , and in the parish of Molland . when the lawyer know thoroughly who he be , and how he have make his money , they behave uncommonly well to he , and show great sympathy with his pursuit . he put they up to a thing or two ; and they poke he in the rib , and laugh , and say that he be quite a boy ; but of the right sort , none the less . and so they make old Squire Bassett pay the bill for both side ; and all he get for three hundred acre be a hundred and twenty pound ; though Tom have pay five hundred . but lawyer know that this must be so , in spite of all their endeavour ; and the old gentleman , who now expect to find a bill for he to pay , almost think himself a rogue , for get anything out of they . 
 it be true that the land be poor and wild , and the soil exceed shallow ; lie on the slope of rock , and burn up in hot summer . but with we , hot summer be thing know by tradition only   as this great winter may be ; we generally have more moisture , especially in July , than we well know what to do with . I have know a fog for a fortnight at the summer solstice , and farmer talk in church about it when they ought to be pray . but it always contrive to come right in the end , as other visitation do , if we take they as true visit , and receive they kindly . 
 now this farm of Squire Faggus   as he truly now have a right to be call   be of the very fine pasture , when it get good store of rain . and Tom , who have ride the Devonshire road with many a reeking jacket , know right well that he might trust the climate for that matter . the herbage be of the very sweetest , and the short , and the close , have perhaps from ten to eighteen inch of wholesome soil between it and the solid rock . Tom see at once what it be fit for the breeding of fine cattle . 
 be such a hand as he be at make the most of everything , both his own and other people 's   although so free in scatter , when the humour lie upon he   he have actually turn to his own advantage that extraordinary weather which have so impoverished every one around he . for he teach his Winnie   who know his meaning as well as any child could , and obey not only his word of mouth , but every glance he give she   to go forth in the snowy evening when horse be seek everywhere   be they wild or tame   for fodder and for shelter ; and to whinny to the forest pony , mile away from home perhaps , and lead they all with rare appetite and promise of abundance , to her master 's homestead . he shod good Winnie in such a manner that she could not sink in the snow ; and he clothe she over the loin with a sheep - skin dye to her own colour , which the wild horse be never tired of come up and sniff at ; take it for an especial gift , and proof of inspiration . and Winnie never come home at night without at least a score of pony trot shyly after she , toss their head and their tail in turn , and make believe to be very wild , although hard pinch by famine . of course Tom would get they all into his pound in about five minute , for he himself could neigh in a manner which go to the heart of the wild horse . and then he feed they well , and turn they into his great cattle pen , to abide their time for breaking , when the snow and frost should be over . 
 he have get more than three hundred now , in this sagacious manner ; and he say it be the fine sight to see their mode of carry on , how they would snort , and stamp , and fume , and prick their ear , and rush backwards , and lash themselves with their long rough tail , and shake their jagged mane , and scream , and fall upon one another , if a strange man come anigh they . but as for feeding time , Tom say it be well than fifty play to watch they , and the trick they be up to , to cheat their feeder , and one another . I ask he how on earth he have manage to get fodder , in such impassable weather , for such a herd of horse ; but he say that they live upon straw and sawdust ; and he know that I do not believe he , any more than about his star - shaving . and this be just the thing he love to mystify honest people , and be a great deal too know . however , I may judge he harshly , because I myself tell everything . 
 I ask he what he mean to do with all that enormous lot of horse , and why he have not exert his wit to catch the red deer as well . he say that the latter would have be against the law of venery , and might have bring he into trouble , but as for dispose of his stud , it would give he little difficulty . he would break they , when the spring weather come on , and deal with they as they require , and keep the handsomest for breeding . the rest he would despatch to London , where he know plenty of horse - dealer ; and he doubt not that they would fetch he as much as ten pound apiece all round , be now in great demand . I tell he I wish that he might get it ; but as it prove afterwards , he do . 
 then he press we both on another point , the time for his marriage to Annie ; and mother look at I to say when , and I look back at mother . however , know something of the world , and unable to make any further objection , by reason of his prosperity , I say that we must even do as the fashionable people do , and allow the maid herself to settle , when she would leave home and all . and this I speak with a very bad grace , be perhaps of an ancient cast , and over fond of honesty I mean , of course , among low people . 
 but Tom pay little heed to this , know the world a great deal well than ever I could pretend to do ; and be ready to take a thing , upon which he have set his mind , whether it come with a good grace , or whether it come with a bad one . and see that it would be awkward to provoke my anger , he leave the room , before more word , to submit himself to Annie . 
 upon this I go in search of Lorna , to tell she of our cousin 's arrival , and to ask whether she would think fit to see he , or to dine by herself that day ; for she should do exactly as it please she in everything , while remain still our guest . but I rather wish that she might choose not to sit in Tom 's company , though she might be introduce to he . not but what he could behave quite as well as could , and much well , as regard elegance and assurance , only that his honesty have not be as one might desire . but Lorna have some curiosity to know what this famous man be like , and declare that she would by all mean have the pleasure of dining with he , if he do not object to her company on the ground of the Doones ' dishonesty ; moreover , she say that it would seem a most foolish air on her part , and one which would cause the great pain to Annie , who have be so good to she , if she should refuse to sit at table with a man who hold the King 's pardon , and be now a pattern of honesty . 
 against this I have not a word to say ; and could not help acknowledge in my heart that she be right , as well as wise , in her decision . and afterwards I discover that mother would have be much displeased , if she have decide otherwise . 
 accordingly she turn away , with one of her very sweetest smile   whose beauty none can describe   say that she must not meet a man of such fashion and renown , in her common gardening frock ; but must try to look as nice as she could , if only in honour of dear Annie . and truth to tell , when she come to dinner , everything about she be the neat and prettiest that can possibly be imagine . she contrive to match the colour so , to suit one another and her own , and yet with a certain delicate harmony of contrast , and the shape of everything be so nice , so that when she come into the room , with a crown of win modesty upon the consciousness of beauty , I be quite as proud as if the Queen of England enter . 
 my mother could not help remark , though she know that it be not mannerly , how like a princess Lorna look , now she have her good thing on ; but two thing catch Squire Faggus 's eye , after he have make a most gallant bow , and receive a most graceful courtesy ; and he keep his bright bold gaze upon they , first on one , and then on the other , until my darling be hot with blush , and I be ready to knock he down if he have not be our visitor . but here again I should have be wrong , as I be apt to be in those day ; for Tom intend no harm whatever , and his gaze be of pure curiosity ; though Annie herself be vex with it . the two object of his close regard , be first , and most worthily , Lorna 's face , and secondly , the ancient necklace restore to she by Sir Ensor Doone . 
 now wish to save my darling 's comfort , and to keep thing quiet , I shout out that dinner be ready , so that half the parish could hear I ; upon which my mother laugh , and chid I , and despatch her guest before she . and a very good dinner we make , I remember , and a very happy one ; attend to the woman first , as now be the manner of eating ; except among the workman . with they , of course , it be needful that the man   who have his hour fix   should be serve first , and make the utmost of his time for feeding , while the woman may go on , as much as ever they please , afterwards . but with we , who be not bind to time , there be no such reason to be quote ; and the woman be the weak vessel , should be the first to begin to fill . and so we always arrange it . 
 now , though our Annie be a graceful maid , and Lizzie a very learn one , you should have see how differently Lorna manage her dining ; she never take more than about a quarter of a mouthful at a time , and she never appear to be chew that , although she must have do so . indeed , she appear to dine as if it be a matter of no consequence , and as if she could think of other thing more than of her business . all this , and her own manner of eat , I describe to Eliza once , when I want to vex she for something very spiteful that she have say ; and I never succeed so well before , for the girl be quite outrageous , have her own perception of it , which make my observation ten time as bitter to she . and I be not sure but what she cease to like poor Lorna from that day ; and if so , I be quite pay out , as I well deserve , for my bit of satire . 
 for it strike I that of all human dealing , satire be the very low , and most mean and common . it be the equivalent in word of what bullying be in deed ; and no more bespeak a clever man , than the other do a brave one . these two wretched trick exalt a fool in his own low esteem , but never in his neighbour 's ; for the deep common sense of our nature tell that no man of a genial heart , or of any spread of mind , can take pride in either . and though a good man may commit the one fault or the other , now and then , by way of outlet , he be sure to have compunction soon , and to scorn himself more than the sufferer . 
 now when the young maiden be go for we have quite a high dinner of fashion that day , with Betty Muxworthy waiting , and Gwenny Carfax at the gravy and only mother , and Tom , and I remain at the white deal table , with brandy , and schnapp , and hot water jug ; Squire Faggus say quite suddenly , and perhaps on purpose to take we aback , in case of our hiding anything , ' what do you know of the history of that beautiful maiden , good mother ? ' 
 ' not half so much as my son do , ' mother answer , with a soft smile at I ; ' and when John do not choose to tell a thing , wild horse will not pull it out of he . ' 
 ' that be not at all like I , mother , ' I reply rather sadly ; ' you know almost every word about Lorna , quite as well as I do . ' 
 ' almost every word , I believe , John ; for you never tell a falsehood . but the few unknown may be of all the most important to I . ' 
 to this I make no answer , for fear of go beyond the truth , or else of make mischief . not that I have , or wish to have , any mystery with mother ; neither be there in pure truth , any mystery in the matter ; to the utmost of my knowledge . and the only thing that I have keep back , solely for mother 's comfort , be the death of poor Lord Alan Brandir   if indeed he be dead   and the connection of Marwood de Whichehalse with the dealing of the Doones , and the threat of Carver Doone against my own prosperity ; and , may be , one or two little thing harrow more than edify . 
 ' come , come , ' say Master Faggus , smile very pleasantly , ' you two understand each other , if any two on earth do . ah , if I have only have a mother , how different I might have be ! ' and with that he sigh , in the tone which always overcome mother upon that subject , and have something to do with his get Annie ; and then he produce his pretty box , full of roll tobacco , and offer I one , as I now have join the goodly company of smoker . so I take it , and watch what he do with his own , lest I might go wrong about mine . 
 but when our cylinder be both light , and I enjoy mine wonderfully , and astonishing mother by my skill , Tom Faggus tell we that he be sure he have see my Lorna 's face before , many and many year ago , when she be quite a little child , but he could not remember where it be , or anything more about it at present ; though he would try to do so afterwards . he could not be mistaken , he say , for he have notice her eye especially ; and have never see such eye before , neither again , until this day . I ask he if he have ever venture into the Doone - valley ; but he shake his head , and reply that he value his life a deal too much for that . then we put it to he , whether anything might assist his memory ; but he say that he know not of aught to do so , unless it be another glass of schnapp . 
 this be provide , he grow very wise , and tell we clearly and candidly that we be both very foolish . for he say that we be keep Lorna , at the risk not only of our stock , and the house above our head , but also of our precious life ; and after all be she worth it , although so very beautiful ? upon which I tell he , with indignation , that her beauty be the least part of her goodness , and that I would thank he for his opinion when I have request it . 
 ' Bravo , our John Ridd ! ' he answer ; ' fool will be fool till the end of the chapter ; and I might be as big a one , if I be in thy shoe , John . nevertheless , in the name of God , do not   let that helpless child go about with a thing worth half the county on she . ' 
 ' she be worth all the county herself , ' say I , ' and all England put together ; but she have nothing worth half a rick of hay upon she ; for the ring I give her cost only , ' and here I stop , for mother be look , and I never would tell she how much it have cost I ; though she have try fifty time to find out . 
 ' Tush , the ring ! ' Tom Faggus cry , with a contempt that move I : ' I would never have stop a man for that . but the necklace , you great oaf , the necklace be worth all your farm put together , and your Uncle Ben 's fortune to the back of it ; ay , and all the town of Dulverton . ' 
 ' what , ' say I , ' that common glass thing , which she have have from her childhood ! ' 
 ' Glass indeed ! they be the fine brilliant ever I set eye on ; and I have handle a good many . ' 
 ' surely , ' cry mother , now flush as red as Tom 's own cheek with excitement , ' you must be wrong , or the young mistress would herself have know it . ' 
 I be greatly pleased with my mother , for call Lorna ' the young mistress ' ; it be not do for the sake of her diamond , whether they be glass or not ; but because she feel as I have do , that Tom Faggus , a man of no birth whatever , be speak beyond his mark , in call a lady like Lorna a helpless child ; as well as in his general tone , which display no deference . he might have be use to the quality , in the way of stop their coach , or roystere at hotel with they ; but he never have meet a high lady before , in equality , and upon virtue ; and we both feel that he ought to have know it , and to have thank we for the opportunity , in a word , to have behave a great deal more humbly than he have even try to do . 
 ' trust I , ' answer Tom , in his lofty manner , which Annie say be ' so noble , ' but which seem to I rather flashy , ' trust I , good mother , and simple John , for know brilliant , when I see they . I would have stop an eight - horse coach , with four carabine out - rider , for such a booty as that . but alas , those day be over ; those be day worth live in . ah , I never shall know the like again . how fine it be by moonlight ! ' 
 ' Master Faggus , ' begin my mother , with a manner of some dignity , such as she could sometimes use , by right of her integrity , and thorough kindness to every one , ' this be not the tone in which you have hitherto speak to I about your former pursuit and life , I fear that the spirit ' but here she stop , because the spirit be her own , and Tom be our visitor , ' what I mean , Master Faggus , be this : you have win my daughter 's heart somehow ; and you win my consent to the matter through your honest sorrow , and manly undertaking to lead a different life , and touch no property but your own . Annie be my eld daughter , and the child of a most upright man . I love she good of all on earth , next to my boy John here ' here mother give I a mighty squeeze , to be sure that she would have I at least ' and I will not risk my Annie 's life with a man who yearn for the highway . ' 
 have make this very long speech   for she , mother come home upon my shoulder , and weep so that   but for heed she   I would have take Tom by the nose , and throw he , and Winnie after he , over our farm - yard gate . for I be violent when rouse ; and freely hereby acknowledge it ; though even my enemy will own that it take a great deal to rouse I . but I do consider the grief and tear   when justly cause   of my dear friend , to be a great deal to rouse I . 




 CHAPTER XLVII 

 JEREMY in DANGER 

 nothing very long abide , as the great of all writer   in whose extent I be for ever lose in raptured wonder , and yet for ever quite at home , as if his heart be mine , although his brain so different , in a word as Mr. William Shakespeare , in every one of his work insist , with a humour melancholy . and if my journey to London lead to nothing else of advancement , it take I a hundred year in front of what I might else have be , by the most simple accident . 
 two woman be scold one another across the road , very violently , both from upstair window ; and I in my hurry for quiet life , and not know what might come down upon I , quicken my step for the near corner . but suddenly something fall on my head ; and at first I be afraid to look , especially as it weigh heavily . but hear no breakage of ware , and only the other scold laugh heartily , I turn I about and espy a book , which one have cast at the other , hop to break her window . so I take the book , and tender it at the door of the house from which it have fall ; but the watchman come along just then , and the man at the door declare that it never come from their house , and beg I to say no more . this I promise readily , never wish to make mischief ; and I say , ' good sir , now take the book ; I will go on to my business . ' but he answer that he would do no such thing ; for the book alone , be hurl so hard , would convict his people of a lewd assault ; and he beg I , if I would do a good turn , to put the book under my coat and go . and so I do : in part at least . for I do not put the book under my coat , but go along with it openly , look for any to challenge it . now this book , so acquire , have be not only the joy of my young day , and main delight of my manhood , but also the comfort , and even the hope , of my now decline year . in a word , it be next to my Bible to I , and write in equal English ; and if you espy any goodness whatever in my own loose style of writing , you must not thank I , John Ridd , for it , but the writer who hold the champion 's belt in wit , as I once do in wrestling . 
 now , as nothing very long abide , it can not be expect that a woman 's anger should last very long , if she be at all of the proper sort . and my mother , be one of the very good , could not long retain she wrath against the Squire Faggus especially when she come to reflect , upon Annie 's suggestion , how natural , and one might say , how inevitable it be that a young man fond of adventure and change and win good profit by jeopardy , should not settle down without some regret to a fix abode and a life of sameness , however safe and respectable . and even as Annie put the case , Tom deserve the great credit for vanquish so nobly these yearning of his nature ; and it seem very hard to upbraid he , consider how good his motif be ; neither could Annie understand how mother could reconcile it with her knowledge of the Bible , and the one sheep that be lose , and the hundredth piece of silver , and the man that go down to Jericho . 
 whether Annie 's logic be good and sound , I be sure I can not tell ; but it seem to I that she ought to have let the Jericho traveller alone , inasmuch as he rather fall among Tom Fagusses , than resemble they . however , her reasoning be too much for mother to hold out against ; and Tom be replace , and more than that , be regard now as an injure man . but how my mother contrive to know , that because she have be too hard upon Tom , he must be right about the necklace , be a point which I never could clearly perceive , though no doubt she could explain it . 
 to prove herself right in the conclusion , she go herself to fetch Lorna , that the trinket might be examine , before the day grow dark . my darling come in , with a very quick glance and smile at my cigarro   for I be have the third by this time , to keep thing in amity ; and I wave it towards she , as much as to say , ' you see that I can do it . ' and then mother lead she up to the light , for Tom to examine her necklace . 
 on the shapely curve of her neck it hang , like dewdrop upon a white hyacinth ; and I be vex that Tom should have the chance to see it there . but even if she have read my thought , or outrun they with her own , Lorna turn away , and softly take the jewel from the place which so much adorn they . and as she turn away , they sparkle through the rich dark wave of hair . then she lay the glitter circlet in my mother 's hand ; and Tom Faggus take it eagerly , and bear it to the window . 
 ' do not   you go out of sight , ' I say ; ' you can not resist such thing as those , if they be what you think they . ' 
 ' Jack , I shall have to trounce thee yet . I be now a man of honour , and entitle to the duello . what will you take for it , Mistress Lorna ? at a hazard , say now . ' 
 ' I be not accustomed to sell thing , sir , ' reply Lorna , who do not like he much , else she would have answer sportively , ' what be it worth , in your opinion ? ' 
 ' do you think it be worth five pound , now ? ' 
 ' oh , no ! I never have so much money as that in all my life . it be very bright , and very pretty ; but it can not be worth five pound , I be sure . ' 
 ' what a chance for a bargain ! oh , if it be not for Annie , I could make my fortune . ' 
 ' but , sir , I would not sell it to you , not for twenty time five pound . my grandfather be so kind about it ; and I think it belong to my mother . ' 
 ' there be twenty - five rise diamond in it , and twenty - five large brilliant that can not be match in London . how say you , Mistress Lorna , to a hundred thousand pound ? ' 
 my darling 's eye so flash at this , bright than any diamond , that I say to myself , ' well , all have fault ; and now I have find out Lorna 's she be fond of money ! ' and then I sigh rather heavily ; for of all fault this seem to I one of the bad in a woman . but even before my sigh be finish , I have cause to condemn myself . for Lorna take the necklace very quietly from the hand of Squire Faggus , who have not half do with admire it , and she go up to my mother with the sweetest smile I ever see . 
 ' dear kind mother , I be so glad , ' she say in a whisper , coax mother out of sight of all but I ; ' now you will have it , will not   you , dear ? and I shall be so happy ; for a thousandth part of your kindness to I no jewel in the world can match . ' 
 I can not lay before you the grace with which she do it , all the air of seek favour , rather than confer it , and the high - breed fear of give offence , which be of all fear the noble . Mother know not what to say . of course she would never dream of take such a gift as that ; and yet she see how sadly Lorna would be disappoint . therefore , mother do , from habit , what she almost always do , she call I to help she . but know that my eye be full for anything noble move I so , quite as rashly as thing pitiful I pretend not to hear my mother , but to see a wild cat in the dairy . 
 therefore I can not tell what mother say in reply to Lorna ; for when I come back , quite eager to let my love know how I worship she , and how deeply I be ashamed of myself , for meanly wrong she in my heart , behold Tom Faggus have get again the necklace which have such charm for he , and be deliver all around   but especially to Annie , who be wonder at his learning   a dissertation on precious stone , and his sentiment about those in his hand . he say that the work be very ancient , but undoubtedly very good ; the cutting of every line be true , and every angle be in its place . and this he say , make all the difference in the lustre of the stone , and therefore in its value . for if the facet be ill - match , and the point of light so ever little out of perfect harmony , all the lustre of the jewel would be loose and wavering , and the central fire dull ; instead of answer , as it should , to all possibility of gaze , and overpower any eye intent on its deep mystery . we laugh at the squire 's dissertation ; for how should he know all these thing , be nothing well , and indeed much bad than a mere Northmolton blacksmith ? he take our laughter with much good nature ; have Annie to squeeze his hand and convey her grief at our ignorance : but he say that of one thing he be quite certain , and therein I believe he . to wit , that a trinket of this kind never could have belong to any ignoble family , but to one of the very high and most wealthy in England . and look at Lorna , I feel that she must have come from a high source than the very good of diamond . 
 Tom Faggus say that the necklace be make , he would answer for it , in Amsterdam , two or three hundred year ago , long before London jeweller have begin to meddle with diamond ; and on the gold clasp he find some letter , do in some invert way , the meaning of which be beyond he ; also a bearing of some kind , which he believe be a mountain - cat . and thereupon he declare that now he have earn another glass of schnapp , and would mistress Lorna mix it for he ? 
 I be amazed at his impudence ; and Annie , who think this her business , do not look well please ; and I hop that Lorna would tell he at once to go and do it for himself . but instead of that she rise to do it with a soft humility , which go direct to the heart of Tom ; and he leap up with a curse at himself , and take the hot water from she , and would not allow she to do anything except to put the sugar in ; and then he bow to she grandly . I know what Lorna be think of ; she be think all the time that her necklace have be take by the Doones with violence upon some great robbery ; and that Squire Faggus know it , though he would not show his knowledge ; and that this be perhaps the reason why mother have refuse it so . 
 we say no more about the necklace for a long time afterwards ; neither do my darling wear it , now that she know its value , but do not know its history . she come to I the very next day , try to look cheerful , and beg I if I love she   never mind how little   to take charge of it again , as I once have do before , and not even to let she know in what place I store it . I tell she that this last request I could not comply with ; for have be round her neck so often , it be now a sacred thing , more than a million pound could be . therefore it should dwell for the present in the neighbourhood of my heart ; and so could not be far from she . at this she smile her own sweet smile , and touch my forehead with her lip , and wish that she could only learn how to deserve such love as mine . 
 Tom Faggus take his good departure , which be a kind farewell to I , on the very day I be speak of , the day after his arrival . Tom be a thoroughly upright man , accord to his own standard ; and you might rely upon he always , up to a certain point I mean , to be there or thereabout . but sometimes thing be too many for Tom , especially with ardent spirit , and then he judge , perhaps too much , with only himself for the jury . at any rate , I would trust he fully , for candour and for honesty , in almost every case in which he himself could have no interest . and so we get on very well together ; and he think I a fool ; and I try my good not to think anything bad of he . 
 Scarcely be Tom clean out of sight , and Annie 's tear not dry yet   for she always make a point of cry upon his departure , when in come Master Jeremy Stickles , splash with mud from head to foot , and not in the very good of humour , though happy to get back again . 
 ' curse those fellow ! ' he cry , with a stamp which send the water hiss from his boot upon the ember ; ' a pretty plight you may call this , for his Majesty 's Commissioner to return to his headquarters in ! Annie , my dear , ' for he be always very affable with Annie , ' will you help I off with my overall , and then turn your pretty hand to the gridiron ? not a blessed morsel have I touch for more than twenty - four hour . ' 
 ' surely then you must be quite starve , sir , ' my sister reply with the great zeal ; for she do love a man with an appetite ; ' how glad I be that the fire be clear ! ' but Lizzie , who happen to be there , say with her peculiar smile , 
 ' Master Stickles must be use to it ; for he never come back without tell we that . ' 
 ' hush ! ' cry Annie , quite shocked with she ; ' how would you like to be use to it ? now , Betty , be quick with the thing for I . pork , or mutton , or deer 's meat , sir ? we have some cure since the autumn . ' 
 ' oh , deer 's meat , by all mean , ' Jeremy Stickles answer ; ' I have taste none since I leave you , though dream of it often . well , this be well than be chase over the moor for one 's life , John . all the way from Landacre Bridge , I have ride a race for my precious life , at the peril of my limb and neck . three great Doones gallop after I , and a good job for I that they be so big , or they must have overtake I . just go and see to my horse , John , that be an excellent lad . he deserve a good turn this day , from I ; and I will render it to he . ' 
 however he leave I to do it , while he make himself comfortable : and in truth the horse require care ; he be blow so that he could hardly stand , and plaster with mud , and steam so that the stable be quite full with it . by the time I have put the poor fellow to right , his master have finish dinner , and be in a more pleasant humour , have even offer to kiss Annie , out of pure gratitude , as he say ; but Annie answer with spirit that gratitude must not be show by increase the obligation . Jeremy make reply to this that his only way to be grateful then be to tell we his story : and so he do , at great length than I can here repeat it ; for it do not bear particularly upon Lorna 's fortune . 
 it appear that as he be rid towards we from the town of Southmolton in Devonshire , he find the road very soft and heavy , and the flood out in all direction ; but meet with no other difficulty until he come to Landacre Bridge . he have only a single trooper with he , a man not of the militia but of the King 's army , whom Jeremy have bring from Exeter . as these two descend towards the bridge they observe that both the Kensford water and the River Barle be pour down in mighty flood from the melting of the snow . so great indeed be the torrent , after they unite , that only the parapet of the bridge could be see above the water , the road across either bank be cover and very deep on the hither side . the trooper do not like the look of it , and propose to ride back again , and round by way of Simonsbath , where the stream be small . but Stickles would not have it so , and dash into the river , swam his horse for the bridge , and gain it with some little trouble ; and there he find the water not more than up to his horse 's knee perhaps . on the crown of the bridge he turn his horse to watch the trooper 's passage , and to help he with direction ; when suddenly he see he fall headlong into the torrent , and hear the report of a gun from behind , and feel a shock to his own body , such as lift he out of the saddle . turn round he behold three man , rise up from behind the hedge on one side of his onward road , two of they ready to load again , and one with his gun unfire , wait to get good aim at he . then Jeremy do a gallant thing , for which I doubt whether I should have have the presence of mind in danger . he see that to swim his horse back again would be almost certain death ; as afford such a target , where even a wound must be fatal . therefore he strike the spur into the nag , and ride through the water straight at the man who be point the long gun at he . if the horse have be carry off his leg , there must have be an end of Jeremy ; for the other man be get ready to have another shot at he . but luckily the horse gallop right on without any need for swimming , be himself excited , no doubt , by all he have see and hear of it . and Jeremy lay almost flat on his neck , so as to give little space for good aim , with the mane toss wildly in front of he . now if that young fellow with the gun have his brain as ready as his flint be , he would have shoot the horse at once , and then have Stickles at his mercy ; but instead of that he let fly at the man , and miss he altogether , be scar perhaps by the pistol which Jeremy show he the mouth of . and gallop by at full speed , Master Stickles try to leave his mark behind he , for he change the aim of his pistol to the big man , who be load his gun and curse like ten cannon . but the pistol miss fire , no doubt from the flood which have gurgle in over the holster ; and Jeremy see three horse tether at a gate just up the hill , know that he have not yet escape , but have more of danger behind he . he try his other great pistol at one of the horse tether there , so as to lessen   if possible   the number of his pursuer . but the powder again fail he ; and he durst not stop to cut the bridle , bear the man come up the hill . so he even make the most of his start , thank God that his weight be light , compare at least to what theirs be . 
 and another thing he have notice which give he some hope of escape , to wit that the horse of the Doones , although very handsome animal , be suffer still from the bitter effect of the late long frost , and the scarcity of fodder . ' if they do not catch I up , or shoot I , in the course of the first two mile , I may see my home again ' ; this be what he say to himself as he turn to mark what they be about , from the brow of the steep hill . he see the flood valley shin with the breadth of water , and the trooper 's horse on the other side , shake his drench flank and neighing ; and half - way down the hill he see the three Doones mount hastily . and then he know that his only chance lie in the stoutness of his steed . 
 the horse be in pretty good condition ; and the rider know he thoroughly , and how to make the most of he ; and though they have travel some mile that day through very heavy ground , the bath in the river have wash the mud off , and be some refreshment . therefore Stickles encourage his nag , and put he into a good hard gallop , head away towards Withycombe . at first he have think of turn to the right , and make off for Withypool , a mile or so down the valley ; but his good sense tell he that no one there would dare to protect he against the Doones , so he resolve to go on his way ; yet fast than he have intend . 
 the three villain come after he , with all the speed they could muster , make sure from the badness of the road that he must stick fast ere long , and so be at their mercy . and this be Jeremy 's chief fear , for the ground be soft and thoroughly rotten , after so much frost and snow , the poor horse have terrible work of it , with no time to pick the way ; and even more good luck than skill be need to keep he from founder . how Jeremy pray for an Exmoor fog   such as he have often swear at , that he might turn aside and lurk , while his pursuer go past he ! but no fog come , nor even a storm to damp the priming of their gun ; neither be wood or coppice nigh , nor any place to hide in ; only hill , and moor , and valley ; with fly shadow over they , and great bank of snow in the corner . at one time poor Stickles be quite in despair ; for after leap a little brook which cross the track at Newland , be stick fast in a ' dancing bog , ' as we call they upon Exmoor . the horse have break through the crust of moss and sedge and marishwee , and could do nothing but wallow and sink , with the black water spirt over he . and Jeremy , struggle with all his might , see the three villain now top the crest , less than a furlong behind he ; and hear they shout in their savage delight . with the calmness of despair , he yet resolve to have one more try for it ; and scramble over the horse 's head , gain firm land , and tug at the bridle . the poor nag reply with all his power to the call upon his courage , and rear his forefeet out of the slough , and with strain eyeball gaze at he . ' now , ' say Jeremy , ' now , my fine fellow ! ' lift he with the bridle , and the brave beast gather the roll of his loin , and spring from his quagmire haunch . one more spring , and he be on earth again , instead of be under it ; and Jeremy leap on his back , and stoop , for he know that they would fire . two bullet whistle over he , as the horse , mad with fright , dash forward ; and in five minute more he have come to the Exe , and the pursuer have fall behind he . the Exe , though a much small stream than the Barle , now run in a foaming torrent , unbridged , and too wide for leap . but Jeremy 's horse take the water well ; and both he and his rider be lightened , as well as comfort by it . and as they pass towards Lucott hill , and strike upon the fount of Lynn , the horse of the three pursuer begin to tire under they . then Jeremy Stickles know that if he could only escape the slough , he be safe for the present ; and so he stand up in his stirrup , and give they a loud halloo , as if they have be so many fox . 
 their only answer be to fire the remain charge at he ; but the distance be too great for any aim from horseback ; and the drop bullet idly plough the sod upon one side of he . he acknowledge it with a wave of his hat , and lay one thumb to his nose , in the manner fashionable in London for expression of contempt . however , they follow he yet far ; hop to make he pay out dearly , if he should only miss the track , or fall upon morass . but the neighbourhood of our Lynn stream be not so very boggy ; and the King 's messenger now know his way as well as any of his pursuer do ; and so he arrive at Plover 's barrow , thankful , and in rare appetite . 
 ' but be the poor soldier drown ? ' ask Annie ; ' and you never go to look for he ! oh , how very dreadful ! ' 
 ' Shot , or drown ; I know not which . thank God it be only a trooper . but they shall pay for it , as dearly as if it have be a captain . ' 
 ' and how be it you be strike by a bullet , and only shake in your saddle ? have you a coat of mail on , or of milanese chain - armour ? now , Master Stickles , have you ? ' 
 ' no , Mistress Lizzie ; we do not wear thing of that kind nowadays . you be apt , I perceive , at romance . but I happen to have a little flat bottle of the good stoneware sling beneath my saddle - cloak , and fill with the very good eau de vie , from the George Hotel , at Southmolton . the brand of it now be upon my back . oh , the murderous scoundrel , what a brave spirit they have spill ! ' 
 ' you have well set to and thank God , ' say I , ' that they have not spill a braver one . ' 




 CHAPTER XLVIII 

 every MAN must DEFEND himself 

 it be only right in Jeremy Stickles , and of the simple common sense , that he would not tell , before our girl , what the result of his journey be . but he lead I aside in the course of the evening , and tell I all about it ; say that I know , as well as he do , that it be not woman 's business . this I take , as it be mean , for a gentle caution that Lorna   whom he have not see as yet   must not be inform of any of his doing . Herein I quite agree with he ; not only for his furtherance , but because I always think that woman , of whatever mind , be good when least they meddle with the thing that appertain to man . 
 Master Stickles complain that the weather have be against he bitterly , close all the road around he ; even as it have do with we . it have take he eight day , he say , to get from Exeter to Plymouth ; whither he find that most of the troop have be draft off from Exeter . when all be tell , there be but a battalion of one of the King 's horse regiment , and two company of foot soldier ; and their commander have order , later than the date of Jeremy 's commission , on no account to quit the southern coast , and march inland . therefore , although they would gladly have come for a brush with the celebrated Doones , it be more than they durst attempt , in the face of their instruction . however , they spar he a single trooper , as a companion of the road , and to prove to the justice of the county , and the lord lieutenant , that he have their approval . 
 to these authority Master Stickles now be force to address himself , although he would rather have have one trooper than a score from the very well train band . for these train band have afford very good soldier , in the time of the civil war , and for some year afterwards ; but now their discipline be go ; and the young generation have see no real fighting . each would have his own opinion , and would want to argue it ; and if he be not allow , he go about his duty in such a temper as to prove that his own way be the good . 
 neither be this the bad of it ; for Jeremy make no doubt but what   if he could only get the militia to turn out in force   he might manage , with the help of his own man , to force the stronghold of the enemy ; but the truth be that the officer , know how hard it would be to collect their man at that time of the year , and in that state of the weather , begin with one accord to make every possible excuse . and especially they press this point , that Bagworthy be not in their county ; the Devonshire people affirm vehemently that it lie in the shire of Somerset , and the Somersetshire folk averring , even with imprecation , that it lie in Devonshire . now I believe the truth to be that the boundary of the two county , as well as of Oare and Brendon parish , be define by the Bagworthy river ; so that the disputant on both side be both right and wrong . 
 upon this , Master Stickles suggest , and as I think very sensibly , that the two county should unite , and equally contribute to the extirpation of this pest , which sham and injure they both alike . but hence arise another difficulty ; for the man of Devon say they would march when Somerset have take the field ; and the son of Somerset reply that indeed they be quite ready , but what be their cousin of Devonshire do ? and so it come to pass that the King 's Commissioner return without any army whatever ; but with promise of two hundred man when the road should be more passable . and meanwhile , what be we to do , abandon as we be to the mercy of the Doones , with only our own hand to help we ? and herein I grieve at my own folly , in have let Tom Faggus go , whose wit and courage would have be worth at least half a dozen man to we . upon this matter I hold long council with my good friend Stickles ; tell he all about Lorna 's presence , and what I know of her history . he agree with I that we could not hope to escape an attack from the outlaws , and the more especially now that they know himself to be return to we . also he praise I for my forethought in have thresh out all our corn , and hide the produce in such a manner that they be not likely to find it . furthermore , he recommend that all the entrance to the house should at once be strengthen , and a watch must be maintain at night ; and he think it wiser that I should go   late as it be   to Lynmouth , if a horse could pass the valley , and fetch every one of his mount trooper , who might now be quarter there . also if any man of courage , though capable only of handle a pitchfork , could be find in the neighbourhood , I be to try to summon they . but our district be so thinly people , that I have little faith in this ; however my errand be give I , and I set forth upon it ; for John Fry be afraid of the water . 
 know how fiercely the flood be out , I resolve to travel the high road , by Cosgate and through Countisbury ; therefore I swam my horse through the Lynn , at the ford below our house   where sometimes you may step across , and thence gallop up and along the hill . I could see all the inland valley ribbon'd with broad water ; and in every winding crook , the bank of snow that feed they ; while on my right the turbid sea be flake with April shower . but when I descend the hill towards Lynmouth , I fear that my journey be all in vain . 
 for the East Lynn   which be our river   be ramp and roar frightfully , lash whole trunk of tree on the rock , and rend they , and grind they . and into it rush , from the opposite side , a torrent even madder ; upset what it come to aid ; shatter wave with boiling billow , and scatter wrath with fury . it be certain death to attempt the passage : and the little wooden footbridge have be carry away long ago . and the man I be seek must be , of course , on the other side of this deluge , for on my side there be not a single house . 
 I follow the bank of the flood to the beach , some two or three hundred yard below ; and there have the luck to see will watcombe on the opposite side , caulk an old boat . though I could not make he hear a word , from the deafen roar of the torrent , I get he to understand at last that I want to cross over . upon this he fetch another man , and the two of they launch a boat ; and paddle well out to sea , fetched round the mouth of the frantic river . the other man prove to be Stickles 's chief mate ; and so he go back and fetch his comrade , bring their weapon , but leave their horse behind . as it happen there be but four of they ; however , to have even these be a help ; and I start again at full speed for my home ; for the man must follow afoot , and cross our river high up on the moorland . 
 this take they a long way round , and the track be rather bad to find , and the sky already darken ; so that I arrive at Plover 's barrow more than two hour before they . but they have do a sagacious thing , which be well worth the delay ; for by hoist their flag upon the hill , they fetch the two watchman from the Foreland , and add they to their number . 
 it be lucky that I come home so soon ; for I find the house in a great commotion , and all the woman tremble . when I ask what the matter be , Lorna , who seem the most self - possess , answer that it be all her fault , for she alone have frighten they . and this in the follow manner . she have steal out to the garden towards dusk , to watch some favourite hyacinth just push up , like a baby 's tooth , and just attract the fatal notice of a great house - snail at night - time . Lorna at last have discover the glutton , and be bear he off in triumph to the tribunal of the duck , when she descry two glitter eye glare at she steadfastly , from the elder - bush beyond the stream . the elder be smooth its wrinkle leaf , be at least two month behind time ; and among they this calm cruel face appear ; and she know it be the face of Carver Doone . 
 the maiden , although so use to terror   as she tell I once before , lose all presence of mind hereat , and could neither shriek nor fly , but only gaze , as if bewitch . then Carver Doone , with his deadly smile , gloat upon her horror , lift his long gun , and point full at Lorna 's heart . in vain she strove to turn away ; fright have stricken her stiff as stone . with the inborn love of life , she try to cover the vital part wherein the wing death must lodge for she know Carver 's certain aim but her hand hang numb , and heavy ; in nothing but her eye be life . 
 with no sign of pity in his face , no quiver of relent , but a well - pleased grin at all the charming palsy of his victim , Carver Doone lower , inch by inch , the muzzle of his gun . when it point to the ground , between her delicate arched instep , he pull the trigger , and the bullet fling the mould all over she . it be a refinement of bullying , for which I swear to God that night , upon my knee , in secret , that I would smite down Carver Doone or else he should smite I down . Base beast ! what large humanity , or what dream of divinity , could make a man put up with this ? 
 my darling   the lovely , and most harmless , in the world of maidens , fall away on a bank of grass , and weep at her own cowardice ; and tremble , and wonder where I be ; and what I would think of this . good God ! what could I think of it ? she over - rat my slow nature , to admit the question . 
 while she lean there , quite unable yet to save herself , Carver come to the brink of the flood , which alone be between they ; and then he stroke his jet - black beard , and wait for Lorna to begin . very likely , he think that she would thank he for his kindness to she . but she be now recover the power of her nimble limb ; and ready to be off like hope , and wonder at her own cowardice . 
 ' I have spar you this time , ' he say , in his deep calm voice , ' only because it suit my plan ; and I never yield to temper . but unless you come back to - morrow , pure , and with all you take away , and teach I to destroy that fool , who have destroy himself for you , your death be here , your death be here , where it have long be wait . ' 
 although his gun be empty , he strike the breech of it with his finger ; and then he turn away , not deign even once to look back again ; and Lorna see his giant figure stride across the meadow - land , as if the ridd be nobody , and he the proper owner . both mother and I be greatly hurt at hearing of this insolence : for we have own that meadow , from the time of the great Alfred ; and even when that good king lie in the Isle of Athelney , he have a Ridd along with he . 
 now I speak to Lorna gently , see how much she have be try ; and I praise she for her courage , in not have run away , when she be so unable ; and my darling be pleased with this , and smile upon I for say it ; though she know right well that , in this matter , my judgment be not impartial . but you may take this as a general rule , that a woman like praise from the man whom she love , and can not stop always to balance it . 
 now expect a sharp attack that night when Jeremy Stickles the more expect , after the word of Carver , which seem to be mean to mislead we we prepare a great quantity of knuckle of pork , and a ham in full cut , and a fillet of hung mutton . for we would almost surrender rather than keep our garrison hungry . and all our man be exceedingly brave ; and count their round of the house in half - pint . 
 before the maiden go to bed , Lorna make a remark which seem to I a very clever one , and then I wonder how on earth it have never occur to I before . but first she have do a thing which I could not in the least approve of : for she have go up to my mother , and throw herself into her arm , and beg to be allow to return to Glen Doone . 
 ' my child , be you unhappy here ? ' mother ask she , very gently , for she have begin to regard she now as a daughter of her own . 
 ' oh , no ! too happy , by far too happy , Mrs. Ridd . I never know rest or peace before , or meet with real kindness . but I can not be so ungrateful , I can not be so wicked , as to bring you all into deadly peril , for my sake alone . let I go : you must not pay this great price for my happiness . ' 
 ' dear child , we be pay no price at all , ' reply my mother , embrace she ; ' we be not threaten for your sake only . ask John , he will tell you . he know every bit about politic , and this be a political matter . ' 
 dear mother be rather proud in her heart , as well as terribly frightened , at the importance now accrue to Plover 's Barrows farm ; and she often declare that it would be as famous in history as the Rye House , or the meal - tub , or even the great black box , in which she be a firm believer : and even my knowledge of politic could not move she upon that matter . ' such thing have happen before , ' she would say , shake her head with its wisdom , ' and why might they not happen again ? woman would be woman , and man would be man , to the end of the chapter ; and if she have be in Lucy Water 's place , she would keep it quiet , as she have do ' ; and then she would look round , for fear , lest either of her daughter have hear she ; ' but now , can you give I any reason , why it may not have be so ? you be so fearfully positive , John : just as man always be . ' ' no , ' I use to say ; ' I can give you no reason , why it may not have be so , mother . but the question be , if it be so , or not ; rather than what it might have be . and , I think , it be pretty good proof against it , that what nine man of every ten in England would only too gladly believe , if true , be nevertheless keep dark from they . ' ' there you be again , John , ' mother would reply , ' all about man , and not a single word about woman . if you have any argument at all , you would own that marriage be a question upon which woman be the good judge . ' ' oh ! ' I would groan in my spirit , and go ; leave my dearest mother quite sure , that now at last she must have convince I . but if mother have know that Jeremy Stickles be work against the black box , and its issue , I doubt whether he would have fare so well , even though he be a visitor . however , she know that something be do and something of importance ; and she trust in God for the rest of it . only she use te tell I , very seriously , of an evening , ' the very least they can give you , dear John , be a coat of arm . be sure you take nothing less , dear ; and the farm can well support it . ' 
 but lo ! I have leave Lorna ever so long , anxious to consult I upon political matter . she come to I , and her eye alone ask a hundred question , which I rather have answer upon her lip than trouble her pretty ear with they . therefore I tell she nothing at all , save that the attack   if any should be   would not be make on her account ; and that if she should hear , by any chance , a trifle of a noise in the night , she be to wrap the clothe around she , and shut her beautiful eye again . on no account , whatever she do , be she to go to the window . she like my expression about her eye , and promise to do the very good she could and then she creep so very close , that I need must have she close ; and with her head on my breast she ask , 
 ' can not   you keep out of this fight , John ? ' 
 ' my own one , ' I answer , gaze through the long black lash , at the depth of radiant love ; ' I believe there will be nothing : but what there be I must see out . ' 
 ' shall I tell you what I think , John ? it be only a fancy of mine , and perhaps it be not worth tell . ' 
 ' let we have it , dear , by all mean . you know so much about their way . ' 
 ' what I believe be this , John . you know how high the river be , high than ever they be before , and twice as high , you have tell I . I believe that Glen Doone be flood , and all the house under water . ' 
 ' you little witch , ' I answer ; ' what a fool I must be not to think of it ! of course it be : it must be . the torrent from all the Bagworthy forest , and all the valley above it , and the great drift in the glen itself , never could have outlet down my famous waterslide . the valley must be under water twenty foot at least . well , if ever there be a fool , I be he , for not have thought of it . ' 
 ' I remember once before , ' say Lorna , reckon on her finger , ' when there be heavy rain , all through the autumn and winter , five or it may be six year ago , the river come down with such a rush that the water be two foot deep in our room , and we all have to camp by the cliff - edge . but you think that the flood be high now , I believe I hear you say , John . ' 
 ' I do not   think about it , my treasure , ' I answer ; ' you may trust I for understand flood , after our work at Tiverton . and I know that the deluge in all our valley be such that no live man can remember , neither will ever behold again . consider three month of snow , snow , snow , and a fortnight of rain on the top of it , and all to be drain in a few day away ! and great barricade of ice still in the river block they up , and ponde they . you may take my word for it , Mistress Lorna , that your pretty bower be six foot deep . ' 
 ' well , my bower have serve its time ' , say Lorna , blush as she remember all that have happen there ; ' and my bower now be here , John . but I be so sorry to think of all the poor woman flood out of their house and shelter in the snowdrift . however , there be one good of it : they can not send many man against we , with all this trouble upon they . ' 
 ' you be right , ' I reply ; ' how clever you be ! and that be why there be only three to cut off Master Stickles . and now we shall beat they , I make no doubt , even if they come at all . and I defy they to fire the house : the thatch be too wet for burn . ' 
 we send all the woman to bed quite early , except Gwenny Carfax and our old Betty . these two we allow to stay up , because they might be useful to we , if they could keep from quarrel . for my part , I have little fear , after what Lorna have tell I , as to the result of the combat . it be not likely that the Doones could bring more than eight or ten man against we , while their home be in such danger : and to meet these we have eight good man , include Jeremy , and myself , all well armed and resolute , besides our three farm - servant , and the parish - clerk , and the shoemaker . these five could not be trust much for any valiant conduct , although they speak very confidently over their can of cider . neither be their weapon fit for much execution , unless it be at close quarter , which they would be likely to avoid . Bill Dadds have a sickle , Jem Slocombe a flail , the cobbler have borrow the constable 's staff   for the constable would not attend , because there be no warrant , and the parish clerk have bring his pitch - pipe , which be enough to break any man 's head . but John Fry , of course , have his blunderbuss , load with tin - tack and marble , and more likely to kill the man who discharge it than any other person : but we know that John have it only for show , and to describe its quality . 
 now it be my great desire , and my chief hope , to come across Carver Doone that night , and settle the score between we ; not by any shot in the dark , but by a conflict man to man . as yet , since I come to full - grow power , I have never meet any one whom I could not play teetotum with : but now at last I have find a man whose strength be not to be laugh at . I could guess it in his face , I could tell it in his arm , I could see it in his stride and gait , which more than all the rest betray the substance of a man . and be so well use to wrestling , and to judge antagonist , I feel that here   if anywhere   I have find my match . 
 therefore I be not content to abide within the house , or go the round with the trooper ; but betook myself to the rick yard , know that the Doones be likely to begin their onset there . for they have a pleasant custom , when they visit farm - house , of light themselves towards pick up anything they want , or stab the inhabitant , by first create a blaze in the rick yard . and though our rick be all now of mere straw   except indeed two of prime clover - hay , and although on the top they be so wet that no firebrand might hurt they ; I be both unwilling to have they burn , and fearful that they might kindle , if well rouse up with fire upon the windward side . 
 by the bye , these Doones have get the bad of this pleasant trick one time . for happen to fire the rick of a lonely farm call Yeanworthy , not far above Glenthorne , they approach the house to get people 's good , and to enjoy their terror . the master of the farm be lately dead , and have leave , inside the clock - case , loaded , the great long gun , wherewith he have use to sport at the duck and the goose on the shore . now Widow Fisher take out this gun , and not care much what become of she   for she have love her husband dearly , she lay it upon the window - sill , which look upon the rick - yard ; and she back up the butt with a chest of oak drawer , and she open the window a little back , and let the muzzle out on the slope . presently five or six fine young Doones come dance a reel   as their manner be   betwixt she and the flame rick . upon which she pull the trigger with all the force of her thumb , and a quarter of a pound of duck - shot go out with a blaze on the dancer . you may suppose what their dancing be , and their reel how change to staggering , and their music none of the sweetest . one of they fall into the rick , and be burn , and bury in a ditch next day ; but the other be set upon their horse , and carry home on a path of blood . and strange to say , they never avenge this very dreadful injury ; but have hear that a woman have fire this desperate shot among they , they say that she ought to be a Doone , and inquire how old she be . 
 now I have not be so very long wait in our mow - yard , with my good gun ready , and a big club by I , before a heaviness of sleep begin to creep upon I . the flow of water be in my ear , and in my eye a hazy spreading , and upon my brain a closure , as a cobbler sew a vamp up . so I lean back in the clover - rick , and the dust of the seed and the smell come round I , without any trouble ; and I doze about Lorna , just once or twice , and what she have say about new - mow hay ; and then back go my head , and my chin go up ; and if ever a man be bl with slumber , down it come upon I , and away go I into it . 
 now this be very vile of I , and against all good resolution , even such as I would have swear to an hour ago or less . but if you have be in the water as I have , ay , and have long fight with it , after a good day 's work , and then great anxiety afterwards , and brain - work   which be not fair for I , and upon that a stout supper , mayhap you would not be so hard on my sleep ; though you feel it your duty to wake I . 




 CHAPTER XLIX 

 MAIDEN sentinel be BEST 

 it be not likely that the outlaws would attack out premise until some time after the moon be rise ; because it would be too dangerous to cross the flooded valley in the darkness of the night . and but for this consideration , I must have strive hard against the stealthy approach of slumber . but even so , it be very foolish to abandon watch , especially in such as I , who sleep like any dormouse . moreover , I have choose the very bad place in the world for such employment , with a goodly chance of awakening in a bed of solid fire . 
 and so it might have be , nay , it must have be , but for Lorna 's vigilance . her light hand upon my arm awake I , not too readily ; and leap up , I seize my club , and prepare to knock down somebody . 
 ' who be that ? ' I cry ; ' stand back , I say , and let I have fair chance at you . ' 
 ' be you go to knock I down , dear John ? ' reply the voice I love so well ; ' I be sure I should never get up again , after one blow from you , John . ' 
 ' my darling , be it you ? ' I cry ; ' and break all your order ? come back into the house at once : and nothing on your head , dear ! ' 
 ' how could I sleep , while at any moment you might be kill beneath my window ? and now be the time of real danger ; for man can see to travel . ' 
 I see at once the truth of this . the moon be high and clearly light all the water valley . to sleep any long might be death , not only to myself , but all . 
 ' the man on guard at the back of the house be fast asleep , ' she continue ; ' Gwenny , who let I out , and come with I , have hear he snore for two hour . I think the woman ought to be the watch , because they have have no travelling . where do you suppose little Gwenny be ? ' 
 ' surely not go to Glen Doone ? ' I be not sure , however : for I could believe almost anything of the cornish maiden 's hardihood . 
 ' no , ' reply Lorna , ' although she want even to do that . but of course I would not hear of it , on account of the swollen water . but she be perch on yonder tree , which command the Barrow valley . she say that they be almost sure to cross the streamlet there ; and now it be so wide and large , that she can trace it in the moonlight , half a mile beyond she . if they cross , she be sure to see they , and in good time to let we know . ' 
 ' what a shame , ' I cry , ' that the man should sleep , and the maiden be the soldier ! I will sit in that tree myself , and send little Gwenny back to you . go to bed , my good and dear ; I will take good care not to sleep again . ' 
 ' please not to send I away , dear John , ' she answer very mournfully ; ' you and I have be together through peril bad than this . I shall only be more timid , and more miserable , indoor . ' 
 ' I can not let you stay here , ' I say ; ' it be altogether impossible . do you suppose that I can fight , with you among the bullet , Lorna ? if this be the way you mean to take it , we have well go both to the apple - room , and lock ourselves in , and hide under the tile , and let they burn all the rest of the premise . ' 
 at this idea Lorna laugh , as I could see by the moonlight ; and then she say , 
 ' you be right , John . I should only do more harm than good : and of all thing I hate fight most , and disobedience next to it . therefore I will go indoor , although I can not go to bed . but promise I one thing , dearest John . you will keep yourself out of the way , now will not   you , as much as you can , for my sake ? ' 
 ' of that you may be quite certain , Lorna . I will shoot they all through the hay - rick . ' 
 ' that be right , dear , ' she answer , never doubt but what I could do it ; ' and then they can not see you , you know . but do not   think of climb that tree , John ; it be a great deal too dangerous . it be all very well for Gwenny ; she have no bone to break . ' 
 ' none worth break , you mean , I suppose . very well ; I will not climb the tree , for I should defeat my own purpose , I fear ; be such a conspicuous object . now go indoor , darling , without more word . the more you linger , the more I shall keep you . ' 
 she laugh her own bright laugh at this , and only say , ' God keep you , love ! ' and then away she trip across the yard , with the step I love to watch so . and thereupon I shoulder arm , and resolve to tramp till morning . for I be vex at my own neglect , and that Lorna should have to right it . 
 but before I have be long on duty , make the round of the rick and stable , and hail Gwenny now and then from the bottom of her tree , a short wide figure steal towards I , in and out the shadow , and I see that it be no other than the little maid herself , and that she bear some tiding . 
 ' ten on them cross the watter down yonner , ' say Gwenny , put her hand to her mouth , and seem to regard it as good news rather than otherwise : ' be arl crap up by hedgerow now . I could shutt dree on them from the bar of the gate , if so be I have your goon , young man . ' 
 ' there be no time to lose , Gwenny . run to the house and fetch Master Stickles , and all the man ; while I stay here , and watch the rick - yard . ' 
 perhaps I be wrong in heed the rick at such a time as that ; especially as only the clover be of much importance . but it seem to I like a sort of triumph that they should be even able to boast of have fire our mow - yard . therefore I stand in a nick of the clover , whence we have cut some truss , with my club in hand , and gun close by . 
 the robber ride into our yard as coolly as if they have be invite , have lift the gate from the hinge first on account of its be fasten . then they actually open our stable - door , and turn our honest horse out , and put their own rogue in the place of they . at this my breath be quite take away ; for we think so much of our horse . by this time I could see our trooper , wait in the shadow of the house , round the corner from where the Doones be , and expect the order to fire . but Jeremy Stickles very wisely keep they in readiness , until the enemy should advance upon they . 
 ' two of you lazy fellow go , ' it be the deep voice of Carver Doone , ' and make we a light , to cut their throat by . only one thing , once again . if any man touch Lorna , I will stab he where he stand . she belong to I . there be two other young damsel here , whom you may take away if you please . and the mother , I hear , be still comely . now for our right . we have bear too long the insolence of these yokel . kill every man , and every child , and burn the cursed place down . ' 
 as he speak thus blasphemously , I set my gun against his breast ; and by the light buckle from his belt , I see the little ' sight ' of brass gleam alike upon either side , and the sleek round barrel glimmering . the aim be sure as death itself . if I only draw the trigger   which go very lighily   Carver Doone would breathe no more . and yet will you believe I ? I could not pull the trigger . would to God that I have do so ! 
 for I never have take human life , neither do bodily harm to man ; beyond the little bruise , and the trifling ache and pain , which follow a good and honest bout in the wrestling ring . therefore I drop my carbine , and grasp again my club , which seem a more straight - forward implement . 
 presently two young man come towards I , bear brand of resine hemp , kindle from Carver 's lamp . the foremost of they set his torch to the rick within a yard of I , and smoke conceal I from he . I strike he with a back - handed blow on the elbow , as he bent it ; and I hear the bone of his arm break , as clearly as ever I hear a twig snap . with a roar of pain he fall on the ground , and his torch drop there , and sing he . the other man stand amazed at this , not have yet gain sight of I ; till I catch his firebrand from his hand , and strike it into his countenance . with that he leap at I ; but I catch he , in a manner learn from early wrestling , and snap his collar - bone , as I lay he upon the top of his comrade . 
 this little success so encourage I , that I be half inclined to advance , and challenge Carver Doone to meet I ; but I bear in mind that he would be apt to shoot I without ceremony ; and what be the utmost of human strength against the power of powder ? moreover , I remember my promise to sweet Lorna ; and who would be leave to defend she , if the rogue get rid of I ? 
 while I be hesitate thus   for I always continue to hesitate , except in actual conflict , a blaze of fire light up the house , and brown smoke hang around it . six of our man have let go at the Doones , by Jeremy Stickles ' order , as the villain come swagger down in the moonlight ready for rape or murder . two of they fall , and the rest hang back , to think at their leisure what this be . they be not use to this sort of thing : it be neither just nor courteous . 
 be unable any long to contain myself , as I think of Lorna 's excitement at all this noise of firing , I come across the yard , expect whether they would shoot at I . however , no one shot at I ; and I go up to Carver Doone , whom I know by his size in the moonlight , and I take he by the beard , and say , ' do you call yourself a man ? ' 
 for a moment he be so astonished that he could not answer . none have ever dare , I suppose , to look at he in that way ; and he see that he have meet his equal , or perhaps his master . and then he try a pistol at I , but I be too quick for he . 
 ' now , Carver Doone , take warning , ' I say to he , very soberly ; ' you have show yourself a fool by your contempt of I . I may not be your match in craft ; but I be in manhood . you be a despicable villain . lie low in your native muck . ' 
 and with that word , I lay he flat upon his back in our straw - yard , by a trick of the inner heel , which he could not have resist   though his strength have be twice as great as mine , unless he be a wrestler . see he down the other run , though one of they make a shot at I , and some of they get their horse , before our man come up ; and some go away without they . and among these last be Captain Carver who arise , while I be feel myself   for I have a little wound , and stride away with a train of curse enough to poison the light of the moon . 
 we gain six very good horse , by this attempt rapine , as well as two young prisoner , whom I have smite by the clover - rick . and two dead Doones be leave behind , whom   as we bury they in the churchyard , without any service over they , I for my part be most thankful that I have not kill . for to have the life of a fellow - man lay upon one 's conscience deserve he his death , or deserve it not be to my sense of right and wrong the heavy of all burden ; and the one that wear most deeply inward , with the dwelling of the mind on this view and on that of it . 
 I be inclined to pursue the enemy and try to capture more of they ; but Jeremy Stickles would not allow it , for he say that all the advantage would be upon their side , if we go hurry after they , with only the moon to guide we . and who could tell but what there might be another band of they , ready to fall upon the house , and burn it , and seize the woman , if we leave they unprotected ? when he put the case thus , I be glad enough to abide by his decision . and one thing be quite certain , that the Doones have never before receive so rude a shock , and so violent a blow to their supremacy , since first they have build up their power , and become the Lords of Exmoor . I know that Carver Doone would gnash those mighty tooth of his , and curse the man around he , for the blunder   which be in truth his own   of over - confidence and carelessness . and at the same time , all the rest would feel that such a thing have never happen , while old Sir Ensor be alive ; and that it be cause by nothing short of gross mismanagement . 
 I scarcely know who make the great fuss about my little wound , mother , or Annie , or Lorna . I be heartily ashamed to be so treat like a milksop ; but most unluckily it have be impossible to hide it . for the ball have cut along my temple , just above the eyebrow ; and be fire so near at hand , the powder too have scar I . therefore it seem a great deal bad than it really be ; and the sponging , and the plastering , and the sobbing , and the moaning , make I quite ashamed to look Master Stickles in the face . 
 however , at last I persuade they that I have no intention of give up the ghost that night ; and then they all fall to , and thank God with an emphasis quite unknown in church . and hereupon Master Stickles say , in his free and easy manner   for no one court his observation , that I be the lucky of all mortal in have a mother , and a sister , and a sweetheart , to make much of I . for his part , he say , he be just as well off in not have any to care for he . for now he might go and get shoot , or stab , or knock on the head , at his pleasure , without any one be offend . I make bold , upon this , to ask he what be become of his wife ; for I have hear he speak of have one . he say that he neither know nor care ; and perhaps I should be like he some day . that Lorna should hear such sentiment be very grievous to I . but she look at I with a smile , which prove her contempt for all such idea ; and lest anything still more unfit might be say , I dismiss the question . 
 but Master Stickles tell I afterwards , when there be no one with we , to have no faith in any woman , whatever she might seem to be . for he assure I that now he possess very large experience , for so small a matter ; be thoroughly acquaint with woman of every class , from lady of the high blood , to Bonarobas , and peasant ' wife : and that they all might be divide into three head and no more ; that be to say as follow . first , the very hot and passionate , who be only contemptible ; second , the cold and indifferent , who be simply odious ; and third , the mixture of the other two , who have the bad quality of both . as for reason , none of they have it ; it be like a seal book to they , which if they ever try to open , they begin at the back of the cover . 
 now I do not like to hear such thing ; and to I they appear to be insolent , as well as narrow - minded . for if you come to that , why might not man , as well as woman , be divide into the same three class , and be pronounce upon by woman , as being even more devoid than their gentle judge of reason ? moreover , I know , both from my own sense , and from the great of all great poet , that there be , and always have be , plenty of woman , good , and gentle , warm - hearted , love , and lovable ; very keen , moreover , at see the right , be it by reason , or otherwise . and upon the whole , I prefer they much to the people of my own sex , as goodness of heart be more important than to show good reason for have it . and so I say to Jeremy , 
 ' you have be ill - treat , perhaps , Master Stickles , by some woman or other ? ' 
 ' ah , that have I , ' he reply with an oath ; ' and the last on earth who should serve I so , the woman who be my wife . a woman whom I never strike , never wrong in any way , never even let she know that I like another well . and yet when I be at Berwick last , with the regiment on guard there against those vile moss - trooper , what do that woman do but fly in the face of all authority , and of my especial business , by run away herself with the big of all moss - trooper ? not that I care a groat about she ; and I wish the fool well rid of she : but the insolence of the thing be such that everybody laugh at I ; and back I go to London , lose a far well and safe job than this ; and all through she . come , let us have another onion . ' 
 Master Stickles 's view of the matter be so entirely unromantic , that I scarcely wonder at Mistress Stickles for have run away from he to an adventurous moss - trooper . for nine woman out of ten must have some kind of romance or other , to make their life endurable ; and when their love have lose this attractive element , this soft dew - fog   if such it be , the love itself be apt to languish ; unless its bloom be well replace by the bud hope of child . now Master Stickles neither have , nor wish to have , any child . 
 without wait for any warrant , only say something about ' captus in flagrante delicto , ' if that be the way to spell it Stickles send our prisoner off , bind and look miserable , to the jail at Taunton . I be desirous to let they go free , if they would promise amendment ; but although I have take they , and surely therefore have every right to let they go again , Master Stickles say , ' not so . ' he assure I that it be a matter of public polity ; and of course , not know what he mean , I could not contradict he ; but think that surely my private right ought to be respect . for if I throw a man in wrestling , I expect to get his stake ; and if I take a man prisoner why , he ought , in common justice , to belong to I , and I have a good right to let he go , if I think proper to do so . however , Master Stickles say that I be quite benighted , and know nothing of the Constitution ; which be the very thing I know , beyond any man in our parish ! 
 nevertheless , it be not for I to contradict a commissioner ; and therefore I let my prisoner go , and wish they a happy deliverance . Stickles reply , with a merry grin , that if ever they get it , it would be a jail deliverance , and the bliss of dancing ; and he lay his hand to his throat in a manner which seem to I most uncourteous . however , his foresight prove too correct ; for both those poor fellow be execute , soon after the next assize . Lorna have do she very good to earn another chance for they ; even go down on her knee to that common Jeremy , and plead with great tear for they . however , although much move by she , he vow that he durst do nothing else . to set they free be more than his own life be worth ; for all the country know , by this time , that two captive Doones be rope to the cider - press at Plover 's barrow . Annie bind the broken arm of the one whom I have knock down with the club , and I myself support it ; and then she wash and rub with lard the face of the other poor fellow , which the torch have injure ; and I fetch back his collar - bone to the good of my ability . for before any surgeon could arrive , they be off with a well - arm escort . that day we be reinforce so strongly from the station along the coast , even as far as Minehead , that we not only fear no further attack , but even talk of assault Glen Doone , without wait for the train - band . however , I think that it would be mean to take advantage of the enemy in the thick of the flood and confusion ; and several of the other think so too , and do not like fight in water . therefore it be resolve to wait and keep a watch upon the valley , and let the flood go down again . 




 CHAPTER L 

 a MERRY meeting a SAD one 

 now the business I have most at heart   as every one know by this time   be to marry Lorna as soon as might be , if she have no objection , and then to work the farm so well , as to nourish all our family . and herein I see no difficulty ; for Annie would soon be off our hand , and somebody might come and take a fancy to little Lizzie   who be grow up very nicely now , though not so fine as Annie ; moreover , we be almost sure to have great store of hay and corn after so much snow , if there be any truth in the old saying , 
 " a foot deep of rain will kill hay and grain ; but three foot of snow will make they come mo ' . " 
 and although it be too true that we have lose a many cattle , yet even so we have not lose money ; for the few remain fetched such price as be never know before . and though we grumble with all our heart , and really believe , at one time , that starvation be upon we , I doubt whether , on the whole , we be not the fat , and the rich , and the wiser for that winter . and I might have say the happy , except for the sorrow which we feel at the failure among our neighbour . the snowe lose every sheep they have , and nine out of ten horn cattle ; and poor Jasper Kebby would have be force to throw up the lease of his farm , and perhaps to go to prison , but for the help we give he . 
 however , my dear mother would have it that Lorna be too young , as yet , to think of be marry : and indeed I myself be compel to admit that her form be become more perfect and lovely ; though I have not think it possible . and another difficulty be , that as we have all be protestant from the time of Queen Elizabeth , the maiden must be convert first , and teach to hate all papist . now Lorna have not the small idea of ever be convert . she say that she love I truly , but want not to convert I ; and if I love she equally , why should I wish to convert she ? with this I be tolerably content , not see so very much difference between a creed and a credo , and believe God to be our Father , in Latin as well as English . moreover , my darling know but little of the popish way whether excellent or otherwise inasmuch as the Doones , though they steal their house , or at least the joiner 's work , have never be tempt enough by the devil to steal either church or chapel . 
 Lorna come to our little church , when Parson Bowden reappear after the snow be over ; and she say that all be very nice , and very like what she have see in the time of her Aunt Sabina , when they go far away to the little chapel , with a shilling in their glove . it make the tear come into her eye , by the force of memory , when Parson Bowden do the thing , not so gracefully nor so well , yet with pleasant imitation of her old Priest 's sacred rite . 
 ' he be a worthy man , ' she say , be use to talk in the service time , and my mother be oblige to cough : ' I like he very much indeed : but I wish he would let I put his thing the right way on his shoulder . ' 
 everybody in our parish , who could walk at all , or hire a boy and a wheelbarrow , ay , and half the folk from Countisbury , Brendon , and even Lynmouth , be and be to be find that Sunday , in our little church of Oare . People who would not come anigh we , when the Doones be threaten with carbine and with fire - brand , flock in their very good clothe , to see a lady Doone go to church . now all this come of that vile John Fry ; I know it as well as possible ; his tongue be bad than the clacker of a charity - school bell , or the ladle in the frying - pan , when the bee be swarm . 
 however , Lorna be not troubled ; partly because of her natural dignity and gentleness ; partly because she never dream that the people be come to look at she . but when we come to the Psalms of the day , with some vague sense of be star at more than ought to be , she drop the heavy black lace fringe of the velvet hat she wear , and conceal from the congregation all except her bright red lip , and the oval snowdrift of her chin . I touch her hand , and she press mine ; and we feel that we be close together , and God see no harm in it . 
 as for Parson Bowden   as worthy a man as ever live , and one who could shoot fly , he scarcely know what he be do , without the clerk to help he . he have bear it very well indeed , when I return from London ; but to see a live Doone in his church , and a lady Doone , and a lovely Doone , moreover one engage to I , upon whom he almost look as the squire of his parish   although not rightly an Armiger , and to feel that this lovely Doone be a Papist , and therefore of high religion as all our parson think and that she know exactly how he ought to do all the service , of which he himself know little ; I wish to express my firm belief that all these thing together turn Parson Bowden 's head a little , and make he look to I for order . 
 my mother , the very good of woman , be   as I could well perceive   a little annoyed and vex with thing . for this particular occasion , she have procure from Dulverton , by special message to Ruth Huckaback   whereof more anon , a head - dress with a feather never see before upon Exmoor , to the good of every one 's knowledge . it come from a bird call a flame something a flame oh , or a flame ah , I will not be positive but I can assure you that it do flame ; and dear mother have no other thought , but that all the congregation would neither see nor think of any other mortal thing , or immortal even , to the very end of the sermon . 
 Herein she be so disappointed , that no soon do she get home , but upstairs she go at speed , not even stop at the mirror in our little parlour , and fling the whole thing into a cupboard , as I know by the bang of the door , have ease the lock for she lately . Lorna see there be something wrong ; and she look at Annie and Lizzie   as more likely to understand it   with her former timid glance ; which I know so well , and which have first enslave I . 
 ' I know not what ail mother , ' say Annie , who look very beautiful , with lilac lute - string ribbon , which I see the Snowe girl envy ; ' but she have not attend to one of the prayer , nor say " amen , " all the morning . never fear , darle Lorna , it be nothing about you . it be something about our John , I be sure ; for she never worry herself very much about anybody but he . ' and here Annie make a look at I , such as I have have five hundred of . 
 ' you keep your opinion to yourself , ' I reply ; because I know the dear , and her little bit of jealousy ; ' it happen that you be quite wrong , this time . Lorna , come with I , my darling . ' 
 ' oh yes , Lorna ; go with he , ' cry Lizzie , drop her lip , in a way which you must see to know its meaning ; ' John want nobody now but you ; and none can find fault with his taste , dear . ' 
 ' you little fool , I should think not , ' I answer , very rudely ; for , betwixt the lot of they , my Lorna 's eyelash be quiver ; ' now , dear angel , come with I ; and snap your hand at the whole of they . ' 
 my angel do come , with a sigh , and then with a smile , when we be alone ; but without any unangelic attempt at snap her sweet white finger . 
 these little thing be enough to show that while every one so admire Lorna , and so kindly take to she , still there would , just now and then , be petty and paltry flash of jealousy concern she ; and perhaps it could not be otherwise among so many woman . however , we be always doubly kind to she afterwards ; and although her mind be so sensitive and quick that she must have suffer , she never allow we to perceive it , nor lower herself by resent it . 
 possibly I may have mention that little Ruth Huckaback have be ask , and have even promise to spend she Christmas with we ; and this be the more desirable , because she have leave we through some offence , or sorrow , about thing say of she . now my dear mother , be the kind and well - hearted of all woman , could not bear that poor dear Ruth   who would some day have such a fortune , should be entirely lose to we . ' it be our duty , my dear child , ' she say more than once about it , ' to forgive and forget , as freely as we hope to have it do to we . if dear little Ruth have not behave quite as we might have expect , great allowance should be make for a girl with so much money . design people get hold of she , and flatter she , and coax she , to obtain a base influence over she ; so that when she fall among simple folk , who speak the honest truth of she , no wonder the poor child be vex , and give herself air , and so on . Ruth can be very useful to we in a number of little way ; and I consider it quite a duty to pardon her freak of petulance . ' 
 now one of the little way in which Ruth have be very useful , be the purchase of the scarlet feather of the flame bird ; and now that the house be quite safe from attack , and the mark on my forehead be heal , I be beg , over and over again , to go and see Ruth , and make all thing straight , and pay for the gorgeous plumage . this last I be very desirous to do , that I might know the price of it , have make a small bet on the subject with Annie ; and have hold counsel with myself , whether or not it be possible to get something of the kind for Lorna , of still more distinguished appearance . of course she could not wear scarlet as yet , even if I have wish it ; but I believe that people of fashion often wear purple for mourning ; purple too be the royal colour , and Lorna be by right a queen ; therefore I be quite resolve to ransack Uncle Reuben 's store , in search of some bright purple bird , if nature have kindly provide one . 
 all this , however , I keep to myself , intend to trust Ruth Huckaback , and no one else in the matter . and so , one beautiful spring morning , when all the earth be kiss with scent , and all the air caress with song , up the lane I stoutly ride , well armed , and well provide . 
 now though it be part of my life to heed , it be no part of my tale to tell , how the wheat be come on . I reckon that you , who read this story , after I be dead and go   and before that none shall read it , will say , ' tush ! what be his wheat to we ? we be not wheat : we be human being : and all we care for be human doing . ' this may be very good argument , and in the main , I believe that it be so . nevertheless , if a man be to tell only what he think and do , and not what come around he , he must not mention his own clothe , which his father and mother buy for he . and more than my own clothe to I , ay , and as much as my own skin , be the work of nature round about , whereof a man be the small . 
 and now I will tell you , although most likely only to be laugh at , because I can not put it in the style of Mr. Dryden whom to compare to Shakespeare ! but if once I begin upon that , you will never hear the last of I nevertheless , I will tell you this ; not wish to be rude , but only just because I know it ; the more a man can fling his arm   so to say   round Nature 's neck , the more he can upon her bosom , like an infant , lie and suck , the more that man shall earn the trust and love of all his fellow man . 
 in this matter be no jealousy   when the man be dead ; because thereafter all other know how much of the milk be have ; and he can suck no long ; and they value he accordingly , for the nourishment he be to they . even as when we keep a roaster of the suck - pig , we choose , and praise at table most , the favourite of its mother . fifty time have I see this , and smile , and praise our people 's taste , and offer they more of the vital . 
 now here be I upon Shakespeare   who die , of his own fruition , at the age of fifty - two , yet live more than fifty thousand man , within his little span of life , when all the while I ought to be rid as hard as I can to Dulverton . but , to tell the truth , I could not ride hard , be hold at every turn , and often without any turn at all , by the beauty of thing around I . these thing grow upon a man if once he stop to notice they . 
 it want yet two hour to noon , when I come to Master Huckaback 's door , and strike the panel smartly . know nothing of their manner , only that people in a town could not be expect to entertain   as we do in farm - house , have , moreover , keen expectation of Master Huckaback 's avarice , I have bring some stuff to eat , make by Annie , and pack by Lorna , and require no thinking about it . 
 Ruth herself come and let I in , blush very heartily ; for which colour I praise her health , and my praise heighten it . that little thing have lovely eye , and could be trust thoroughly . I do like an obstinate little woman , when she be sure that she be right . and indeed if love have never speed I straight to the heart of Lorna   compare to whom , Ruth be no more than the thief be to the candle , who know but what I might have yield to the law of nature , that thorough trimmer of balance , and verify the proverb that the giant love the dwarf ? 
 ' I take the privilege , Mistress Ruth , of salute you accord to kinship , and the ordering of the Canons . ' and therewith I buss she well , and put my arm around her waist , be so terribly restrict in the matter of Lorna , and know the use of practice . not that I have any warmth all that be darle Lorna 's only out of pure gallantry , and my knowledge of London fashion . Ruth blush to such a pitch at this , and look up at I with such a gleam ; as if I must have my own way ; that all my love of kiss sunk , and I feel that I be wrong she . only my mother have tell I , when the girl be out of the way , to do all I could to please darle Ruth , and I have go about it accordingly . 
 now Ruth as yet have never hear a word about dear Lorna ; and when she lead I into the kitchen   where everything look beautiful , and tell I not to mind , for a moment , about the scrubbing of my boot , because she would only be too glad to clean it all up after I , and tell I how glad she be to see I , blush more at every word , and recall some of they , and stoop down for pot and pan , when I look at she too ruddily all these thing come upon I so , without any legal notice , that I could only look at Ruth , and think how very good she be , and how bright her handle be ; and wonder if I have wrong she . once or twice , I begin this I say upon my honour to endeavour to explain exactly , how we be at Plover 's barrow ; how we all have be bind to fight , and have defeat the enemy , keep their queen amongst we . but Ruth would make some great mistake between Lorna and Gwenny Carfax , and give I no chance to set she aright , and care about nothing much , except some news of Sally Snowe . 
 what could I do with this little thing ? all my sense of modesty , and value for my dinner , be against my over - press all the graceful hint I have give about Lorna . Ruth be just a girl of that sort , who will not believe one word , except from her own seeing ; not so much from any doubt , as from the practice of use eye which have be in business . 
 I ask Cousin Ruth   as we use to call she , though the cousinship be distant   what be become of Uncle Ben , and how it be that we never hear anything of or from he now . she reply that she hardly know what to make of her grandfather 's manner of carry on , for the last half - year or more . he be apt to leave his home , she say , at any hour of the day or night ; go none know whither , and return no one might say when . and his dress , in her opinion , be enough to frighten a hodman , of a scavenger of the road , instead of the decent suit of kersey , or of Sabbath doeskin , such as have win the respect and reverence of his fellow - townsman . but the bad of all thing be , as she confess with tear in her eye , that the poor old gentleman have something weigh heavily on his mind . 
 ' it will shorten his day , Cousin Ridd , ' she say , for she never would call I Cousin John ; ' he have no enjoyment of anything that he eat or drink , nor even in count his money , as he use to do all Sunday ; indeed no pleasure in anything , unless it be smoke his pipe , and think and star at bit of brown stone , which he pull , every now and then , out of his pocket . and the business he use to take such pride in be now leave almost entirely to the foreman , and to I . ' 
 ' and what will become of you , dear Ruth , if anything happen to the old man ? ' 
 ' I be sure I know not , ' she answer simply ; ' and I can not bear to think of it . it must depend , I suppose , upon dear grandfather 's pleasure about I . ' 
 ' it must rather depend , ' say I , though have no business to say it , ' upon your own good pleasure , Ruth ; for all the world will pay court to you . ' 
 ' that be the very thing which I never could endure . I have beg dear grandfather to leave no chance of that . when he have threaten I with poverty , as he do sometimes , I have always meet he truly , with the answer that I fear one thing a great deal bad than poverty ; namely , to be an heiress . but I can not make he believe it . only think how strange , Cousin Ridd , I can not make he believe it . ' 
 ' it be not strange at all , ' I answer ; ' consider how he value money . neither would any one else believe you , except by look into your true , and very pretty eye , dear . ' 
 now I beg that no one will suspect for a single moment , either that I do not mean exactly what I say , or mean a single atom more , or would not have say the same , if Lorna have be stand by . what I have always like in Ruth , be the calm , straightforward gaze , and beauty of her large brown eye . indeed I have speak of they to Lorna , as the only one to be compare   though not for more than a moment   to her own , for truth and light , but never for depth and softness . but now the little maiden drop they , and turn away , without reply . 
 ' I will go and see to my horse , ' I say ; ' the boy that have take he seem surprised at his have no horn on his forehead . perhaps he will lead he into the shop , and feed he upon broadcloth . ' 
 ' oh , he be such a stupid boy , ' Ruth answer with great sympathy : ' how quick of you to observe that now : and you call yourself " Slow John Ridd ! " I never do see such a stupid boy : sometimes he spoil my temper . but you must be back in half an hour , at the late , Cousin Ridd . you see I remember what you be ; when once you get among horse , or cow , or thing of that sort . ' 
 ' thing of that sort ! well do , Ruth ! one would think you be quite a Cockney . ' 
 Uncle Reuben do not come home to his dinner ; and his granddaughter say she have strictest order never to expect he . therefore we have none to dine with we , except the foreman of the shop , a worthy man , name Thomas Cockram , fifty year of age or so . he seem to I to have strong intention of his own about little Ruth , and on that account to regard I with a wholly undue malevolence . and perhaps , in order to justify he , I may have be more attentive to she than otherwise need have be ; at any rate , Ruth and I be pleasant ; and he the very opposite . 
 ' my dear Cousin Ruth , ' I say , on purpose to vex Master Cockram , because he eye we so heavily , and squint to unluckily , ' we have long be look for you at our Plover 's Barrows farm . you remember how you use to love hunt for egg in the morning , and hide up in the tallat with Lizzie , for I to seek you among the hay , when the sun be down . ah , Master Cockram , those be the thing young people find their pleasure in , not in sell a yard of serge , and give twopence - halfpenny change , and write ' settle " at the bottom , with a pencil that have black their tooth . now , Master Cockram , you ought to come as far as our good farm , at once , and eat two new - lay egg for breakfast , and be make to look quite young again . our good Annie would cook for you ; and you should have the hot new milk and the pope 's eye from the mutton ; and every foot of you would become a yard in about a fortnight . ' and hereupon , I spread my chest , to show he an example . Ruth could not keep her countenance : but I see that she think it wrong of I ; and would scold I , if ever I give she the chance of take those little liberty . however , he deserve it all , accord to my young idea , for his great impertinence in aim at my cousin . 
 but what I say be far less grievous to a man of honest mind than little Ruth 's own behaviour . I could hardly have believe that so thoroughly true a girl , and one so proud and upright , could have get rid of any man so cleverly as she get rid of Master Thomas Cockram . she give he not even a glass of wine , but commend to his notice , with a sweet and thoughtful gravity , some invoice which must be correct , before her dear grandfather should return ; and to amend which three great ledger must be search from first to last . Thomas Cockram wink at I , with the bad of his two wrong eye ; as much as to say , ' I understand it ; but I can not help myself . only you look out , if ever ' and before he have finish wink , the door be shut behind he . then Ruth say to I in the simple manner , ' you have ride far today , Cousin Ridd ; and have far to ride to get home again . what will dear Aunt Ridd say , if we send you away without nourishment ? all the key be in my keeping , and dear grandfather have the fine wine , not to be match in the west of England , as I have hear good judge say ; though I know not wine from cider . do you like the wine of Oporto , or the wine of xere ? ' 
 ' I know not one from the other , fair cousin , except by the colour , ' I answer : ' but the sound of Oporto be nobler , and rich . suppose we try wine of Oporto . ' 
 the good little creature go and fetch a black bottle of an ancient cast , cover with dust and cobwebs . these I be anxious to shake aside ; and indeed I think that the wine would be well for be rouse up a little . Ruth , however , would not hear a single word to that purport ; and see that she know more about it , I leave she to manage it . and the result be very fine indeed , to wit , a sparkling rosy liquor , dance with little flake of light , and scented like new violet . with this I be so pleased and gay , and Ruth so glad to see I gay , that we quite forget how the time go on ; and though my fair cousin would not be persuade to take a second glass herself , she keep on fill mine so fast that it be never empty , though I do my good to keep it so . 
 ' what be a little drop like this to a man of your size and strength , Cousin Ridd ? ' she say , with her cheek just brush with rose , which make she look very beautiful ; ' I have hear you say that your head be so thick or rather so clear , you ought to say that no liquor ever move it . ' 
 ' that be right enough , ' I answer ; ' what a witch you must be , dear Ruth , to have remember that now ! ' 
 ' oh , I remember every word I have ever hear you say , Cousin Ridd ; because your voice be so deep , you know , and you talk so little . now it be useless to say " no " . these bottle hold almost nothing . dear grandfather will not come home , I fear , until long after you be go . what will aunt Ridd think of I , I be sure ? you be all so dreadfully hospitable . now not another " no , " Cousin Ridd . we must have another bottle . ' 
 ' well , must be must , ' I answer , with a certain resignation . ' I can not bear bad manner , dear ; and how old be you next birthday ? ' 
 ' Eighteen , dear John ; ' say Ruth , come over with the empty bottle ; and I be pleased at she call I ' John , ' and have a great mind to kiss she . however , I think of my Lorna suddenly , and of the anger I should feel if a man go on with she so ; therefore I lay back in my chair , to wait for the other bottle . 
 ' do you remember how we dance that night ? ' I ask , while she be open it ; ' and how you be afraid of I first , because I look so tall , dear ? ' 
 ' yes , and so very broad , Cousin Ridd . I think that you would eat I . but I have come to know , since then , how very kind and good you be . ' 
 ' and will you come and dance again , at my wedding , Cousin Ruth ? ' 
 she nearly let the bottle fall , the last of which she be slop carefully into a vessel of bright glass ; and then she raise her hand again , and finish it judiciously . and after that , she take the window , to see that all her work be clear ; and then she pour I out a glass and say , with very pale cheek , but else no sign of meaning about she , ' what do you ask I , Cousin Ridd ? ' 
 ' nothing of any importance , Ruth ; only we be so fond of you . I mean to be marry as soon as I can . will you come and help we ? ' 
 ' to be sure I will , Cousin Ridd unless , unless , dear grandfather can not spare I from the business . ' she go away ; and her breast be heave , like a rick of under - carry hay . and she stand at the window long , try to make yawn of sigh . 
 for my part , I know not what to do . and yet I could think about it , as I never could with Lorna ; with whom I be always in a whirl , from the power of my love . so I think some time about it ; and perceive that it be the manly way , just to tell she everything ; except that I fear she like I . but it seem to I unaccountable that she do not even ask the name of my intended wife . perhaps she think that it must be Sally ; or perhaps she fear to trust her voice . 
 ' come and sit by I , dear Ruth ; and listen to a long , long story , how thing have come about with I . ' 
 ' no , thank you , Cousin Ridd , ' she answer ; ' at least I mean that I shall be happy that I shall be ready to hear you to listen to you , I mean of course . but I would rather stay where I be , and have the air or rather be able to watch for dear grandfather come home . he be so kind and good to I . what should I do without he ? ' 
 then I tell she how , for year and year , I have be attach to Lorna , and all the danger and difficulty which have so long beset we , and how I hop that these be pass , and no other might come between we , except on the score of religion ; upon which point I trust soon to overcome my mother 's objection . and then I tell she how poor , and helpless , and alone in the world , my Lorna be ; and how sad all her youth have be , until I bring she away at last . and many other little thing I mention , which there be no need for I again to dwell upon . Ruth hear it all without a word , and without once look at I ; and only by her attitude could I guess that she be weep . then when all my tale be tell , she ask in a low and gentle voice , but still without show her face to I , 
 ' and do she love you , Cousin Ridd ? do she say that she love you with with all her heart ? ' 
 ' certainly , she do , ' I answer . ' do you think it impossible for one like she to do so ? ' 
 she say no more ; but cross the room before I have time to look at she , and come behind my chair , and kiss I gently on the forehead . 
 ' I hope you may be very happy , with I mean in your new life , ' she whisper very softly ; ' as happy as you deserve to be , and as happy as you can make other be . now how I have be neglect you ! I be quite ashamed of myself for think only of grandfather : and it make I so low - spirited . you have tell I a very nice romance , and I have never even help you to a glass of wine . here , pour it for yourself , dear cousin ; I shall be back again directly . ' 
 with that she be out of the door in a moment ; and when she come back , you would not have think that a tear have dim those large bright eye , or wander down those pale clear cheek . only her hand be cold and tremble : and she make I help myself . 
 Uncle Reuben do not appear at all ; and Ruth , who have promise to come and see we , and stay for a fortnight at our house   if her grandfather could spare she , now discover , before I leave , that she must not think of do so . perhaps she be right in decide thus ; at any rate it have now become improper for I to press she . and yet I now desire tenfold that she should consent to come , think that Lorna herself would work the speedy cure of her pass whim . 
 for such , I try to persuade myself , be the nature of Ruth 's regard for I : and upon look back I could not charge myself with any misconduct towards the little maiden . I have never seek her company , I have never trifle with she   at least until that very day , and be so engross with my own love , I have scarcely ever thought of she . and the maiden would never have think of I , except as a clumsy yokel , but for my mother 's and sister 's meddling , and their wily suggestion . I believe they have tell the little soul that I be deeply in love with she ; although they both stoutly deny it . but who can place trust in a woman 's word , when it come to a question of match - make ? 




 CHAPTER LI 

 a visit from the counsellor 

 now while I be rid home that evening , with a tender conscience about Ruth , although not a wound one , I guess but little that all my thought be need much for my own affair . so however it prove to be ; for as I come in , soon after dark , my sister Eliza meet I at the corner of the cheese - room , and she say , ' do not   go in there , John , ' point to mother 's room ; ' until I have have a talk with you . ' 
 ' in the name of Moses , ' I inquire , have pick up that phrase at Dulverton ; ' what be you at about I now ? there be no peace for a quiet fellow . ' 
 ' it be nothing we be at , ' she answer ; ' neither may you make light of it . it be something very important about Mistress Lorna Doone . ' 
 ' let we have it at once , ' I cry ; ' I can bear anything about Lorna , except that she do not care for I . ' 
 ' it have nothing to do with that , John . and I be quite sure that you never need fear anything of that sort . she perfectly weary I sometimes , although her voice be so soft and sweet , about your endless perfection . ' 
 ' bless her little heart ! ' I say ; ' the subject be inexhaustible . ' 
 ' no doubt , ' reply Lizzie , in the dry manner ; ' especially to your sister . however this be no time to joke . I fear you will get the bad of it , John . do you know a man of about Gwenny 's shape , nearly as broad as he be long , but about six time the size of Gwenny , and with a length of snow - white hair , and a thickness also ; as the copse be last winter . he never can comb it , that be quite certain , with any comb yet invent . ' 
 ' then you go and offer your service . there be few thing you can not scarify . I know the man from your description , although I have never see he . now where be my Lorna ? ' 
 ' your Lorna be with Annie , have a good cry , I believe ; and Annie too glad to second she . she know that this great man be here , and know that he want to see she . but she beg to defer the interview , until dear John 's return . ' 
 ' what a nasty way you have of tell the very commonest piece of news ! ' I say , on purpose to pay she out . ' what man will ever fancy you , you unlucky little snapper ? now , no more nursery talk for I . I will go and settle this business . you have well go and dress your doll ; if you can give they clothe unpoisone . ' Hereupon Lizzie burst into a perfect roar of tear ; feel that she have the bad of it . and I take she up , and beg her pardon ; although she scarcely deserve it ; for she know that I be out of luck , and she might have spar her satire . 
 I be almost sure that the man who be come must be the Counsellor himself ; of whom I feel much keener fear than of his son Carver . and know that his visit bode ill to I and Lorna , I go and seek my dear ; and lead she with a heavy heart , from the maiden 's room to mother 's , to meet our dreadful visitor . 
 Mother be stand by the door , make curtsey now and then , and listen to a long harangue upon the right of state and land , which the Counsellor   have find that she be the owner of her property , and know nothing of her title to it   be encourage to deliver it . my dear mother stand gaze at he , spell - bind by his eloquence , and only hop that he would stop . he be shake his hair upon his shoulder , in the power of his word , and his wrath at some little thing , which he declare to be quite illegal . 
 then I venture to show myself , in the flesh , before he ; although he feign not to see I ; but he advance with zeal to Lorna ; hold out both hand at once . 
 ' my darling child , my dearest niece ; how wonderfully well you look ! Mistress Ridd , I give you credit . this be the country of good thing . I never would have believe our Queen could have look so royal . surely of all virtue , hospitality be the fine , and the most romantic . Dearest Lorna , kiss your uncle ; it be quite a privilege . ' 
 ' perhaps it be to you , sir , ' say Lorna , who could never quite check her sense of oddity ; ' but I fear that you have smoke tobacco , which spoil reciprocity . ' 
 ' you be right , my child . how keen your scent be ! it be always so with we . your grandfather be note for his olfactory power . ah , a great loss , dear Mrs. Ridd , a terrible loss to this neighbourhood ! as one of our great writer say I think it must be Milton " we ne'er shall look upon his like again . " ' 
 ' with your good leave sir , ' I break in , ' Master Milton could never have write so sweet and simple a line as that . it be one of the great Shakespeare . ' 
 ' woe be I for my neglect ! ' say the Counsellor , bow airily ; ' this must be your son , Mistress Ridd , the great John , the wrestler . and one who meddle with the Muses ! ah , since I be young , how everything be change , madam ! except indeed the beauty of woman , which seem to I to increase every year . ' here the old villain bow to my mother ; and she blush , and make another curtsey , and really do look very nice . 
 ' now though I have quote the poet amiss , as your son inform I   for which I tender my good thank , and must amend my reading , I can hardly be wrong in assume that this young armiger must be the too attractive cynosure to our poor little maiden . and for my part , she be welcome to he . I have never be one of those who dwell upon distinction of rank , and birth , and such like ; as if they be in the heart of nature , and must be eternal . in early youth , I may have think so , and be full of that little pride . but now I have long account it one of the first axiom of political economy you be follow I , Mistress Ridd ? ' 
 ' well , sir , I be do my good ; but I can not quite keep up with you . ' 
 ' never mind , madam ; I will be slow . but your son 's intelligence be so quick ' 
 ' I see , sir ; you think that mine must be . but no ; it all come from his father , sir . his father be that quick and clever ' 
 ' ah , I can well suppose it , madam . and a credit he be to both of you . now , to return to our mutton a figure which you will appreciate I may now be regard , I think , as this young lady 's legal guardian ; although I have not have the honour of be formally appoint such . her father be the eld son of Sir Ensor Doone ; and I happen to be the second son ; and as young maiden can not be baronet , I suppose I be " Sir Counsellor . " be it so , Mistress Ridd , accord to your theory of genealogy ? ' 
 ' I be sure I do not   know , sir , ' my mother answer carefully ; ' I know not anything of that name , sir , except in the Gospel of Matthew : but I see not why it should be otherwise . ' 
 ' Good , madam ! I may look upon that as your sanction and approval : and the College of Heralds shall hear of it . and in return , as Lorna 's guardian , I give my full and ready consent to her marriage with your son , madam . ' 
 ' oh , how good of you , sir , how kind ! well , I always do say , that the learned people be , almost always , the good and kind , and the most simple - hearted . ' 
 ' Madam , that be a great sentiment . what a goodly couple they will be ! and if we can add he to our strength ' 
 ' oh no , sir , oh no ! ' cry mother : ' you really must not think of it . he have always be bring up so honest ' 
 ' Hem ! that make a difference . a decide disqualification for domestic life among the Doones . but , surely , he might get over those prejudice , madam ? ' 
 ' oh no , sir ! he never can : he never can indeed . when he be only that high , sir , he could not steal even an apple , when some wicked boy try to mislead he . ' 
 ' ah , ' reply the Counsellor , shake his white head gravely ; ' then I greatly fear that his case be quite incurable . I have know such case ; violent prejudice , breed entirely of education , and anti - economical to the last degree . and when it be so , it be desperate : no man , after imbibe idea of that sort , can in any way be useful . ' 
 ' oh yes , sir , John be very useful . he can do as much work as three other man ; and you should see he load a sledd , sir . ' 
 ' I be speak , madam , of high usefulness , power of the brain and heart . the main thing for we upon earth be to take a large view of thing . but while we talk of the heart , what be my niece Lorna do , that she do not come and thank I , for my perhaps too prompt concession to her youthful fancy ? ah , if I have want thank , I should have be more stubborn . ' 
 Lorna , be challenge thus , come up and look at her uncle , with her noble eye fix full upon his , which beneath his white eyebrow glisten , like dormer window pile with snow . 
 ' for what be I to thank you , uncle ? ' 
 ' my dear niece , I have tell you . for remove the heavy obstacle , which to a mind so well regulate could possibly have exist , between your dutiful self and the object of your affection . ' 
 ' well , uncle , I should be very grateful , if I think that you do so from love of I ; or if I do not know that you have something yet conceal from I . ' 
 ' and my consent , ' say the Counsellor , ' be the more meritorious , the more liberal , frank , and candid , in the face of an exist fact , and a very clearly establish one ; which might have appear to weak mind in the light of an impediment ; but to my loftier view of matrimony seem quite a recommendation . ' 
 ' what fact do you mean , sir ? be it one that I ought to know ? ' 
 ' in my opinion it be , good niece . it form , to my mind , so fine a basis for the invariable harmony of the matrimonial state . to be brief as I always endeavour to be , without become obscure you two young people   ah , what a gift be youth ! one can never be too thankful for it   you will have the rare advantage of commence married life , with a subject of common interest to discuss , whenever you weary of well , say of one another ; if you can now , by any mean , conceive such a possibility . and perfect justice mete out : mutual goodwill result , from the sense of reciprocity . ' 
 ' I do not understand you , sir . why can you not say what you mean , at once ? ' 
 ' my dear child , I prolong your suspense . curiosity be the most powerful of all feminine instinct ; and therefore the most delightful , when not prematurely satisfied . however , if you must have my strong reality , here they be . your father slay dear John 's father , and dear John 's father slay your . ' 
 have say thus much , the Counsellor lean back upon his chair , and shade his calm white - bearded eye from the ray of our tallow candle . he be a man who like to look , rather than to be look at . but Lorna come to I for aid ; and I go up to Lorna and mother look at both of we . 
 then feel that I must speak first   as no one would begin it , I take my darling round the waist , and lead she up to the Counsellor ; while she try to bear it bravely ; yet must lean on I , or do . 
 ' now , Sir Counsellor Doone , ' I say , with Lorna squeeze both my hand , I never yet know how   consider that she be walk all the time , or something like it ; ' you know right well , Sir Counsellor , that Sir Ensor Doone give approval . ' I can not tell what make I think of this : but so it come upon I . 
 ' approval to what , good rustic John ? to the slaughter so reciprocal ? ' 
 ' no , sir , not to that ; even if it ever happen ; which I do not believe . but to the love betwixt I and Lorna ; which your story shall not break , without more evidence than your word . and even so , shall never break ; if Lorna think as I do . ' 
 the maiden give I a little touch , as much as to say , ' you be right , darling : give it to he , again , like that . ' however , I hold my peace , well know that too many word do mischief . 
 then mother look at I with wonder , be herself too amazed to speak ; and the Counsellor look , with great wrath in his eye , which he try to keep from burn . 
 ' how say you then , John Ridd , ' he cry , stretch out one hand , like Elijah ; ' be this a thing of the sort you love ? be this what you be use to ? ' 
 ' so please your worship , ' I answer ; ' no kind of violence can surprise we , since first come Doones upon Exmoor . up to that time none hear of harm ; except of take a purse , maybe , or cut a strange sheep 's throat . and the poor folk who do this be hang , with some benefit of clergy . but ever since the Doones come first , we be use to anything . ' 
 ' Thou varlet , ' cry the Counsellor , with the colour of his eye quite change with the sparkle of his fury ; ' be this the way we be to deal with such a low - breed clod as thou ? to question the doing of our people , and to talk of clergy ! what , dream you not that we could have clergy , and of the right sort , too , if only we care to have they ? tush ! be I to spend my time argue with a plough - tail Bob ? ' 
 ' if your worship will hearken to I , ' I answer very modestly , not wish to speak harshly , with Lorna look up at I ; ' there be many thing that might be say without any kind of argument , which I would never wish to try with one of your worship 's learning . and in the first place it seem to I that if our father hat one another bitterly , yet neither win the victory , only mutual discomfiture ; surely that be but a reason why we should be wise than they , and make it up in this generation by goodwill and loving ' 
 ' oh , John , you wise than your father ! ' mother break upon I here ; ' not but what you might be as wise , when you come to be old enough . ' 
 ' young people of the present age , ' say the Counsellor severely , ' have no right feeling of any sort , upon the simple matter . Lorna Doone , stand forth from contact with that heir of parricide ; and state in your own mellifluous voice , whether you regard this slaughter as a pleasant trifle . ' 
 ' you know , without any word of mine , ' she answer very softly , yet not withdraw from my hand , ' that although I have be season well to every kind of outrage , among my gentle relative , I have not yet so purely lose all sense of right and wrong as to receive what you have say , as lightly as you declare it . you think it a happy basis for our future concord . I do not quite think that , my uncle ; neither do I quite believe that a word of it be true . in our happy valley , nine - tenth of what be say be false ; and you be always will not to argue that true and false be but a blind turn upon a pivot . without any failure of respect for your character , good uncle , I decline politely to believe a word of what you have tell I . and even if it be prove to I , all I can say be this , if my John will have I , I be his for ever . ' 
 this long speech be too much for she ; she have overrate her strength about it , and the sustenance of irony . so at last she fall into my arm , which have long be wait for she ; and there she lie with no other sound , except a gurgling in her throat . 
 ' you old villain , ' cry my mother , shake her fist at the Counsellor , while I could do nothing else but hold , and bend across , my darling , and whisper to deaf ear ; ' what be the good of the quality ; if this be all that come of it ? out of the way ! you know the word that make the deadly mischief ; but not the way that heal they . give I that bottle , if hand you have ; what be the use of Counsellors ? ' 
 I see that dear mother be carry away ; and indeed I myself be something like it ; with the pale face upon my bosom , and the heaving of the heart , and the heat and cold all through I , as my darling breathe or lay . meanwhile the Counsellor stand back , and seem a little sorry ; although of course it be not in his power to be at all ashamed of himself . 
 ' my sweet love , my darling child , ' our mother go on to Lorna , in a way that I shall never forget , though I live to be a hundred ; ' pretty pet , not a word of it be true , upon that old liar 's oath ; and if every word be true , poor chick , you should have our John all the more for it . you and John be make by God and mean for one another , whatever fall between you . little lamb , look up and speak : here be your own John and I ; and the devil take the Counsellor . ' 
 I be amazed at mother 's word , be so unlike she ; while I love she all the more because she forget herself so . in another moment in ran Annie , ay and Lizzie also , know by some mystic sense   which I have often notice , but never could explain   that something be astir , belong to the world of woman , yet foreign to the eye of man . and now the Counsellor , be well - bear , although such a heartless miscreant , beckon to I to come away ; which I , be smother with woman , be only too glad to do , as soon as my own love would let go of I . 
 ' that be the bad of they , ' say the old man ; when I have lead he into our kitchen , with an apology at every step , and give he hot schnapps and water , and a cigarro of brave Tom Faggus : ' you never can say much , sir , in the way of reasoning   however gently mean and put   but what these woman will fly out . it be wise to put a wild bird in a cage , and expect he to sit and look at you , and chirp without a feather rumple , than it be to expect a woman to answer reason reasonably . ' say this , he look at his puff of smoke as if it contain more reason . 
 ' I be sure I do not know , sir , ' I answer accord to a phrase which have always be my favourite , on account of its general truth : moreover , he be now our guest , and have right to be treat accordingly : ' I be , as you see , not acquaint with the way of woman , except my mother and sister . ' 
 ' except not even they , my son , say the Counsellor , now have finish his glass , without much consultation about it ; ' if you once understand your mother and sister why you understand the lot of they . ' 
 he make a twist in his cloud of smoke , and dash his finger through it , so that I could not follow his meaning , and in manner like not to press he . 
 ' now of this business , John , ' he say , after get to the bottom of the second glass , and have a trifle or so to eat , and praise our chimney - corner ; ' take you on the whole , you know , you be wonderfully good people ; and instead of give I up to the soldier , as you might have do , you be do your good to make I drunk . ' 
 ' not at all , sir , ' I answer ; ' not at all , your worship . let I mix you another glass . we rarely have a great gentleman by the side of our ember and oven . I only beg your pardon , sir , that my sister Annie   who know where to find all the good pan and the lard   could not wait upon you this evening ; and I fear they have do it with dripping instead , and in a pan with the bottom burn . but old Betty quite lose her head sometimes , by dint of over - scolding . ' 
 ' my son , ' reply the Counsellor , stand across the front of the fire , to prove his strict sobriety : ' I mean to come down upon you to - night ; but you have turn the table upon I . not through any skill on your part , nor through any paltry weakness as to love   and all that stuff , which boy and girl spin top at , or knock doll ' nose together , but through your simple way of take I , as a man to be believe ; combine with the comfort of this place , and the choice tobacco and cordial . I have not enjoy an evening so much , God bless I if I know when ! ' 
 ' your worship , ' say I , ' make I more proud than I well know what to do with . of all the thing that please and lead we into happy sleep at night , the first and chief be to think that we have please a visitor . ' 
 ' then , John , thou hast deserve good sleep ; for I be not pleased easily . but although our family be not so high now as it hath be , I have enough of the gentleman leave to be pleased when good people try I . my father , Sir Ensor , be well than I in this great element of birth , and my son Carver be far bad . aetas parentum , what be it , my boy ? I hear that you have be at a grammar - school . ' 
 ' so I have , your worship , and at a very good one ; but I only get far enough to make more tail than head of Latin . ' 
 ' let that pass , ' say the Counsellor ; ' John , thou art all the wiser . ' and the old man shake his hoary lock , as if Latin have be his ruin . I look at he sadly , and wonder whether it might have so ruin I , but for God 's mercy in stop it . 




 CHAPTER LII 

 the way to make the cream rise 

 that night the reverend Counsellor , not be in such state of mind as ought to go alone , kindly take our good old bedstead , carve in panel , well enough , with the woman of Samaria . I set he up , both straight and heavy , so that he need but close both eye , and keep his mouth just open ; and in the morning he be thankful for all that he could remember . 
 I , for my part , scarcely know whether he really have begin to feel goodwill towards we , and to see that nothing else could be of any use to he ; or whether he be merely act , so as to deceive we . and it have strike I , several time , that he have make a great deal more of the spirit he have take than the quantity would warrant , with a man so wise and solid . neither do I quite understand a little story which Lorna tell I , how that in the night awake , she have hear , or seem to hear , a sound of feeling in her room ; as if there have be some one groping carefully among the thing within her drawer or wardrobe - closet . but the noise have cease at once , she say , when she sit up in bed and listen ; and know how many mouse we have , she take courage and fall asleep again . 
 after breakfast , the Counsellor   who look no whit the bad for schnapp , but even more grave and venerable   follow our Annie into the dairy , to see how we manage the clot cream , of which he have eat a basinful . and thereupon they talk a little ; and Annie think he a fine old gentleman , and a very just one ; for he have nobly condemn the people who speak against Tom Faggus . 
 ' your honour must plainly understand , ' say Annie , be now alone with he , and spread out her light quick hand over the pan , like butterfly , ' that they be bring in here to cool , after be set in the basin - hole , with the wood - ash under they , which I show you in the back - kitchen . and they must have very little heat , not enough to simmer even ; only just to make the bubble rise , and the scum upon the top set thick ; and after that , it clot as firm oh , as firm as my two hand be . ' 
 ' have you ever hear , ' ask the Counsellor , who enjoy this talk with Annie , ' that if you pass across the top , without break the surface , a string of bead , or polished glass , or anything of that kind , the cream will set three time as solid , and in thrice the quantity ? ' 
 ' no , sir ; I have never hear that , ' say Annie , star with all her simple eye ; ' what a thing it be to read book , and grow learn ! but it be very easy to try it : I will get my coral necklace ; it will not be witchcraft , will it , sir ? ' 
 ' certainly not , ' the old man reply ; ' I will make the experiment myself ; and you may trust I not to be hurt , my dear . but coral will not do , my child , neither will anything colour . the bead must be of plain common glass ; but the bright they be the well . ' 
 ' then I know the very thing , ' cry Annie ; ' as bright as bright can be , and without any colour in it , except in the sun or candle light . Dearest Lorna have the very thing , a necklace of some old glass - bead , or I think they call they jewel : she will be too glad to lend it to we . I will go for it , in a moment . ' 
 ' my dear , it can not be half so bright as your own pretty eye . but remember one thing , Annie , you must not say what it be for ; or even that I be go to use it , or anything at all about it ; else the charm will be break . bring it here , without a word ; if you know where she keep it . ' 
 ' to be sure I do , ' she answer ; ' John use to keep it for she . but she take it away from he last week , and she wear it when I mean when somebody be here ; and he say it be very valuable , and speak with great learning about it , and call it by some particular name , which I forget at this moment . but valuable or not , we can not hurt it , can we , sir , by pass it over the cream - pan ? ' 
 ' hurt it ! ' cry the Counsellor : ' nay , we shall do it good , my dear . it will help to raise the cream : and you may take my word for it , young maiden , none can do good in this world , without in turn receive it . ' pronounce this great sentiment , he look so grand and benevolent , that Annie   as she say afterwards   could scarce forbear from kiss he , yet fear to take the liberty . therefore , she only run away to fetch my Lorna 's necklace . 
 now as luck would have it whether good luck or otherwise , you must not judge too hastily , my darling have take it into her head , only a day or two before , that I be far too valuable to be trust with her necklace . now that she have some idea of its price and quality , she have begin to fear that some one , perhaps even Squire Faggus   in whom her faith be illiberal , might form design against my health , to win the bauble from I . so , with many pretty coaxing , she have lead I to give it up ; which , except for her own sake , I be glad enough to do , mislike a charge of such importance . 
 therefore Annie find it sparkle in the little secret hole , near the head of Lorna 's bed , which she herself have recommend for its safe custody ; and without a word to any one she bring it down , and dance it in the air before the Counsellor , for he to admire its lustre . 
 ' oh , that old thing ! ' say the gentleman , in a tone of some contempt ; ' I remember that old thing well enough . however , for want of a well , no doubt it will answer our purpose . three time three , I pass it over . Crinkleum , crankum , grass and clover ! what be you fear of , you silly child ? ' 
 ' good sir , it be perfect witchcraft ! I be sure of that , because it rhyme . oh , what would mother say to I ? shall I ever go to heaven again ? oh , I see the cream already ! ' 
 ' to be sure you do ; but you must not look , or the whole charm will be break , and the devil will fly away with the pan , and drown every cow you have get in it . ' 
 ' oh , sir , it be too horrible . how could you lead I to such a sin ? away with thee , witch of Endor ! ' 
 for the door begin to creak , and a broom appear suddenly in the opening , with our Betty , no doubt , behind it . but Annie , in the great terror , slam the door , and bolt it , and then turn again to the Counsellor ; yet look at his face , have not the courage to reproach he . for his eye roll like two blaze barrel , and his white shag brow be knit across they , and his forehead scowl in black furrow , so that Annie say that if she ever see the devil , she see he then , and no mistake . whether the old man wish to scare she , or whether he be try not to laugh , be more than I can tell you . 
 ' now , ' he say , in a deep stern whisper ; ' not a word of this to a live soul ; neither must you , nor any other enter this place for three hour at least . by that time the charm will have do its work : the pan will be cream to the bottom ; and you will bless I for a secret which will make your fortune . put the bauble under this pannikin ; which none must lift for a day and a night . have no fear , my simple wench ; not a breath of harm shall come to you , if you obey my order . ' 
 ' oh , that I will , sir , that I will : if you will only tell I what to do . ' 
 ' go to your room , without so much as a single word to any one . bolt yourself in , and for three hour now , read the Lord 's Prayer backwards . ' 
 Poor Annie be only too glad to escape , upon these condition ; and the Counsellor kiss she upon the forehead and tell she not to make her eye red , because they be much too sweet and pretty . she drop they at this , with a sob and a curtsey , and run away to her bedroom ; but as for read the Lord 's Prayer backwards , that be much beyond she ; and she have not do three word quite right , before the three hour expire . 
 meanwhile the Counsellor be go . he bid our mother adieu , with so much dignity of bearing , and such warmth of gratitude , and the high - breed courtesy of the old school   now fast disappear , that when he be go , dear mother fall back on the chair which he have use last night , as if it would teach she the grace . and for more than an hour she make believe not to know what there be for dinner . 
 ' oh , the wickedness of the world ! oh , the lie that be tell of people or rather I mean the falsehood because a man be well bear , and have well manner ! why , Lorna , how be it that you never speak about your charming uncle ? do you notice , Lizzie , how his silver hair be wave upon his velvet collar , and how white his hand be , and every nail like an acorn ; only pink like shell - fish , or at least like shell ? and the way he bow , and drop his eye , from his pure respect for I ! and then , that he would not even speak , on account of his emotion ; but press my hand in silence ! oh , Lizzie , you have read I beautiful thing about Sir Gallyhead , and the rest ; but nothing to equal Sir Counsellor . ' 
 ' you have well marry he , madam , ' say I , come in very sternly ; though I know I ought not to say it : ' he can repay your adoration . he have steal a hundred thousand pound . ' 
 ' John , ' cry my mother , ' you be mad ! ' and yet she turn as pale as death ; for woman be so quick at turn ; and she inkle what it be . 
 ' of course I be , mother ; mad about the marvel of Sir Galahad . he have go off with my Lorna 's necklace . fifty farm like our can never make it good to Lorna . ' 
 Hereupon ensue grim silence . Mother look at Lizzie 's face , for she could not look at I ; and Lizzie look at I , to know : and as for I , I could have stamp almost on the heart of any one . it be not the value of the necklace I be not so low a hound as that nor be it even the damned folly show by every one of we it be the thought of Lorna 's sorrow for her ancient plaything ; and even more , my fury at the breach of hospitality . 
 but Lorna come up to I softly , as a woman should always come ; and she lay one hand upon my shoulder ; and she only look at I . she even seem to fear to look , and drop her eye , and sigh at I . without a word , I know by that , how I must have look like Satan ; and the evil spirit leave my heart ; when she have make I think of it . 
 ' Darling John , do you want I to think that you care for my money , more than for I ? ' 
 I lead she away from the rest of they , be desirous of explain thing , when I see the depth of her nature open , like an everlasting well , to I . but she would not let I say a word , or do anything by ourselves , as it be : she say , ' your duty be to your mother : this blow be on she , and not on I . ' 
 I see that she be right ; though how she know it be beyond I ; and I ask she just to go in front , and bring my mother round a little . for I must let my passion pass : it may drop its weapon quickly ; but it can not come and go , before a man have time to think . 
 then Lorna go up to my mother , who be still in the chair of elegance ; and she take she by both hand , and say , 
 ' Dearest mother , I shall fret so , if I see you fret . and to fret will kill I , mother . they have always tell I so . ' 
 poor mother bent on Lorna 's shoulder , without thought of attitude , and lay her cheek on Lorna 's breast , and sob till Lizzie be jealous , and come with two pocket - handkerchief . as for I , my heart be light   if they would only dry their eye , and come round by dinnertime   than it have be since the day on which Tom Faggus discover the value of that blessed and cursed necklace . none could say that I want Lorna for her money now . and perhaps the Doones would let I have she ; now that her property be go . 
 but who shall tell of Annie 's grief ? the poor little thing would have stake her life upon find the trinket , in all its beauty , lie under the pannikin . she proudly challenge I to lift it which I have do , long ere that , of course if only I would take the risk of the spell for my incredulity . I tell she not to talk of spell , until she could spell a word backwards ; and then to look into the pan where the charmed cream should be . she would not acknowledge that the cream be the same as all the rest be : and indeed it be not quite the same , for the point of poor Lorna 's diamond have make a few star - ray across the rich firm crust of yellow . 
 but when we raise the pannikin , and there be nothing under it , poor Annie fall against the wall , which have be whiten lately ; and her face put all the white to scorn . my love , who be as fond of she , as if she have know she for fifty year , hereupon run up and catch she , and abuse all diamond . I will dwell no more upon Annie 's grief , because we feel it all so much . but I could not help tell she , if she want a witch , to seek good Mother Melldrum , a legitimate performer . 
 that same night Master Jeremy Stickles   of whose absence the Counsellor must have know   come back , with all equipment ready for the grand attack . now the Doones know , quite as well as we do , that this attack be threaten ; and that but for the wonderful weather it would have be make long ago . therefore we , or at least our people   for I be doubtful about go , be sure to meet with a good resistance , and due preparation . 
 it be very strange to hear and see , and quite impossible to account for , that now some hundred of country people   who fear to whisper so much as a word against the Doones a year ago , and would soon have think of attack a church , in service time , than Glen Doone   now sharpen their old cutlass , and lay pitch - fork on the grindstone , and brag at every village cross , as if each would kill ten Doones himself , neither care to wipe his hand afterwards . and this fierce bravery , and tall contempt , have be grow ever since the news of the attack upon our premise have take good people by surprise ; at least as concern the issue . 
 Jeremy Stickles laugh heartily about Annie 's new manner of charming the cream ; but he look very grave at the loss of the jewel , so soon as he know their value . 
 ' my son , ' he exclaim , ' this be very heavy . it will go ill with all of you to make good this loss , as I fear that you will have to do . ' 
 ' what ! ' cry I , with my blood run cold . ' we make good the loss , Master Stickles ! every farthing we have in the world , and the labour of our life to boot , will never make good the tenth of it . ' 
 ' it would cut I to the heart , ' he answer , lay his hand on mine , ' to hear of such a deadly blow to you and your good mother . and this farm ; how long , John , have it be in your family ? ' 
 ' for at least six hundred year , ' I say , with a foolish pride that be only too like to end in groan ; ' and some people say , by a Royal grant , in the time of the great King Alfred . at any rate , a Ridd be with he throughout all his hiding - time . we have always hold by the King and crown : surely none will turn we out , unless we be guilty of treason ? ' 
 ' my son , ' reply Jeremy very gently , so that I could love he for it , ' not a word to your good mother of this unlucky matter . keep it to yourself , my boy , and try to think but little of it . after all , I may be wrong : at any rate , least say well mend . ' 
 ' but Jeremy , dear Jeremy , how can I bear to leave it so ? do you suppose that I can sleep , and eat my food , and go about , and look at other people , as if nothing at all have happen ? and all the time have it on my mind , that not an acre of all the land , nor even our old sheep - dog , belong to we , of right at all ! it be more than I can do , Jeremy . let I talk , and know the bad of it . ' 
 ' very well , ' reply Master Stickles , see that both the door be close ; ' I think that nothing could move you , John ; or I never would have tell you . likely enough I be quite wrong ; and God send that I be so . but what I guess at some time back seem more than a guess , now that you have tell I about these wondrous jewel . now will you keep , as close as death , every word I tell you ? ' 
 ' by the honour of a man , I will . until you yourself release I . ' 
 ' that be quite enough , John . from you I want no oath ; which , accord to my experience , tempt a man to lie the more , by make it more important . I know you now too well to swear you , though I have the power . now , my lad , what I have to say will scare your mind in one way , and ease it in another . I think that you have be hard pressed I can read you like a book , John by something which that old villain say , before he steal the necklace . you have try not to dwell upon it ; you have even try to make light of it for the sake of the woman : but on the whole it have grieve you more than even this dastard robbery . ' 
 ' it would have do so , Jeremy Stickles , if I could once have believe it . and even without much belief , it be so against our manner , that it make I miserable . only think of love Lorna , only think of kiss she ; and then remember that her father have destroy the life of mine ! ' 
 ' only think , ' say Master Stickles , imitate my very voice , ' of Lorna love you , John , of Lorna kiss you , John ; and all the while say to herself , " this man 's father murder mine . " now look at it in Lorna 's way as well as in your own way . how one - side all man be ! ' 
 ' I may look at it in fifty way , and yet no good will come of it . Jeremy , I confess to you , that I try to make the good of it ; partly to baffle the Counsellor , and partly because my darling need my help , and bear it so , and behave to I so nobly . but to you in secret , I be not ashamed to say that a woman may look over this easy than a man may . ' 
 ' because her nature be large , my son , when she truly love ; although her mind be small . now , if I can ease you from this secret burden , will you bear , with strength and courage , the other which I plant on you ? ' 
 ' I will do my good , ' say I. 
 ' no man can do more , ' say he and so begin his story . 




 CHAPTER LIII 

 JEREMY find out something 

 ' you know , my son , ' say Jeremy Stickles , with a good pull at his pipe , because he be go to talk so much , and put his leg well along the settle ; ' it have be my duty , for a weary time than I care to think of   and which would have be unbearable , except for your great kindness , to search this neighbourhood narrowly , and learn everything about everybody . now the neighbourhood itself be queer ; and people have different way of thinking from what we be use to in London . for instance now , among your folk , when any piece of news be tell , or any man 's conduct speak of , the very first question that arise in your mind be this " be this action kind and good ? " long after that , you say to yourself , " do the law enjoin or forbid this thing ? " now here be your fundamental error : for among all truly civilised people the foremost of all question be , " how stand the law herein ? " and if the law approve , no need for any further questioning . that this be so , you may take my word : for I know the law pretty thoroughly . 
 ' very well ; I need not say any more about that , for I have show that you be all quite wrong . I only speak of this savage tendency , because it explain so many thing which have puzzle I among you , and most of all your kindness to man whom you never see before ; which be an utterly illegal thing . it also explain your toleration of these outlaw Doones so long . if your view of law have be correct , and law an element of your life , these robber could never have be indulge for so many year amongst you : but you must have abate the nuisance . ' 
 ' now , Stickles , ' I cry , ' this be too bad ! ' he be deliver himself so grandly . ' why you yourself have be amongst we , as the balance , and sceptre , and sword of law , for nigh upon a twelvemonth ; and have you abate the nuisance , or even care to do it , until they begin to shoot at you ? ' 
 ' my son , ' he reply , ' your argument be quite beside the purpose , and only tend to prove more clearly that which I have say of you . however , if you wish to hear my story , no more interruption . I may not have a chance to tell you , perhaps for week , or I know not when , if once those yellow and red arrive , and be bless to they , the lubber ! well , it may be six month ago , or it may be seven , at any rate a good while before that cursed frost begin , the mere name of which send a shiver down every bone of my body , when I be rid one afternoon from Dulverton to Watchett ' 
 ' Dulverton to Watchett ! ' I cry . ' now what do that remind I of ? I be sure , I remember something ' 
 ' remember this , John , if anything that another word from thee , and thou hast no more of mine . well , I be a little weary perhaps , have be plague at Dulverton with the grossness of the people . for they would tell I nothing at all about their fellow - townsman , your worthy Uncle Huckaback , except that he be a God - fear man , and they only wish I be like he . I bless myself for a stupid fool , in think to have pump they ; for by this time I might have know that , through your western homeliness , every man in his own country be something more than a prophet . and I feel , of course , that I have do more harm than good by question ; inasmuch as every soul in the place would run straightway and inform he that the King 's man from the other side of the forest have be sift out his way and work . ' 
 ' ah , ' I cry , for I could not help it ; ' you begin to understand at last , that we be not quite such a set of oafs , as you at first believe we . ' 
 ' I be rid on from Dulverton , ' he resume , with great severity , yet threaten I no more , which check I more than fifty threat : ' and it be late in the afternoon , and I be grow weary . the road   if road it could be call   ' turn suddenly down from the high land to the very brink of the sea ; and round a little jut of cliff , I meet the roar of the breaker . my horse be scared , and leap aside ; for a northerly wind be pip , and drive hunk of foam across , as child scatter snow - ball . but he only sink to his fetlock in the dry sand , pile with pop - weed : and I try to make he face the wave ; and then I look about I . 
 ' Watchett town be not to be see , on account of a little foreland , a mile or more upon my course , and stand to the right of I . there be room enough below the cliff   which be nothing there to your , John , for horse and man to get along , although the tide be run high with a northerly gale to back it . but close at hand and in the corner , draw above the yellow sand and long eye - brow of rackweed , as snug a little house blink on I as ever I see , or wish to see . 
 ' you know that I be not luxurious , neither in any way give to the common lust of the flesh , John . my father never allow his hair to grow a fourth part of an inch in length , and he be a thoroughly godly man ; and I try to follow in his footstep , whenever I think about it . nevertheless , I do assure you that my view of that little house and the way the light be twinkle , so different from the cold and darkness of the rolling sea , move the ancient Adam in I , if he could be find to move . I love not a house with too many window : be out of house and door some three - quarter of my time , when I get inside a house I like to feel the difference . air and light be good for people who have any lack of they ; and if a man once talk about they , ' tis enough to prove his need of they . but , as you well know , John Ridd , the horse who have be at work all day , with the sunshine in his eye , sleep well in dark stable , and need no moon to help he . 
 ' see therefore that this same inn have four window , and no more , I think to myself how snug it be , and how beautiful I could sleep there . and so I make the old horse draw hand , which he be only too glad to do , and we clomb above the spring - tide mark , and over a little piece of turf , and strike the door of the hostelry . some one come and peep at I through the lattice overhead , which be full of bull ' eye ; and then the bolt be draw back , and a woman meet I very courteously . a dark and foreign - look woman , very hot of blood , I doubt , but not altogether a bad one . and she wait for I to speak first , which an Englishwoman would not have do . 
 ' " can I rest here for the night ? " I ask , with a lift of my hat to she ; for she be no provincial dame , who would stare at I for the courtesy ; " my horse be weary from the slough , and myself but little well : beside that , we both be famish . " 
 ' " yes , sir , you can rest and welcome . but of food , I fear , there be but little , unless of the common order . our fisher would have draw the net , but the wave be violent . however , we have what you call it ? I never can remember , it be so hard to say the flesh of the hog salt . " 
 ' " Bacon ! " say I ; " what can be well ? and half dozen of egg with it , and a quart of fresh - draw ale . you make I rage with hunger , madam . be it cruelty , or hospitality ? " 
 ' " ah , good ! " she reply , with a merry smile , full of southern sunshine : " you be not of the man round here ; you can think , and you can laugh ! " 
 ' " and most of all , I can eat , good madam . in that way I shall astonish you ; even more than by my intellect . " 
 ' she laugh aloud , and swing her shoulder , as your native can not do ; and then she call a little maid to lead my horse to stable . however , I prefer to see that matter do myself , and tell she to send the little maid for the frying - pan and the egg - box . 
 ' whether it be my natural wit and elegance of manner ; or whether it be my London freedom and knowledge of the world ; or   which be perhaps the most probable , because the least pleasing supposition   my ready and permanent appetite , and appreciation of garlic I leave you to decide , John : but perhaps all three combine to recommend I to the grace of my charming hostess . when I say " charming , " I mean of course by manner and by intelligence , and most of all by cook ; for as regard external charm   most fleeting and fallacious   her have cease to cause distress , for I can not say how many year . she say that it be the climate for even upon that subject she request my opinion and I answer , " if there be a change , let madam blame the season . " 
 ' however , not to dwell too much upon our little pleasantry   for I always get on with these foreign woman well than with your Molls and Pegs , I became , not inquisitive , but reasonably desirous to know , by what strange hap or hazard , a clever and a handsome woman , as she must have be some day , a woman moreover with great contempt for the rustic mind around she , could have settle here in this lonely inn , with only the wave for company , and a boorish husband who slave all day in turn a potter 's wheel at Watchett . and what be the meaning of the emblem set above her doorway , a very unattractive cat sit in a ruined tree ? 
 ' however , I have not very long to strain my curiosity ; for when she find out who I be , and how I hold the King 's commission , and might be call an officer , her desire to tell I all be more than equal to mine of hear it . many and many a day , she have long for some one both skilful and trustworthy , most of all for some one bear warrant from a court of justice . but the magistrate of the neighbourhood would have nothing to say to she , declare that she be a crack - brain woman , and a wicked , and even a foreign one . 
 ' with many grimace she assure I that never by her own free - will would she have live so many year in that hateful country , where the sky for half the year be fog , and rain for nearly the other half . it be so the very night when first her evil fortune bring she there ; and so no doubt it would be , long after it have kill she . but if I wish to know the reason of she be there , she would tell I in few word , which I will repeat as briefly . 
 ' by birth she be an italian , from the mountain of Apulia , who have go to Rome to seek her fortune , after be badly treat in some love - affair . her christian name be Benita ; as for her surname , that could make no difference to any one . be a quick and active girl , and resolve to work down her trouble , she find employment in a large hotel ; and rise gradually , begin to send money to her parent . and here she might have thriven well , and marry well under sunny sky , and be a happy woman , but that some black day send thither a rich and noble english family , eager to behold the Pope . it be not , however , their fervent longing for the Holy Father which have bring they to St. Peter 's roof ; but rather their own bad luck in make their home too hot to hold they . for although in the main good Catholics , and pleasant receiver of anything , one of their number have give offence , by the folly of try to think for himself . some bitter feud have be among they , Benita know not how it be ; and the sister of the nobleman who have die quite lately be married to the rival claimant , whom they all detest . it be something about divide land ; Benita know not what it be . 
 ' but this Benita do know , that they be all great people , and rich , and very liberal ; so that when they offer to take she , to attend to the child , and to speak the language for they , and to comfort the lady , she be only too glad to go , little foresee the end of it . moreover , she love the child so , from their pretty way and that , and the thing they give she , and the style of their dress , that it would have break her heart almost never to see the dear again . 
 ' and so , in a very evil hour , she accept the service of the noble Englishman , and send her father an old shoe fill to the tongue with money , and trust herself to fortune . but even before she go , she know that it could not turn out well ; for the laurel leaf which she throw on the fire would not crackle even once , and the horn of the goat come wrong in the twist , and the heel of her foot be shin . this make her sigh at the starting - time ; and after that what could you hope for ? 
 ' however , at first all thing go well . my Lord be as gay as gay could be : and never would come inside the carriage , when a decent horse could be get to ride . he would gallop in front , at a reckless pace , without a weapon of any kind , delight with the pure blue air , and throw his heart around he . Benita have never see any man so admirable , and so childish . as innocent as an infant ; and not only content , but noisily happy with anything . only other people must share his joy ; and the shadow of sorrow scatter it , though it be but the shade of poverty . 
 ' here Benita weep a little ; and I like she none the less , and believe she ten time more ; in virtue of a tear or two . 
 ' and so they travel through Northern Italy , and throughout the south of France , make their way anyhow ; sometimes in coach , sometimes in cart , sometimes upon mule - back , sometimes even a - foot and weary ; but always as happy as could be . the child laugh , and grow , and throve   especially the young lady , the elder of the two , and Benita begin to think that omen must not be rely upon . but suddenly her faith in omen be confirm for ever . 
 ' my Lord , who be quite a young man still , and laugh at english arrogance , ride on in front of his wife and friend , to catch the first of a famous view , on the french side of the Pyrenee hill . he kiss his hand to his wife , and say that he would save she the trouble of come . for those two be so one in one , that they could make each other know whatever he or she have feel . and so my Lord go round the corner , with a fine young horse leap up at the step . 
 ' they wait for he , long and long ; but he never come again ; and within a week , his mangle body lie in a little chapel - yard ; and if the priest only say a quarter of the prayer they take the money for , God know they can have no throat leave ; only a relaxation . 
 ' my lady dwell for six month more it be a melancholy tale   what true tale be not so ?   scarcely able to believe that all her fright be not a dream . she would not wear a piece or shape of any mourning - clothe ; she would not have a person cry , or any sorrow among we . she simply disbelieve the thing , and trust God to right it . the Protestants , who have no faith , can not understand this feeling . enough that so it be ; and so my Lady go to heaven . 
 ' for when the snow come down in autumn on the root of the Pyrenees , and the chapel - yard be white with it , many people tell the lady that it be time for she to go . and the strong plea of all be this , that now she bear another hope of repeat her husband 's virtue . so at the end of October , when wolf come down to the farm - land , the little english family go home towards their England . 
 ' they land somewhere on the Devonshire coast , ten or eleven year agone , and stay some day at Exeter ; and set out thence in a hire coach , without any proper attendance , for Watchett , in the north of Somerset . for the lady own a quiet mansion in the neighbourhood of that town , and her one desire be to find refuge there , and to meet her lord , who be sure to come   she say   when he hear of his new infant . therefore with only two serve - man and two maid   include Benita , the party set forth from Exeter , and lie the first night at Bampton . 
 ' on the following morn they start bravely , with earnest hope of arrive at their journey 's end by daylight . but the road be soft and very deep , and the slough be out in place ; and the heavy coach break down in the axle , and need mending at Dulverton ; and so they lose three hour or more , and would have be wise to sleep there . but her ladyship would not hear of it ; she must be home that night , she say , and her husband would be wait . how could she keep he wait now , after such a long , long time ? 
 ' therefore , although it be afternoon , and the year now come to December , the horse be put to again , and the heavy coach go up the hill , with the lady and her two child , and Benita , sit inside of it ; the other maid , and two serve - man   each man with a great blunderbuss   mount upon the outside ; and upon the horse three exeter postilion . much have be say at Dulverton , and even back at Bampton , about some great freebooter , to whom all Exmoor owe suit and service , and pay they very punctually . both the serve - man be scared , even over their ale , by this . but the lady only say , " drive on ; I know a little of highwayman : they never rob a lady . " 
 ' through the fog and through the muck the coach go on , as good it might ; sometimes founder in a slough , with half of the horse splash it , and some - time knuckle up on a bank , and strain across the middle , while all the horse kick at it . however , they go on till dark as well as might be expect . but when they come , all thank God , to the pitch and slope of the sea - bank , lead on towards Watchett town , and where my horse have shy so , there the little boy jump up , and clap his hand at the water ; and there   as Benita say   they meet their fate , and could not fly it . 
 ' although it be past the dusk of day , the silver light from the sea flow in , and show the cliff , and the gray sand - line , and the drift of wreck , and wrack - weed . it show they also a troop of horseman , wait under a rock hard by , and ready to dash upon they . the postilion lash towards the sea , and the horse strove in the depth of sand , and the serve - man cock their blunder - bus , and cower away behind they ; but the lady stand up in the carriage bravely , and neither scream nor speak , but hide her son behind she . meanwhile the driver drive into the sea , till the lead horse be swim . 
 ' but before the wave come into the coach , a score of fierce man be round it . they curse the postilion for mad coward , and cut the trace , and seize the wheel - horse , all - wild with dismay in the wet and the dark . then , while the carriage be heel over , and well - nigh upset in the water , the lady exclaim , " I know that man ! he be our ancient enemy ; " and Benita   foresee that all their box would be turn inside out , or carry away , snatch the most valuable of the jewel , a magnificent necklace of diamond , and cast it over the little girl 's head , and bury it under her travelling - cloak , hop to save it . then a great wave , crest with foam , roll in , and the coach be throw on its side , and the sea rush in at the top and the window , upon shrieking , and clash , and faint away . 
 ' what follow Benita know not , as one might well suppose , herself be stun by a blow on the head , beside be palsy with terror . " see , I have the mark now , " she say , " where the jamb of the door come down on I ! " but when she recover her sens , she find herself lie upon the sand , the robber be out of sight , and one of the serve - man be bath her forehead with sea water . for this she rat he well , have take already too much of that article ; and then she arise and run to her mistress , who be sit upright on a little rock , with her dead boy 's face to her bosom , sometimes gaze upon he , and sometimes quest round for the other one . 
 ' although there be torch and link around , and she look at her child by the light of they , no one dare to approach the lady , or speak , or try to help she . each man whisper his fellow to go , but each hang back himself , and mutter that it be too awful to meddle with . and there she would have sit all night , with the fine little fellow stone dead in her arm , and her tearless eye dwell upon he , and her heart but not her mind thinking , only that the italian woman steal up softly to her side , and whisper , " it be the will of God . " 
 ' " so it always seem to be , " be all the word the mother ' answer ; and then she fall on Benita 's neck ; and the man be ashamed to be near her weeping ; and a sailor lie down and bellow . surely these man be the good . 
 ' before the light of the morning come along the tide to Watchett my Lady have meet her husband . they take she into the town that night , but not to her own castle ; and so the power of womanhood   which be itself maternity   come over swiftly upon she . the lady , whom all people love   though at certain time particular , lie in Watchett little churchyard , with son and heir at her right hand , and a little babe , of sex unknown , sleep on her bosom . 
 ' this be a miserable tale , ' say Jeremy Stickles brightly ; ' hand I over the schnapp , my boy . what fool we be to spoil our eye for other people 's trouble ! enough of our own to keep they clean , although we all be chimney - sweep . there be nothing like good holland , when a man become too sensitive . restore the action of the gland ; that be my rule , after weeping . let I make you another , John . you be quite low - spirited . ' 
 but although Master Jeremy carry on so   as become his manhood , and laugh at the sailor 's bellowing ; bless his heart , I know as well that tear be in his brave keen eye , as if I have dare to look for they , or to show mine own . 
 ' and what be the lady 's name ? ' I ask ; ' and what become of the little girl ? and why do the woman stay there ? ' 
 ' well ! ' cry Jeremy Stickles , only too glad to be cheerful again : ' talk of a woman after that ! as we use to say at school " who drag whom , how many time , in what manner , round the wall of what ? " but to begin , last first , my John   as become a woman : Benita stay in that bless place , because she could not get away from it . the Doones if Doones indeed they be , about which you of course know well take every stiver out of the carriage : wet or dry they take it . and Benita could never get her wage : for the whole affair be in Chancery , and they have appoint a receiver . ' 
 ' whew ! ' say I , know something of London , and sorry for Benita 's chance . 
 ' so the poor thing be compel to drop all thought of Apulia , and settle down on the brink of Exmoor , where you get all its evil , without the good to balance they . she marry a man who turn a wheel for make the blue Watchett ware , partly because he could give she a house , and partly because he prove himself a good soul towards my Lady . there they be , and have three child ; and there you may go and visit they . ' 
 ' I understand all that , Jeremy , though you do tell thing too quickly , and I would rather have John Fry 's style ; for he leave one time for his word to melt . now for my second question . what become of the little maid ? ' 
 ' you great oaf ! ' cry Jeremy Stickles : ' you be rather more likely to know , I should think , than any one else in all the kingdom . ' 
 ' if I know , I should not ask you . Jeremy Stickles , do try to be neither conceited nor thick - headed . ' 
 ' I will when you be neither , ' answer Master Jeremy ; ' but you occupy all the room , John . no one else can get in with you there . ' 
 ' very well then , let I out . take I down in both way . ' 
 ' if ever you be take down ; you must have your double joint ready now . and yet in other way you will be as proud and set up as Lucifer . as certain sure as I stand here , that little maid be Lorna Doone . ' 




 CHAPTER LIV 

 MUTUAL DISCOMFITURE 

 it must not be suppose that I be altogether so thick - headed as Jeremy would have make I out . but it be part of my character that I like other people to think I slow , and to labour hard to enlighten I , while all the time I can say to myself , ' this man be shallow than I be ; it be pleasant to see his shoal come up while he be sound mine so ! ' not that I would so behave , God forbid , with anybody   be it man or woman   who in simple heart approach I , with no gauge of intellect . but when the upper hand be take , upon the faith of one 's patience , by a man of even small wit   not that Jeremy be that , neither could he have live to be think so , why , it naturally happen , that we knuckle under , with an ounce of indignation . 
 Jeremy 's tale would have move I greatly both with sorrow and anger , even without my guess at first , and now my firm belief , that the child of those unlucky parent be indeed my Lorna . and as I think of the lady 's trouble , and her faith in Providence , and her cruel , childless death , and then imagine how my darling would be overcome to hear it , you may well believe that my quick reply to Jeremy Stickles 's banter be but as the flourish of a drum to cover the sound of pain . 
 for when he describe the heavy coach and the person in and upon it , and the breaking down at Dulverton , and the place of their destination , as well as the time and the weather , and the season of the year , my heart begin to burn within I , and my mind replace the picture , first of the foreign lady's - maid by the pump caress I , and then of the coach struggle up the hill , and the beautiful dame , and the fine little boy , with the white cockade in his hat ; but most of all the little girl , dark - haired and very lovely , and have even in those day the rich soft look of Lorna . 
 but when he speak of the necklace throw over the head of the little maiden , and of her disappearance , before my eye arise at once the flashing of the beacon - fire , the lonely moor embrown with the light , the tramp of the outlaw cavalcade , and the helpless child head - downward , lie across the robber 's saddle - bow . 
 then I remember my own mad shout of boyish indignation , and marvel at the strange long way by which the event of life come round . and while I think of my own return , and childish attempt to hide myself from sorrow in the sawpit , and the agony of my mother 's tear , it do not fail to strike I as a thing of oman , that the selfsame day should be , both to my darling and myself , the black and most miserable of all youthful day . 
 the King 's Commissioner think it wise , for some good reason of his own , to conceal from I , for the present , the name of the poor lady suppose to be Lorna 's mother ; and know that I could easily now discover it , without he , I let that question abide awhile . indeed I be half afraid to hear it , remember that the nobler and the wealthy she prove to be , the small be my chance of win such a wife for plain John Ridd . not that she would give I up : that I never dream of . but that other would interfere ; or indeed I myself might find it only honest to relinquish she . that last thought be a dreadful blow , and take my breath away from I . 
 Jeremy Stickles be quite decide and of course the discovery be his , he have a right to be so that not a word of all these thing must be impart to Lorna herself , or even to my mother , or any one whatever . ' keep it tight as wax , my lad , ' he cry , with a wink of great expression ; ' this belong to I , mind ; and the credit , ay , and the premium , and the right of discount , be altogether mine . it would have take you fifty year to put two and two together so , as I do , like a clap of thunder . ah , God have give some man brain ; and other have good farm and money , and a certain skill in the low beast . each must use his special talent . you work your farm : I work my brain . in the end , my lad , I shall beat you . ' 
 ' then , Jeremy , what a fool you must be , if you cudgel your brain to make money of this , to open the barn - door to I , and show I all your threshing . ' 
 ' not a whit , my son . quite the opposite . two man always thresh well than one . and here I have you bind to use your flail , one two , with mine , and yet in strict honour bind not to bushel up , till I tell you . ' 
 ' but , ' say I , be much amuse by a Londoner 's brave , yet uncertain , use of simple rural metaphor , for he have wholly forget the winnowing : ' surely if I bushel up , even when you tell I , I must take half - measure . ' 
 ' so you shall , my boy , ' he answer , ' if we can only cheat those confound knave of Equity . you shall take the beauty , my son , and the elegance , and the love , and all that and , my boy , I will take the money . ' 
 this he say in a way so dry , and yet so richly unctuous , that be gift somehow by God , with a kind of sense of queerness , I fall back in my chair , and laugh , though the underside of my laugh be tear . 
 ' now , Jeremy , how if I refuse to keep this half as tight as wax . you bind I to no such partnership , before you tell the story ; and I be not sure , by any mean , of your right to do so afterwards . ' 
 ' tush ! ' he reply : ' I know you too well , to look for meanness in you . if from pure goodwill , John Ridd , and anxiety to relieve you , I make no condition precedent , you be not the man to take advantage , as a lawyer might . I do not even want your promise . as sure as I hold this glass , and drink your health and love in another drop   force on I by pathetic word , so surely will you be bind to I , until I do release you . tush ! I know man well by this time : a mere look of trust from one be worth another 's ten thousand oath . ' 
 ' Jeremy , you be right , ' I answer ; ' at least as regard the issue . although perhaps you be not right in lead I into a bargain like this , without my own consent or knowledge . but suppose that we should both be shoot in this grand attack on the valley   for I mean to go with you now , heart and soul , be Lorna to remain untold of that which change all her life ? ' 
 ' both shoot ! ' cry Jeremy Stickles : ' my goodness , boy , talk not like that ! and those Doones be curse good shot too . Nay , nay , the yellow shall go in front ; we attack on the Somerset side , I think . I from a hill will reconnoitre , as behove a general , you shall stick behind a tree , if we can only find one big enough to hide you . you and I to be shoot , John Ridd , with all this inferior food for powder anxious to be devour ? ' 
 I laugh , for I know his cool hardihood , and never - flinch courage ; and sooth to say no coward would have dare to talk like that . 
 ' but when one come to think of it , ' he continue , smile at himself ; ' some provision should be make for even that unpleasant chance . I will leave the whole in writing , with order to be open , etc . , etc . now no more of that , my boy ; a cigarro after schnapp , and go to meet my yellow boy . ' 
 his ' yellow boy , ' as he call the Somersetshire train band , be even now come down the valley from the London Road , as every one since I go up to town , grandly entitle the lane to the moor . there be one good point about these man , that have no discipline at all , they make pretence to none whatever . Nay , rather they ridicule the thing , as below man of any spirit . on the other hand , Master Stickles 's trooper look down on these native fellow from a height which I hope they may never tumble , for it would break the neck of all of they . 
 now these fine native come along , sing , for their very life , a song the like of which set down here would oust my book from modest people , and make everybody say , ' this man never can have love Lorna . ' therefore , the less of that the well ; only I think , ' what a difference from the goodly psalm of the ale house ! ' 
 have finish their canticle , which contain more mirth than melody , they draw themselves up , in a sort of way suppose by they to be military , each man with heel and elbow strike into those of his neighbour , and salute the King 's Commissioner . ' why , where be your officer ? ' ask Master Stickles ; ' how be it that you have no officer ? ' upon this there arise a general grin , and a knowing look pass along their face , even up to the man by the gatepost . ' be you go to tell I , or not , ' say Jeremy , ' what be become of your officer ? ' 
 ' Plaise zur , ' say one little fellow at last , be nod at by the rest to speak , in right of his know eloquence ; ' hus tould Harfizers , as a wor no nade of un , now King 's man hiszell wor coom , a puppose vor to command we laike . ' 
 ' and do you mean to say , you villain , ' cry Jeremy , scarce know whether to laugh , or to swear , or what to do ; ' that your officer take their dismissal thus , and let you come on without they ? ' 
 ' what could them do ? ' ask the little man , with reason certainly on his side : ' hus zent them about their business , and they be glad enough to goo . ' 
 ' well ! ' say poor Jeremy , turn to I ; ' a pretty state of thing , John ! Threescore cobbler , and farming man , plasterer , tailor , and kettle - to - mend ; and not a man to keep order among they , except my bless self , John ! and I trow there be not one among they could hit all in - door fly . the Doones will make riddle of all of we . ' 
 however , he have well hope when the son of Devon appear , as they do in about an hour 's time ; fine fellow , and eager to prove themselves . these have not discard their officer , but march in good obedience to they , and be quite prepared to fight the man of Somerset   if need be   in addition to the Doones . and there be scarcely a man among they but could have trounce three of the yellow man , and would have do it gladly too , in honour of the red facing . 
 ' do you mean to suppose , Master Jeremy Stickles , ' say I , look on with amazement , behold also all our maiden at the upstair window wonder ; ' that we , my mother a widow woman , and I a young man of small estate , can keep and support all these precious fellow , both yellow one , and red one , until they have take the Doone Glen ? ' 
 ' God forbid it , my son ! ' he reply , lay a finger upon his lip : ' nay , nay , I be not of the shabby order , when I have the string of government . kill your sheep at famine price , and knead your bread at a figure express the rigour of last winter . let Annie make out the bill every day , and I at night will double it . you may take my word for it , Master John , this spring - harvest shall bring you in three time as much as last autumn 's do . if they cheat you in town , my lad , you shall have your change in the country . take thy bill , and write down quickly . ' 
 however this do not meet my view of what an honest man should do ; and I go to consult my mother about it , as all the account would be make in her name . 
 dear mother think that if the King pay only half again as much as other people would have to pay , it would be perhaps the proper thing ; the half be due for loyalty : and here she quote an ancient saying , 
 the King and his staff . be a man and a half : 
 which , accord to her judgment , rule beyond dispute the law of the present question . to argue with she after that   which she bring up with such triumph   would have be bad than useless . therefore I just tell Annie to make the bill at a third below the current market price ; so that the upshot would be fair . she promise I honestly that she would ; but with a twinkle in her bright blue eye , which she must have catch from Tom Faggus . it always have appear to I that stern and downright honesty upon money matter be a thing not understand of woman ; be they as good as good can be . 
 the yellow and the red together number a hundred and twenty man , most of whom sleep in our barn and stack ; and besides these we have fifteen trooper of the regular army . you may suppose that all the country be turn upside down about it ; and the folk who come to see they drill by no mean a needless exercise be a great plague than the soldier . the officer too of the devonshire hand be such a torment to we , that we almost wish their man have dismiss they , as the Somerset troop have do with theirs . for we could not keep they out of our house , be all young man of good family , and therefore not to be meet with bar . and have now three lovely maiden   for even Lizzie might be call so , when she care to please , mother and I be at wit 's end , on account of those bless officer . I never get a wink of sleep ; they come whistle under the window so ; and directly I go out to chase they , there be nothing but a cat to see . 
 therefore all of we be right glad   except perhaps Farmer Snowe , from whom we have buy some victual at rare price , when Jeremy Stickles give order to march , and we begin to try to do it . a good deal of boasting go overhead , as our man defile along the lane ; and the thick broad patin of pennywort jut out between the stone , ready to heal their bruise . the parish choir come part of the way , and the singing - loft from Countisbury ; and they keep our soldier ' spirit up with some of the most pugnacious Psalms . Parson Bowden march ahead , lead all our van and file , as against the Papists ; and promise to go with we , till we come to bullet distance . therefore we march bravely on , and child come to look at we . and I wonder where Uncle Reuben be , who ought to have lead the culverin   whereof we have no less than three , if Stickles could only have find he ; and then I think of little Ruth ; and without any fault on my part , my heart go down within I . 
 the culverin be lay on bark ; and all our horse pull they , and look round every now and then , with their ear curve up like a squirrel'd nut , and their nose toss anxiously , to know what sort of plough it be man have be pleased to put behind they man , whose endless whim and wildness they could never understand , any more than they could satisfy . however , they pull their very good as all our horse always do and the culverin go up the hill , without smack of whip , or swearing . it have be arrange , very justly , no doubt , and quite in keep with the spirit of the Constitution , but as it prove not too wisely , that either body of man should act in its own county only . so when we reach the top of the hill , the son of Devon march on , and across the track lead into Doone - gate , so as to fetch round the western side , and attack with their culverin from the cliff , whence the sentry have challenge I on the night of my pass the entrance . meanwhile the yellow lad be to stay upon the eastern highland , whence Uncle Reuben and myself have reconnoitre so long ago ; and whence I have leap into the valley at the time of the great snow - drift . and here they be not to show themselves ; but keep their culverin in the wood , until their cousin of Devon appear on the opposite parapet of the glen . 
 the third culverin be entrust to the fifteen trooper ; who , with ten pick soldier from either train hand , make in all five - and - thirty man , be to assault the Doone - gate itself , while the outlaws be place between two fire from the eastern cliff and the western . and with this force go Jeremy Stickles , and with it go myself , as know more about the passage than any other stranger do . therefore , if I have put it clearly , as I strive to do , you will see that the Doones must repulse at once three simultaneous attack , from an army numbering in the whole one hundred and thirty - five man , not include the Devonshire officer ; fifty man on each side , I mean , and thirty - five at the head of the valley . 
 the tactic of this grand campaign appear to I so clever , and beautifully order , that I commend Colonel Stickles , as everybody now call he , for his great ability and mastery of the art of war . he admit that he deserve high praise ; but say that he be not by any mean equally certain of success , so large a proportion of his force be only a raw militia , brave enough no doubt for anything , when they see their way to it ; but know little of gunnery , and wholly unused to be shoot at . whereas all the Doones be practise marksman , be compel when lad   like the Balearic slinger   to strike down their meal before taste they . and then Colonel Stickles ask I , whether I myself could stand fire ; he know that I be not a coward , but this be a different question . I tell he that I have be shoot at , once or twice before ; but nevertheless dislike it , as much as almost anything . upon that he say that I would do ; for that when a man get over the first blush of diffidence , he soon begin to look upon it as a puff of destiny . 
 I wish I could only tell what happen , in the battle of that day , especially as nearly all the people round these part , who never see gun - fire in it , have get the tale so much amiss ; and some of they will even stand in front of my own hearth , and contradict I to the tooth ; although at the time they be not bear , nor their father put into breech . but in truth , I can not tell , exactly , even the part in which I help , how then can I be expect , time by time , to lay before you , all the little in and out of place , where I myself be not ? only I can contradict thing , which I know could not have be ; and what I plainly see should not be controvert in my own house . 
 now we five - and - thirty man lie back a little way round the corner , in the hollow of the track which lead to the strong Doone - gate . our culverin be in amongst we , load now to the muzzle , and it be not comfortable to know that it might go off at any time . although the yeomanry be not come   accord to arrangement , some of we have horse there ; besides the horse who drag the cannon , and now be sniff at it . and there be plenty of spectator to mind these horse for we , as soon as we should charge ; inasmuch as all our friend and neighbour , who have so keenly prepare for the battle , now resolve to take no part , but look on , and praise the winner . 
 at last we hear the loud bang - bang , which prove that Devon and Somerset be pour their indignation hot into the den of malefactor , or at least so we suppose ; therefore at double quick march we advance round the bend of the cliff which have hide we , hop to find the gate undefended , and to blow down all barrier with the fire of our cannon . and indeed it seem likely at first to be so , for the wild and mountainous gorge of rock appear to be all in pure loneliness , except where the coloured coat of our soldier , and their metal trapping , shine with the sun behind they . therefore we shout a loud hurrah , as for an easy victory . 
 but while the sound of our cheer ring back among the crag above we , a shrill clear whistle cleave the air for a single moment , and then a dozen carbine bellow , and all among we fly murderous lead . several of our man roll over , but the rest rush on like Britons , Jeremy and myself in front , while we hear the horse plunge at the loaded gun behind we . ' now , my lad , ' cry Jeremy , ' one dash , and we be beyond they ! ' for he see that the foe be overhead in the gallery of brushwood . 
 our man with a brave shout answer he , for his courage be fine example ; and we leap in under the foot of the foe , before they could load their gun again . but here , when the foremost among we be past , an awful crash ring behind we , with the shriek of man , and the din of metal , and the horrible screaming of horse . the trunk of the tree have be launch overhead , and crash into the very midst of we . our cannon be under it , so be two man , and a horse with his poor back break . another horse vainly struggle to rise , with his thigh - bone smashed and protrude . 
 now I lose all presence of mind at this , for I love both those good horse , and shout for any to follow I , dash headlong into the cavern . some five or six man come after I , the foremost of whom be Jeremy , when a storm of shot whistle and pat around I , with a blaze of light and a thunderous roar . on I leap , like a madman , and pounce on one gunner , and hurl he across his culverin ; but the other have flee , and a heavy oak door fall to with a bang , behind they . so utterly be my sens go , and naught but strength remain , that I catch up the cannon with both hand , and dash it , breech - first , at the doorway . the solid oak burst with the blow , and the gun stick fast , like a builder 's putlog . 
 but here I look round in vain for any one to come and follow up my success . the scanty light show I no figure move through the length of the tunnel behind I ; only a heavy groan or two go to my heart , and chill it . so I hurry back to seek Jeremy , fear that he must be smite down . 
 and so indeed I find he , as well as three other poor fellow , strike by the charge of the culverin , which have pass so close beside I . two of the four be as dead as stone , and grow cold already , but Jeremy and the other could manage to groan , just now and then . so I turn my attention to they , and think no more of fighting . 
 have so many wounded man , and so many dead among we , we loiter at the cavern 's mouth , and look at one another , wish only for somebody to come and take command of we . but no one come ; and I be griefe so much about poor Jeremy , besides be wholly unused to any violence of bloodshed , that I could only keep his head up , and try to stop he from bleed . and he look up at I pitifully , be perhaps in a haze of thought , as a calf look at a butcher . 
 the shot have take he in the mouth ; about that no doubt could be , for two of his tooth be in his beard , and one of his lip be want . I lay his shattered face on my breast , and nurse he , as a woman might . but he look at I with a jerk at this ; and I see that he want coolness . 
 while here we stay , quite out of danger   for the fellow from the gallery could by no mean shoot we , even if they remain there , and the oaken door whence the other flee be block up by the culverin , a boy who have no business there   be in fact our clerk 's apprentice to the art of shoe - making   come round the corner upon we in the manner which boy , and only boy , can use with grace and freedom ; that be to say , with a sudden rush , and a sidelong step , and an impudence , 
 ' got the bad of it ! ' cry the boy ; ' well be off all of you . Zoomerzett and Devon a vighting ; and the Doones have drashe them both . Maister Ridd , even thee be drashe . ' 
 we few , who yet remain of the force which be to have win the Doone - gate , gaze at one another , like so many fool , and nothing more . for we still have some faint hope of win the day , and recover our reputation , by mean of what the other man might have do without we . and we could not understand at all how Devonshire and Somerset , be embark in the same cause , should be fight with one another . 
 find nothing more to be do in the way of carry on the war , we lay poor Master Stickles and two more of the wound upon the carriage of bark and hurdle , whereon our gun have lie ; and we roll the gun into the river , and harness the horse yet alive , and put the other out of their pain , and sadly wend homeward , feel ourselves to be thoroughly beat , yet ready to maintain that it be no fault of ours whatever . and in this opinion the woman join , be only too glad and thankful to see we home alive again . 
 now , this enterprise have fail so , I prefer not to dwell too long upon it ; only just to show the mischief which lie at the root of the failure . and this mischief be the vile jealousy betwixt red and yellow uniform . now I try to speak impartially , belong no more to Somerset than I do to Devonshire , live upon the border , and bear of either county . the tale be tell I by one side first ; and then quite to a different tune by the other ; and then by both together , with very hot word of reviling , and a desire to fight it out again . and put this with that , the truth appear to be as follow : 
 the man of Devon , who bear red facing , have a long way to go round the hill , before they could get into due position on the western side of the Doone Glen . and know that their cousin in yellow would claim the whole of the glory , if allow to be first with the firing , these worthy fellow wait not to take good aim with their cannon , see the other about to shoot ; but fettle it anyhow on the slope , point in a general direction ; and trust in God for aimworthiness , lay the rope to the breech , and fire . now as Providence ordain it , the shot , which be a casual mixture of anything consider hard for instance , jug - bottom and knob of door the whole of this pernicious dose come scatter and shatter among the unfortunate yellow man upon the opposite cliff ; kill one and wound two . 
 now what do the man of Somerset do , but instead of wait for their friend to send round and beg pardon , train their gun full mouth upon they , and with a vicious meaning shoot . not only this , but they loudly cheer , when they see four or five red coat lie low ; for which savage feel not even the remark of the devonshire man concern their coat could entirely excuse they . now I need not tell the rest of it , for the tale make a man discontent . enough that both side wax hotter and hotter with the fire of destruction . and but that the gorge of the cliff lay between , very few would have live to tell of it ; for our western blood become stiff and firm , when churn with the sense of wrong in it . 
 at last the Doones   who must have laugh at the thunder pass overhead   recall their man from the gallery , issue out of Gwenny 's gate   which have be wholly overlook   and fall on the rear of the Somerset man , and slay four beside their cannon . then while the survivor run away , the outlaws take the hot culverin , and roll it down into their valley . thus , of the three gun set forth that morning , only one ever come home again , and that be the gun of the devonshire man , who drag it home themselves , with the view of make a boast about it . 
 this be a melancholy end of our brave setting out , and everybody blame every one else ; and several of we want to have the whole thing over again , as then we must have right it . but upon one point all agree , by some reason not clear to I , that the root of the evil be to be find in the way Parson Bowden go up the hill , with his hat on , and no cassock . 




 CHAPTER LV 

 get into CHANCERY 

 two of the Devonshire officer   Captains Pyke and Dallan   now take command of the man who be leave , and order all to go home again , commend much the bravery which have be display on all side , and the loyalty to the king , and the english constitution . this last word always seem to I to settle everything when say , because nobody understand it , and yet all can puzzle their neighbour . so the Devonshire man , have bean to sow   which they ought to have do on Good Friday   go home ; and our Somerset friend only stay for two day more to backbite they . 
 to I the whole thing be purely grievous ; not from any sense of defeat   though that be bad enough   but from the pain and anguish cause by death , and wound , and mourning . ' surely we have woe enough , ' I use to think of an evening , when the poor fellow could not sleep or rest , or let other rest around they ; ' surely all this smell of wound be not incense man should pay to the God who make they . death , when it come and be do with , may be a bliss to any one ; but the doubt of life or death , when a man lie , as it be , like a trunk upon a sawpit and a grisly head look up at he , and the groan of pain be cleave he , this would be beyond all bear but for Nature 's sap sweet hope . ' 
 Jeremy Stickles lie and toss , and thrust up his foot in agony , and bit with his lipless mouth the clothe , and be proud to see blood upon they . he look at we ever so many time , as much as to say , ' Fools , let I die , then I shall have some comfort ' ; but we nod at he sagely , especially the woman , try to convey to he , on no account to die yet . and then we talk to one another   on purpose for he to hear we , how brave he be , and not the man to knock under in a hurry , and how he should have the victory yet ; and how well he look , consider . 
 these thing cheer he a little now , and a little more next time ; and every time we go on so , he take it with less impatience . then once when he have be very quiet , and not even try to frown at we , Annie lean over , and kiss his forehead , and spread the pillow and sheet , with a curve as delicate as his own white ear ; and then he feebly lift hand , and pray to God to bless she . and after that he come round gently ; though never to the man he have be , and never to speak loud again . 
 for a time   as I may have imply before   Master Stickles 's authority , and manner of levy duty , have not be take kindly by the people round our neighbourhood . the manor of East Lynn and West Lynn , and even that of Woolhanger although just then all three be at issue about some right of wreck , and the hanging of a sheep - stealer   a man of no great eminence , yet claim by each for the sake of his clothe   these three , have their right impugn , or even supersede , as they declare by the quartering of soldier in their neighbourhood , unite very kindly to oppose the King 's Commissioner . however , Jeremy have contrive to conciliate the whole of they , not so much by anything engage in his deportment or delicate address , as by hold out bright hope that the plunder of the Doone Glen might become divisible among the adjoining manor . now I have never discover a thing which the lord of manor   at least in our part of the world   do not believe to belong to themselves , if only they could get their right . and it do seem natural enough that if the Doones be oust , and a nice collection of prey remain , this should be part among the people have ancient right of plunder . nevertheless , Master Jeremy know that the soldier would have the first of it , and the King what they could not carry . 
 and perhaps he be punish justly for language so misleading , by the general indignation of the people all around we , not at his failure , but at himself , for that which he could in no wise prevent . and the steward of the manor ride up to our house on purpose to reproach he , and be greatly vex with all of we , because he be too ill to see they . 
 to myself   though by right the last to be think of , among so much pain and trouble   Jeremy 's wound be a great misfortune , in more way than one . in the first place , it defer my chance of impart either to my mother or to mistress Lorna my firm belief that the maid I love be not spring from the race which have slay my father ; neither could he in any way have offend against her family . and this discovery I be yearn more and more to declare to they ; be force to see   even in the midst of all our warlike trouble   that a certain difference be grow betwixt they both , and betwixt they and I . for although the word of the Counsellor have seem to fail among we , be bravely meet and scatter , yet our courage be but as wind fling wide the tare - seed , when the sower cast they from his bag . the crop may not come evenly , many place may long lie bare , and the field be all in patch ; yet almost every vetch will spring , and tiller out , and stretch across the scattering where the wind puff . 
 and so dear mother and darle Lorna now have be for many a day thinking , worry , and wear , about the matter between we . neither like to look at the other , as they use to do ; with mother admire Lorna 's eye , and grace , and form of breeding ; and Lorna love mother 's goodness , softness , and simplicity . and the sad and most hurtful thing be that neither could ask the other of the shadow fall between they . and so it go on , and deepen . 
 in the next place Colonel Stickles 's illness be a grievous thing to we , in that we have no one now to command the trooper . ten of these be still alive , and so well approve to we , that they could never fancy aught , whether for dinner or supper , without its be forth - come . if they want trout they should have it ; if colloped venison , or broil ham , or salmon from Lynmouth and Trentisoe , or truffle from the woodside , all these be at the warrior ' service , until they lust for something else . even the wounded man eat nobly ; all except poor Jeremy , who be force to have a young eld shoot , with the pith draw , for to feed he . and once , when they want pickle loach   from my description of it , I take up my boyish sport again , and pronge they a good jarful . therefore , none of they could complain ; and yet they be not satisfied ; perhaps for want of complain . 
 be that as it might , we know that if they once resolve to go   as they might do at any time , with only a corporal over they   all our house , and all our good , ay , and our own precious life , would and must be at the mercy of embitter enemy . for now the Doones , have drive back , as every one say , five hundred man though not thirty have ever fight with they be in such feather all round the country , that nothing be too good for they . offering pour in at the Doone gate , fast than Doones could away with they , and the sympathy both of Devon and Somerset become almost oppressive . and perhaps this wealth of congratulation , and mutual good feeling between plundered and victim , save we from any piece of spite ; kindliness have win the day , and every one love every one . 
 but yet another cause arise , and this the strong one of all , to prove the need of Stickles 's aid , and calamity of his illness . and this come to our knowledge first , without much time to think of it . for two man appear at our gate one day , strip to their shirt , and void of horse , and look very sorrowful . now have some fear of attack from the Doones , and scarce know what their trick might be , we receive these stranger cautiously , desire to know who they be before we let they see all our premise . 
 however , it soon become plain to we that although they might not be honest fellow , at any rate they be not Doones ; and so we take they in , and fed , and leave they to tell their business . and this they be glad enough to do ; as man who have be maltreat almost always be . and it be not for we to contradict they , lest our victual should go amiss . 
 these two very worthy fellow nay , more than that by their own account , be downright martyrs be come , for the public benefit , from the Court of Chancery , sit for everybody 's good , and boldly redress evil . this court have a power of scent unknown to the common - law practitioner , and slowly yet surely track its game ; even as the great lumber dog , now introduce from Spain , and call by some people ' pointer , ' differ from the swift gaze - hound , who see his prey and run he down in the manner of the common lawyer . if a man 's ill fate should drive he to make a choice between these two , let he rather be chase by the hound of law , than track by the dog of Equity . 
 now , as it fall in a very black day   for all except the lawyer   his Majesty 's Court of Chancery , if that be what it call itself , gain scent of poor Lorna 's life , and of all that might be make of it . whether through that brave young lord who run into such peril , or through any of his friend , or whether through that deep old Counsellor , whose game none might penetrate ; or through any disclosure of the italian woman , or even of Jeremy himself ; none just now could tell we ; only this truth be too clear Chancery have hear of Lorna , and then have see how rich she be ; and never delay in one thing , have open mouth , and swallow she . 
 the Doones , with a share of that dry humour which be in they hereditary , have welcome the two apparitor   if that be the proper name for they   and lead they kindly down the valley , and tell they then to serve their writ . mislike the look of thing , these poor man begin to fumble among their clothe ; upon which the Doones cry , ' off with they ! let we see if your message he on your skin . ' and with no more manner than that , they strip , and lash they out of the valley ; only bid they come to we , if they want Lorna Doone ; and to we they come accordingly . neither be they sure at first but that we should treat they so ; for they have no knowledge of the west country , and think it quite a godless place , wherein no writ be holy . 
 we however comfort and cheer they so considerably , that , in gratitude , they show their writ , to which they have stick like leech . and these be twofold ; one address to Mistress Lorna Doone , so call , and bid she keep in readiness to travel whenever call upon , and commit herself to nobody , except the accredited messenger of the right honourable Court ; while the other be address to all subject of his Majesty , have custody of Lorna Doone , or any power over she . and this last threaten and exhort , and hold out hope of recompense , if she be render truly . my mother and I hold consultation , over both these document , with a mixture of some wrath and fear , and a fork of great sorrow to stir they . and now have Jeremy Stickles 's leave , which he give with a nod when I tell he all , and at last make he understand it , I lay bare to my mother as well what I know , as what I merely surmise , or guess , concern Lorna 's parentage . all this she receive with great tear , and wonder , and fervent thank to God , and still more fervent praise of her son , who have nothing whatever to do with it . however , now the question be , how to act about these writ . and herein it be most unlucky that we could not have Master Stickles , with his knowledge of the world , and especially of the law - court , to advise we what to do , and to help in do it . and firstly of the first I say , ' we have rogue to deal with ; but try we not to rogue they . ' 
 to this , in some measure , dear mother agree , though she could not see the justice of it , yet think that it might be wise , because of our want of practice . and then I say , ' now we be bind to tell Lorna , and to serve her citation upon she , which these good fellow have give we . ' 
 ' then go , and do it thyself , my son , ' mother reply with a mournful smile , misdoubte what the end might be . so I take the slip of brown parchment , and go to seek my darling . 
 Lorna be in her favourite place , the little garden which she tend with such care and diligence . see how the maiden love it , and be happy there , I have labour hard to fence it from the danger of the wood . and here she have correct I , with well taste , and sense of pleasure , and the joy of musing . for I mean to shut out the brook , and build my fence inside of it ; but Lorna say no ; if we must have a fence , which could not but be injury , at any rate leave the stream inside , and a pleasant bank beyond it . and soon I perceive that she be right , though not so much as afterwards ; for the fairest of all thing in a garden , and in summer - time most useful , be a brook of crystal water ; where a man may come and meditate , and the flower may lean and see themselves , and the ray of the sun be purfied . now partly with her own white hand , and partly with Gwenny 's red one , Lorna have make of this sunny spot a haven of beauty to dwell in . it be not only that colour lie in the harmony we would seek of they , neither be it the height of plant , slop to one another ; nor even the delicate tone of foliage follow suit , and neighbouring . even the breathing of the wind , soft and gentle in and out , move thing that need not move , and pass long - stalk one , even this be not enough among the flush of fragrance , to tell a man the reason of his quiet satisfaction . but so it shall for ever be . as the river we float upon   with wine , and flower , and music ,   be nothing at the well - spring but a bubble without reason . 
 feel many thing , but think without much to guide I , over the grass - plat lay between , I go up to Lorna . she in a shower of damask rose , raise her eye and look at I . and even now , in those sweet eye , so deep with loving - kindness , and soft maiden dreaming , there seem to be a slight unwilling , half confess withdrawal ; overcome by love and duty , yet a painful thing to see . 
 ' darling , ' I say , ' be your spirit good ? be you strong enough to - day , to bear a tale of cruel sorrow ; but which perhaps , when your tear be shed , will leave you all the happy ? ' 
 ' what can you mean ? ' she answer trembling , not have be vey strong of late , and now surprised at my manner ; ' be you come to give I up , John ? ' 
 ' not very likely , ' I reply ; ' neither do I hope such a thing would leave you all the happy . oh , Lorna , if you can think that so quickly as you seem to have do , now you have every prospect and strong temptation to it . you be far , far above I in the world , and I have no right to claim you . perhaps , when you have hear these tiding you will say , " John Ridd , begone ; your life and mine be part . " ' 
 ' will I ? ' cry Lorna , with all the brightness of her playful way return : ' you very foolish and jealous John , how shall I punish you for this ? be I to forsake every flower I have , and not even know that the world go round , while I look up at you , the whole day long and say , " John , I love , love , love you ? " ' 
 during these word she lean upon I , half in gay imitation of what I have so often make she do , and half in depth of earnestness , as the thrice - repeat word grow strong , and grow warm , with and to her heart . and as she look up at the finish , say , ' you , ' so musically , I be much inclined to clasp her round ; but remember who she be , forbore ; at which she seem surprised with I . 
 ' Mistress Lorna , I reply , with I know not what temptation , make little of her caress , though more than all my heart to I : ' Mistress Lorna , you must keep your rank and proper dignity . you must never look at I with anything but pity now . ' 
 ' I shall look at you with pity , John , ' say Lorna , try to laugh it off , yet not know what to make of I , ' if you talk any more of this nonsense , know I as you ought to do . I shall even begin to think that you , and your friend , be weary of I , and of so long support I ; and be only seek cause to send I back to my old misery . if it be so , I will go . my life matter little to any one . ' here the great bright tear arise ; but the maiden be too proud to sob . 
 ' Sweetest of all sweet love , ' I cry , for the sign of a tear defeat I ; ' what possibility could make I ever give up Lorna ? ' 
 ' dearest of all dear , ' she answer ; ' if you dearly love I , what possibility could ever make I give you up , dear ? ' 
 upon that there be no more forbear , but I kiss and clasp she , whether she be Countess , or whether Queen of England ; mine she be , at least in heart ; and mine she should be wholly . and she be of the same opinion , nothing be say between we . 
 ' now , Lorna , ' say I , as she hang on my arm , willing to trust I anywhere , ' come to your little plant - house , and hear my moving story . ' 
 ' no story can move I much , dear , ' she answer rather faintly , for any excitement stay with she ; ' since I know your strength of kindness , scarcely any tale can move I , unless it be of yourself , love ; or of my poor mother . ' 
 ' it be of your poor mother , darling . can you bear to hear it ? ' and yet I wonder why she do not say as much of her father . 
 ' yes , I can bear anything . but although I can not see she , and have long forget , I could not bear to hear ill of she . ' 
 ' there be no ill to hear , sweet child , except of evil do to she . Lorna , you be of an ill - star race . ' 
 ' well that than a wicked race , ' she answer with her usual quickness , leap at conclusion ; ' tell I I be not a Doone , and I will but I can not love you more . ' 
 ' you be not a Doone , my Lorna , for that , at least , I can answer ; though I know not what your name be . ' 
 ' and my father your father what I mean be ' 
 ' your father and mine never meet one another . your father be kill by an accident in the pyrenean mountain , and your mother by the Doones ; or at least they cause her death , and carry you away from she . ' 
 all this , come as in one breath upon the sensitive maiden , be more than she could bear all at once ; as any but a fool like I must of course have know . she lie back on the garden bench , with her black hair shed on the oaken bark , while her colour go and come and only by that , and her quiver breath , could any one say that she live and think . and yet she press my hand with her , that I might tell she all of it . 




 CHAPTER LVI 

 JOHN become TOO popular 

 no flower that I have ever see , either in shifting of light and shade , or in the pearly morning , may vie with a fair young woman 's face when tender thought and quick emotion vary , enrich , and beautify it . thus my Lorna hearken softly , almost without word or gesture , yet with sigh and glance tell , and the pressure of my hand , how each word be move she . 
 when at last my tale be do , she turn away , and weep bitterly for the sad fate of her parent . but to my surprise she speak not even a word of wrath or rancour . she seem to take it all as fate . 
 ' Lorna , darling , ' I say at length , for man be more impatient in trial of time than woman be , ' do you not even wish to know what your proper name be ? ' 
 ' how can it matter to I , John ? ' she answer , with a depth of grief which make I seem a trifl . ' it can never matter now , when there be none to share it . ' 
 ' poor little soul ! ' be all I say in a tone of pure pity ; and to my surprise she turn upon I , catch I in her arm , and love I as she have never do before . 
 ' Dearest , I have you , ' she cry ; ' you , and only you , love . have you I want no other . all my life be one with your . oh , John , how can I treat you so ? ' 
 blush through the wet of weeping , and the gloom of ponder , yet she would not hide her eye , but fold I , and dwell on I . 
 ' I can not believe , ' in the pride of my joy , I whisper into one little ear , ' that you could ever so love I , beauty , as to give up the world for I . ' 
 ' would you give up your farm for I , John ? ' cry Lorna , leap back and look , with her wondrous power of light at I ; ' would you give up your mother , your sister , your home , and all that you have in the world and every hope of your life , John ? ' 
 ' of course I would . without two thought . you know it ; you know it , Lorna . ' 
 ' it be true that I do , ' she answer in a tone of deep sadness ; ' and it be this power of your love which have make I love you so . no good can come of it , no good . God 's face be set against selfishness . ' 
 as she speak in that low tone I gaze at the clear line of her face   where every curve be perfect   not with love and wonder only , but with a strange new sense of awe . 
 ' darling , ' I say , ' come near to I . give I surety against that . for God 's sake never frighten I with the thought that he would part we . ' 
 ' do it then so frighten you ? ' she whisper , come close to I ; ' I know it , dear ; I have know it long ; but it never frighten I . it make I sad , and very lonely , till I can remember . ' 
 ' till you can remember what ? ' I ask , with a long , deep shudder ; for we be so superstitious . 
 ' until I do remember , love , that you will soon come back to I , and be my own for ever . this be what I always think of , this be what I hope for . ' 
 although her eye be so glorious , and beam with eternity , this distant sort of beatitude be not much to my liking . I want to have my love on earth ; and my dear wife in my own home ; and child in good time , if God should please to send we any . and then I would be to they , exactly what my father be to I . and beside all this , I doubt much about be fit for heaven ; where no plough be , and no cattle , unless sacrifice bull go thither . 
 therefore I say , ' now kiss I , Lorna ; and do not   talk any nonsense . ' and the darling come and do it ; be kindly obedient , as the other world often make we . 
 ' you sweet love , ' I say at this , be slave to her soft obedience ; ' do you suppose I should be content to leave you until Elysium ? ' 
 ' how on earth can I tell , dear John , what you will be content with ? ' 
 ' you , and only you , ' say I ; ' the whole of it lie in a syllable . now you know my entire want ; and want must be my comfort . ' 
 ' but surely if I have money , sir , and birth , and rank , and all sort of grandeur , you would never dare to think of I . ' 
 she draw herself up with an air of pride , as she gravely pronounce these word , and give I a scornful glance , or try ; and turn away as if to enter some grand coach or palace ; while I be so amazed and grieve in my raw simplicity especially after the way in which she have first receive my news , so loving and warm - hearted , that I never say a word , but star and think , ' how do she mean it ? ' 
 she see the pain upon my forehead , and the wonder in my eye , and leave coach and palace too , back she fly to I in a moment , as simple as simplest milkmaid . 
 ' oh , you fearful stupid , John , you inexpressibly stupid , John , ' she cry with both arm round my neck , and her lip upon my forehead ; ' you have call yourself thick - head , John , and I never would believe it . but now I do with all my heart . will you never know what I be , love ? ' 
 ' no , Lorna , that I never shall . I can understand my mother well , and one at least of my sister , and both the Snowe girl very easily , but you I never understand ; only love you all the more for it . ' 
 ' then never try to understand I , if the result be that , dear John . and yet I be the very simple of all foolish simple creature . Nay , I be wrong ; therein I yield the palm to you , my dear . to think that I can act so ! no wonder they want I in London , as an ornament for the stage , John . ' 
 now in after day , when I hear of Lorna as the rich , and noble , and lovely lady to be find in London , I often remember that little scene , and recall every word and gesture , wonder what lie under it . even now , while it be quite impossible once to doubt those clear deep eye , and the bright lip tremble so ; nevertheless I feel how much the world would have to do with it ; and that the good and true people can not shake themselves quite free . however , for the moment , I be very proud and show it . 
 and herein differ fact from fancy , thing as they befall we from thing as we would have they , human end from human hope ; that the first be move by a thousand and the last on two wheel only , which   be name   be desire and fear . hope of course be nothing more than desire with a telescope , magnify distant matter , overlook near one ; open one eye on the object , close the other to all objection . and if hope be the future tense of desire , the future of fear be religion at least with too many of we . 
 whether I be right or wrong in these small morality , one thing be sure enough , to wit , that hope be the fast traveller , at any rate , in the time of youth . and so I hop that Lorna might be prove of blameless family , and honourable rank and fortune ; and yet none the less for that , love I and belong to I . so I lead she into the house , and she fall into my mother 's arm ; and I leave they to have a good cry of it , with Annie ready to help they . 
 if Master Stickles should not mend enough to gain his speech a little , and declare to we all he know , I be to set out for Watchett , rid upon horseback , and there to hire a cart with wheel , such as we have not begin , as yet , to use on Exmoor . for all our work go on broad wood , with runner and with earthboard ; and many of we still look upon wheel   though mention in the Bible   as the invention of the evil one , and Pharoah 's especial property . 
 now , instead of get well , Colonel Stickles grow bad and bad , in spite of all our tendance of he , with simple and with nourishment , and no poisonous medicine , such as doctor would have give he . and the fault of this lie not with we , but purely with himself and his unquiet constitution . for he rouse himself up to a perfect fever , when through Lizzie 's giddiness he learn the very thing which mother and Annie be hide from he , with the utmost care ; namely , that Sergeant Bloxham have take upon himself to send direct to London by the Chancery officer , a full report of what have happen , and of the illness of his chief , together with an urgent prayer for a full battalion of King 's troop , and a plenary commander . 
 this Sergeant Bloxham , be senior of the survive soldier , and a very worthy man in his way , but a trifle over - zealous , have succeed to the captaincy upon his master 's disablement . then , with desire to serve his country and show his education , he sit up most part of three night , and write this very wonderful report by the aid of our stable lanthorn . it be a very fine piece of work , as three man to whom he read it   but only one at a time   pronounce , be under seal of secrecy . and all might have go well with it , if the author could only have hold his tongue , when near the ear of woman . but this be beyond his sense as it seem , although so good a writer . for have hear that our Lizzie be a famous judge of literature   as indeed she tell almost every one , he could not contain himself , but must have her opinion upon his work . 
 Lizzie sit on a log of wood , and listen with all her ear up , have make proviso that no one else should be there to interrupt she . and she put in a syllable here and there , and many a time she take out one   for the Sergeant overload his gun , more often than undercharge it ; like a liberal man of letter , and then she declare the result so good , so chaste , and the style to be so elegant , and yet so fervent , that the Sergeant break his pipe in three , and fall in love with she on the spot . now this have lead I out of my way ; as thing be always do , partly through their own perverseness , partly through my kind desire to give fair turn to all of they , and to all the people who do they . if any one expect of I a strict and well - drill story , stand ' at attention ' all the time , with hand at the side like two wen on my trunk , and eye go neither right nor leave ; I trow that man have be disappoint many a page ago , and have leave I to my evil way ; and if not , I love his charity . therefore let I seek his grace , and get back , and just begin again . 
 that great despatch be send to London by the Chancery officer , whom we fit up with clothe , and for three day fatten they ; which in strict justice they need much , as well as in point of equity . they be kind enough to be pleased with we , and accept my new shirt generously ; and urgent as their business be , another week   as they both declare   could do no harm to nobody , and might set they upon their leg again . and know , although they be London man , that fish do live in water , these two fellow go fish all day , but never land anything . however , their holiday be cut short ; for the Sergeant , have finish now his narrative of proceeding , be not the man to let it hang fire , and be quench perhaps by Stickles . 
 therefore , have do their business , and serve both citation , these two good man have a pannier of victual put up by dear Annie , and borrow two of our horse , ride to Dunster , where they leave they , and hire on towards London . we have not time to like they much , and so we do not miss they , especially in our great anxiety about poor Master Stickles . 
 Jeremy lie between life and death , for at least a fortnight . if the link of chain have fly upwards   for half a link of chain it be which take he in the mouth so , even one inch upwards , the poor man could have need no one except Parson Bowden ; for the bottom of his skull , which hold the brain as in the egg - cup , must have clean go from he . but strike he horizontally , and a little upon the skew , the metal come out at the back of his neck , and   the powder not be strong , I suppose   it lodge in his leather collar . 
 now the rust of this iron hang in the wound , or at least we think so ; though since I have talk with a man of medicine , I be not so sure of it . and our chief aim be to purge this rust ; when rather we should have stop the hole , and let the oxide do its bad , with a plug of new flesh on both side of it . 
 at last I prevail upon he by argument , that he must get well , to save himself from be ignobly and unjustly supersede ; and hereupon I revile Sergeant Bloxham more fiercely than Jeremy 's self could have do , and indeed to such a pitch that Jeremy almost forgive he , and become much milder . and after that his fever and the inflammation of his wound , diminish very rapidly . 
 however , not know what might happen , or even how soon poor Lorna might be take from our power , and , fall into lawyer ' hand , have cause to wish herself most heartily back among the robber , I set forth one day for Watchett , take advantage of the visit of some trooper from an outpost , who would make our house quite safe . I ride alone , be fully prim , and have no misgiving . for it be say that even the Doones have begin to fear I , since I cast their culverin through the door , as above related ; and they could not but believe , from my be still untouched   although so large an object   in the thickest of their fire , both of gun and cannon , that I must bear a charmed life , proof against ball and bullet . however , I know that Carver Doone be not a likely man to hold any superstitious opinion ; and of he I have an instinctive dread , although quite ready to face he . 
 rid along , I meditate upon Lorna 's history ; how many thing be now begin to unfold themselves , which have be obscure and dark ! for instance , Sir Ensor Doone 's consent , or to say the least his indifference , to her marriage with a yeoman ; which in a man so proud   though die   have greatly puzzle both of we . but now , if she not only prove to be no grandchild of the Doone , but even descend from his enemy , it be natural enough that he should feel no great repugnance to her humiliation . and that Lorna 's father have be a foe to the house of Doone I gather from her mother 's cry when she behold their leader . moreover that fact would supply their motive in carry off the unfortunate little creature , and rear she among they , and as one of their own family ; yet hide her true birth from she . she be a ' great card , ' as we say , when play all - four at Christmas - time ; and if one of they could marry she , before she learn of right and wrong , vast property , enough to buy pardon for a thousand Doones , would be at their mercy . and since I be come to know Lorna well , and she to know I thoroughly many thing have be outspoken , which her early bashfulness have keep cover from I . attempt I mean to pledge her love to this one , or that other ; some of which perhaps might have be successful , if there have not be too many . 
 and then , as her beauty grow rich and bright , Carver Doone be smite strongly , and would hear of no one else as a suitor for she ; and by the terror of his claim drive off all the other . here too may the explanation of a thing which seem to be against the law of human nature , and upon which I long , but dare not to cross - question Lorna . how could such a lovely girl , although so young , and brave , and distant , have escape the vile affection of a lawless company ? 
 but now it be as clear as need be . for any proven violence would have utterly vitiate all claim upon her grand estate ; at least as those claim must be urge before a court of equity . and therefore all the elder   with view upon her real estate   keep strict watch on the younger , who confine their view to her personality . 
 now I do not mean to say that all this , or the hundred other thing which come , crowd consideration , be half as plain to I at the time , as I have set they down above . far be it from I to deceive you so . no doubt my thought be then dark and hazy , like an oil - lamp full of fungus ; and I have trim they , as when they burn , with scissor sharpen long afterwards . all I mean to say be this , that jog along to a certain tune of the horse 's foot , which we call ' three - halfpence and twopence , ' I see my way a little into some thing which have puzzle I . 
 when I knock at the little door , whose sill be gritty and grime with sand , no one come for a very long time to answer I , or to let I in . not wish to be unmannerly , I wait a long time , and watch the sea , from which the wind be blow ; and whose many lip of wave though the tide be half - way out speak to and refresh I . after a while I knock again , for my horse be become hungry ; and a good while after that again , a voice come through the key - hole , 
 ' who be that wish to enter ? ' 
 ' the boy who be at the pump , ' say I , ' when the carriage break down at Dulverton . the boy that live at oh ah ; and some day you would come seek for he . ' 
 ' oh , yes , I remember certainly . my leetle boy , with the fair white skin . I have desire to see he , oh many , yes , many time . ' 
 she be open the door , while say this , and then she start back in affright that the little boy should have grow so . 
 ' you can not be that leetle boy . it be quite impossible . why do you impose on I ? ' 
 ' not only be I that little boy , who make the water to flow for you , till the nebule come upon the glass ; but also I be come to tell you all about your little girl . ' 
 ' come in , you very great leetle boy , ' she answer , with her dark eye brighten . and I go in , and look at she . she be alter by time , as much as I be . the slight and graceful shape be go ; not that I remember anything of her figure , if you please ; for boy of twelve be not yet prone to note the shape of woman ; but that her lithe straight gait have strike I as be so unlike our people . now her time for walk so be past , and transmit to her child . yet her face be comely still , and full of strong intelligence . I gaze at she , and she at I ; and we be sure of one another . 
 ' now what will ye please to eat ? ' she ask , with a lively glance at the size of my mouth : ' that be always the first thing you people ask , in these barbarous place . ' 
 ' I will tell you by - and - by , ' I answer , mislike this satire upon we ; ' but I might begin with a quart of ale , to enable I to speak , madam . ' 
 ' very well . one quevart of be - or ; ' she call out to a little maid , who be her eld child , no doubt . ' it be to be expect , sir . be - or , be - or , be - or , all day long , with you englishman ! ' 
 ' Nay , ' I reply , ' not all day long , if madam will excuse I . only a pint at breakfast - time , and a pint and a half at eleven o'clock , and a quart or so at dinner . and then no more till the afternoon ; and half a gallon at supper - time . no one can object to that . ' 
 ' well , I suppose it be right , ' she say , with an air of resignation ; ' God know . but I do not understand it . it be " good for business , " as you say , to preclude everything . ' 
 ' and it be good for we , madam , ' I answer with indignation , for beer be my favourite beverage ; ' and I be a credit to beer , madam ; and so be all who trust to it . ' 
 ' at any rate , you be , young man . if beer have make you grow so large , I will put my child upon it ; it be too late for I to begin . the smell to I be hateful . ' 
 now I only set down that to show how perverse those foreign people be . they will drink their wretched heartless stuff , such as they call claret , or wine of Medoc , or Bordeaux , or what not , with no more meaning than sour rennet , stir with the pulp from the cider press , and strain through the cap of our Betty . this be very well for they ; and as good as they deserve , no doubt , and mean perhaps by the will of God , for those unhappy native . but to bring it over to England and set it against our home - brew ale   not to speak of wine from Portugal   and sell it at ten time the price , as a cure for british bile , and a great enlightenment ; this I say be the vile feature of the age we live in . 
 Madam Benita Odam for the name of the man who turn the wheel prove to be John Odam show I into a little room contain two chair and a fir - wood table , and sit down on a three - legged seat and study I very steadfastly . this she have a right to do ; and I , have all my clothe on now , be not disconcert . it would not become I to repeat her judgment upon my appearance , which she deliver as calmly as if I be a pig at market , and as proudly as if her own pig . and she ask I whether I have ever get rid of the black mark on my breast . 
 not want to talk about myself   though very fond of do so , when time and season favour   I lead she back to that fearful night of the day when first I have see she . she be not desirous to speak of it , because of her own little child ; however , I draw she gradually to recollection of Lorna , and then of the little boy who die , and the poor mother bury with he . and her strong hot nature kindle , as she dwell upon these thing ; and my wrath wax within I ; and we forget reserve and prudence under the sense of so vile a wrong . she tell I   as nearly as might be   the very same story which she have tell to Master Jeremy Stickles ; only she dwell upon it more , because of my know the outset . and be a woman , with an inkling of my situation , she enlarge upon the little maid , more than to dry Jeremy . 
 ' would you know she again ? ' I ask , be stir by these account of Lorna , when she be five year old : ' would you know she as a full - grown maiden ? ' 
 ' I think I should , ' she answer ; ' it be not possible to say until one see the person ; but from the eye of the little girl , I think that I must know she . oh , the poor young creature ! be it to be believe that the cannibal devour she ! what a people you be in this country ! meat , meat , meat ! ' 
 as she raise her hand and eye in horror at our carnivorous propensity , to which she clearly attribute the disappearance of Lorna , I could scarce help laugh , even after that sad story . for though it be say at the present day , and will doubtless be say hereafter , that the Doones have devour a baby once , as they come up Porlock hill , after fight hard in the market - place , I know that the tale be utterly false ; for cruel and brutal as they be , their taste be very correct and choice , and indeed one might say fastidious . nevertheless I could not stop to argue that matter with she . 
 ' the little maid have not be devour , ' I say to Mistress Odam : ' and now she be a tall young lady , and as beautiful as can be . if I sleep in your good hostel to - night after go to Watchett town , will you come with I to oare to - morrow , and see your little maiden ? ' 
 ' I would like and yet I fear . this country be so barbarous . and I be good to eat my God , there be much picking on my bone ! ' 
 she survey herself with a glance so mingled of pity and admiration , and the truth of her word be so apparent   only that it would have take a week to get at the bone , before pick   that I nearly lose good manner ; for she really seem to suspect even I of cannibal inclination . however , at last I make her promise to come with I on the morrow , presume that Master Odam could by any mean be persuade to keep her company in the cart , as propriety demand . have little doubt that Master Odam be entirely at his wife 's command , I look upon that matter as settle , and set off for Watchett , to see the grave of Lorna 's poor mother , and to hire a cart for the morrow . 
 and here   as so often happen with man   I succeed without any trouble or hindrance , where I have look for both of they , namely , in find a suitable cart ; whereas the other matter , in which I could have expect no difficulty , come very near to defeat I . for when I hear that Lorna 's father be the Earl of Dugal as Benita impress upon I with a strong enforcement , as much as to say , ' who be you , young man , to come even ask about she ? ' then I never think but that everybody in Watchett town must know all about the tombstone of the Countess of Dugal . 
 this , however , prove otherwise . for Lord Dugal have never live at Watchett Grange , as their place be call ; neither have his name become familiar as its owner . because the Grange have only devolve to he by will , at the end of a long entail , when the last of the Fitz - Pains die out ; and though he like the idea of it , he have go abroad , without take seisin . and upon news of his death , John Jones , a rich gentleman from Llandaff , have take possession , as next of right , and hush up all the story . and though , even at the bad of time , a lady of high rank and wealth could not be rob , and as bad as murder , and then bury in a little place , without move some excitement , yet it have be give out , on purpose and with diligence , that this be only a foreign lady travel for her health and pleasure , along the seacoast of England . and as the poor thing never speak , and several of her servant and her baggage look so foreign , and she herself die in a collar of lace unlike any make in England , all Watchett , without hesitation , pronounce she to be a foreigner . and the English serve man and maid , who might have clear up everything , either be bribe by Master Jones , or else decamp of their own accord with the relic of the baggage . so the poor Countess of Dugal , almost in sight of her own grand house , be bury in an unknown grave , with her pair of infant , without a plate , without a tombstone   bad than all   without a tear , except from the hire italian woman . 
 surely my poor Lorna come of an ill - star family . 
 now in spite of all this , if I have only take Benita with I , or even tell she what I wish , and crave her direction , there could have be no trouble . but I do assure you that among the stupid people at Watchett   compare with whom our folk of Oare , exceed dense though be , be as Hamlet against Dogberry   what with one of they and another , and the firm conviction of all the town that I could be come only to wrestle , I do assure you   as I say before   that my wit almost go out of I . and what vex I yet more about it be , that I see my own mistake , in come myself to seek out the matter , instead of send some unknown person . for my face and form be know at that time   and still be so   to nine people out of every ten live in forty mile of I . not through any excellence , or anything of good desert , in either the one or the other , but simply because folk will be fool on the rivalry of wrestling . the art be a fine one in itself , and demand a little wit of brain , as well as strength of body ; it bind the man who study it to temperance , and chastity , to self - respect , and most of all to an even and sweet temper ; for I have throw strong man than myself   when I be a mere sapling , and before my strength grow hard on I   through their loss of temper . but though the art be an honest one , surely they who excel therein have a right   like all the rest of man - kind   to their own private life . 
 be that either way and I will not speak too strongly , for fear of indulge my own annoyance anyhow , all Watchett town care ten time as much to see John Ridd , as to show he what he want . I be lead to every public - house , instead of to the churchyard ; and twenty table be ready for I , in lieu of a single gravestone . ' Zummerzett thou bee'st , Jan Ridd , and Zummerzett thou shalt be . Thee carl theezell a Davonsheer man ! Whoy , thee live in Zummerzett ; and in Zummerzett thee wast barn , lad . ' and so it go on , till I be weary ; though very much oblige to they . 
 Dull and solid as I be , and with a wild duck wait for I at good Mistress Odam 's , I see that there be nothing for it but to yield to these good people , and prove I a man of Somerset , by eat a dinner at their expense . as for the churchyard , none would hear of it ; and I grieve for broach the matter . 
 but how be I to meet Lorna again , without have do the thing of all thing which I have promise to see to ? it would never do to tell she that so great be my popularity , and so strong the desire to feed I , that I could not attend to her mother . Least of all could I say that every one in Watchett know John Ridd ; while none have hear of the Countess of Dugal . and yet that be about the truth , as I hint very delicately to mistress Odam that evening . but she   be vex about her wild duck , and not have english idea on the matter of sport , and so on   make a poor unwitting face at I . nevertheless Master Odam restore I to my self - respect ; for he star at I till I go to bed ; and he break his hose with excitement . for be in the leg - line myself , I want to know what the muscle be of a man who turn a wheel all day . I have never see a treadmill   though they have one now at Exeter , and it touch I much to learn whether it be good exercise . and herein , from what I see of Odam , I incline to think that it do great harm ; as move the muscle too much in a line , and without variety . 




 CHAPTER LVII 

 LORNA KNOWS she nurse 

 have obtain from Benita Odam a very close and full description of the place where her poor mistress lay , and the mark whereby to know it , I hasten to Watchett the follow morning , before the sun be up , or any people be about . and so , without interruption , I be in the churchyard at sunrise . 
 in the farth and dark nook , overgrow with grass , and overhang by a weeping - tree a little bank of earth betoken the rounding off of a hapless life . there be nothing to tell of rank , or wealth , of love , or even pity ; nameless as a peasant lie the last   as suppose   of a mighty race . only some unskilful hand , probably Master Odam 's under his wife 's teaching , have carve a rude L. , and a ruder D. , upon a large pebble from the beach , and set it up as a headstone . 
 I gather a little grass for Lorna and a sprig of the weeping - tree , and then return to the Forest Cat , as Benita 's lonely inn be call . for the way be long from Watchett to Oare ; and though you may ride it rapidly , as the Doones have do on that fatal night , to travel on wheel , with one horse only , be a matter of time and of prudence . therefore , we set out pretty early , three of we and a baby , who could not well be leave behind . the wife of the man who own the cart have undertake to mind the business , and the other baby , upon condition of have the key of all the tap leave with she . 
 as the manner of journeying over the moor have be describe oft enough already , I will say no more , except that we all arrive before dusk of the summer 's day , safe at Plover 's barrow . Mistress Benita be delighted with the change from her dull hard life ; and she make many excellent observation , such as seem natural to a foreigner look at our country . 
 as luck would have it , the first who come to meet we at the gate be Lorna , with nothing whatever upon her head   the weather be summerly   but her beautiful hair shed round she ; and wear a sweet white frock tuck in , and show her figure perfectly . in her joy she run straight up to the cart ; and then stop and gaze at Benita . at one glance her old nurse know she : ' oh , the eye , the eye ! ' she cry , and be over the rail of the cart in a moment , in spite of all her substance . Lorna , on the other hand , look at she with some doubt and wonder , as though have right to know much about she , and yet unable to do so . but when the foreign woman say something in roman language , and fling new hay from the cart upon she , as if in a romp of childhood , the young maid cry , ' oh , Nita , Nita ! ' and fall upon her breast , and weep ; and after that look round at we . 
 this be so , there could be no doubt as to the power of prove Lady Lorna 's birth , and right , both by evidence and token . for though we have not the necklace now thank to Annie 's wisdom we have the ring of heavy gold , a very ancient relic , with which my maid   in her simple way   have pledge herself to I . and Benita know this ring as well as she know her own finger , have hear a long history about it ; and the effigy on it of the wild cat be the bearing of the house of Lorne . 
 for though Lorna 's father be a nobleman of high and goodly lineage , her mother be of yet more ancient and renowned descent , be the last in line direct from the great and kingly chief of Lorne . a wild and headstrong race they be , and must have everything their own way . hot blood be ever among they , even of one household ; and their sovereignty   which more than once have defy the King of Scotland   wan and fall among themselves , by continual quarrelling . and it be of a piece with this , that the Doones   who be an offset , by the mother 's side , hold in co - partnership some large property , which have come by the spindle , as we say   should fall out with the Earl of Lorne , the last but one of that title . 
 the daughter of this nobleman have marry Sir Ensor Doone ; but this , instead of healing matter , lead to fiercer conflict . I never could quite understand all the in and out of it ; which none but a lawyer may go through , and keep his head at the end of it . the motif of mankind be plain than the motion they produce . especially when charity   such as find among we   sit to judge the former , and be never weary of it ; while reason do not care to trace the latter complication , except for fee or title . 
 therefore it be enough to say , that know Lorna to be direct in heirship to vast property , and bear especial spite against the house of which she be the last , the Doones have bring she up with full intention of lawful marriage ; and have carefully seclude she from the wild of their young gallant . of course , if they have be next in succession , the child would have go down the waterfall , to save any further trouble ; but there be an intercept branch of some honest family ; and they be outlaw , would have a poor chance   though the law love outlaw   against they . only Lorna be of the stock ; and Lorna they must marry . and what a triumph against the old earl , for a cursed Doone to succeed he ! 
 as for their outlawry , great robbery , and grand murder , the veri child , nowadays , must know that money heal the whole of that . even if they have murder people of a good position , it would only cost about twice as much to prove their motif loyal . but they have never slay any man above the rank of yeoman ; and folk even say that my father be the high of their victim ; for the death of Lorna 's mother and brother be never set to their account . 
 pure pleasure it be to any man , to reflect upon all these thing . how truly we discern clear justice , and how well we deal it . if any poor man steal a sheep , have ten child starve , and regard it as mountain game   as a rich man do a hare , to the gallow with he . if a man of rank beat down a door , smite the owner upon the head , and honour the wife with attention , it be a thing to be grateful for , and to slouch smitten head the low . 
 while we be full of all these thing , and wonder what would happen next , or what we ought ourselves to do , another very important matter call for our attention . this be no less than Annie 's marriage to the Squire Faggus . we have try to put it off again ; for in spite of all advantage , neither my mother nor myself have any real heart for it . not that we dwell upon Tom 's short - coming or rather perhaps his go too far , at the time when he work the road so . all that be cover by the King 's pardon , and universal respect of the neighbourhood . but our scruple be this and the more we talk the more it grow upon we that we both have great misgiving as to his future steadiness . 
 for it would be a thousand pity , we say , for a fine , well - grow , and pretty maiden   such as our Annie be , useful too , in so many way , and lively , and warm - hearted , and mistress of 500 pound , to throw herself away on a man with a kind of a turn for drinking . if that last be even hint , Annie would be most indignant , and ask , with cheek as red as rose , who have ever see Master Faggus any the bad for liquor indeed ? her own opinion be , in truth , that he take a great deal too little , after all his hard work , and hard riding , and come over the hill to be insult ! and if ever it lie in her power , and with no one to grudge he his trumpery glass , she would see that poor Tom have the nourishment which his cough and his lung require . 
 his lung be quite as sound as mine , this matter be out of all argument ; so mother and I look at one another , as much as to say , ' let she go upstairs , she will cry and come down more reasonable . ' and while she be go , we use to say the same thing over and over again ; but without perceive a cure for it . and we almost always finish up with the following reflection , which sometimes come from mother 's lip , and sometimes from my own : ' well , well , there be no telling . none can say how a man may alter ; when he take to matrimony . but if we could only make Annie promise to be a little firm with he ! ' 
 I fear that all this talk on our part only hurry matter forward , Annie be more determined every time we pity she . and at last Tom Faggus come , and speak as if he be on the King 's road , with a pistol at my head , and one at mother 's . ' no more fast and loose , ' he cry . ' either one thing or the other . I love the maid , and she love I ; and we will have one another , either with your leave , or without it . how many more time be I to dance over these vile hill , and leave my business , and get nothing more than a sigh or a kiss , and " Tom , I must wait for mother " ? you be famous for be straightforward , you Ridds . just treat I as I would treat you now . ' 
 I look at my mother ; for a glance from she would have send Tom out of the window ; but she check I with her hand , and say , ' you have some ground of complaint , sir ; I will not deny it . now I will be as straight - forward with you , as even a Ridd be suppose to be . my son and myself have all along dislike your marriage with Annie . not for what you have be so much , as for what we fear you will be . have patience , one moment , if you please . we do not fear your taking to the highway life again ; for that you be too clever , no doubt , now that you have property . but we fear that you will take to drinking , and to squander money . there be many example of this around we ; and we know what the fate of the wife be . it have be hard to tell you this , under our own roof , and with our own ' here mother hesitate . 
 ' spirit , and cider , and beer , ' I break in ; ' out with it , like a Ridd , mother ; as he will have all of it . ' 
 ' spirit , and cider , and beer , ' say mother very firmly after I ; and then she give way and say , ' you know , Tom , you be welcome to every drop and more of it . ' 
 now Tom must have have a far sweet temper than ever I could claim ; for I should have thrust my glass away , and never have take another drop in the house where such a check have meet I . but instead of that , Master Faggus reply , with a pleasant smile , 
 ' I know that I be welcome , good mother ; and to prove it , I will have some more . ' 
 and thereupon be mix himself another glass of holland with lemon and hot water , yet pour it very delicately . 
 ' oh , I have be so miserable take a little more , Tom , ' say mother , hand the bottle . 
 ' yes , take a little more , ' I say ; ' you have mix it over weak , Tom . ' 
 ' if ever there be a sober man , ' cry Tom , comply with our request ; ' if ever there be in Christendom a man of perfect sobriety , that man be now before you . shall we say to - morrow week , mother ? it will suit your washing day . ' 
 ' how very thoughtful you be , Tom ! now John would never have think of that , in spite of all his steadiness . ' 
 ' certainly not , ' I answer proudly ; ' when my time come for Lorna , I shall not study Betty Muxworthy . ' 
 in this way the Squire get over we ; and Farmer Nicholas Snowe be send for , to counsel with mother about the matter and to set his two daughter sew . 
 when the time for the wedding come , there be such a stir and commotion as have never be know in the parish of Oare since my father 's marriage . for Annie 's beauty and kindliness have make she the pride of the neighbourhood ; and the present send she , from all around , be enough to stock a shop with . Master Stickles , who now could walk , and who certainly owe his recovery , with the blessing of God , to Annie , present she with a mighty Bible , silver - clasp , and very handsome , beat the parson 's out and out , and for which he have send to Taunton . even the common trooper , have taste her cookery many time   to help out their poor ration , club together , and must have give at least a week 's pay apiece , to have turn out what they do for she . this be no less than a silver pot , well - design , but suit surely rather to the bridegroom 's taste than bride 's . in a word , everybody give her thing . 
 and now my Lorna come to I , with a spring of tear in appeal eye for she be still somewhat childish , or rather , I should say , more childish now than when she live in misery and she place her little hand in mine , and she be half afraid to speak , and drop her eye for I to ask . 
 ' what be it , little darling ? ' I ask , as I see her breath come fast ; for the small emotion move her form . 
 ' you do not   think , John , you do not   think , dear , that you could lend I any money ? ' 
 ' all I have get , ' I answer ; ' how much do you want , dear heart ? ' 
 ' I have be calculate ; and I fear that I can not do any good with less than ten pound , John . ' 
 here she look up at I , with horror at the grandeur of the sum , and not know what I could think of it . but I keep my eye from she . ' ten pound ! ' I say in my deep voice , on purpose to have it out in comfort , when she should be frightened ; ' what can you want with ten pound , child ? ' 
 ' that be my concern , say Lorna , pluck up her spirit at this : ' when a lady ask for a loan , no gentleman pry into the cause of she ask it . ' 
 ' that may be as may be , ' I answer in a judicial manner ; ' ten pound , or twenty , you shall have . but I must know the purport . ' 
 ' then that you never shall know , John . I be very sorry for ask you . it be not of the small consequence . oh , dear , no . ' herewith she be run away . 
 ' oh , dear , yes , ' I reply ; ' it be of very great consequence ; and I understand the whole of it . you want to give that stupid Annie , who have lose you a hundred thousand pound , and who be go to be marry before we , dear God only can tell why , be my young sister you want to give she a wedding present . and you shall do it , darling ; because it be so good of you . do not   you know your title , love ? how humble you be with we humble folk . you be Lady Lorna something , so far as I can make out yet : and you ought not even to speak to we . you will go away and disdain we . ' 
 ' if you please , talk not like that , John . I will have nothing to do with it , if it come between you and I , John . ' 
 ' you can not help yourself , ' say i. and then she vow that she could and would . and rank and birth be banish from between our lip in no time . 
 ' what can I get she good enough ? I be sure I do not know , ' she ask : ' she have be so kind and good to I , and she be such a darling . how I shall miss she , to be sure ! by the bye , you seem to think , John , that I shall be rich some day . ' 
 ' of course you will . as rich as the french King who keep ours . would the Lord Chancellor trouble himself about you , if you be poor ? ' 
 ' then if I be rich , perhaps you would lend I twenty pound , dear John . ten pound would be very mean for a wealthy person to give she . ' 
 to this I agree , upon condition that I should make the purchase myself , whatever it might be . for nothing could be easy than to cheat Lorna about the cost , until time should come for she pay I . and this be well than to cheat she for the benefit of our family . for this end , and for many other , I set off to Dulverton , bear more commission , more message , and more question than a man of thrice my memory might carry so far as the corner where the sawpit be . and to make thing bad , one girl or other would keep on run up to I , or even after I   when start   with something or other she have just think of , which she could not possibly do without , and which I must be sure to remember , as the most important of the whole . 
 to my dear mother , who have partly outlive the exceed value of trifle , the most important matter seem to ensure Uncle Reuben 's countenance and presence at the marriage . and if I succeed in this , I might well forget all the maiden ' trumpery . this she would have be wise to tell I when they be out of hearing ; for I leave she to fight her own battle with they ; and laugh at her predicament , promise to do the good I could for all , so far as my wit would go . 
 Uncle Reuben be not at home , but Ruth , who receive I very kindly , although without any expression of joy , be sure of his return in the afternoon , and persuade I to wait for he . and by the time that I have finish all I could recollect of my order , even with paper to help I , the old gentleman ride into the yard , and be more surprised than pleased to see I . but if he be surprised , I be more than that I be utterly astonish at the change in his appearance since the last time I have see he . from a hale , and rather heavy man , gray - haired , but plump , and ruddy , he be alter to a shrunken , wizene , tremble , and almost decrepit figure . instead of curly and comely lock , grizzle indeed , but plentiful , he have only a few lank white hair scatter and flatten upon his forehead . but the great change of all be in the expression of his eye , which have be so keen , and restless , and bright , and a little sarcastic . bright indeed they still be , but with a slow unhealthy lustre ; their keenness be turn to perpetual outlook , their restlessness to a haggard want . as for the humour which once gleam there   which people who fear it call sarcasm   it have be succeed by stare of terror , and then mistrust , and shrink . there be none of the interest in mankind , which be needful even for satire . 
 ' now what can this be ? ' think I to myself , ' have the old man lose all his property , or take too much to strong water ? ' 
 ' come inside , John Ridd , ' he say ; ' I will have a talk with you . it be cold out here ; and it be too light . come inside , John Ridd , boy . ' 
 I follow he into a little dark room , quite different from Ruth Huckaback 's . it be close from the shop by an old division of boarding , hang with tan canvas ; and the smell be very close and faint . here there be a ledger desk , and a couple of chair , and a long - legged stool . 
 ' take the stool , ' say Uncle Reuben , show I in very quietly , ' it be fitter for your height , John . wait a moment ; there be no hurry . ' 
 then he slip out by another door , and close it quickly after he , tell the foreman and waiting - man that the business of the day be do . they have well all go home at once ; and he would see to the fastening . of course they be only too glad to go ; but I wonder at his send they , with at least two hour of daylight leave . 
 however , that be no business of mine , and I wait , and ponder whether fair Ruth ever come into this dirty room , and if so , how she keep her hand from it . for Annie would have have it upside down in about two minute , and scrub , and brush , and dust , until it look quite another place ; and yet all this do without scold and crossness ; which be the curse of clean woman , and ten time bad than the dusty dust . 
 Uncle Ben come reel in , not from any power of liquor , but because he be stiff from horseback , and weak from work and worry . 
 ' let I be , John , let I be , ' he say , as I go to help he ; ' this be an unkind dreary place ; but many a hundred of good gold Carolus have be turn in this place , John . ' 
 ' not a doubt about it , sir , ' I answer in my loud and cheerful manner ; ' and many another hundred , sir ; and may you long enjoy they ! ' 
 ' my boy , do you wish I to die ? ' he ask , come up close to my stool , and regard I with a shrewd though blear - eyed gaze ; ' many do . do you , John ? ' 
 ' come , ' say I , ' do not   ask such nonsense . you know well than that , Uncle Ben . or else , I be sorry for you . I want you to live as long as possible , for the sake of ' here I stop . 
 ' for the sake of what , John ? I know it be not for my own sake . for the sake of what , my boy ? ' 
 ' for the sake of Ruth , ' I answer ; ' if you must have all the truth . who be to mind she when you be go ? ' 
 ' but if you know that I have gold , or a manner of get gold , far more than ever the sailor get out of the spanish galleon , far more than ever be hear of ; and the secret be to be your , John ; your after I and no other soul 's then you would wish I dead , John . ' here he eye I as if a speck of dust in my eye should not escape he . 
 ' you be wrong , Uncle Ben ; altogether wrong . for all the gold ever hear or dream of , not a wish would cross my heart to rob you of one day of life . ' 
 at last he move his eye from mine ; but without any word , or sign , to show whether he believe , or disbelieve . then he go to a chair , and sit with his chin upon the ledger - desk ; as if the effort of probe I have be too much for his weary brain . ' dream of ! all the gold ever dream of ! as if it be but a dream ! ' he mutter ; and then he close his eye to think . 
 ' Good Uncle Reuben , ' I say to he , ' you have be a long way to - day , sir . let I go and get you a glass of good wine . Cousin Ruth know where to find it . ' 
 ' how do you know how far I have be ? ' he ask , with a vicious look at I . ' and Cousin Ruth ! you be very pat with my granddaughter 's name , young man ! ' 
 ' it would be hard upon I , sir , not to know my own cousin 's name . ' 
 ' very well . let that go by . you have behave very badly to Ruth . she love you ; and you love she not . ' 
 at this I be so wholly amazed not at the thing itself , I mean , but at his knowledge of it that I could not say a single word ; but look , no doubt , very foolish . 
 ' you may well be ashamed , young man , ' he cry , with some triumph over I , ' you be the big of all fool , as well as a conceited coxcomb . what can you want more than Ruth ? she be a little damsel , truly ; but fine man than you , John Ridd , with all your boasted strength and wrestling , have wed small maiden . and as for quality , and value bot ! one inch of Ruth be worth all your seven foot put together . ' 
 now I be not seven foot high ; nor ever be six foot eight inch , in my very prime of life ; and nothing vex I so much as to make I out a giant , and above human sympathy , and human scale of weakness . it cost I hard to hold my tongue ; which luckily be not in proportion to my stature . and only for Ruth 's sake I hold it . but Uncle Ben   be old and wear   be vex by not have any answer , almost as much as a woman be . 
 ' you want I to go on , ' he continue , with a look of spite at I , ' about my poor Ruth 's love for you , to feed your cursed vanity . because a set of ass call you the fine man in England ; there be no maid   I suppose   who be not in love with you . I believe you be as deep as you be long , John Ridd . shall I ever get to the bottom of your character ? ' 
 this be a little too much for I . any insult I could take   with goodwill   from a white - haired man , and one who be my relative ; unless it touch my love for Lorna , or my conscious modesty . now both of these be touch to the quick by the sentence of the old gentleman . therefore , without a word , I go ; only make a bow to he . 
 but woman who be   beyond all doubt   the mother of all mischief , also nurse that babe to sleep , when he be too noisy . and there be Ruth , as I take my horse   with a trunk of frippery on he , poor little Ruth be at the bridle , and rust all the knop of our town - go harness with tear . 
 ' good - bye dear , ' I say , as she bend her head away from I ; ' shall I put you up on the saddle , dear ? ' 
 ' Cousin Ridd , you may take it lightly , ' say Ruth , turn full upon I , ' and very likely you be right , accord to your nature ' this be the only cut thing the little soul ever say to I ' but oh , Cousin Ridd , you have no idea of the pain you will leave behind you . ' 
 ' how can that be so , Ruth , when I be as good as order to be off the premise ? ' 
 ' in the first place , Cousin Ridd , grandfather will be angry with himself , for have so ill - use you . and now he be so weak and poorly , that he be always repent . in the next place I shall scold he first , until he admit his sorrow ; and when he have admit it , I shall scold myself for scold he . and then he will come round again , and think that I be hard on he ; and end perhaps by hat you for he be like a woman now , John . ' 
 that last little touch of self - knowledge in Ruth , which she deliver with a gleam of some secret pleasantry , make I stop and look closely at she : but she pretend not to know it . ' there be something in this child , ' I think , ' ve ry different from other girl . what it be I can not tell ; for one very seldom get at it . ' 
 at any rate the upshot be that the good horse go back to stable , and have another feed of corn , while my wrath sink within I . there be two thing , accord to my experience   which may not hold with another man   fit beyond any other to take hot temper out of we . the first be to see our favourite creature feeding , and lick up their food , and happily snuffle over it , yet spar time to be grateful , and show taste and perception ; the other be to go garden boldly , in the spring of the year , without any misgiving about it , and hop the utmost of everything . if there be a third anodyne , approach these two in power , it be to smoke good tobacco well , and watch the setting of the moon ; and if this should only be over the sea , the result be irresistible . 
 Master Huckaback show no especial sign of joy at my return ; but receive I with a little grunt , which appear to I to mean , ' ah , I think he would hardly be fool enough to go . ' I tell he how sorry I be for have in some way offend he ; and he answer that I do well to grieve for one at least of my offence . to this I make no reply , as behove a man deal with cross and fractious people ; and presently he become well - temper , and send little Ruth for a bottle of wine . she give I a beautiful smile of thank for my forbearance as she pass ; and I know by her manner that she would bring the good bottle in all the cellar . 
 as I have but little time to spare   although the day be long and light   we be force to take our wine with promptitude and rapidity ; and whether this loosen my uncle 's tongue , or whether he mean beforehand to speak , be now almost uncertain . but true it be that he bring his chair very near to mine , after three or four glass , and send Ruth away upon some errand which seem of small importance . at this I be vex , for the room always look so different without she . 
 ' come , Jack , ' he say , ' here be your health , young fellow , and a good and obedient wife to you . not that your wife will ever obey you though ; you be much too easy - temper . even a bitter and stormy woman might live in peace with you , Jack . but never you give she the chance to try . marry some sweet little thing , if you can . if not , do not   marry any . ah , we have the maid to suit you , my lad , in this old town of Dulverton . ' 
 ' have you so , sir ? but perhaps the maid might have no desire to suit I . ' 
 ' that you may take my word she have . the colour of this wine will prove it . the little sly hussy have be to the cobwebbed arch of the cellar , where she have no right to go , for any one under a magistrate . however , I be glad to see it , and we will not spare it , John . after my time , somebody , whoever marry little Ruth , will find some rare wine there , I trow , and perhaps not know the difference . ' 
 think of this the old man sigh , and expect I to sigh after he . but a sigh be not   like a yawn   infectious ; and we be all more prone to be send to sleep than to sorrow by one another . not but what a sigh sometimes may make we think of sigh . 
 ' well , sir , ' cry I , in my sprightly manner , which rouse up most people , ' here be to your health and dear little Ruth 's : and may you live to knock off the cobwebs from every bottle in under the arch . Uncle Reuben , your life and health , sir ? ' 
 with that I take my glass thoughtfully , for it be wondrous good ; and Uncle Ben be pleased to see I dwell pleasantly on the subject with parenthesis , and self - commune , and oral judgment unpronounce , though smacking of fine decision . ' Curia vult advisari , ' as the lawyer say ; which mean , ' let we have another glass , and then we can think about it . ' 
 ' come now , John , ' say Uncle Ben , lay his wrinkle hand on my knee , when he see that none could heed we , ' I know that you have a sneaking fondness for my grandchild Ruth . do not   interrupt I now ; you have ; and to deny it will only provoke I . ' 
 ' I do like Ruth , sir , ' I say boldly , for fear of misunderstanding ; ' but I do not love she . ' 
 ' very well ; that make no difference . like may very soon be love   as some people call it   when the maid have money to help she . ' 
 ' but if there be , as there be in my case ' 
 ' once for all , John , not a word . I do not attempt to lead you into any engagement with little Ruth ; neither will I blame you   though I may be disappoint   if no such engagement should ever be . but whether you will have my grandchild , or whether you will not and such a chance be rarely offer to a fellow of your standing ' Uncle Ben despise all farmer ' in any case I have at least resolve to let you know my secret ; and for two good reason . the first be that it wear I out to dwell upon it , all alone , and the second be that I can trust you to fulfil a promise . moreover , you be my next of kin , except among the womankind ; and you be just the man I want , to help I in my enterprise . ' 
 ' and I will help you , sir , ' I answer , fear some conspiracy , ' in anything that be true , and loyal , and accord to the law of the realm . ' 
 ' ha , ha ! ' cry the old man , laugh until his eye run over , and spread out his skinny hand upon his shin breech , ' thou hast go the same fool ' track as the rest ; even as spy Stickles go , and all his precious trooper . land of arm at Glenthorne , and Lynmouth , wagon escort across the moor , sound of metal and booming noise ! ah , but we manage it cleverly , to cheat even those so near to we . disaffection at Taunton , sign of insurrection at Dulverton , revolutionary tanner at Dunster ! we set it all abroad , right well . and not even you to suspect our work ; though we think at one time that you watch we . now who , do you suppose , be at the bottom of all this Exmoor insurgency , all this western rebellion not that I say there be none , mind but who be at the bottom of it ? ' 
 ' either Mother Melldrum , ' say I , be now a little angry , ' or else old Nick himself . ' 
 ' nay , old Uncle Reuben ! ' say this , Master Huckaback cast back his coat , and stand up , and make the most of himself . 
 ' well ! ' cry I , be now quite come to the limit of my intellect , ' then , after all , Captain Stickles be right in call you a rebel , sir ! ' 
 ' of course he be ; could so keen a man be wrong about an old fool like I ? but come , and see our rebellion , John . I will trust you now with everything . I will take no oath from you ; only your word to keep silence ; and most of all from your mother . ' 
 ' I will give you my word , ' I say , although like not such pledge ; which make a man think before he speak in ordinary company , against his usual practice . however , I be now so curious , that I think of nothing else ; and scarcely could believe at all that Uncle Ben be quite right in his head . 
 ' take another glass of wine , my son , ' he cry with a cheerful countenance , which make he look more than ten year young ; ' you shall come into partnership with I : your strength will save we two horse , and we always fear the horse work . come and see our rebellion , my boy ; you be a make man from to - night . ' 
 ' but where be I to come and see it ? where be I to find it , sir ? ' 
 ' meet I , ' he answer , yet close his hand , and wrinkle with doubt his forehead , ' come alone , of course ; and meet I at the Wizard 's Slough , at ten to - morrow morning . ' 




 CHAPTER LVIII 

 MASTER HUCKABACK 's SECRET 

 Knowing Master Huckaback to be a man of his word , as well as one who would have other so , I be careful to be in good time the next morning , by the side of the Wizard 's Slough . I be free to admit that the name of the place bear a feeling of uneasiness , and a love of distance , in some measure to my heart . but I do my good not to think of this ; only I think it a wise precaution , and due for the sake of my mother and Lorna , to load my gun with a dozen slug make from the lead of the old church - porch , lay by , long since , against witchcraft . 
 I be well aware that some people now begin to doubt about witchcraft ; or at any rate feign to do so ; be desirous to disbelieve whatever they be afraid of . this spirit be grow too common among we , and will end   unless we put a stop to it !   in the destruction of all religion . and as regard witchcraft , a man be bind either to believe in it , or to disbelieve the Bible . for even in the New Testament , discard many thing of the Old , such as sacrifice , and Sabbath , and fast , and other misery , witchcraft be clearly speak of as a thing that must continue ; that the Evil One be not utterly rob of his vested interest . hence let no one tell I that witchcraft be do away with ; for I will meet he with St. Paul , than whom no well man , and few less superstitious , can be find in all the Bible . 
 feel these thing more in those day than I feel they now , I fetch a goodish compass round , by the way of the cloven rock , rather than cross Black Barrow down , in a reckless and unholy manner . there be several spot , upon that down , cursed and smite , and blast , as if thunderbolt have fall there , and Satan sit to keep they warm . at any rate it be good   as every one acknowledge   not to wander there too much ; even with a doctor of divinity on one arm and of medicine upon the other . 
 therefore , I , be all alone , and on foot   as seem the wise , prefer a course of roundabout ; and start about eight o'clock , without mention my business , arrive at the mouth of the deep descent , such as John Fry describe it . now this   though I have not speak of it   be not my first time of be there . for , although I could not bring myself to spy upon Uncle Reuben , as John Fry have do , yet I think it no ill manner , after he have leave our house , to have a look at the famous place , where the malefactor come to life , at least in John 's opinion . at that time , however , I see nothing except the great ugly black morass , with the grisly reed around it ; and I do not care to go very near it , much less to pry on the further side . 
 now , on the other hand , I be bent to get at the very bottom of this mystery   if there be any , have less fear of witch or wizard , with a man of Uncle Reuben 's wealth to take my part , and see I through . so I rattle the ramrod down my gun , just to know if the charge be right , after so much walking ; and find it full six inch deep , as I like to have it , go boldly down the steep gorge of rock , with a firm resolve to shoot any witch unless it be good Mother Melldrum . nevertheless to my surprise , all be quiet , and fair to look at , in the decline of the narrow way , with great stalk fern come forth like tree , yet hang like cobwebs over one . and along one side , a little spring be get rid of its water . any man might stop and think ; or he might go on and think ; and in either case , there be none to say that he be make a fool of himself . 
 when I come to the foot of this ravine , and over against the great black slough , there be no sign of Master Huckaback , nor of any other live man , except myself , in the silence . therefore , I sit in a niche of rock , gaze at the slough , and ponder the old tradition about it . 
 they say that , in the ancient time , a mighty necromancer live in the wilderness of Exmoor . here , by spell and incantation , he build himself a strong high palace , eight - sided like a spider 's web , and stand on a central steep ; so that neither man nor beast could cross the moor without his knowledge . if he wish to rob and slay a traveller , or to have wild ox , or stag for food , he have nothing more to do than sit at one of his eight window , and point his unholy book at he . any move creature , at which that book be point , must obey the call , and come from whatever distance , if sight once by the wizard . 
 this be a bad condition of thing , and all the country groan under it ; and Exmoor   although the most honest place that a man could wish to live in   be begin to get a bad reputation , and all through that vile wizard . no man durst even go to steal a sheep , or a pony , or so much as a deer for dinner , lest he should be bring to book by a far big rogue than he be . and this go on for many year ; though they pray to God to abate it . but at last , when the wizard be get fat and haughty upon his high stomach , a mighty deliverance come to Exmoor , and a warning , and a memory . for one day the sorcerer gaze from his window face the southeast of the compass , and he yawn , have kill so many man that now he be weary of it . 
 ' Ifackins , ' he cry , or some such oath , both profane and uncomely , ' I see a man on the verge of the sky - line , go along laboriously . a pilgrim , I trow , or some such fool , with the nail of his boot inside they . too thin to be worth eat ; but I will have he for the fun of the thing ; and most of those saint have get money . ' 
 with these word he stretch forth his leg on a stool , and point the book of heathenish spell back upwards at the pilgrim . now this good pilgrim be plod along , soberly and religiously , with a pound of flint in either boot , and not an ounce of meat inside he . he feel the spell of the wicked book , but only as a horse might feel a ' gee - wug ! ' address to he . it be in the power of this good man , either to go on , or turn aside , and see out the wizard 's meaning . and for a moment he halt and stand , like one in two mind about a thing . then the wizard clap one cover to , in a jocular and insulting manner ; and the sound of it come to the pilgrim 's ear , about five mile in the distance , like a great gun fire at he . 
 ' by our Lady , ' he cry , ' I must see to this ; although my poor foot have no skin below they . I will teach this heathen miscreant how to scoff at Glastonbury . ' 
 thereupon he turn his course , and plough along through the moor and bog , towards the eight - sided palace . the wizard sit on his chair of comfort , and with the rank contempt observe the holy man plough towards he . ' he have something good in his wallet , I trow , ' say the black thief to himself ; ' these fellow get always the pick of the wine , and the good of a woman 's money . ' then he cry , ' come in , come in , good sir , ' as he always do to every one . 
 ' bad sir , I will not come in , ' say the pilgrim ; ' neither shall you come out again . here be the bone of all you have slay ; and here shall your own bone be . ' 
 ' hurry I not , ' cry the sorcerer ; ' that be a thing to think about . how many mile hast thou travel this day ? ' 
 but the pilgrim be too wide awake , for if he have speak of any number , bear no cross upon it , the necromancer would have have he , like a ball at bando - play . therefore he answer , as truly as need be , ' by the grace of our Lady , nine . ' 
 now nine be the cross of all cross number , and full to the lip of all crochet . so the wizard stagger back , and think , and inquire again with bravery , ' where can you find a man and wife , one go up - hill and one go down , and not a word speak between they ? ' 
 ' in a cucumber plant , ' say the modest saint ; blush even to think of it ; and the wizard know he be do for . 
 ' you have try I with ungodly question , ' continue the honest pilgrim , with one hand still over his eye , as he think of the feminine cucumber ; ' and now I will ask you a pure one . to whom of mankind have you ever do good , since God see fit to make you ? ' 
 the wizard thought , but could quote no one ; and he look at the saint , and the saint at he , and both their heart be tremble . ' can you mention only one ? ' ask the saint , point a piece of the true cross at he , hop he might cling to it ; ' even a little child will do ; try to think of some one . ' 
 the earth be rock beneath their foot , and the palace window darken on they , with a tint of blood , for now the saint be come inside , hop to save the wizard . 
 ' if I must tell the pure truth , ' say the wizard , look up at the arch of his window , ' I can tell of only one to whom I ever have do good . ' 
 ' one will do ; one be quite enough ; be quick before the ground open . the name of one and this cross will save you . lay your thumb on the end of it . ' 
 ' Nay , that I can not do , great saint . the devil have mercy upon I . ' 
 all this while the palace be sink , and blackness come over they . 
 ' Thou hast all but do for thyself , ' say the saint , with a glory burn round his head ; ' by that last invocation . yet give we the name of the one , my friend , if one there be ; it will save thee , with the cross upon thy breast . all be crash round we ; dear brother , who be that one ? ' 
 ' my own self , ' cry the wretched wizard . 
 ' then there be no help for thee . ' and with that the honest saint go upward , and the wizard , and all his palace , and even the crag that bear it , sink to the bowel of the earth ; and over they be nothing leave except a black bog fringe with reed , of the tint of the wizard 's whisker . the saint , however , be all right , after sleep off the excitement ; and he found a chapel , some three mile westward ; and there he lie with his holy relic and thither in after age come   as we all come home at last   both my Lorna 's Aunt Sabina , and her guardian Ensor Doone . 
 while yet I dwell upon this strange story , wonder if it all be true , and why such thing do not happen now , a man on horseback appear as suddenly as if he have rise out of the earth , on the other side of the great black slough . at first I be a little scared , my mind be in the tune for wonder ; but presently the white hair , whiter from the blackness of the bog between we , show I that it be Uncle Reuben come to look for I , that way . then I leave my chair of rock , and wave my hat and shout to he , and the sound of my voice among the crag and lonely corner frighten I . 
 Old Master Huckaback make no answer , but   so far as I could guess   beckon I to come to he . there be just room between the fringe of reed and the belt of rock around it , for a man go very carefully to escape that horrible pit - hole . and so I go round to the other side , and there find open space enough , with stunted bush , and starvele tree , and straggle tuft of rush . 
 ' you fool , you be frightened , ' say Uncle Ben , as he look at my face after shake hand : ' I want a young man of steadfast courage , as well as of strength and silence . and after what I hear of the battle at Glen Doone , I think I might trust you for courage . ' 
 ' so you may , ' say I , ' wherever I see mine enemy ; but not where witch and wizard be . ' 
 ' tush , great fool ! ' cry Master Huckaback ; ' the only witch or wizard here be the one that bewitcheth all man . now fasten up my horse , John Ridd , and not too near the slough , lad . ah , we have choose our entrance wisely . two good horseman , and their horse , come hither to spy we out , be go mine on their own account   and their last account it be   down this good wizard 's bog - hole . ' 
 with these word , Uncle Reuben clutch the mane of his horse and come down , as a man do when his leg be old ; and as I myself begin to do , at this time of writing . I offer a hand , but he be vex , and would have nought to do with it . 
 ' now follow I , step for step , ' he say , when I have tether his horse to a tree ; ' the ground be not death   like the wizard 's hole , but many part be treacherous , I know it well by this time . ' 
 without any more ado , he lead I in and out the marshy place , to a great round hole or shaft , brattice up with timber . I never have see the like before , and wonder how they could want a well , with so much water on every side . around the mouth be a few little heap of stuff unused to the daylight ; and I think at once of the tale I have hear concern mine in Cornwall , and the silver cup at Combe - Martin , send to the Queen Elizabeth . 
 ' we have a tree across it , John , ' say Uncle Reuben , smile grimly at my sudden shrink from it : ' but some rogue come spy here , just as one of our man go up . he be frighten half out of his life , I believe , and never venture to come again . but we put the blame of that upon you . and I see that we be wrong , John . ' here he look at I with keen eye , though weak . 
 ' you be altogether wrong , ' I answer . ' be I mean enough to spy upon any one dwell with we ? and more than that , Uncle Reuben , it be mean of you to suppose it . ' 
 ' all idea be different , ' reply the old man to my heat , like a little wear - out rill run down a smithy ; ' you with your strength and youth , and all that , be inclined to be romantic . I take thing as I have know they , go on for seventy year . now will you come and meet the wizard , or do your courage fail you ? ' 
 ' my courage must be none , ' say I , ' if I would not go where you go , sir . ' 
 he say no more , but sign to I to lift a heavy wooden corb with an iron loop across it , and sink in a little pit of earth , a yard or so from the mouth of the shaft . I raise it , and by his direction drop it into the throat of the shaft , where it hang and shake from a great cross - beam lay at the level of the earth . a very stout thick rope be fasten to the handle of the corb , and run across a pulley hang from the centre of the beam , and thence out of sight in the nether place . 
 ' I will first descend , ' he say ; ' your weight be too great for safety . when the bucket come up again , follow I , if your heart be good . ' 
 then he whistle down , with a quick sharp noise , and a whistle from below reply ; and he clomb into the vehicle , and the rope run through the pulley , and Uncle Ben go merrily down , and be out of sight , before I have time to think of he . 
 now be leave on the bank like that , and in full sight of the goodly heaven , I wrestle hard with my flesh and blood , about go down into the pit - hole . and but for the pale shame of the thing , that a white - headed man should adventure so , and green youth doubt about it , never could I have make up my mind ; for I do love air and heaven . however , at last up come the bucket ; and with a short sad prayer I go into whatever might happen . 
 my tooth would chatter , do all I could ; but the strength of my arm be with I ; and by they I hold on the grimy rope , and so ease the foot of the corb , which threaten to go away fathom under I . of course I should still have be safe enough , be like an egg in an egg - cup , too big to care for the bottom ; still I wish that all should be do , in good order , without excitement . 
 the scooping of the side grow black , and the patch of sky above more blue , as with many thought of Lorna , a long way underground I sink . then I be fetch up at the bottom with a jerk and rattle ; and but for hold by the rope so , must have tumble over . two great torch of bale - resin show I all the darkness , one be hold by Uncle Ben and the other by a short square man with a face which seem well - know to I . 
 ' hail to the world of gold , John Ridd , ' say Master Huckaback , smile in the old dry manner ; ' big coward never come down the shaft , now do he , Carfax ? ' 
 ' they be all alike , ' say the short square man , ' fust time as they doos it . ' 
 ' may I go to heaven , ' I cry , ' which be a thing quite out of sight ' for I always have a vein of humour , too small to be follow by any one ' if ever again of my own accord I go so far away from it ! ' Uncle Ben grin less at this than at the way I knock my shin in get out of the bucket ; and as for Master Carfax , he would not even deign to smile . and he seem to look upon my entrance as an interloping . 
 for my part , I have nought to do , after rub my bruised leg , except to look about I , so far as the dullness of light would help . and herein I seem , like a mouse in a trap , able no more than to run to and fro , and knock himself , and stare at thing . for here be a little channel groove with post on either side of it , and end with a heap of darkness , whence the sight come back again ; and there be a scoop place , like a funnel , but pour only to darkness . so I wait for somebody to speak first , not see my way to anything . ' 
 ' you seem to be disappoint , John , ' say Uncle Reuben , look blue by the light of the flambeaux ; ' do you expect to see the roof of gold , and the side of gold , and the floor of gold , John Ridd ? ' 
 ' ha , ha ! ' cry Master Carfax ; ' I reckon she do ; no doubt she do . ' 
 ' you be wrong , ' I reply ; ' but I do expect to see something well than dirt and darkness . ' 
 ' come on then , my lad ; and we will show you some - thing well . we want your great arm on here , for a job that have beat the whole of we . ' 
 with these word , Uncle Ben lead the way along a narrow passage , roof with rock and floor with slate - colour shale and shingle , and wind in and out , until we stop at a great stone block or boulder , lie across the floor , and as large as my mother 's well oaken wardrobe . beside it be several sledge - hammer , batter , and some with broken helve . 
 ' thou great villain ! ' cry Uncle Ben , give the boulder a little kick ; ' I believe thy time be come at last . now , John , give we a sample of the thing they tell of thee . take the big of they sledge - hammer and crack this rogue in two for we . we have try at he for a fortnight , and he be a nut worth crack . but we have no man who can swing that hammer , though all in the mine have handle it . ' 
 ' I will do my very good , ' say I , pull off my coat and waistcoat , as if I be go to wrestle ; ' but I fear he will prove too tough for I . ' 
 ' ay , that her wull , ' grunt Master Carfax ; ' lack'th a Carnishman , and a beg one too , not a little charp such as I be . there be no man outside Carnwall , as can crack that boolder . ' 
 ' bless my heart , ' I answer ; ' but I know something of you , my friend , or at any rate of your family . well , I have beat most of your cornish man , though not my place to talk of it . but mind , if I crack this rock for you , I must have some of the gold inside it . ' 
 ' dost think to see the gold come tumble out like the kernel of a nut , thou zany ? ' ask Uncle Reuben pettishly ; ' now wilt thou crack it or wilt thou not ? for I believe thou canst do it , though only a lad of Somerset . ' 
 Uncle Reuben show by say this , and by his glance at Carfax , that he be proud of his county , and would be disappoint for it if I fail to crack the boulder . so I beg he to stoop his torch a little , that I might examine my subject . to I there appear to be nothing at all remarkable about it , except that it sparkle here and there , when the flash of the flame fall upon it . a great obstinate , oblong , sullen stone ; how could it be worth the breaking , except for make road with ? 
 nevertheless , I take up the hammer , and swing it far behind my head , fetch it down , with all my power , upon the middle of the rock . the roof above rang mightily , and the echo go down delven gallery , so that all the miner flock to know what might be do . but Master Carfax only smile , although the blow shake he where he stand , for behold the stone be still unbroken , and as firm as ever . then I smote it again , with no well fortune , and Uncle Ben look vexed and angry , but all the miner grin with triumph . 
 ' this little tool be too light , ' I cry ; ' one of you give I a piece of strong cord . ' 
 then I take two more of the weighty hammer , and lash they fast to the back of mine , not so as to strike , but to burden the fall . have make this firm , and with room to grasp the handle of the large one only for the helve of the other be short I smile at Uncle Ben , and whirl the mighty implement round my head , just to try whether I could manage it . upon that the miner give a cheer , be honest man , and desirous of see fair play between this ' shameless stone '   as Dan Homer call it   and I with my hammer hammering . 
 then I swing I on high to the swing of the sledge , as a thresher bend back to the rise of his flail , and with all my power descending deliver the ponderous onset . crash and crush the great stone fall over , and thread of sparkle gold appear in the jagged side of the breakage . 
 ' how now , Simon Carfax ? ' cry Uncle Ben triumphantly ; ' wilt thou find a man in Cornwall can do the like of that ? ' 
 ' ay , and more , ' he answer ; ' however , it be pretty fair for a lad of these outlandish part . get your roller , my lad , and lead it to the crush engine . ' 
 I be glad to have be of some service to they ; for it seem that this great boulder have be too large to be draw along the gallery and too hard to crack . but now they move it very easily , take piece by piece , and carefully pick up the fragment . 
 ' Thou hast do we a good turn , my lad , ' say Uncle Reuben , as the other pass out of sight at the corner ; ' and now I will show thee the bottom of a very wondrous mystery . but we must not do it more than once , for the time of day be the wrong one . ' 
 the whole affair be a mystery to I , and far beyond my understanding , I follow he softly , without a word , yet think very heavily , and long to be above ground again . he lead I through small passage , to a hollow place near the descend shaft , where I see a most extraordinary monster fit up . in form it be like a great coffee - mill , such as I have see in London , only a thousand time large , and with heavy windlass to work it . 
 ' put in a barrow - load of the smoulder , ' say Uncle Ben to Carfax , ' and let they work the crank , for John to understand a thing or two . ' 
 ' at this time of day ! ' cry Simon Carfax ; ' and the watching as have be o ' late ! ' 
 however , he do it without more remonstrance ; pour into the scuttle at the top of the machine about a baskeful of broken rock ; and then a dozen man go to the wheel , and force it round , as sailor do . upon that such a hideous noise arise , as I never should have believe any creature capable of make , and I run to the well of the mine for air , and to ease my ear , if possible . 
 ' enough , enough ! ' shout Uncle Ben by the time I be nearly deafen ; ' we will digest our goodly boulder after the devil be come abroad for his evening work . now , John , not a word about what you have learn ; but henceforth you will not be frighten by the noise we make at dusk . ' 
 I could not deny but what this be very clever management . if they could not keep the echo of the upper air from move , the wise plan be to open their valve during the discouragement of the fall evening ; when folk would rather be drive away , than draw into the wild and quagmire , by a sound so deep and awful , come through the darkness . 




 CHAPTER LIX 

 LORNA go away 

 although there be very ancient tale of gold be find upon Exmoor , in lump and solid hummock , and of man who slay one another for it , this deep digging and great labour seem to I a dangerous and unholy enterprise . and Master Huckaback confess that up to the present time his two partner and himself   for they prove to be three adventurer   have put into the earth more gold than they have take out of it . nevertheless he feel quite sure that it must in a very short time succeed , and pay they back an hundredfold ; and he press I with great earnestness to join they , and work there as much as I could , without move my mother 's suspicion . I ask he how they have manage so long to carry on without discovery ; and he say that this be partly through the wildness of the neighbourhood , and the legend that frighten people of a superstitious turn ; partly through their own great caution , and the manner of fetch both supply and implement by night ; but most of all , they have to thank the trouble of the period , the suspicion of rebellion , and the terror of the Doones , which   like the wizard I be speak of   keep folk from be too inquisitive where they have no business . the slough , moreover , have help they well , both by make their access dark , and yet more by swallow up and conceal all that be cast from the mouth of the pit . once , before the attack on Glen Doone , they have a narrow escape from the King 's Commissioner ; for Captain Stickles have hear no doubt the story of John Fry , go with half a dozen trooper , on purpose to search the neighbourhood . now if he have ride alone , most likely he would have discover everything ; but he fear to venture so , have suspicion of a trap . come as they do in a company , all mount and conspicuous , the watchman   who be post now on the top of the hill , almost every day since John Fry 's appearance   could not help espy they , mile distant , over the moorland . he watch they under the shade of his hand , and presently run down the hill , and raise a great commotion . then Simon Carfax and all his man come up , and make thing natural , remove every sign of work ; and finally , sink underground , draw across the mouth of the pit a hurdle thatch with sedge and heather . only Simon himself be leave behind , ensconce in a hole of the crag , to observe the doing of the enemy . 
 Captain Stickles ride very bravely , with all his man clatter after he , down the rocky pass , and even to the margin of the slough . and there they stop , and hold council ; for it be a perilous thing to risk the passage upon horseback , between the treacherous brink and the cliff , unless one know it thoroughly . Stickles , however , and one follower , carefully feel the way along , have their horse well in hand , and bear a rope to draw they out , in case of be founder . then they spur across the rough boggy land , far away than the shaft be . here the ground lie jagged and shaggy , work up with high tuft of reed , or scrag with stunt brushwood . and between the up and down   which meet anybody anyhow   green - cover place tempt the foot , and black bog - hole discourage it . it be not to be marvel at that amid such place as this , for the first time visit , the horse be a little skeary ; and their rider partook of the feeling , as all good rider do . in and out of the tuft they go , with their eye dilate , wish to be out of harm , if conscience be but satisfied . and of this tufty flaggy ground , pock with bog and boglet , one especial nature be that it will not hold impression . 
 see thus no track of man , nor anything but marsh - work , and stormwork , and of the season , these two honest man ride back , and be glad to do so . for above they hang the mountain , cowl with fog , and seam with storm ; and around they desolation ; and below their foot the grave . hence they go , with all goodwill ; and vow for ever afterwards that fear of a simple place like that be only too ridiculous . so they all ride home with mutual praise , and their courage well - approve ; and the only result of the expedition be to confirm John Fry 's repute as a big liar than ever . 
 now I have enough of that underground work , as before relate , to last I for a year to come ; neither would I , for sake of gold , have ever step into that bucket , of my own goodwill again . but when I tell Lorna whom I could trust in any matter of secrecy , as if she have never be a woman all about my great descent , and the honeycombing of the earth , and the mournful noise at eventide , when the gold be under the crusher and bewail the mischief it must do , then Lorna 's chief desire be to know more about Simon Carfax . 
 ' it must be our Gwenny 's father , ' she cry ; ' the man who disappear underground , and whom she have ever be seek . how grieve the poor little thing will be , if it should turn out , after all , that he leave his child on purpose ! I can hardly believe it ; can you , John ? ' 
 ' well , ' I reply ; ' all man be wicked , more or less , to some extent ; and no man may say otherwise . ' 
 for I do not wish to commit myself to an opinion about Simon , lest I might be wrong , and Lorna think less of my judgment . 
 but be resolve to see this out , and do a good turn , if I could , to Gwenny , who have do I many a good one , I beg my Lorna to say not a word of this matter to the handmaiden , until I have far search it out . and to carry out this resolve , I go again to the place of business where they be grind gold as freely as an apothecary at his pill . 
 have now true right of entrance , and be know to the watchman , and regard   since I crack the boulder   as one who could pay his footing , and perhaps would be the master , when Uncle Ben should be choke with money , I find the corb send up for I rather soon than I wish it . for the smell of the place underground , and the way man 's eye come out of they , with link , and brand , and flambeaux , instead of God 's light to look at , be to I a point of caution , rather than of pleasure . 
 no doubt but what some man enjoy it , be bear , like worm , to dig , and to live in their own scooping . yet even the worm come up sometimes , after a good soft shower of rain , and hold discourse with one another ; whereas these man , and the horse let down , come above ground never . 
 and the change of the sky be half the change our nature call for . earth we have , and all its produce   move from the first appearance , and the hope with infant ' eye , through the bloom of beauty 's promise , to the rich and ripe fulfilment , and the fall back to rest ; sea we have   with all its wonder shed on eye , and ear , and heart ; and the thought of something more   but without the sky to look at , what would earth , and sea , and even our own self , be to we ? 
 do we look at earth with hope ? yes , for victual only . do we look at sea with hope ? yes , that we may escape it . at the sky alone   though question with the doubt of sunshine , or scatter with uncertain star , at the sky alone we look with pure hope and with memory . 
 hence it always hurt my feeling when I get into that bucket , with my small - clothe turn up over , and a kerchief round my hat . but know that my purpose be sound , and my motif pure , I let the sky grow to a little blue hole , and then to nothing over I . at the bottom Master Carfax meet I , be captain of the mine , and desirous to know my business . he wear a loose sack round his shoulder , and his beard be two foot long . 
 ' my business be to speak with you , ' I answer rather sternly ; for this man , who be nothing more than Uncle Reuben 's servant , have carry thing too far with I , show no respect whatever ; and though I do not care for much , I like to receive a little , even in my early day . 
 ' coom into the muck - hole , then , ' be his gracious answer ; and he lead I into a filthy cell , where the miner change their jacket . 
 ' Simon Carfax , I begin , with a manner to discourage he ; ' I fear you be a shallow fellow , and not worth my trouble . ' 
 ' then do not   take it , ' he reply ; ' I want no man 's trouble . ' 
 ' for your sake I would not , ' I answer ; ' but for your daughter 's sake I will ; the daughter whom you leave to starve so pitifully in the wilderness . ' 
 the man star at I with his pale gray eye , whose colour be lose from candle light ; and his voice as well as his body shake , while he cry , 
 ' it be a lie , man . no daughter , and no son have I. nor be ever child of mine leave to starve in the wilderness . you be too big for I to tackle , and that make you a coward for say it . ' his hand be play with a pickaxe helve , as if he long to have I under it . 
 ' perhaps I have wrong you , Simon , ' I answer very softly ; for the sweat upon his forehead shine in the smoky torchlight ; ' if I have , I crave your pardon . but do you not bring up from Cornwall a little maid name " Gwenny , " and suppose to be your daughter ? ' 
 ' ay , and she be my daughter , my last and only child of five ; and for she I would give this mine , and all the gold will ever come from it . ' 
 ' you shall have she , without either mine or gold ; if you only prove to I that you do not abandon she . ' 
 ' abandon she ! I abandon Gwenny ! ' he cry with such a rage of scorn , that I at once believe he . ' they tell I she be dead , and crush , and bury in the drift here ; and half my heart die with she . the Almighty blast their mining - work , if the scoundrel lie to I ! ' 
 ' the scoundrel must have lie to you , ' I answer , with a spirit fire by his heat of fury : ' the maid be live and with we . come up ; and you shall see she . ' 
 ' rig the bucket , ' he shout out along the echo gallery ; and then he fall against the wall , and through the grimy sack I see the heaving of his breast , as I have see my opponent 's chest , in a long hard bout of wrestling . for my part , I could do no more than hold my tongue and look at he . 
 without another word we rise to the level of the moor and mire ; neither would Master Carfax speak , as I lead he across the barrow . in this he be welcome to his own way , for I do love silence ; so little harm can come of it . and though Gwenny be no beauty , her father might be fond of she . 
 so I put he in the cow - house   not to frighten the little maid , and the fold shutter over he , such as we use at the beesting ; and he listen to my voice outside , and hold on , and preserve himself . for now he would have scoop the earth , as cattle do at yearning - time , and as meekly and as patiently , to have his child restore to he . not to make long tale of it for this thing be beyond I , through want of true experience I go and fetch his Gwenny forth from the back kitchen , where she be fight , as usual , with our Betty . 
 ' come along , you little Vick , ' I say , for so we call she ; ' I have a message to you , Gwenny , from the Lord in heaven . ' 
 ' do not   ' ee talk about he , ' she answer ; ' she have long forgatten I . ' 
 ' that he have never do , you stupid . come , and see who be in the cowhouse . ' 
 Gwenny know ; she know in a moment . look into my eye , she know ; and hang back from I to sigh , she know it even well . 
 she have not much elegance of emotion , be flat and square all over ; but none the less for that her heart come quick , and her word come slowly . 
 ' oh , Jan , you be too good to cheat I . be it joke you be put upon I ? ' 
 I answer she with a gaze alone ; and she tuck up her clothe and follow I because the road be dirty . then I open the door just wide enough for the child to to go her father , and leave those two to have it out , as might be most natural . and they take a long time about it . 
 meanwhile I need must go and tell my Lorna all the matter ; and her joy be almost as great as if she herself have find a father . and the wonder of the whole be this , that I get all the credit ; of which not a thousandth part belong by right and reason to I . yet so it almost always be . if I work for good desert , and slave , and lie awake at night , and spend my unborn life in dream , not a blink , nor wink , nor inkle of my labour ever tell . it would have be well to leave unburned , and to keep undevoure , the fuel and the food of life . but if I have labour not , only act by some impulse , whim , caprice , or anything ; or even act not at all , only let thing float by ; pile upon I commendation , bravo , and applause , almost work I up to tempt once again   though sick of it   the ill luck of deserve . 
 without intend any harm , and mean only good indeed , I have now do serious wrong to Uncle Reuben 's prospect . for Captain Carfax be full as angry at the trick play on he as he be happy in discover the falsehood and the fraud of it . nor could I help agree with he , when he tell I all of it , as with tear in his eye he do , and ready to be my slave henceforth ; I could not forbear from own that it be a low and heartless trick , unworthy of man who have family ; and the recoil whereof be well deserve , whatever it might end in . 
 for when this poor man leave his daughter , asleep as he suppose , and have his food , and change of clothe , and Sunday hat to see to , he mean to return in an hour or so , and settle about her sustenance in some house of the neighbourhood . but this be the very thing of all thing which the leader of the enterprise , who have bring he up from Cornwall , for his note skill in metal , be determine , whether by fair mean or foul , to stop at the very outset . Secrecy be their main object , what chance could there be of it , if the miner be allow to keep their child in the neighbourhood ? hence , on the plea of feast Simon , they keep he drunk for three day and three night , assure he   whenever he have gleam enough to ask for she   that his daughter be as well as could be , and enjoy herself with the child . not wish the maid to see he tipsy , he press the matter no far ; but apply himself to the bottle again , and drink her health with pleasure . 
 however , after three day of this , his constitution rise against it , and he become quite sober ; with a certain lowness of heart moreover , and a sense of error . and his first desire to right himself , and easy way to do it , be by exert parental authority upon Gwenny . possess with this intention   for he be not a sweet temper man , and his head be ache sadly   he seek for Gwenny high and low ; first with threat , and then with fear , and then with tear and wail . and so he become to the other man a warning and a great annoyance . therefore they combine to swear what seem a very likely thing , and might be true for all they know , to wit , that Gwenny have come to seek for her father down the shaft - hole , and peer too eagerly into the dark , have topple forward , and go down , and lain at the bottom as dead as a stone . 
 ' and thou be so happy with drink , ' the villain finish up to he , ' and get drunker every day , we think it shame to trouble thee ; and we bury the wench in the low drift ; and no use to think more of she ; but come and have a glass , Sim . ' 
 but Simon Carfax swear that drink have lose he his wife , and now have lose he the last of his five child , and would lose he his own soul , if far he go on with it ; and from that day to his death he never touch strong drink again . nor only this ; but be soon appoint captain of the mine , he allow no man on any pretext to bring cordial thither ; and to this and his stern hard rule and stealthy secret management   as much as to good luck and place   might it be attribute that scarcely any but themselves have dream about this Exmoor mine . 
 as for I , I have no ambition to become a miner ; and the state to which gold - seeking have bring poor Uncle Ben be not at all encouraging . my business be to till the ground , and tend the growth that come of it , and store the fruit in Heaven 's good time , rather than to scoop and burrow like a weasel or a rat for the yellow root of evil . moreover , I be lead from home , between the hay and corn harvest   when we often have a week to spare , by a call there be no resist ; unless I give up all regard for wrestling , and for my county . 
 now here many person may take I amiss , and there always have be some confusion ; which people who ought to have know well have work into subject of quarrelling . by birth it be true , and can not be deny , that I be a man of Somerset ; nevertheless by breed I be , as well as by education , a son of Devon also . and just as both of our two county vow that Glen Doone be none of theirs , but belong to the other one ; so now , each with hot claim and jangle   lead even to blow sometimes , assert and would swear to it   as I become more famous   that John Ridd be of its own producing , breed of its own true blood , and basely steal by the other . 
 now I have not judge it in any way needful or even become and delicate , to enter into my wrestling adventure , or describe my progress . the whole thing be so different from Lorna , and her gentle manner , and her style of walking ; moreover I must seem   even to kind people   to magnify myself so much , or at least attempt to do it , that I have scratch out write page , through my well taste and sense . 
 neither will I , upon this head , make any difference even now ; be simply betray into mention the matter because bare truth require it , in the tale of Lorna 's fortune . 
 for a mighty giant have arise in a part of Cornwall : and his calf be twenty - five inch round , and the breadth of his shoulder two foot and a quarter ; and his stature seven foot and three - quarter . round the chest he be seventy inch , and his hand a foot across , and there be no scale strong enough to judge of his weight in the market - place . now this man or I should say , his backer and his boaster , for the giant himself be modest send I a brave and haughty challenge , to meet he in the ring at bodmin - town , on the first day of August , or else to return my champion 's belt to they by the messenger . 
 it be no use to deny but that I be greatly dash and scar at first . for my part , I be only , when measure without clothe on , sixty inch round the breast , and round the calf scarce twenty - one , only two foot across the shoulder , and in height not six and three - quarter . however , my mother would never believe that this man could beat I ; and Lorna be of the same mind , I resolve to go and try he , as they would pay all expense and a hundred pound , if I conquer he ; so confident be those Cornishmen . 
 now this story be too well know for I to go through it again and again . every child in Devonshire know , and his grandson will know , the song which some clever man make of it , after I have treat he to water , and to lemon , and a little sugar , and a drop of eau - de - vie . enough that I have find the giant quite as big as they have describe he , and enough to terrify any one . but trust in my practice and study of the art , I resolve to try a back with he ; and when my arm be round he once , the giant be but a farthingale put into the vice of a blacksmith . the man have no bone ; his frame sink in , and I be afraid of crush he . he lie on his back , and smile at I ; and I beg his pardon . 
 now this affair make a noise at the time , and redound so much to my credit , that I be deeply grieve at it , because deserve none . for I do like a good strife and struggle ; and the doubt make the joy of victory ; whereas in this case , I might as well have be send for a match with a hay - mow . however , I get my hundred pound , and make up my mind to spend every farthing in present for mother and Lorna . 
 for Annie be marry by this time , and long before I go away ; as need scarcely be say , perhaps ; if any one follow the week and the month . the wedding be quiet enough , except for everybody 's good wish ; and I desire not to dwell upon it , because it grieve I in many way . 
 but now that I have try to hope the very good for dear Annie , a deep blow than could have come , even through she , await I . for after that visit to Cornwall , and with my prize - money about I , I come on foot from Okehampton to Oare , so as to save a little sum towards my time of marry . for Lorna 's fortune I would not have ; small or great I would not have it ; only if there be no deny we would devote the whole of it to charitable us , as Master Peter Blundell have do ; and perhaps the future age would endeavour to be grateful . Lorna and I have settle this question at least twice a day , on the average ; and each time with more satisfaction . 
 now come into the kitchen with all my cash in my breech pocket   golden guineas , with an elephant on they , for the stamp of the Guinea Company , I find dear mother most heartily glad to see I safe and sound again for she have dread that giant , and dream of he and she never ask I about the money . Lizzie also be soft , and more gracious than usual ; especially when she see I pour guineas , like peppercorn , into the pudding - basin . but by the way they hang about , I know that something be go wrong . 
 ' where be Lorna ? ' I ask at length , after try not to ask it ; ' I want she to come , and see my money . she never see so much before . ' 
 ' alas ! ' say mother with a heavy sigh ; ' she will see a great deal more , I fear ; and a deal more than be good for she . whether you ever see she again will depend upon her nature , John . ' 
 ' what do you mean , mother ? have you quarrel ? why do not Lorna come to I ? be I never to know ? ' 
 ' now , John , be not so impatient , ' my mother reply , quite calmly , for in truth she be jealous of Lorna , ' you could wait now , very well , John , if it be till this day week , for the coming of your mother , John . and yet your mother be your good friend . who can ever fill her place ? ' 
 think of her future absence , mother turn away and cry ; and the box - iron sing the blanket . 
 ' now , ' say I , be wild by this time ; ' Lizzie , you have a little sense ; will you tell I where be Lorna ? ' 
 ' the Lady Lorna Dugal , ' say Lizzie , screw up her lip as if the title be too grand , ' be go to London , brother John ; and not likely to come back again . we must try to get on without she . ' 
 ' you little   something ' I cry , which I dare not write down here , as all you be too good for such language ; but Lizzie 's lip provoke I so ' my Lorna go , my Lorna go ! and without good - bye to I even ! it be your spite have sicken she . ' 
 ' you be quite mistaken there , ' she reply ; ' how can folk of low degree have either spite or like towards the people so far above they ? the Lady Lorna Dugal be go , because she could not help herself ; and she weep enough to break ten heart if heart be ever break , John . ' 
 ' Darling Lizzie , how good you be ! ' I cry , without notice her sneer ; ' tell I all about it , dear ; tell I every word she say . ' 
 ' that will not take long , ' say Lizzie , quite as unmove by soft coaxing as by urgent cursing ; ' the lady speak very little to any one , except indeed to mother , and to Gwenny Carfax ; and Gwenny be go with she , so that the benefit of that be lose . but she leave a letter for " poor John , " as in charity she call he . how grand she look , to be sure , with the fine clothe on that be come for she ! ' 
 ' where be the letter , you utter vixen ! oh , may you have a husband ! ' 
 ' who will thresh it out of you , and starve it , and swear it out of you ! ' be the meaning of my imprecation : but Lizzie , not dream as yet of such thing , could not understand I , and be rather thankful ; therefore she answer quietly , 
 ' the letter be in the little cupboard , near the head of Lady Lorna 's bed , where she use to keep the diamond necklace , which we contrive to get steal . ' 
 without another word I rush   so that every board in the house shake   up to my lose Lorna 's room , and tear the little wall - niche open and espy my treasure . it be as simple , and as homely , and loving , as even I could wish . part of it run as follow , the other part it behove I not to open out to stranger : ' my own love , and sometime lord , take it not amiss of I , that even without farewell , I go ; for I can not persuade the man to wait , your return be doubtful . my great - uncle , some grand lord , be await I at Dunster , have fear of venture too near this Exmoor country . I , who have be so lawless always , and the child of outlaws , be now to atone for this , it seem , by live in a court of law , and under special surveillance   as they call it , I believe   of his Majesty 's Court of Chancery . my uncle be appoint my guardian and master ; and I must live beneath his care , until I be twenty - one year old . to I this appear a dreadful thing , and very unjust , and cruel ; for why should I lose my freedom , through heritage of land and gold ? I offer to abandon all if they would only let I go ; I go down on my knee to they , and say I want title not , neither land , nor money ; only to stay where I be , where first I have know happiness . but they only laugh and call I " child , " and say I must talk of that to the King 's High Chancellor . their order they have , and must obey they ; and Master Stickles be order too , to help as the King 's Commissioner . and then , although it pierce my heart not to say one " goodbye , John , " I be glad upon the whole that you be not here to dispute it . for I be almost certain that you would not , without force to yourself , have let your Lorna go to people who never , never can care for she . ' 
 here my darling have weep again , by the token on the paper ; and then there follow some sweet word , too sweet for I to chatter they . but she finish with these noble line , which   be common to all humanity , in a case of steadfast love   I do no harm , but rather help all true love by repeat . ' of one thing rest you well assured and I do hope that it may prove of service to your rest , love , else would my own be break no difference of rank , or fortune , or of life itself , shall ever make I swerve from truth to you . we have pass through many trouble , danger , and dispartment , but never yet be doubt between we ; neither ever shall be . each have trust well the other ; and still each must do so . though they tell you I be false , though your own mind harbour it , from the sense of thing around , and your own undervaluing , yet take counsel of your heart , and cast such thought away from you ; be unworthy of itself they must be unworthy also of the one who dwell there ; and that one be , and ever shall be , your own Lorna Dugal . ' 
 some people can not understand that tear should come from pleasure ; but whether from pleasure or from sorrow   mix as they be in the twisted string of a man 's heart , or a woman 's , great tear fall from my stupid eye , even on the blots of Lorna 's . 
 ' no doubt it be all over , ' my mind say to I bitterly ; ' trust I , all shall yet be right , ' my heart reply very sweetly . 




 CHAPTER LX 

 ANNIE luckier than JOHN 

 some people may look down upon we for our slavish way   as they may choose to call they , but in our part of the country , we do love to mention title , and to roll it on our tongue , with a conscience and a comfort . even if a man know not , through fault of education , who the Duke of this be , or the Earl of that , it will never do for he to say so , lest the room look down on he . therefore he must nod his head , and say , ' ah , to be sure ! I know he as well as ever I know my own good woman 's brother . he marry Lord Flipflap 's second daughter , and a precious life she lead he . ' whereupon the room look up at he . but I , be quite unable to carry all this in my head , as I ought , be speedily put down by people of a noble tendency , apt at Lords , and pat with Dukes , and know more about the King than his Majesty would have request . therefore , I fall back in thought , not dare in word to do so , upon the title of our horse . and all these horse deserve their name , not have merely inherit , but by their own doing earn they . Smiler , for instance , have be so call , not so much from a habit of smile , as from his general geniality , white nose , and white ankle . this worthy horse be now in year , but hale and gay as ever ; and when you let he out of the stable , he could neigh and whinny , and make man and horse know it . on the other hand , Kickums be a horse of morose and surly order ; harbour up revenge , and lead a rider to false confidence . very smoothly he would go , and as gentle as a turtle - dove ; until his rider fully believe that a pack - thread be enough for he , and a pat of approval upon his neck the aim and crown of his worthy life . then suddenly up go his hind foot to heaven , and the rider for the most part fly over his nose ; whereupon good kickum would take advantage of his favourable position to come and bite a piece out of his back . now in my present state of mind , be understand of nobody , have none to bear I company , neither wish to have any , an indefinite kind of attraction draw I into Kickum 's society . a bond of mutual sympathy be soon establish between we ; I would ride no other horse , neither Kickums be ride by any other man . and this good horse become as jealous about I as a dog might be ; and would lash out , or run tooth foremost , at any one who come near he when I be on his back . 
 this season , the reaping of the corn , which have be but a year ago so pleasant and so lightsome , be become a heavy labour , and a thing for grumble rather than for gladness . however , for the sake of all , it must be attend to , and with as fair a show of spirit and alacrity as might be . for otherwise the rest would drag , and drop their hand and idle , be quick to take infection of dullness than of diligence . and the harvest be a heavy one , even heavy than the year before , although of poor quality . therefore be I force to work as hard as any horse could during all the daylight hour , and defer till night the brooding upon my misfortune . but the darkness always find I stiff with work , and weary , and less able to think than to dream , may be , of Lorna . and now the house be so dull and lonesome , want Annie 's pretty presence , and the light of Lorna 's eye , that a man have no temptation after supper - time even to sit and smoke a pipe . 
 for Lizzie , though so learn , and pleasant when it suit she , never have take very kindly to my love for Lorna , and be of a proud and slightly upstart nature , could not bear to be eclipse in bearing , look , and breeding , and even in clothe , by the stranger . for one thing I will say of the Doones , that whether by purchase or plunder , they have always dress my darling well , with her own sweet taste to help they . and though Lizzie 's natural hate of the maid   as a Doone and burden with father 's death   should have be change to remorse when she learn of Lorna 's real parentage , it be only alter to sullenness , and discontent with herself , for frequent rudeness to an innocent person , and one of such high descent . moreover , the child have imbibe strange idea as to our aristocracy , partly perhaps from her own way of thinking , and partly from reading of history . for while , from one point of view she look up at they very demurely , as commission by God for the country 's good ; from another sight she dislike they , as ready to sacrifice their good and follow their bad member . 
 yet why should this wench dare to judge upon a matter so far beyond she , and form opinion which she know well than declare before mother ? but with I she have no such scruple , for I have no authority over she ; and my intellect she look down upon , because I praise her own so . thus she make herself very unpleasant to I ; by little jag and jerk of sneer , speed as though unwittingly ; which I   who now consider myself ally to the aristocracy , and perhaps take air on that account   have not wit enough to parry , yet have wind enough to feel . 
 now any one who do not know exactly how mother feel and think , would have expect my mother   than whom could be no well one   to pet I , and make much of I , under my sad trouble ; to hang with anxiety on my look , and shed her tear with mine   if any , and season every dish of meat put by for her John 's return . and if the whole truth must be tell , I do expect that sort of thing , and think what a plague it would be to I ; yet not get it , be vex , as if by some new injury . for mother be a special creature   as I suppose we all be , be the warm of the warm , when fire at the proper corner ; and yet , if take at the wrong point , you would say she be incombustible . 
 hence it come to pass that I have no one even to speak to , about Lorna and my grievance ; for Captain Stickles be now go southward ; and John Fry , of course , be too low for it , although a married man , and well under his wife 's management . but find myself unable at last to bear this any long , upon the first day when all the wheat be cut , and the stook set up in every field , yet none quite fit for carry , I saddle good kickum at five in the morning , and without a word to mother   for a little anxiety might do she good   off I set for Molland parish , to have the counsel and the comfort of my darling Annie . 
 the horse take I over the ground so fast   there be few well to go when he like , that by nine o'clock Annie be in my arm , and blush to the colour of Winnie 's cheek , with sudden delight and young happiness . 
 ' you precious little soul ! ' I cry : ' how do Tom behave to you ? ' 
 ' hush ! ' say Annie : ' how dare you ask ? he be the kind , and the good , and the noble of all man , John ; not even set yourself aside . now look not jealous , John : so it be . we all have special gift , you know . you be as good as you can be , John ; but my husband 's special gift be nobility of character . ' here she look at I , as one who have discover something quite unknown . 
 ' I be devilish glad to hear it , ' say I , be touch at go down so : ' keep he to that mark , my dear ; and cork the whisky bottle . ' 
 ' yes , darling John , ' she answer quickly , not desire to open that subject , and be too sweet to resent it : ' and how be lovely Lorna ? what an age it be since I have see you ! I suppose we must thank she for that . ' 
 ' you may thank she for see I now , ' say I ; ' or rather , ' see how hurt she look , ' you may thank my knowledge of your kindness , and my desire to speak of she to a soft - hearted dear little soul like you . I think all the woman be go mad . even mother treat I shamefully . and as for Lizzie ' here I stop , know no word strong enough , without shock Annie . 
 ' do you mean to say that Lorna be go ? ' ask Annie , in great amazement ; yet leap at the truth , as woman do , with nothing at all to leap from . 
 ' gone . and I never shall see she again . it serve I right for aspire so . ' 
 be grieve at my manner , she lead I in where none could interrupt we ; and in spite of all my dejection , I could not help notice how very pretty and even elegant all thing be around . for we upon Exmoor have little taste ; all we care for be warm comfort , and plenty to eat and to give away , and a hearty smack in everything . but Squire Faggus have see the world , and keep company with great people ; and the taste he have first display in the shoeing of farmer ' horse   which lead almost to his ruin , by bring he into jealousy , and flattery , and dash way   have now be cultivate in London , and by moonlight , so that none could help admire it . 
 ' well ! ' I cry , for the moment drop care and woe in astonishment : ' we have nothing like this at Plover 's barrow ; nor even Uncle Reuben . I do hope it be honest , Annie ? ' 
 ' would I sit in a chair that be not my own ? ' ask Annie , turn crimson , and drop defiantly , and with a whisk of her dress which I never have see before , into the very grandest one : ' would I lie on a couch , brother John , do you think , unless good money be pay for it ? because other people be clever , John , you need not grudge they their earning . ' 
 ' a couch ! ' I reply : ' why what can you want with a couch in the day - time , Annie ? a couch be a small bed , set up in a room without space for a good four - poster . what can you want with a couch downstairs ? I never hear of such nonsense . and you ought to be in the dairy . ' 
 ' I will not   cry , brother John , I will not ; because you want to make I cry ' and all the time she be cry ' you always be so nasty , John , sometimes . ah , you have no nobility of character , like my husband . and I have not see you for two month , John ; and now you come to scold I ! ' 
 ' you little darling , ' I say , for Annie 's tear always conquer I ; ' if all the rest ill - use I , I will not quarrel with you , dear . you have always be true to I ; and I can forgive your vanity . your thing be very pretty , dear ; and you may couch ten time a day , without my interference . no doubt your husband have pay for all this , with the pony he steal from Exmoor . nobility of character be a thing beyond my understanding ; but when my sister love a man , and he do well and flourish , who be I to find fault with he ? mother ought to see these thing : they would turn her head almost : look at the pimple on the chair ! ' 
 ' they be nothing , ' Annie answer , after kiss I for my kindness : ' they be only put in for the time indeed ; and we be to have much well , with gold all round the binding , and double plush at the corner ; so soon as ever the King repay the debt he owe to my poor Tom . ' 
 I think to myself that our present King have be most unlucky in one thing debt all over the kingdom . not a man who have strike a blow for the King , or for his poor father , or even say a good word for he , in the time of his adversity , but expect at least a baronetcy , and a grant of estate to support it . many have call King Charles ungrateful : and he may have be so . but some indulgence be due to a man , with entry few on the credit side , and a terrible column of debit . 
 ' have no fear for the chair , ' I say , for it creak under I very fearfully , have leg not so large as my finger ; ' if the chair break , Annie , your fear should be , lest the tortoise - shell run into I . why , it be strip like a viper 's loin ! I see some hundred in London ; and very cheap they be . they be make to be sell to the country people , such as you and I , dear ; and carefully keep they will last for almost half a year . now will you come back from your furniture , and listen to my story ? ' 
 Annie be a hearty dear , and she know that half my talk be joke , to make light of my worrying . therefore she take it in good part , as I well know that she would do ; and she lead I to a good honest chair ; and she sit in my lap and kiss I . 
 ' all this be not like you , John . all this be not one bit like you : and your cheek be not as they ought to be . I shall have to come home again , if the woman worry my brother so . we always hold together , John ; and we always will , you know . ' 
 ' you dear , ' I cry , ' there be nobody who understand I as you do . Lorna make too much of I , and the rest they make too little . ' 
 ' not mother ; oh , not mother , John ! ' 
 ' no , mother make too much , no doubt ; but want it all for herself alone ; and reckon it as a part of she . she make I more wroth than any one : as if not only my life , but all my head and heart must seek from her , and have no other thought or care . ' 
 be speed of my grumbling thus , and ease into well temper , I tell Annie all the strange history about Lorna and her departure , and the small chance that now remain to I of ever see my love again . to this Annie would not hearken twice , but judge woman by her faithful self , be quite vex with I for speak so . and then , to my surprise and sorrow , she would deliver no opinion as to what I ought to do until she have consult darling Tom . 
 Dear Tom know much of the world , no doubt , especially the dark side of it . but to I it scarcely seem become that my course of action with regard to the Lady Lorna Dugal should be refer to Tom Faggus , and depend upon his decision . however , I would not grieve Annie again by make light of her husband ; and so when he come in to dinner , the matter be lay before he . 
 now this man never confess himself surprised , under any circumstance ; his knowledge of life be so profound , and his charity universal . and in the present case he vow that he have suspect it all along , and could have throw light upon Lorna 's history , if we have see fit to apply to he . upon further inquiry I find that this light be a very dim one , flow only from the fact that he have stop her mother 's coach , at the village of Bolham , on the Bampton Road , the day before I see they . find only woman therein , and these in a sad condition , Tom with his usual chivalry   as he have no scent of the necklace   allow they to pass ; with nothing more than a pleasant exchange of courtesy , and a testimonial force upon he , in the shape of a bottle of burgundy wine . this the poor countess hand he ; and he twist the cork out with his tooth , and drink her health with his hat off . 
 ' a lady she be , and a true one ; and I be a pretty good judge , ' say Tom : ' ah , I do like a high lady ! ' 
 our Annie look rather queer at this , have no pretension to be one : but she conquer herself , and say , ' yes , Tom ; and many of they like you . ' 
 with this , Tom go on the brag at once , be but a shallow fellow , and not of settle principle , though steady than he use to be ; until I feel myself almost bound to fetch he back a little ; for of all thing I do hate brag the most , as any reader of this tale must by this time know . therefore I say to Squire Faggus , ' come back from your highway day . you have marry the daughter of an honest man ; and such talk be not fit for she . if you be right in rob people , I be right in rob you . I could bind you to your own mantelpiece , as you know thoroughly well , Tom ; and drive away with your own horse , and all your good behind they , but for the sense of honesty . and should I not do as fine a thing as any you do on the highway ? if everything be of public right , how do this chair belong to you ? clever as you be , Tom Faggus , you be nothing but a fool to mix your felony with your farmership . drop the one , or drop the other ; you can not maintain they both . ' 
 as I finish very sternly a speech which have exhaust I more than ten round of wrestling but I be carry away by the truth , as sometimes happen to all of we Tom have not a word to say ; albeit his mind be so much more nimble and rapid than ever mine be . he lean against the mantelpiece   a newly - invent affair in his house   as if I have cord he to it , even as I speak of do . and he lay one hand on his breast in a way which make Annie creep softly to he , and look at I not like a sister . 
 ' you have do I good , John , ' he say at last , and the hand he give I be tremble : ' there be no other man on God 's earth would have dare to speak to I as you have do . from no other would I have take it . nevertheless every word be true ; and I shall dwell on it when you be go . if you never do good in your life before , John , my brother , you have do it now . ' 
 he turn away , in bitter pain , that none might see his trouble ; and Annie , go along with he , look as if I have kill our mother . for my part , I be so upset , for fear of have go too far , that without a word to either of they , but a message on the title - page of King James his Prayer - book , I saddle kickum , and be off , and glad of the moorland air again . 




 CHAPTER LXI 

 THEREFORE he seek COMFORT 

 it be for poor Annie 's sake that I have speak my mind to her husband so freely , and even harshly . for we all know she would break her heart , if Tom take to evil way again . and the right mode of prevent this be , not to coax , and flatter , and make a hero of he   which he do for himself , quite sufficiently , but to set before he the folly of the thing , and the ruin to his own interest . they would both be vex with I , of course , for have leave they so hastily , and especially just before dinner - time ; but that would soon wear off ; and most likely they would come to see mother , and tell she that I be hard to manage , and they could feel for she about it . 
 now with a certain yearning , I know not what , for softness , and for one who could understand I for simple as a child though be , I find few to do that last , at any rate in my love - time I rely upon Kickum 's strength to take I round by Dulverton . it would make the journey some eight mile long , but what be that to a brisk young horse , even with my weight upon he ? 
 and have leave Squire Faggus and Annie much soon than have be intend , I have plenty of time before I , and too much , ere a prospect of dinner . therefore I strike to the right , across the hill , for Dulverton . 
 Pretty Ruth be in the main street of the town , with a basket in her hand , go home from the market . 
 ' why , Cousin Ruth , you be grow , I exclaim ; ' I do believe you be , Ruth . and you be almost too tall , already . ' 
 at this the little thing be so pleased , that she smile through her blush beautifully , and must need come to shake hand with I ; though I sign to she not to do it , because of my horse 's temper . but scarcely be her hand in mine , when kickum turn like an eel upon she , and catch she by the left arm with his tooth , so that she scream with agony . I see the white of his vicious eye , and strike he there with all my force , with my left hand over her right arm , and he never use that eye again ; none the less he keep his hold on she . then I smite he again on the jaw , and catch the little maid up by her right hand , and lay she on the saddle in front of I ; while the horse be giddy and stagger with blow , and foil of his spite , run backward . Ruth 's wit be go ; and she lie before I , in such a helpless and senseless way that I could have kill vile kickum . I strike the spur into he past the rowel , and away he go at full gallop ; while I have enough to do to hold on , with the little girl lie in front of I . but I call to the man who be flock around , to send up a surgeon , as quick as could be , to Master Reuben Huckaback 's . 
 the moment I bring my right arm to bear , the vicious horse have no chance with I ; and if ever a horse be well pay for spite , Kickums have his change that day . the bridle would almost have hold a whale and I draw on it so that his low jaw be well - nigh break from he ; while with both spur I tear his flank , and he learn a little lesson . there be time when a man be more vicious than any horse may vie with . therefore by the time we have reach Uncle Reuben 's house at the top of the hill , the bad horse be only too happy to stop ; every string of his body be tremble , and his head hang down with impotence . I leap from his back at once , and carry the maiden into her own sweet room . 
 now Cousin Ruth be recover softly from her fright and faintness ; and the volley of the wind from gallop so have make her little ear quite pink , and shake her lock all round she . but any one who might wish to see a comely sight and a move one , need only have look at Ruth Huckaback , when she learn   and imagine yet more than it be   the manner of her little ride with I . her hair be of a hazel - brown , and full of wave readiness ; and with no concealment of the trick , she spread it over her eye and face . be so delighted with she , and so glad to see she safe , I kiss she through the thick of it , as a cousin have a right to do ; yea , and ought to do , with gravity . 
 ' darling , ' I say ; ' he have bite you dreadfully : show I your poor arm , dear . ' 
 she pull up her sleeve in the simple manner , rather to look at it herself , than to show I where the wound be . her sleeve be of dark blue Taunton staple ; and her white arm shine , come out of it , as round and plump and velvety , as a stalk of asparagus , newly fetch out of the ground . but above the curved soft elbow , where no room be for one cross word   accord to our proverb ,   three sad gash , edge with crimson , spoil the flow of the pearly flesh . my presence of mind be lose altogether ; and I raise the poor sore arm to my lip , both to stop the bleeding and to take the venom out , have hear how wise it be , and think of my mother . but Ruth , to my great amazement , draw away from I in bitter haste , as if I have be insert instead of extract poison . for the bite of a horse be most venomous ; especially when he shed his tooth ; and far more to be fear than the bite of a dog , or even of a cat . and in my haste I have forget that Ruth might not know a word about this , and might doubt about my meaning , and the warmth of my osculation . but know her danger , I durst not hee her childishness , or her feeling . 
    a maid with an elbow sharp , or knee , 
  Hath cross word two , out of every three . 
 ' do not   be a fool , Cousin Ruth , ' I say , catch she so that she could not move ; ' the poison be soak into you . do you think that I do it for pleasure ? ' 
 the spread of shame on her face be such , when she see her own misunderstanding , that I be ashamed to look at she ; and occupy myself with draw all the risk of glander forth from the white limb , hang helpless now , and leave entirely to my will . before I be quite sure of have wholly exhausted suction , and when I have make the hole in her arm look like the gill of a lamprey , in come the doctor , partly drunk , and in haste to get through his business . 
 ' ha , ha ! I see , ' he cry ; ' bite of a horse , they tell I . very poisonous ; must be burn away . Sally , the iron in the fire . if you have a fire , this weather . ' 
 ' crave your pardon , good sir , ' I say ; for poor little Ruth be faint again at his savage order : ' but my cousin 's arm shall not be burn ; it be a great deal too pretty , and I have suck all the poison out . look , sir , how clean and fresh it be . ' 
 ' bless my heart ! and so it be ! no need at all for cauterising . the epidermis will close over , and the cutis and the pelli . John Ridd , you ought to have study medicine , with your heal power . half my virtue lie in touch . a clean and wholesome body , sir ; I have teach you the latin grammar . I leave you in excellent hand , my dear , and they wait for I at shovel - board . bread and water poultice cold , to be renew , tribus horis . John Ridd , I be at school with you , and you beat I very lamentably , when I try to fight with you . you remember I not ? it be likely enough : I be force to take strong water , John , from infirmity of the liver . attend to my direction ; and I will call again in the morning . ' 
 and in that melancholy plight , care nothing for business , go one of the clever fellow ever know at Tiverton . he could write Latin verses a great deal fast than I could ever write english prose , and nothing seem too great for he . we think that he would go to Oxford and astonish every one , and write in the style of Buchanan ; but he fall all abroad very lamentably ; and now , when I meet he again , be come down to push - pin and shovel - board , with a wager of spirit pende . 
 when Master Huckaback come home , he look at I very sulkily ; not only because of my refusal to become a slave to the gold - digging , but also because he regard I as the cause of a savage broil between Simon Carfax and the man who have cheat he as to his Gwenny . however , when Uncle Ben see Ruth , and know what have befall she , and she with tear in her eye declare that she owe her life to Cousin Ridd , the old man become very gracious to I ; for if he love any one on earth , it be his little granddaughter . 
 I could not stay very long , because , my horse be quite unfit to travel from the injury which his violence and vice have bring upon he , there be nothing for I but to go on foot , as none of Uncle Ben 's horse could take I to Plover 's barrow , without downright cruelty : and though there would be a harvest - moon , Ruth agree with I that I must not keep my mother wait , with no idea where I might be , until a late hour of the night . I tell Ruth all about our Annie , and her noble furniture ; and the little maid be very lively   although her wound be pain she so , that half her laughter come ' on the wrong side of her mouth , ' as we rather coarsely express it ; especially she laugh about Annie 's new - fangle closet for clothe , or standing - press , as she call it . this have frighten I so that I would not come without my stick to look at it ; for the front be inlay with two fiery dragon , and a glass which distort everything , make even Annie look hideous ; and when it be open , a woman 's skeleton , all in white , reveal itself , in the midst of three stand woman . ' it be only to keep my good frock in shape , ' Annie have explain to I ; ' hang they up do ruin they so . but I own that I be afraid of it , John , until I have get all my good clothe there , and then I become very fond of it . but even now it frighten I sometimes in the moonlight . ' 
 have make poor Ruth a little cheerful , with a full account of all Annie 's frock , material , pattern , and fashion   of which I have take a list for my mother , and for Lizzie , lest they should cry out at man 's stupidity about anything of real interest , I proceed to tell she about my own trouble , and the sudden departure of Lorna ; conclude with all the show of indifference which my pride could muster , that now I never should see she again , and must do my good to forget she , as be so far above I . I have not intend to speak of this , but Ruth 's face be so kind and earnest , that I could not stop myself . 
 ' you must not talk like that , Cousin Ridd , ' she say , in a low and gentle tone , and turn away her eye from I ; ' no lady can be above a man , who be pure , and brave , and gentle . and if her heart be worth have , she will never let you give she up , for her grandeur , and her nobility . ' 
 she pronounce those last few word , as I think , with a little bitterness , unperceive by herself perhaps , for it be not in her appearance . but I , attach great importance to a maiden 's opinion about a maiden   because she might judge from experience , would have lead she far into that subject . but she decline to follow , have now no more to say in a matter so removed from she . then I ask her full and straight , and look at she in such a manner that she could not look away , without appear vanquish by feeling of her own which thing be very vile of I ; but all man be so selfish , 
 ' dear cousin , tell I , once for all , what be your advice to I ? ' 
 ' my advice to you , ' she answer bravely , with her dark eye full of pride , and instead of flinch , foil I , ' be to do what every man must do , if he would win fair maiden . since she can not send you token , neither be free to return to you , follow she , pay your court to she ; show that you will not be forget ; and perhaps she will look down I mean , she will relent to you . ' 
 ' she have nothing to relent about . I have never vex nor injure she . my thought have never stray from she . there be no one to compare with she . ' 
 ' then keep she in that same mind about you . see now , I can advise no more . my arm be swell painfully , in spite of all your goodness , and bitter task of surgeonship . I shall have another poultice on , and go to bed , I think , Cousin Ridd , if you will not hold I ungrateful . I be so sorry for your long walk . surely it might be avoid . give my love to dear Lizzie : oh , the room be go round so . ' 
 and she faint into the arm of Sally , who be come just in time to fetch she : no doubt she have be suffer agony all the time she talk to I . leave word that I would come again to inquire for she , and fetch Kickums home , so soon as the harvest permit I , I give direction about the horse , and stride away from the ancient town , be soon upon the moorland . 
 now , through the whole of that long walk the latter part of which be lead by starlight , till the moon arise I dwelt , in my young and foolish way , upon the ordering of our step by a power beyond we . but as I could not bring my mind to any clearness upon this matter , and the star shed no light upon it , but rather confuse I with wonder how their Lord could attend to they all , and yet to a puny fool like I , it come to pass that my thought on the subject be not worth ink , if I know they . 
 but it be perhaps worth ink to relate , so far as I can do so , mother 's delight at my return , when she have almost abandon hope , and conclude that I be go to London , in disgust at her behaviour . and now she be look up the lane , at the rise of the harvest - moon , in despair , as she say afterwards . but if she have despair in truth , what use to look at all ? yet accord to the epigram make by a good Blundellite , 
 despair be never yet so deep in sink as in seem ; despair be hope just drop asleep for well chance of dream . 
 and mother 's dream be a happy one , when she know my step at a furlong distant ; for the night be of those that carry sound thrice as far as day can . she recover herself , when she be sure , and even make up her mind to scold I , and feel as if she could do it . but when she be in my arm , into which she throw herself , and I by the light of the moon descry the silver gleam on one side of her head   now spread since Annie 's departure , bless my heart and yours therewith , no room be leave for scold . she hug I , and she cling to I ; and I look at she , with duty make tenfold , and discharge by love . we say nothing to one another ; but all be right between we . 
 even Lizzie behave very well , so far as her nature admit ; not even say a nasty thing all the time she be get my supper ready , with a weak imitation of Annie . she know that the gift of cooking be not vouchsafe by God to she ; but sometimes she would do she good , by intellect to win it . whereas it be no more to be win by intellect than be divine poetry . an amount of strong quick heart be needful , and the understanding must second it , in the one art as in the other . now my fare be very choice for the next three day or more ; yet not turn out like Annie 's . they could do a thing well enough on the fire ; but they could not put it on table so ; nor even have plate all pip hot . this be Annie 's special gift ; bear in she , and ready to cool with she ; like a plate bear away from the fireplace . I sigh sometimes about Lorna , and they think it be about the plate . and mother would stand and look at I , as much as to say , ' no please he ' ; and Lizzie would jerk up one shoulder , and cry , ' he have well have Lorna to cook for he ' ; while the whole truth be that I want not to be plague about any cookery ; but just to have something good and quiet , and then smoke and think about Lorna . 
 nevertheless the time go on , with one change and another ; and we gather all our harvest in ; and Parson Bowden thank God for it , both in church and out of it ; for his tithe would be very goodly . the unmatched cold of the previous winter , and general fear of scarcity , and our own talk about our ruin , have send price up to a grand high pitch ; and we do our good to keep they there . for nine englishman out of every ten believe that a bitter winter must breed a sour summer , and explain away topmost price . while accord to my experience , more often it would be otherwise , except for the public thinking so . however , I have say too much ; and if any farmer read my book , he will vow that I write it for nothing else except to rob his family . 




 CHAPTER LXII 

 the king must not be prayed for 

 all our neighbourhood be surprised that the Doones have not ere now attack , and probably make an end of we . for we lay almost at their mercy now , have only Sergeant Bloxham , and three man , to protect we , Captain Stickles have be order southward with all his force ; except such as might be needful for collect toll , and watch the import at Lynmouth , and thence to Porlock . the Sergeant , have now imbibe a taste for writing report   though his first great effort have do he no good , and only offend Stickles , report weekly from Plover 's barrow , whenever he could find a messenger . and though we feed not Sergeant Bloxham at our own table , with the good we have   as in the case of Stickles , who represent his Majesty , yet we treat he so well , that he report very highly of we , as loyal and true - hearted liege , and most devoted to our lord the King . and indeed he could scarcely have do less , when Lizzie write great part of his report , and furbish up the rest to such a pitch of lustre , that Lord Clarendon himself need scarce have be ashamed of they . and though this cost a great deal of ale , and even of strong water   for Lizzie would have it the duty of a critic to stand treat to the author , and though it be otherwise a plague , as give the maid such air of patronage , and such pretence to politic ; yet there be no stop it , without the risk of mortal offence to both writer and reviewer . our mother also , while disapprove Lizzie 's long stay in the saddle - room on a Friday night and a Saturday , and insist that Betty should be there , be nevertheless as proud as need be , that the King should read our Eliza ' s writing at least so the innocent soul believe and we all look forward to something great as the fruit of all this history . and something great do come of it , though not as we expect ; for these report , or as many of they as be ever open , stand we in good stead the next year , when we be accuse of harbouring and comfort guilty rebel . 
 now the reason why the Doones do not attack we be that they be prepare to meet another and more powerful assault upon their fortress ; be assure that their repulse of King 's troop could not be look over when bring before the authority . and no doubt they be right ; for although the conflict in the Government during that summer and autumn have delay the matter yet positive order have be issue that these outlaws and malefactor should at any price be bring to justice ; when the sudden death of King Charles the Second throw all thing into confusion , and all mind into a panic . 
 we hear of it first in church , on Sunday , the eighth day of February , 1684 - 5 , from a cousin of John Fry , who have ride over on purpose from Porlock . he come in just before the anthem , splash and heat from his ride , so that every one turn and look at he . he want to create a stir   know how much would be make of he , and he take the good way to do it . for he let the anthem go by very quietly or rather I should say very pleasingly , for our choir be exceed proud of itself , and I sing bass twice as loud as a bull , to beat the clerk with the clarionet and then just as Parson Bowden , with a look of pride at his minstrel , be kneel down to begin the prayer for the King 's Most excellent Majesty   for he never read the litany , except upon Easter Sunday , up jump young Sam Fry , and shout , 
 ' I forbid that there prai - er . ' 
 ' what ! ' cry the parson , rise slowly , and look for some one to shut the door : ' have we a rebel in the congregation ? ' for the parson be grow short - sighted now , and know not Sam Fry at that distance . 
 ' no , ' reply Sam , not a whit abash by the staring of all the parish ; ' no rebel , parson ; but a man who mislaiketh popery and murder . that there prai - er be a prai - er for the dead . ' 
 ' Nay , ' cry the parson , now recognise and know he to be our John 's first cousin , ' you do not mean to say , Sam , that his gracious Majesty be dead ! ' 
 ' dead as a sto - un : poison by they Papishers . ' and Sam rub his hand with enjoyment , at the effect he have produce . 
 ' remember where you be , Sam , ' say Parson Bowden solemnly ; ' when do this most sad thing happen ? the King be the head of the Church , Sam Fry ; when do he leave she ? ' 
 ' day afore yesterday . twelve o'clock . Warn't   we quick to hear of ' un ? ' 
 ' can not   be , ' say the minister : ' the tiding can never have come so soon . anyhow , he will want it all the more . let we pray for his gracious Majesty . ' 
 and with that he proceed as usual ; but nobody cry ' amen , ' for fear of be entangle with Popery . but after give forth his text , our parson say a few word out of book , about the many virtue of his Majesty , and self - denial , and devotion , compare his pious mirth to the dancing of the patriarch David before the ark of the covenant ; and he add , with some severity , that if his flock would not join their pastor   who be much more likely to judge aright   in pray for the King , the least they could do on return home be to pray that the King might not be dead , as his enemy have assert . 
 now when the service be over , we kill the king , and we bring he to life , at least fifty time in the churchyard : and Sam Fry be mount on a high gravestone , to tell every one all he know of it . but he know no more than he have tell we in the church , as before repeat : upon which we be much disappointed with he , and incline to disbelieve he ; until he happily remember that his Majesty have die in great pain , with blue spot on his breast and black spot all across his back , and these in the form of a cross , by reason of Papists have poison he . when Sam call this to his remembrance   or to his imagination   he be overwhelm , at once , with so many invitation to dinner , that he scarce know which of they to accept ; but decide in our favour . 
 grieve much for the loss of the king , however greatly it might be   as the parson have declare it be , while tell we to pray against it   for the royal benefit , I resolve to ride to Porlock myself , directly after dinner , and make sure whether he be dead , or not . for it be not by any mean hard to suppose that Sam Fry , be John 's first cousin , might have inherit either from grandfather or grandmother some of those gift which have make our John so famous for mendacity . at Porlock I find that it be too true ; and the woman of the town be in great distress , for the King have always be popular with they : the man , on the other hand , be forecast what would be likely to ensue . 
 and I myself be of this number , rid sadly home again ; although bind to the King as churchwarden now ; which dignity , next to the parson 's in rank , be with we   as it ought to be in every good parish   hereditary . for who can stick to the church like the man whose father stick to it before he ; and who know all the little in , and great out , which must in these troublous time come across ? 
 but though appoint at last , by virtue of be good farmer in the parish   as well as by vice of mismanagement on the part of my mother , and Nicholas Snowe , who have thoroughly muxe up everything , be too quick - headed ; yet , while I dwell with pride upon the fact that I stand in the King 's shoe , as the manager and promoter of the Church of England , and I know that we must miss his Majesty   whose arm be above the Commandments , as the leader of our thought in church , and handsome upon a guinea ; nevertheless I keep on think how his death would act on I . 
 and here I see it , many way . in the first place , trouble must break out ; and we have eight - and - twenty rick ; count grain , and straw , and hay . moreover , mother be grow weak about riot , and shooting , and burn ; and she gather the bed - clothe around her ear every night , when her foot be tuck up ; and pray not to awake until morning . in the next place , much rebellion   though we would not own it ; in either sense of the verb , to ' own '   be whispering , and pluck skirt , and make sign , among we . and the terror of the Doones help greatly ; as a fruitful tree of lawlessness , and a good excuse for everybody . and after this or rather before it , and first of all indeed   if I must state the true order   arise upon I the thought of Lorna , and how these thing would affect her fate . 
 and indeed I must admit that it have occur to I sometimes , or be suggest by other , that the Lady Lorna have not behave altogether kindly , since her departure from among we . for although in those day the post   as we call the service of letter - carrying , which now come within twenty mile of we   do not extend to our part of the world , yet it might have be possible to procure for hire a man who would ride post , if Lorna fear to trust the pack - horse , or the trooper , who go to and fro . yet no message whatever have reach we ; neither any token even of her safety in London . as to this last , however , we have no misgiving , have learn from the orderly , more than once , that the wealth , and beauty , and adventure of young Lady Lorna Dugal be greatly talk of , both at court and among the common people . 
 now rid sadly homeward , in the sunset of the early spring , I be more than ever touch with sorrow , and a sense of be , as it be , abandon . and the weather grow quite beautiful , and so mild that the tree be bud , and the cattle full of happiness , I could not but think of the difference between the world of to - day and the world of this day twelvemonth . then all be howl desolation , all the earth block up with snow , and all the air with barb of ice as small as splintered needle , yet glitter , in and out , like star , and gather so upon a man   if long he stay among they   that they begin to weigh he down to sleepiness and frozen death . not a sign of life be move , nor be any change of view ; unless the wild wind strike the crest of some cold drift , and bow it . 
 now , on the other hand , all be good . the open palm of spring be lay upon the yielding of the hill ; and each particular valley seem to be the glove for a finger . and although the sun be low , and dip in the western cloud , the gray light of the sea come up , and take , and taking , tell the special tone of everything . all this lie upon my heart , without a word of thinking , spread light and shadow there , and the soft delight of sadness . nevertheless , I would it be the savage snow around I , and the piping of the restless wind , and the death of everything . for in those day I have Lorna . 
 then I think of promise fair ; such as glow around I , where the red rock hold the sun , when he be depart ; and the distant crag endeavour to retain his memory . but as evening spread across they , shade with a silent fold , all the colour steal away ; all remembrance wan and die . 
 ' so it have be with love , ' I think , ' and with simple truth and warmth . the maid have choose the glitter star , instead of the plain daylight . ' 
 nevertheless I would not give in , although in deep despondency   especially when I pass the place where my dear father have fight in vain , and I try to see thing right and then judge aright about they . this , however , be more easy to attempt than to achieve ; and by the time I come down the hill , I be none the wiser . only I could tell my mother that the King be dead for sure ; and she would have try to cry , but for thought of her mourning . 
 there be not a moment for lament . all the mourning must be ready   if we care to beat the Snowes   in eight - and - forty hour : and , although it be Sunday night , mother now feel sure of the thing , sit up with Lizzie , cut pattern , and stitch thing on brown paper , and snipping , and lay the fashion down , and request all opinion , yet when give , scorn they ; insomuch that I grow weary even of tobacco   which have comfort I since Lorna , and pray she to go on until the King should be alive again . 
 the thought of that so flurry she for she never yet could see a joke that she lay her scissor on the table and say , ' the Lord forbid , John ! after what I have cut up ! ' 
 ' it would be just like he , ' I answer , with a know smile : ' mother , you have well stop . pattern may do very well ; but do not   cut up any more good stuff . ' 
 ' well , good lack , I be a fool ! three table peg with needle ! the Lord in his mercy keep his Majesty , if ever he hath get he ! ' 
 by this device we go to bed ; and not another stitch be strike until the trooper have office - tiding that the King be truly dead . hence the snowe beat we by a day ; and both old Betty and Lizzie lay the blame upon I , as usual . 
 almost before we have put off the mourning , which as loyal subject we keep for the King three month and a week ; rumour of disturbance , of plotting , and of outbreak begin to stir among we . we hear of fighting in Scotland , and buying of ship on the continent , and of arm in Dorset and Somerset ; and we keep our beacon in readiness to give signal of a landing ; or rather the soldier do . for we , have trustworthy report that the King have be to high mass himself in the Abbey of Westminster , make all the bishop go with he , and all the guard in London , and then torture all the Protestants who dare to wait outside , moreover have receive from the Pope a flower grow in the Virgin Mary 's garden , and warrant to last for ever , we of the moderate party , hear all this and ten time as much , and have no love for this sour James , such as we have for the lively Charles , be ready to wait for what might happen , rather than care about stop it . therefore we listen to rumour gladly , and shake our head with gravity , and predict , every man something , but scarce any two the same . nevertheless , in our part , thing go on as usual , until the middle of June be nigh . we plough the ground , and sow the corn , and tend the cattle , and heed every one his neighbour 's business , as carefully as heretofore ; and the only thing that move we much be that Annie have a baby . this be a very fine child with blue eye , and christen ' John ' in compliment to I , and with I for his godfather , it be natural to suppose that I think a good deal about he ; and when mother or Lizzie would ask I , all of a sudden , and treacherously , when the fire flare up at supper - time   for we always keep a little wood just alight in summer - time , and enough to make the pot boil , then when they would say to I , ' John , what be you think of ? at a word , speak ! ' I would always answer , ' little John Faggus ' ; and so they make no more of I . 
 but when I be down , on Saturday the thirteenth of June , at the blacksmith 's forge by Brendon town , where the Lynn - stream run so close that he dip his horseshoe in it , and where the news be apt to come first of all to our neighbourhood   except upon a Sunday , while we be talk of the hay - crop , and of a great sheep - stealer , round the corner come a man upon a piebald horse look flagged and weary . but see half a dozen of we , young , and brisk , and hearty , he make a flourish with his horse , and wave a blue flag vehemently , shout with great glory , 
 ' Monmouth and the protestant faith ! Monmouth and no Popery ! Monmouth , the good King 's eld son ! down with the poisoning murderer ! down with the black usurper , and to the devil with all papist ! ' 
 ' why so , thou little varlet ? ' I ask very quietly ; for the man be too small to quarrel with : yet know Lorna to be a ' papist , ' as we choose to call they though they might as well call we ' kingist , ' after the head of our Church I think that this scurvy scampish knave might show they the way to the place he mention , unless his courage fail he . 
 ' Papist yourself , be you ? ' say the fellow , not dare to answer much : ' then take this , and read it . ' 
 and he hand I a long rigmarole , which he call a ' Declaration ' : I see that it be but a heap of lie , and thrust it into the blacksmith 's fire , and blow the bellow thrice at it . no one dare attempt to stop I , for my mood have not be sweet of late ; and of course they know my strength . 
 the man ride on with a mutter noise , have win no recruit from we , by force of my example : and he stop at the ale - house far down , where the road go away from the Lynn - stream . some of we go thither after a time , when our horse be shodden and rasp , for although we might not like the man , we might be glad of his tiding , which seem to be something wonderful . he have set up his blue flag in the tap - room , and be teach every one . 
 ' here coom'th Maister Jan Ridd , ' say the landlady , be well pleased with the call for beer and cider : ' her hath be to lunnon - town , and live within a maile of I . arl the news coom from they nowadays , instead of from here , as she ought to do . if Jan Ridd say it be true , I will try almost to belave it . hath the good Duke land , sir ? ' and she look at I over a foaming cup , and blow the froth off , and put more in . 
 ' I have no doubt it be true enough , ' I answer , before drinking ; ' and too true , Mistress Pugsley . many a poor man will die ; but none shall die from our parish , nor from Brendon , if I can help it . ' 
 and I know that I could help it ; for every one in those little place would abide by my advice ; not only from the fame of my schooling and long sojourn in London , but also because I have earn repute for be very ' slow and sure ' : and with nine people out of ten this be the very good recommendation . for they think themselves much before you in wit , and under no obligation , but rather confer a favour , by do the thing that you do . hence , if I care for influence which mean , for the most part , make people do one 's will , without know it my first step toward it would be to be call , in common parlance , ' slow but sure . ' 
 for the next fortnight we be daily trouble with conflict rumour , each man relate what he desire , rather than what he have right , to believe . we be tell that the Duke have be proclaim King of England in every town of Dorset and of Somerset ; that he have win a great battle at Axminster , and another at Bridport , and another somewhere else ; that all the western county have rise as one man for he , and all the militia have join his rank ; that Taunton , and Bridgwater , and Bristowe , be all mad with delight , the two former be in his hand , and the latter craving to be so . and then , on the other hand , we hear that the Duke have be vanquish , and put to flight , and upon be apprehend , have confess himself an impostor and a papist as bad as the King be . 
 we long for Colonel Stickles   as he always become in time of war , though he fall back to Captain , and even Lieutenant , directly the fight be over , for then we should have win trusty news , as well as good consideration . but even Sergeant Bloxham , much against his will , be go , have leave his heart with our Lizzie , and a collection of all his writing . all the soldier have be order away at full speed for Exeter , to join the Duke of Albemarle , or if he be go , to follow he . as for we , who have feed they so long   although not quite for nothing , we must take our chance of Doones , or any other enemy . 
 now all these tiding move I a little ; not enough to spoil appetite , but enough to make thing lively , and to teach I that look of wisdom which be breed of practice only , and the hearing of many lie . therefore I withhold my judgment , fear to be triumph over , if it should happen to miss the mark . but mother and Lizzie , ten time in a day , predict all they could imagine ; and their prophecy increase in strength accord to contradiction . yet this be not in the proper style for a house like our , which know the news , or at least have know it ; and still be famous , all around , for the last advice . even from Lynmouth , people send up to Plover 's barrow to ask how thing be go on : and it be very grievous to answer that in truth we know not , neither have hear for day and day ; and our reputation be so great , especially since the death of the King have go abroad from Oare parish , that many inquirer would only wink , and lie a finger on the lip , as if to say , ' you know well enough , but see not fit to tell I . ' and before the end arrive , those people believe that they have be right all along , and that we have conceal the truth from they . 
 for I myself become involved   God know how much against my will and my proper judgment   in the trouble , and the conflict , and the cruel work come afterwards . if ever I have make up my mind to anything in all my life , it be at this particular time , and as stern and strong as could be . I have resolve to let thing pass , to hear about they gladly , to encourage all my friend to talk , and myself to express opinion upon each particular point , when in the fullness of time no further doubt could be . but all my policy go for nothing , through a few touch of feeling . 
 one day at the beginning of July , I come home from mow about noon , or a little later , to fetch some cider for all of we , and to eat a morsel of bacon . for mow be no joke that year , the summer be wonderfully wet   even for our wet country , and the swathe fall heavy over the scythe than ever I could remember it . we be drench with rain almost every day ; but the mowing must be do somehow ; and we must trust to God for the haymaking . 
 in the courtyard I see a little cart , with iron brake underneath it , such as fastidious people use to deaden the jolting of the road ; but few man under a lord or baronet would be so particular . therefore I wonder who our noble visitor could be . but when I enter the kitchen - place , brush up my hair for somebody , behold it be no one great than our Annie , with my godson in her arm , and look pale and tear - begone . and at first she could not speak to I . but presently have sit down a little , and receive much praise for her baby , she smile and blush , and find her tongue as if she have never go from we . 
 ' how natural it all look again ! oh , I love this old kitchen so ! baby dear , only look at it wid he pitty , pitty eye , and he tongue out of his mousy ! but who put the flour - riddle up there . and look at the pestle and mortar , and rust I declare in the patty pan ! and a book , positively a dirty book , where the clean skewer ought to hang ! oh , Lizzie , Lizzie , Lizzie ! ' 
 ' you may just as well cease lamenting , ' I say , ' for you can not   alter Lizzie 's nature , and you will only make mother uncomfortable , and perhaps have a quarrel with Lizzie , who be proud as Punch of her housekeeping . ' 
 ' she , ' cry Annie , with all the contempt that could be compress in a syllable . ' well , John , no doubt you be right about it . I will try not to notice thing . but it be a hard thing , after all my care , to see everything go to ruin . but what can be expect of a girl who know all the king of carthage ? ' 
 ' there be no king of Carthage , Annie . they be call , why let I see they be call oh , something else . ' 
 ' never mind what they be call , ' say Annie ; ' will they cook our dinner for we ? but now , John , I be in such trouble . all this talk be make - believe . ' 
 ' do not   you cry , my dear : do not   cry , my darling sister , ' I answer , as she drop into the worn place of the settle , and bent above her infant , rock as if both their heart be one : ' do not   you know , Annie , I can not tell , but I know , or at least I mean , I have hear the man of experience say , it be so bad for the baby . ' 
 ' perhaps I know that as well as you do , John , ' say Annie , look up at I with a gleam of her old laughing : ' but how can I help cry ; I be in such trouble . ' 
 ' tell I what it be , my dear . any grief of yours will vex I greatly ; but I will try to bear it . ' 
 ' then , John , it be just this . Tom have go off with the rebel ; and you must , oh , you must go after he . ' 




 CHAPTER LXIII 

 JOHN be worst by the WOMEN 

 move as I be by Annie 's tear , and gentle style of coax , and most of all by my love for she , I yet declare that I could not go , and leave our house and homestead , far less my dear mother and Lizzie , at the mercy of the merciless Doones . 
 ' be that all your objection , John ? ' ask Annie , in her quick pant way : ' would you go but for that , John ? ' 
 ' now , ' I say , ' be in no such hurry ' for while I be gradually yield , I like to pass it through my finger , as if my finger shape it : ' there be many thing to be think about , and many way of view it . ' 
 ' oh , you never can have love Lorna ! no wonder you give she up so ! John , you can love nobody , but your oat - rick , and your hay - rick . ' 
 ' sister mine , because I rant not , neither rave of what I feel , can you be so shallow as to dream that I feel nothing ? what be your love for Tom Faggus ? what be your love for your baby   pretty darling as he be   to compare with such a love as for ever dwell with I ? because I do not prate of it ; because it be beyond I , not only to express , but even form to my own heart in thought ; because I do not shape my face , and would scorn to play to it , as a thing of acting , and lie it out before you , be you fool enough to think ' but here I stop , have say more than be usual with I . 
 ' I be very sorry , John . Dear John , I be so sorry . what a shallow fool I be ! ' 
 ' I will go seek your husband , ' I say , to change the subject , for even to Annie I would not lay open all my heart about Lorna : ' but only upon condition that you ensure this house and people from the Doones meanwhile . even for the sake of Tom , I can not leave all helpless . the oat - rick and the hay - rick , which be my only love , they be welcome to make cinder of . but I will not have mother treat so ; nor even little Lizzie , although you scorn your sister so . ' 
 ' oh , John , I do think you be the hard , as well as the softest of all the man I know . not even a woman 's bitter word but what you pay she out for . will you never understand that we be not like you , John ? we say all sort of spiteful thing , without a bit of meaning . John , for God 's sake fetch Tom home ; and then revile I as you please , and I will kneel and thank you . ' 
 ' I will not promise to fetch he home , ' I answer , be ashamed of myself for have lose command so : ' but I will promise to do my good , if we can only hit on a plan for leave mother harmless . ' 
 Annie think for a little while , try to gather her smooth clear brow into maternal wrinkle , and then she look at her child , and say , ' I will risk it , for daddy 's sake , darling ; you precious soul , for daddy 's sake . ' I ask she what she be go to risk . she would not tell I ; but take upper hand , and see to my cider - can and bacon , and go from corner to cupboard , exactly as if she have never be marry ; only without an apron on . and then she say , ' now to your mower , John ; and make the most of this fine afternoon ; kiss your godson before you go . ' and I , be use to obey she , in little thing of that sort , kiss the baby , and take my can , and go back to my scythe again . 
 by the time I come home it be dark night , and pour again with a foggy rain , such as we have in July , even more than in January . be soak all through , and through , and with water quelche in my boot , like a pump with a bad bucket , I be only too glad to find Annie 's bright face , and quick figure , flit in and out the firelight , instead of Lizzie sit grandly , with a feast of literature , and not a drop of gravy . mother be in the corner also , with her cheery - colour ribbon glisten very nice by candle - light , look at Annie now and then , with memory of her babyhood ; and then at she have a baby : yet half afraid of praise she much , for fear of that young Lizzie . but Lizzie show no jealousy : she truly love our Annie   now that she be go from we , and she want to know all sort of thing , and she adore the baby . therefore Annie be allow to attend to I , as she use to do . 
 ' now , John , you must start the first thing in the morning , ' she say , when the other have leave the room , but somehow she stick to the baby , ' to fetch I back my rebel , accord to your promise . ' 
 ' not so , ' I reply , mislike the job , ' all I promise be to go , if this house be assure against any onslaught of the Doones . ' 
 ' just so ; and here be that assurance . ' with these word she draw forth a paper , and lay it on my knee with triumph , enjoy my amazement . this , as you may suppose be great ; not only at the document , but also at her possession of it . for in truth it be no less than a formal undertaking , on the part of the Doones , not to attack Plover 's Barrows farm , or mol any of the inmate , or carry off any chattel , during the absence of John Ridd upon a special errand . this document be sign not only by the Counsellor , but by many other Doones : whether Carver 's name be there , I could not say for certain ; as of course he would not sign it under his name of ' Carver , ' and I have never hear Lorna say to what   if any   he have be baptize . 
 in the face of such a deed as this , I could no long refuse to go ; and have receive my promise , Annie tell I   as be only fair   how she have procure that paper . it be both a clever and courageous act ; and would have seem to I , at first sight , far beyond Annie 's power . but none may gauge a woman 's power , when her love and faith be move . 
 the first thing Annie have do be this : she make herself look ugly . this be not an easy thing ; but she have learn a great deal from her husband , upon the subject of disguise . it hurt her feeling not a little to make so sad a fright of herself ; but what could it matter ? if she lose Tom , she must be a far great fright in earnest , than now she be in seem . and then she leave her child asleep , under Betty Muxworthy 's tendance for Betty take to that child , as if there never have be a child before and away she go in her own ' spring - cart '   as the name of that engine prove to be , without a word to any one , except the old man who have drive she from Molland parish that morning , and who coolly take one of our good horse , without ' by your leave ' to any one . 
 Annie make the old man drive she within easy reach of the Doone - gate , whose position she know well enough , from all our talk about it . and there she bid the old man stay , until she should return to he . then with she comely figure hide by a dirty old woman 's cloak , and her fair young face deface by patch and by liniment , so that none might covet she , she address the young man at the gate in a cracked and tremble voice ; and they be scarcely civil to the ' old hag , ' as they call she . she say that she bear important tiding for Sir Counsellor himself , and must be conduct to he . to he accordingly she be lead , without even any hoodwinking , for she have spectacle over her eye , and make believe not to see ten yard . 
 she find Sir Counsellor at home , and when the rest be out of sight , throw off all disguise to he , flash forth as a lovely young woman , from all her wrap and disfigurement . she fling her patch on the floor , amid the old man 's laughter , and let she tuck - up hair come down ; and then go up and kiss he . 
 ' worthy and reverend Counsellor , I have a favour to ask , ' she begin . 
 ' so I should think from your proceeding , ' the old man interrupt ' ah , if I be half my age ' 
 ' if you be , I would not sue so . but most excellent Counsellor , you owe I some amend , you know , for the way in which you rob I . ' 
 ' beyond a doubt I do , my dear . you have put it rather strongly ; and it might offend some people . nevertheless I own my debt , have so fair a creditor . ' 
 ' and do you remember how you sleep , and how much we make of you , and would have see you home , sir ; only you do not wish it ? ' 
 ' and for excellent reason , child . my good escort be in my cloak , after we make the cream to rise . ha , ha ! the unholy spell . my pretty child , have it injure you ? ' 
 ' yes , I fear it have , say Annie ; ' or whence can all my ill luck come ? ' and here she show some sign of cry , know that Counsellor hat it . 
 ' you shall not have ill luck , my dear . I have hear all about your marriage to a very noble highwayman . ah , you make a mistake in that ; you be worthy of a Doone , my child ; your frying be a blessing mean for those who can appreciate . ' 
 ' my husband can appreciate , ' she answer very proudly ; ' but what I wish to know be this , will you try to help I ? ' 
 the Counsellor answer that he would do so , if her need be moderate ; whereupon she open her meaning to he , and tell of all her anxiety . consider that Lorna be go , and her necklace in his possession , and that I   against whom alone of we the Doones could bear any malice   would be out of the way all the while , the old man readily undertake that our house should not be assault , nor our property molest , until my return . and to the promptitude of his pledge , two thing perhaps contribute , namely , that he know not how we be strip of all defender , and that some of his own force be away in the rebel camp . for   as I learn thereafter   the Doones be now in direct feud with the present Government , and sure to be crush if that prevail , have resolve to drop all religious question , and cast in their lot with Monmouth . and the turbulent youth , be long restrain from their wonte outlet for vehemence , by the trooper in the neighbourhood , be only too glad to rush forth upon any promise of blow and excitement . 
 however , Annie know little of this , but take the Counsellor 's pledge as a mark of especial favour in her behalf   which it may have be to some extent , and thank he for it most heartily , and feel that he have earn the necklace ; while he , like an ancient gentleman , disclaim all obligation , and send she under an escort safe to her own cart again . but Annie , repasse the sentinel , with her youth restore and bloom with the flush of triumph , go up to they very gravely , and say , ' the old hag wish you good - evening , gentleman ' ; and so make her good curtsey . 
 now , look at it as I would , there be no excuse leave for I , after the promise give . Dear Annie have not only cheat the Doones , but also have get the good of I , by a pledge to a thing impossible . and I bitterly say , ' I be not like Lorna : a pledge once give , I keep it . ' 
 ' I will not have a word against Lorna , ' cry Annie ; ' I will answer for her truth as surely as I would for my own or your , John . ' and with that she vanquish I . 
 but when my poor mother hear that I be commit , by word of honour , to a wild - goose chase , among the rebel , after that runagate Tom Faggus , she simply star , and would not believe it . for lately I have joke with she , in a little style of jerk , as people do when out of sort ; and she , not understand this , and know joke to be out of my power , would only look , and sigh , and toss , and hope that I mean nothing . at last , however , we convince she that I be in earnest , and must be off in the early morning , and leave John Fry with the hay crop . 
 then mother be ready to fall upon Annie , as not content with disgrace we , by wed a man of new honesty   if indeed of any , but lay trap to catch her brother , and entangle he perhaps to his death , for the sake of a worthless fellow ; and ' felon ' she be go to say , as by the shape of her lip I know . but I lay my hand upon dear mother 's lip ; because what must be , must be ; and if mother and daughter stay at home , well in love than in quarrel . 
 right early in the morning , I be off , without word to any one ; know that mother and sister mine have cry each her good self to sleep ; relent when the light be out , and sorry for hard word and thought ; and yet too much alike in nature to understand each other . therefore I take good kickum , who   although with one eye spoil   be worth ten sweet - temper horse , to a man who know how to manage he ; and be well charge both with bacon and powder , forth I set on my wild - goose chase . 
 for this I claim no bravery . I care but little what come of it ; save for mother 's sake , and Annie 's , and the keeping of the farm , and discomfiture of the Snowes , and lament of Lorna at my death , if die I must in a lonesome manner , not find out till afterwards , and bleach bone leave to weep over . however , I have a little kettle , and a pound and a half of tobacco , and two dirty pipe and a clean one ; also a bit of clothe for change , also a brisket of hung venison , and four loaf of farmhouse bread , and of the upper side of bacon a stone and a half it might be not to mention diver small thing for campaigning , which may come in handily , when no one else have get they . 
 we go away in merry style ; my horse be ready for anything , and I only glad of a bit of change , after month of working and brooding ; with no content to crown the work ; no hope to hatch the brooding ; or without hatch to reckon it . who could tell but what Lorna might be discover , or at any rate hear of , before the end of this campaign ; if campaign it could be call of a man who go to fight nobody , only to redeem a runagate ? and vex as I be about the hay , and the hunch - back rick John be sure to make   which spoil the look of a farm - yard , still even this be well than to have the mow and house fire , as I have nightly expect , and be wear out with the worry of it . 
 yet there be one thing rather unfavourable to my present enterprise , namely , that I know nothing of the country I be bind to , nor even in what part of it my business might be suppose to lie . for beside the uncertainty cause by the conflict of report , it be likely that King Monmouth 's army would be move from place to place , accord to the prospect of supply and of reinforcement . however , there would arise more chance of get news as I go on : and my road be towards the east and south , Dulverton would not lie so very far aside of it , but what it might be worth a visit , both to collect the late tiding , and to consult the map and plan in Uncle Reuben 's parlour . therefore I draw the off - hand rein , at the cross - road on the hill , and make for the town ; expect perhaps to have breakfast with Master Huckaback , and Ruth , to help and encourage we . this little maiden be now become a very great favourite with I , have long outgrow , no doubt , her childish fancy and folly , such as my mother and Annie have plant under her soft brown hair . it have be my duty , as well as my true interest   for Uncle Ben be more and more testy , as he go on gold - digging , to ride thither , now and again , to inquire what the doctor think of she . not that her wound be long in healing , but that people can scarcely be too careful and too inquisitive , after a great horse - bite . and she always let I look at the arm , as I have be first doctor ; and she hold it up in a graceful manner , curve at the elbow , and with a sweep of white roundness go to a wrist the size of my thumb or so , and without any thimble - top standing forth , such as even our Annie have . but gradually all I could see , above the elbow , where the bite have be , be very clear , transparent skin , with very firm sweet flesh below , and three little blue mark as far asunder as the prong of a toasting - fork , and no deep than where a twig have chafe the peel of a waxen apple . and then I use to say in fun , as the child do , ' shall I kiss it , to make it well , dear ? ' 
 now Ruth look very grave indeed , upon hearing of this my enterprise ; and cry , say she could almost cry , for the sake of my dear mother . do I know the risk and chance , not of the battlefield alone , but of the havoc afterwards ; the swearing away of innocent life , and the hurdle , and the hanging ? and if I would please not to laugh   which be so unkind of I , have I never hear of imprisonment , and torture with the cruel boot , and sell into slavery , where the sun and the lash outvie one another in cut a man to piece ? I reply that of all these thing I have hear , and would take especial care to steer I free of all of they . my duty be all that I wish to do ; and none could harm I for do that . and I beg my cousin to give I good - speed , instead of talk dolefully . upon this she change her manner wholly , become so lively and cheerful that I be convince of her indifference , and surprise even more than gratify . 
 ' go and earn your spur , Cousin Ridd , ' she say : ' you be strong enough for anything . which side be to have the benefit of your doughty arm ? ' 
 ' have I not tell you , Ruth , ' I answer , not be fond of this kind of talk , more suitable for Lizzie , ' that I do not mean to join either side , that be to say , until ' 
 ' until , as the common proverb go , you know which way the cat will jump . oh , John Ridd ! oh , John Ridd ! ' 
 ' nothing of the sort , ' say I : ' what a hurry you be in ! I be for the King of course . ' 
 ' but not enough to fight for he . only enough to vote , I suppose , or drink his health , or shout for he . ' 
 ' I can not   make you out to - day , Cousin Ruth ; you be nearly as bad as Lizzie . you do not say any bitter thing , but you seem to mean they . ' 
 ' no , cousin , think not so of I . it be far more likely that I say they , without mean they . ' 
 ' anyhow , it be not like you . and I know not what I can have do in any way , to vex you . ' 
 ' dear I , nothing , Cousin Ridd ; you never do anything to vex I . ' 
 ' then I hope I shall do something now , Ruth , when I say good - bye . God know if we ever shall meet again , Ruth : but I hope we may . ' 
 ' to be sure we shall , ' she answer in her bright manner . ' try not to look wretched , John : you be as happy as a Maypole . ' 
 ' and you as a rose in May , ' I say ; ' and pretty nearly as pretty . give my love to Uncle Ben ; and I trust he to keep on the win side . ' 
 ' of that you need have no misgiving . never yet have he fail of it . now , Cousin Ridd , why go you not ? you hurry I so at breakfast time ? ' 
 ' my only reason for waiting , Ruth , be that you have not kiss I , as you be almost bind to do , for the last time perhaps of see I . ' 
 ' oh , if that be all , just fetch the stool ; and I will do my good , cousin . ' 
 ' I pray you be not so vexatious ; you always use to do it nicely , without any stool , Ruth . ' 
 ' ah , but you be grow since then , and become a famous man , John Ridd , and a member of the nobility . go your way , and win your spur . I want no lip - service . ' 
 be at the end of my wit , I do even as she order I . at least I have no spur to win , because there be big one on my boot , pay for in the Easter bill , and make by a famous saddler , so as never to clog with marsh - weed , but prick as hard as any horse , in reason , could desire . and Kickums never want spur ; but always go tail - foremost , if anybody offer they for his consideration . 




 CHAPTER LXIV 

 slaughter in the MARSHES 

 we rattle away at a merry pace , out of the town of Dulverton ; my horse be gaily feed , and myself quite fit again for go . of course I be puzzle about Cousin Ruth ; for her behaviour be not at all such as I have expect ; and indeed I have hop for a far more loving and move farewell than I get from she . but I say to myself , ' it be useless ever to count upon what a woman will do ; and I think that I must have vex she , almost as much as she vex I . and now to see what come of it . ' so I put my horse across the moorland ; and he throw his chest out bravely . 
 now if I try to set down at length all the thing that happen to I , upon this adventure , every in and out , and up and down , and to and fro , that occupy I , together with the thing I see , and the thing I hear of , however much the wise people might applaud my narrative , it be likely enough that idle reader might exclaim , ' what ail this man ? know he not that man of part and of real understanding , have tell we all we care to hear of that miserable business . let he keep to his farm , and his bacon , and his wrestling , and constant feeding . ' 
 fear to meet with such rebuff   which after my death would vex I , I will try to set down only what be needful for my story , and the clearing of my character , and the good name of our parish . but the manner in which I be bandy about , by false information , from pillar to post , or at other time drive quite out of my way by the presence of the King 's soldier , may be know by the name of the follow town , to which I be send in succession , Bath , Frome , Wells , Wincanton , Glastonbury , Shepton , Bradford , Axbridge , Somerton , and Bridgwater . 
 this last place I reach on a Sunday night , the fourth or fifth of July , I think or it might be the sixth , for that matter ; inasmuch as I have be too much worried to get the day of the month at church . only I know that my horse and myself be glad to come to a decent place , where meat and corn could be have for money ; and be quite weary of wander about , we hop to rest there a little . 
 of this , however , we find no chance , for the town be full of the good Duke 's soldier ; if man may be call so , the half of whom have never be drill , nor have fire a gun . and it be rumour among they , that the ' popish army , ' as they call it , be to be attack that very night , and with God 's assistance beat . however , by this time I have be teach to pay little attention to rumour ; and have seek vainly for Tom Faggus among these poor rustic warrior , I take to my hostel ; and go to bed , be as weary as weary can be . 
 fall asleep immediately , I take heed of nothing ; although the town be all alive , and light have come glance , as I lie down , and shout make echo all round my room . but all I do be to bolt the door ; not an inch would I budge , unless the house , and even my bed , be on fire . and so for several hour I lay , in the depth of the deep slumber , without even a dream on its surface ; until I be rouse and awaken at last by a pushing , and pull , and pinch , and a plucking of hair out by the root . and at length , be able to open mine eye , I see the old landlady , with a candle , heavily wonder at I . 
 ' can not   you let I alone ? ' I grumble . ' I have pay for my bed , mistress ; and I will not   get up for any one . ' 
 ' would to God , young man , ' she answer , shake I as hard as ever , ' that the popish soldier may sleep this night , only half as strong as thou dost ! fie on thee , fie on thee ! get up , and go fight ; we can hear the battle already ; and a man of thy size mought stop a cannon . ' 
 ' I would rather stop a - bed , ' say I ; ' what have I to do with fighting ? I be for King James , if any . ' 
 ' then thou mayest even stop a - bed , ' the old woman mutter sulkily . ' a would never have labour half an hour to awake a Papisher . but hearken you one thing , young man ; Zummerzett thou art , by thy brogue ; or at least by thy understanding of it ; no Zummerzett maid will look at thee , in spite of thy size and stature , unless thou strik a blow this night . ' 
 ' I lack no Zummerzett maid , mistress : I have a fair than your brown thing ; and for she alone would I strike a blow . ' 
 at this the old woman give I up , as be beyond correction : and it vex I a little that my great fame have not reach so far as Bridgwater , when I think that it go to Bristowe . but those people in East Somerset know nothing about wrestling . Devon be the headquarters of the art ; and Devon be the county of my chief love . Howbeit , my vanity be move , by this slur upon it for I have tell she my name be John Ridd , when I have a gallon of ale with she , ere ever I come upstairs ; and she have nod , in such a manner , that I think she know both name and fame and here be I , not only shake , pinch , and with many hair pull out , in the midst of my first good sleep for a week , but also abuse , and take amiss , and   which vex I most of all   unknown . 
 now there be nothing like vanity to keep a man awake at night , however he be weary ; and most of all , when he believe that he be do something great this time , if never do before yet other people will not see , except what they may laugh at ; and so be far above he , and sleep themselves the happy . therefore their sleep rob his own ; for all thing play so , in and out   with the godly and ungodly ever move in a balance , as they have do in my time , almost every year or two , all thing have such nice reply of produce to the call for it , and such a spread across the world , give here and take there , yet on the whole pretty even , that haply sleep itself have but a certain stock , and keep in hand , and sell to flatter   which can pay   that which flatten vanity can not pay , and will not sue for . 
 be that as it may , I be by this time wide awake , though much aggrieve at feel so , and through the open window hear the distant roll of musketry , and the beating of drum , with a quick rub - a - dub , and the ' come round the corner ' of trumpet - call . and perhaps Tom Faggus might be there , and shoot at any moment , and my dear Annie leave a poor widow , and my godson Jack an orphan , without a tooth to help he . 
 therefore I revile myself for all my heavy laziness ; and partly through good honest will , and partly through the sting of pride , and yet a little perhaps by virtue of a young man 's love of riot , up I arise , and dress myself , and wake Kickums   who be snore , and set out to see the bad of it . the sleepy hostler scratch his poll , and could not tell I which way to take ; what odd to he who be King , or Pope , so long as he pay his way , and get a bit of bacon on Sunday ? and would I please to remember that I have rouse he up at night , and the quality always make a point of pay four time over for a man 's loss of his beauty - sleep . I reply that his loss of beauty - sleep be rather improve to a man of so high complexion ; and that I , be none of the quality , must pay half - quality price : and so I give he double fee , as become a good farmer ; and he be glad to be quit of Kickums ; as I see by the turn of his eye , while go out at the archway . 
 all this be do by lanthorn light , although the moon be high and bold ; and in the northern heaven , flag and ribbon of a jostling pattern ; such as we often have in autumn , but in July very rarely . of these Master Dryden have speak somewhere , in his courtly manner ; but of he I think so little because by fashion prefer to Shakespeare that I can not remember the passage ; neither be it a credit to he . 
 therefore I be guide mainly by the sound of gun and trumpet , in rid out of the narrow way , and into the open marsh . and thus I might have find my road , in spite of all the spread of water , and the glaze of moonshine ; but that , as I follow sound   far from hedge or causeway , fog   like a chestnut - tree in blossom , touch with moonlight   meet I . now fog be a thing that I understand , and can do with well enough , where I know the country ; but here I have never be before . it be nothing to our Exmoor fog ; not to be compare with they ; and all the time one could see the moon ; which we can not do in our fog ; nor even the sun , for a week together . yet the gleam of water always make the fog more difficult : like a curtain on a mirror ; none can tell the boundary . 
 and here we have broad - water patch , in and out , inlay on land , like mother - of - pearl in brown Shittim wood . to a wild duck , bear and breed there , it would almost be a puzzle to find her own nest amongst we ; what chance then have I and kickum , both unused to marsh and mere ? each time when we think that we must be right , now at last , by track or passage , and approach the conflict , with the sound of it wax near , suddenly a break of water would be lay before we , with the moon look mildly over it , and the northern light behind we , dance down the line of fog . 
 it be an awful thing , I say   and to this day I remember it , to hear the sound of rag fight , and the yell of rave slayer , and the howl of poor man stricken hard , and shatter from wrath to wail ; then suddenly the dead low hush , as of a soul depart , and spirit kneel over it . through the vapour of the earth , and white breath of the water , and beneath the pale round moon   bow as the drift go by , all this rush and pause of fear pass or linger on my path . 
 at last , when I almost despair of escape from this tangle of spongy bank , and of hazy creek , and reed - fringe , my horse hear the neigh of a fellow - horse , and be only too glad to answer it ; upon which the other , have lose its rider , come up and prick his ear at we , and gaze through the fog very steadfastly . therefore I encourage he with a soft and genial whistle , and Kickums do his good to tempt he with a snort of inquiry . however , nothing would suit that nag , except to enjoy his new freedom ; and he caper away with his tail set on high , and the stirrup - iron clash under he . therefore , as he might know the way , and appear to have be in the battle , we follow he very carefully ; and he lead we to a little hamlet , call   as I find afterwards   West Zuyland , or Zealand , so name perhaps from its situation amid this inland sea . 
 here the King 's troop have be quite lately , and their fire be still burn ; but the man themselves have be summon away by the night attack of the rebel . hence I procure for my guide a young man who know the district thoroughly , and who lead I by many intricate way to the rear of the rebel army . we come upon a broad open moor strip with sullen water course , shag with sedge , and yellow iris , and in the dry part with bilberry . for by this time it be four o'clock , and the summer sun , rise wanly , show we all the ghastly scene . 
 would that I have never be there ! often in the lonely hour , even now it haunt I : would , far more , that the piteous thing have never be do in England ! fly man , fling back from dream of victory and honour , only glad to have the luck of life and limb to fly with , mud - bedraggle , foul with slime , reek both with sweat and blood , which they could not stop to wipe , cursing , with their pump - out lung , every stick that hinder they , or gory puddle that slip the step , scarcely able to leap over the corse that have drag to die . and to see how the corse lay ; some , as fair as death in sleep ; with the smile of placid valour , and of noble manhood , hover yet on the silent lip . these have bloodless hand put upwards , white as wax , and firm as death , clasp   as on a monument   in prayer for dear one leave behind , or in high thanksgiving . and of these man there be nothing in their broad blue eye to fear . but other be of different sort ; simple fellow unused to pain , accustom to the bill - hook , perhaps , or rasp of the knuckle in a quick - set hedge , or make some to - do at breakfast , over a thumb cut in sharpen a scythe , and expect their wife to make more to - do . yet here lie these poor chap , dead ; dead , after a deal of pain , with little mind to bear it , and a soul they have never think of ; gone , their God alone know whither ; but to mercy we may trust . upon these thing I can not dwell ; and none I trow would ask I : only if a plain man see what I see that morning , he   if God have bless he with the heart that be in most of we   must have sicken of all desire to be great among mankind . 
 see I rid to the front   where the work of death go on among the man of true english pluck ; which , when move , no farth move , the fugitive call out to I , in half a dozen dialect , to make no utter fool of myself ; for the great gun be come , and the fight be over ; all the rest be slaughter . 
 ' arl oop wi Moonmo ' , ' shout one big fellow , a miner of the Mendip hill , whose weapon be a pickaxe : ' na oose to vaight na moor . wend thee hame , yoong mon agin . ' 
 upon this I stop my horse , desire not to be shoot for nothing ; and eager to aid some poor sick people , who try to lift their arm to I . and this I do to the good of my power , though void of skill in the business ; and more inclined to weep with they than to check their weeping . while I be give a drop of cordial from my flask to one poor fellow , who sit up , while his life be ebb , and with slow insistence urge I , when his broken voice would come , to tell his wife   whose name I know not   something about an apple - tree , and a golden guinea store in it , to divide among six child in the midst of this I feel warm lip lay against my cheek quite softly , and then a little push ; and behold it be a horse lean over I ! I arise in haste , and there stand Winnie , look at I with beseech eye , enough to melt a heart of stone . then see my attention fix she turn her head , and glance back sadly toward the place of battle , and give a little wistful neigh : and then look I full in the face again , as much as to say , ' do you understand ? ' while she scrap with one hoof impatiently . if ever a horse try hard to speak , it be Winnie at that moment . I go to her side and pat she ; but that be not what she want . then I offer to leap into the empty saddle ; but neither do that seem good to she : for she run away toward the part of the field at which she have be glance back , and then turn round , and shake her mane , entreat I to follow she . 
 upon this I learn from the die man where to find his apple - tree , and promise to add another guinea to the one in store for his child ; and so , commend he to God , I mount my own horse again , and to Winnie 's great delight , profess myself at her service . with her ring silvery neigh , such as no other horse of all I ever know could equal , she at once proclaim her triumph , and tell her master   or mean to tell , if death should not have close his ear   that she be come to his aid , and bring one who might be trust , of the high race that kill . 
 a cannon - bullet   fire low , and plough the marsh slowly   meet poor Winnie front to front ; and she , be as quick as thought , lower her nose to sniff at it . it might be a message from her master ; for it make a mournful noise . but luckily for Winnie 's life , a rise of wet ground take the ball , even under her very nose ; and there it cut a splashy groove , miss she off hindfoot by an inch , and scatter black mud over she . it frighten I much more than Winnie ; of that I be quite certain : because though I be firm enough , when it come to a real tussle , and the heart of a fellow warm up and tell he that he must go through with it ; yet I never do approve of make a cold pie of death . 
 therefore , with those reckless cannon , brazen - mouthed , and bellowing , two furlong off , or it might be more   and the more the merry , I would have give that year 's hay - crop for a bit of a hill , or a thicket of oak , or almost even a badger 's earth . People will call I a coward for this   especially when I have make up my mind , that life be not worth have without any sign of Lorna ; nevertheless , I can not help it : those be my feeling ; and I set they down , because they make a mark on I . at Glen Doone I have fight , even against cannon , with some spirit and fury : but now I see nothing to fight about ; but rather in every poor double corpse , a good reason for not fight . so , in cold blood rid on , and yet ashamed that a man should shrink where a horse go bravely , I cast a bitter blame upon the reckless way of Winnie . 
 nearly all be scatter now . of the noble countryman   arm with scythe or pickaxe , blacksmith 's hammer , or fold - pitcher , who have stand their ground for hour against blaze musketry   from man whom they could not get at , by reason of the water - dyke , and then against the deadly cannon , drag by the Bishop 's horse to slaughter his own sheep ; of these sturdy englishman , noble in their want of sense , scarce one out of four remain for the coward to shoot down . ' cross the rhaine , ' they shout out , ' cross the rhaine , and coom within rache : ' but the other mongrel Britons , with a mongrel at their head , find it pleasanter to shoot man who could not shoot in answer , than to meet the chance of mischief from strong arm , and strong heart . 
 the last scene of this piteous play be act , just as I ride up . broad daylight , and upstande sun , winnow fog from the eastern hill , and spread the moor with freshness ; all along the dyke they shine , glisten on the willow - trunk , and touch the bank with a hoary gray . but alas ! those bank be touch more deeply with a gory red , and strew with fall trunk , more woeful than the wreck of tree ; while howl , cursing , yelling , and the loathsome reek of carnage , drown the scent of the new - mow hay , and the carol of the lark . 
 then the cavalry of the King , with their horse at full speed , dash from either side upon the helpless mob of countryman . a few pike feebly level meet they ; but they shoot the pikemen , draw sword , and helter - skelter leap into the shattered and scatter mass . right and leave they hack and hew ; I could hear the snapping of scythe beneath they , and see the flash of their sweeping sword . how it must end be plain enough , even to one like myself , who have never behold such a battle before . but Winnie lead I away to the left ; and as I could not help the people , neither stop the slaughter , but find the cannon - bullet come very rudely nigh I , I be only too glad to follow she . 




 CHAPTER LXV 

 fall among LAMBS 

 that faithful creature , whom I begin to admire as if she be my own   which be no little thing for a man to say of another man 's horse , stop in front of a low black shed , such as we call a ' linhay . ' and here she utter a little greeting , in a subdued and soften voice , hop to obtain an answer , such as her master be will not to give in a cheery manner . receive no reply , she enter ; and I   who could scarce keep up with she , poor Kickums be weary   leap from his back , and follow . there I find she sniff gently , but with great emotion , at the body of Tom Faggus . a corpse poor Tom appear to be , if ever there be one in this world ; and I turn away , and feel unable to keep altogether from weeping . but the mare either could not understand , or else would not believe it . she reach her long neck forth , and feel he with she under lip , pass it over his skin as softly as a mother would do to an infant ; and then she look up at I again ; as much as to say , ' he be all right . ' 
 upon this I take courage , and handle poor Tom , which be young I have fear at first to do . he groan very feebly , as I raise he up ; and there be the wound , a great savage one   whether from pike - thrust or musket - ball , gap and well in his right side , from which a piece seem to be tear away . I bind it up with some of my linen , so far as I know how ; just to stanch the flow of blood , until we could get a doctor . then I give he a little weak brandy and water , which he drink with the great eagerness , and make sign to I for more of it . but not know how far it be right to give cordial under the circumstance , I hand he unmixe water that time ; think that he be too far go to perceive the difference . but herein I wrong Tom Faggus ; for he shake his head and frown at I . even at the door of death , he would not drink what Adam drink , by whom come death into the world . so I give he a little more eau - de - vie , and he take it most submissively . 
 after that he seem well , and a little colour come into his cheek ; and he look at Winnie and know she ; and would have her nose in his clammy hand , though I think it not good for either of they . with the stay of my arm he sit upright , and faintly look about he ; as if at the end of a violent dream , too much for his power of mind . then he manage to whisper , ' be Winnie hurt ? ' 
 ' as sound as a roach , ' I answer . ' then so be I , ' say he : ' put I upon she back , John ; she and I die together . ' 
 surprise as I be at this fatalism   for so it appear to I , of which he have often show symptom before   but I take they for mere levity , now I know not what to do ; for it seem to I a murderous thing to set such a man on horseback ; where he must surely bleed to death , even if he could keep the saddle . but he tell I , with many break and pause , that unless I obey his order , he would tear off all my bandage , and accept no further aid from I . 
 while I be yet hesitate , a storm of horse at full gallop go by , tearing , swearing , bear away all the country before they . only a little pollard hedge keep we from their blood - shoot eye . ' now be the time , ' say my cousin Tom , so far as I could make out his word ; on their heel , I be safe , John , if I have only Winnie under I . Winnie and I die together . ' 
 see this strong bent of his mind , strong than any pain of death , I even do what his feeble eye sometimes implore , and sometimes command . with a strong sash , from his own hot neck , bind and twisted , tight as wax , around his damaged waist , I set he upon Winnie 's back , and place his trembling foot in stirrup , with a band from one to another , under the good mare 's body ; so that no swerve could throw he out : and then I say , ' lean forward , Tom ; it will stop your hurt from bleed . ' he lean almost on the neck of the mare , which , as I know , must close the wound ; and the light of his eye be quite different , and the pain of his forehead unstrung itself , as if he feel the undulous readiness of her volatile pace under he . 
 ' God bless you , John ; I be safe , ' he whisper , fear to open his lung much : ' who can come near my Winnie mare ? a mile of her gallop be ten year of life . look out for yourself , John Ridd . ' he suck his lip , and the mare go off , as easy and swift as a swallow . 
 ' well , ' think I , as I look at kickum , ignobly crop up a bit of grass , ' I have do a very good thing , no doubt , and ought to be thankful to God for the chance . but as for get away unharmed , with all these scoundrel about I , and only a foundered horse to trust in good and spiteful as he be upon the whole , I begin to think that I have make a fool of myself , accord to my habit . no wonder Tom say , " look out for yourself ! " I shall look out from a prison window , or perhaps even out of a halter . and then , what will Lorna think of I ? ' 
 be in this wistful mood , I resolve to abide awhile , even where fate have throw I ; for my horse require good rest no doubt , and be take it even while he crop , with his hind leg far away stretch out , and his foreleg gather under he , and his muzzle on the mole - hill ; so that he have five supporting from his mother earth . moreover , the linhay itself be full of very ancient cow dung ; than which there be no balmy and more maiden soporific . hence I resolve , upon the whole , though grieve about breakfast , to light a pipe , and go to sleep ; or at least until the hot sun should arouse the fly . 
 I may have sleep three hour , or four , or it might be even five for I never count time , while sleep when a shake more rude than the old landlady 's , bring I back to the world again . I look up , with a mighty yawn ; and see twenty , or so , of foot - soldier . 
 ' this linhay be not your , ' I say , when they have quite arouse I , with tongue , and hand , and even sword - prick : ' what business have you here , good fellow ? ' 
 ' business bad for you , ' say one , ' and will lead you to the gallow . ' 
 ' do you wish to know the way out again ? ' I ask , very quietly , as be no braggadocio . 
 ' we will show thee the way out , ' say one , ' and the way out of the world , ' say another : ' but not the way to heaven , ' say one chap , most unlikely to know it : and thereupon they all fall wag , like a bed of clover leaf in the morning , at their own choice humour . 
 ' will you pile your arm outside , ' I say , ' and try a bit of fair play with I ? ' 
 for I dislike these man sincerely , and be fain to teach they a lesson ; they be so unchristian in appearance , have face of a coffee colour , and dirty beard half over they . moreover their dress be outrageous , and their address still bad . however , I have wiser let they alone , as will appear afterwards . these savage - look fellow laugh at the idea of my have any chance against some twenty of they : but I know that the place be in my favour ; for my part of it have be fence off   for wean a calf most likely , so that only two could come at I at once ; and I must be very much out of training , if I could not manage two of they . therefore I lay aside my carbine , and the two horse - pistol ; and they with many coarse joke at I go a little way outside , and set their weapon against the wall , and turn up their coat sleeve jauntily ; and then begin to hesitate . 
 ' go you first , Bob , ' I hear they say : ' you be the big man of we ; and Dick the wrestler along of you . we will back you up , boy . ' 
 ' I will warrant I will draw the badger , ' say Bob ; ' and not a tooth will I leave he . but mind , for the honour of Kirke 's lamb , every man stand I a glass of gin . ' then he , and another man , make a rush , and the other come double - quick - march on their heel . but as Bob run at I most stupidly , not even know how to place his hand , I catch he with my knuckle at the back of his neck , and with all the sway of my right arm send he over the head of his comrade . meanwhile Dick the wrestler have grapple I , expect to show off his art , of which indeed he have some small knowledge ; but be quite of the light - weight , in a second he be fly after his companion Bob . 
 now these two man be hurt so badly , the light one have knock his head against the lintel of the outer gate , that the rest have no desire to encounter the like misfortune . so they hang back whispering ; and before they have make up their mind , I rush into the midst of they . the suddenness and the weight of my onset take they wholly by surprise ; and for once in their life , perhaps , Kirke 's lamb be worthy of their name . like a flock of sheep at a dog 's attack they fall away , hustle one another , and my only difficulty be not to tumble over they . 
 I have take my carbine out with I , have a fondness for it ; but the two horse - pistol I leave behind ; and therefore feel good title to take two from the magazine of the lamb . and with these , and my carbine , I leap upon kickum , who be now quite glad of a gallop again ; and I bade adieu to that mongrel lot ; yet they have the meanness to shoot at I . thank God for my deliverance   inasmuch as those man would have string I up , from a pollard - ash without trial , as I hear they tell one another , and see the tree they have settle upon , I venture to go rather fast on my way , with doubt and uneasiness urge I . and now my way be home again . nobody could say but what I have do my duty , and rescue Tom   if he could be rescue   from the mischief into which his own perverseness and love of change   rather than deep religious conviction , to which our Annie ascribe his outbreak   have lead , or seem likely to lead he . and how proud would my mother be ; and ah well , there be nobody else to be proud of I now . 
 but while think these thing , and desire my breakfast , beyond any power of describing , and even beyond my remembrance , I fall into another fold of lamb , from which there be no exit . these , like true crusader , meet I , swagger very heartily , and with their barrel of cider set , like so many cannon , across the road , over against a small hostel . 
 ' we have win the victory , my lord King , and we mean to enjoy it . down from thy horse , and have a stoup of cider , thou big rebel . ' 
 ' no rebel be i. my name be John Ridd . I belong to the side of the king : and I want some breakfast . ' 
 these fellow be truly hospitable ; that much will I say for they . be accustom to arab way , they could toss a grill , or fritter , or the inner meaning of an egg , into any form they please , comely and very good to eat ; and it lead I to think of Annie . so I make the rare breakfast any man might hope for , after all his trouble ; and get on with these brown fellow well than could be expect , I crave permission to light a pipe , if not disagreeable . hear this , they roar at I , with a superior laughter , and ask I , whether or not , I know the tobacco - leaf from the chick - weed ; and when I be force to answer no , not have go into the subject , but be content with anything brown , they clap I on the back and swear they have never see any one like I . upon the whole this please I much ; for I do not wish to be take always as of the common pattern : and so we smoke admirable tobacco for they would not have any of mine , though very courteous concern it and I be begin to understand a little of what they tell I ; when up come those confound lamb , who have show more tail than head to I , in the linhay , as I mention . 
 now these man upset everything . have be among wrestler so much as my duty compel I to be , and have learn the necessity of the rest which follow the conflict , and the right of discussion which all people have to pay their sixpence to enter ; and how they obtrude this right , and their wisdom , upon the man who have labour , until he forget all the work he do , and begin to think that they do it ; have some knowledge of this sort of thing , and the flux of mind swim in liquor , I foresaw a brawl , as plainly as if it be Bear Street in Barnstaple . 
 and a brawl there be , without any error , except of the man who hit their friend , and those who defend their enemy . my partner in breakfast and beer - can swore that I be no prisoner , but the good and most loyal subject , and the fine - hearted fellow they have ever the luck to meet with . whereas the man from the linhay swear that I be a rebel miscreant ; and have I they would , with a rope's - end ready , in spite of every   violent language   who have get drunk at my expense , and be mislead by my   strong word   lie . 
 while this fight be go on   and its mere occurrence show , perhaps , that my conversation in those day be not entirely despicable else why should my new friend fight for I , when I have pay for the ale , and therefore win the wrong tense of gratitude ?   it be in my power at any moment to take horse and go . and this would have be my wise plan , and a very great saving of money ; but somehow I feel as if it would be a mean thing to slip off so . even while I be hesitate , and the man be break each other 's head , a superior officer ride up , with his sword draw , and his face on fire . 
 ' what , my lamb , my lamb ! ' he cry , smite with the flat of his sword ; ' be this how you waste my time and my purse , when you ought to be catch a hundred prisoner , worth ten pound apiece to I ? who be this young fellow we have here ? speak up , sirrah ; what art thou , and how much will thy good mother pay for thee ? ' 
 ' my mother will pay naught for I , ' I answer ; while the lamb fall back , and glower at one another : ' so please your worship , I be no rebel ; but an honest farmer , and well - prove of loyalty . ' 
 ' ha , ha ; a farmer art thou ? those fellow always pay the good . good farmer , come to yon barren tree ; thou shalt make it fruitful . ' 
 Colonel Kirke make a sign to his man , and before I could think of resistance , stout new rope be fling around I ; and with three man on either side I be lead along very painfully . and now I see , and repent deeply of my careless folly , in stop with those boon - companion , instead of be far away . but the newness of their manner to I , and their mode of regard the world   differ so much from mine own , as well as the flavour of their tobacco , have make I quite forget my duty to the farm and to myself . yet methought they would be tender to I , after all our speech : how then be I disappointed , when the man who have drink my beer , draw on those grievous rope , twice as hard as the man I have be at strife with ! yet this may have be from no ill will ; but simply that have fall under suspicion of laxity , they be compel , in self - defence , now to be over - zealous . 
 nevertheless , however pure and godly might be their motif , I behold myself in a grievous case , and likely to get the bad of it . for the face of the Colonel be hard and stern as a block of bogwood oak ; and though the man might pity I and think I unjustly execute , yet they must obey their order , or themselves be put to death . therefore I address myself to the Colonel , in a most ingratiating manner ; beg he not to sully the glory of his victory , and dwell upon my pure innocence , and even good service to our lord the King . but Colonel Kirke only give command that I should be smite in the mouth ; which office Bob , whom I have fling so hard out of the linhay , perform with great zeal and efficiency . but be aware of the come smack , I thrust forth a pair of tooth ; upon which the knuckle of my good friend make a melancholy shipwreck . 
 it be not in my power to tell half the thought that move I , when we come to the fatal tree , and see two man hang there already , as innocent perhaps as I be , and henceforth entirely harmless . though order by the Colonel to look steadfastly upon they , I could not bear to do so ; upon which he call I a paltry coward , and promise my breech to any man who would spit upon my countenance . this vile thing Bob , be anger perhaps by the smart wound of his knuckle , bravely step forward to do for I , trust no doubt to the rope I be lead with . but , unluckily as it prove for he , my right arm be free for a moment ; and therewith I deal he such a blow , that he never spake again . for this thing I have often grieve ; but the provocation be very sore to the pride of a young man ; and I trust that God have forgive I . at the sound and sight of that bitter stroke , the other man draw back ; and Colonel Kirke , now black in the face with fury and vexation , give order for to shoot I , and cast I into the ditch hard by . the man raise their piece , and point at I , wait for the word to fire ; and I , be quite overcome by the hurry of these event , and quite unprepared to die yet , could only think all upside down about Lorna , and my mother , and wonder what each would say to it . I spread my hand before my eye , not be so brave as some man ; and hop , in some foolish way , to cover my heart with my elbow . I hear the breath of all around , as if my skull be a sound - board ; and know even how the different man be finger their trigger . and a cold sweat break all over I , as the Colonel , prolong his enjoyment , begin slowly to say , ' fire . ' 
 but while he be yet dwell on the ' f , ' the hoof of a horse dash out on the road , and horse and horseman fling themselves betwixt I and the gun muzzle . so narrowly be I save that one man could not check his trigger : his musket go off , and the ball strike the horse on the wither , and scar he exceedingly . he begin to lash out with his heel all around , and the Colonel be glad to keep clear of he ; and the man make excuse to lower their gun , not really wish to shoot I . 
 ' how now , Captain Stickles ? ' cry Kirke , the more angry because he have show his cowardice ; ' dare you , sir , to come betwixt I and my lawful prisoner ? ' 
 ' Nay , hearken one moment , Colonel , ' reply my old friend Jeremy ; and his damage voice be the sweetest sound I have hear for many a day ; ' for your own sake , hearken . ' he look so full of momentous tiding , that Colonel Kirke make a sign to his man not to shoot I till further order ; and then he go aside with Stickles , so that in spite of all my anxiety I could not catch what pass between they . but I fancy that the name of the Lord Chief - Justice Jeffreys be speak more than once , and with emphasis and deference . 
 ' then I leave he in your hand , Captain Stickles , ' say Kirke at last , so that all might hear he ; and though the news be good for I , the smile of baffle malice make his dark face look most hideous ; ' and I shall hold you answerable for the custody of this prisoner . ' 
 ' Colonel Kirke , I will answer for he , ' Master Stickles reply , with a grave bow , and one hand on his breast : ' John Ridd , you be my prisoner . follow I , John Ridd . ' 
 upon that , those precious lamb flock away , leave the rope still around I ; and some be glad , and some be sorry , not to see I swing . be free of my arm again , I touch my hat to Colonel Kirke , as become his rank and experience ; but he do not condescend to return my short salutation , have espy in the distance a prisoner , out of whom he might make money . 
 I wring the hand of Jeremy Stickles , for his truth and goodness ; and he almost weep   for since his wound he have be a weakened man   as he answer , ' turn for turn , John . you save my life from the Doones ; and by the mercy of God , I have save you from a far bad company . let your sister Annie know it . ' 




 CHAPTER lxvi 

 suitable DEVOTION 

 now Kickums be not like Winnie , any more than a man be like a woman ; and so he have not follow my fortune , except at his own distance . no doubt but what he feel a certain interest in I ; but his interest be not devotion ; and man might go his way and be hang , rather than horse would meet hardship . therefore , see thing to be bad , and his master involve in trouble , what do this horse do but start for the ease and comfort of Plover 's barrow , and the plentiful ration of oat abide in his own manger . for this I do not blame he . it be the manner of mankind . 
 but I could not help be very uneasy at the thought of my mother 's discomfort and worry , when she should spy this good horse come home , without any master , or rider , and I almost hop that he might be catch   although he be worth at least twenty pound   by some of the King 's trooper , rather than find his way home , and spread distress among our people . yet , know his nature , I doubt if any could catch , or catch would keep he . 
 Jeremy Stickles assure I , as we take the road to Bridgwater , that the only chance for my life   if I still refuse to fly   be to obtain an order forthwith , for my despatch to London , as a suspect person indeed , but not find in open rebellion , and believe to be under the patronage of the great Lord Jeffreys . ' for , ' say he , ' in a few hour time you would fall into the hand of Lord Feversham , who have win this fight , without see it , and who have return to bed again , to have his breakfast more comfortably . now he may not be quite so savage perhaps as Colonel Kirke , nor find so much sport in gibbeting ; but he be equally pitiless , and his price no doubt would be high . ' 
 ' I will pay no price whatever , ' I answer , ' neither will I fly . an hour agone I would have flee for the sake of my mother , and the farm . but now that I have be take prisoner , and my name be know , if I fly , the farm be forfeit ; and my mother and sister must starve . moreover , I have do no harm ; I have bear no weapon against the king , nor desire the success of his enemy . I like not that the son of a bona - roba should be King of England ; neither do I count the Papists any bad than we be . if they have aught to try I for , I will stand my trial . ' 
 ' then to London thou must go , my son . there be no such thing as trial here : we hang the good folk without it , which save they much anxiety . but quicken thy step , good John ; I have influence with Lord Churchill , and we must contrive to see he , ere the foreigner fall to work again . Lord Churchill be a man of sense , and imprison nothing but his money . ' 
 we be lucky enough to find this nobleman , who have since become so famous by his foreign victory . he receive we with great civility ; and look at I with much interest , be a tall and fine young man himself , but not to compare with I in size , although far well favour . I like his face well enough , but think there be something false about it . he put I a few keen question , such as a man not assure of honesty might have find hard to answer ; and he stand in a very upright attitude , make the most of his figure . 
 I see nothing to be proud of , at the moment , in this interview ; but since the great Duke of Marlborough rise to the top of glory , I have try to remember more about he than my conscience quite back up . how should I know that this man would be foremost of our kingdom in five - and - twenty year or so ; and not know , why should I heed he , except for my own pocket ? nevertheless , I have be so cross - question far bad than by young Lord Churchill about his grace the Duke of Marlborough , and what he say to I , and what I say then , and how his grace reply to that , and whether he smile like another man , or screw up his lip like a button   as our parish tailor say of he , and whether I know from the turn of his nose that no frenchman could stand before he : all these inquiry have worry I so , ever since the Battle of Blenheim , that if tailor would only print upon waistcoat , I would give double price for a vest bearing this inscription , ' no information can be give about the Duke of Marlborough . ' 
 now this good Lord Churchill for one might call he good , by comparison with the very bad people around he grant without any long hesitation the order for my safe deliverance to the Court of King 's Bench at Westminster ; and Stickles , who have to report in London , be empower to convey I , and make answerable for produce I . this arrangement would have be entirely to my liking , although the time of year be bad for leave Plover 's barrow so ; but no man may quite choose his time , and on the while I would have be quite content to visit London , if my mother could be warn that nothing be amiss with I , only a mild , and as one might say , nominal captivity . and to prevent her anxiety , I do my good to send a letter through good Sergeant Bloxham , of whom I hear as quarter with Dumbarton 's regiment at Chedzuy . but that regiment be away in pursuit ; and I be force to entrust my letter to a man who say that he know he , and accept a shilling to see to it . 
 for fear of any unpleasant change , we set forth at once for London ; and truly thankful may I be that God in his mercy spar I the sight of the cruel and bloody work with which the whole country reek and howl during the next fortnight . I have hear thing that set my hair on end , and make I loathe good meat for day ; but I make a point of set down only the thing which I see do ; and in this particular case , not many will quarrel with my decision . enough , therefore , that we ride on   for Stickles have find I a horse at last   as far as Wells , where we sleep that night ; and be join in the morning by several trooper and orderly , we make a slow but safe journey to London , by way of Bath and Reading . 
 the sight of London warm my heart with various emotion , such as a cordial man must draw from the heart of all humanity . here there be quick way and manner , and the rapid sense of knowledge , and the power of understanding , ere a word be speak . whereas at Oare , you must say a thing three time , very slowly , before it get inside the skull of the good man you be address . and yet we be far more clever there than in any parish for fifteen mile . 
 but what move I most , when I see again the noble oil and tallow of the London light , and the dripping torch at almost every corner , and the handsome signboard , be the thought that here my Lorna live , and walk , and take the air , and perhaps think now and then of the old day in the good farm - house . although I would make no approach to she , any more than she have do to I   upon which grief I have not dwelt , for fear of seem selfish , yet there must be some large chance , or the little chance might be enlarge , of fall in with the maiden somehow , and learn how her mind be set . if against I , all should be over . I be not the man to sigh and cry for love , like a Romeo : none should even guess my grief , except my sister Annie . 
 but if Lorna love I still as in my heart of heart I hop then would I for no one care , except her own delicious self . rank and title , wealth and grandeur , all should go to the wind , before they scar I from my own true love . 
 think thus , I go to bed in the centre of London town , and be bite so grievously by creature whose name be ' legion , ' mad with the delight of get a wholesome farmer among they , that verily I be ashamed to walk in the courtly part of the town next day , have lump upon my face of the size of a pickle walnut . the landlord say that this be nothing ; and that he expect , in two day at the utmost , a very fresh young Irishman , for whom they would all forsake I . nevertheless , I decline to wait , unless he could find I a hayrick to sleep in ; for the insect of grass only tickle . he assure I that no hayrick could now be find in London ; upon which I be force to leave he , and with mutual esteem we part . 
 the next night I have well luck , be introduce to a decent widow , of very high Scotch origin . that house be sweep and garnish so , that not a bit be leave to eat , for either man or insect . the change of air have make I hungry , I want something after supper ; be quite ready to pay for it , and show my purse as a symptom . but the face of Widow MacAlister , when I propose to have some more food , be a thing to be draw   if it could be draw far   by our new caricaturist . 
 therefore I leave she also ; for liefer would I be eat myself than have nothing to eat ; and so I come back to my old furrier ; the which be a thoroughly hearty man , and welcome I to my room again , with two shilling add to the rent , in the joy of his heart at see I . be under parole to Master Stickles , I only go out betwixt certain hour ; because I be account as liable to be call upon ; for what purpose I know not , but hop it might be a good one . I feel it a loss , and a hindrance to I , that I be so bound to remain at home during the session of the court of law ; for thereby the chance of ever behold Lorna be very greatly contract , if not altogether annihilate . for these be the very hour in which the people of fashion , and the high world , be will not to appear to the rest of mankind , so as to encourage they . and of course by this time , the Lady Lorna be high among people of fashion , and be not likely to be see out of fashionable hour . it be true that there be some place of expensive entertainment , at which the well sort of mankind might be see and study , in their hour of relaxation , by those of the low order , who could pay sufficiently . but alas , my money be get low ; and the privilege of see my better be more and more deny to I , as my cash draw short . for a man must have a good coat at least , and the pocket not wholly empty , before he can look at those whom God have create for his ensample . 
 hence , and from many other cause part of which be my own pride it happen that I abode in London betwixt a month and five week ' time , ere ever I see Lorna . it seem unfit that I should go , and waylay she , and spy on she , and say   or mean to say , ' Lo , here be your poor faithful farmer , a man who be unworthy of you , by mean of his common birth ; and yet who dare to crawl across your path , that you may pity he . for God 's sake show a little pity , though you may not feel it . ' such behaviour might be comely in a love - lorn boy , a page to some grand princess ; but I , John Ridd , would never stoop to the lowering of love so . 
 nevertheless I hear of Lorna , from my worthy furrier , almost every day , and with a fine exaggeration . this honest man be one of those who in virtue of their trade , and nicety of behaviour , be admit into noble life , to take measurement , and show pattern . and while so do , they contrive to acquire what be to the english mind at once the most important and most interesting of all knowledge , the science of be able to talk about the title people . so my furrier   whose name be Ramsack , have to make robe for peer , and cloak for their wife and otherwise , know the great folk , sham or real , as well as he know a fox or skunk from a wolverine skin . 
 and when , with some fencing and foil of inquiry , I hint about Lady Lorna Dugal , the old man 's face become so pleasant that I know her birth must be wondrous high . at this my own countenance fall , I suppose , for the well she be bear , the hard she would be to marry and mistake my object , he take I up : 
 ' perhaps you think , Master Ridd , that because her ladyship , Lady Lorna Dugal , be of scottish origin , therefore her birth be not as high as of our english nobility . if you think so you be wrong , sir . she come not of the sandy Scotch race , with high cheek - bone , and raw shoulder - blade , who set up pillar in their courtyard . but she come of the very good Scotch blood , descend from the norseman . her mother be of the very noble race , the Lords of Lorne ; higher even than the great Argyle , who have lately make a sad mistake , and pay for it most sadly . and her father be descend from the King Dugal , who fight against Alexander the Great . no , no , Master Ridd ; none of your promiscuous blood , such as run in the vein of half our modern peerage . ' 
 ' why should you trouble yourself about it , Master Ramsack ? ' I reply : ' let they all go their own way : and let we all look up to they , whether they come by hook or crook . ' 
 ' not at all , not at all , my lad . that be not the way to regard it . we look up at the well - bear man , and side - way at the base - bear . ' 
 ' then we be all base - bear ourselves . I will look up to no man , except for what himself have do . ' 
 ' come , Master Ridd , you might be lash from New - gate to Tyburn and back again , once a week , for a twelvemonth , if some people hear you . keep your tongue more close , young man ; or here you lodge no long ; albeit I love your company , which smell to I of the hayfield . ah , I have not see a hayfield for nine - and - twenty year , John Ridd . the cursed moth keep I at home , every day of the summer . ' 
 ' spread your fur on the haycock , ' I answer very boldly : ' the indoor moth can not abide the presence of the outdoor one . ' 
 ' be it so ? ' he answer : ' I never think of that before . and yet I have know such strange thing happen in the way of fur , that I can well believe it . if you only know , John , the way in which they lay their egg , and how they work tail - foremost ' 
 ' tell I nothing of the kind , ' I reply , with equal confidence : ' they can not work tail - foremost ; and they have no tail to work with . ' for I know a little about grub , and the ignorance concern they , which we have no right to put up with . however , not to go into that   for the argument last a fortnight ; and then be only come so far as to begin again , Master Ramsack soon convince I of the thing I know already ; the excellence of Lorna 's birth , as well as her lofty place at Court , and beauty , and wealth , and elegance . but all these only make I sigh , and wish that I be bear to they . 
 from Master Ramsack I discover that the nobleman to whose charge Lady Lorna have be commit , by the Court of Chancery , be Earl Brandir of Lochawe , her poor mother 's uncle . for the Countess of Dugal be daughter , and only child , of the last Lord Lorne , whose sister have marry Sir Ensor Doone ; while he himself have marry the sister of Earl Brandir . this nobleman have a country house near the village of Kensington ; and here his niece dwell with he , when she be not in attendance on her Majesty the Queen , who have take a liking to she . now since the King have begin to attend the celebration of mass , in the chapel at Whitehall and not at Westminster Abbey , as our gossip have aver he have give order that the door should be throw open , so that all who could make interest to get into the antechamber , might see this form of worship . Master Ramsack tell I that Lorna be there almost every Sunday ; their Majesties be most anxious to have the presence of all the nobility of the catholic persuasion , so as to make a goodly show . and the worthy furrier , have influence with the door - keeper , kindly obtain admittance for I , one Sunday , into the antechamber . 
 here I take care to be in wait , before the Royal procession enter ; but be unknown , and of no high rank , I be not allow to stand forward among the well people , but order back into a corner very dark and dismal ; the verger remarking , with a grin , that I could see over all other head , and must not set my own so high . be frightened to find myself among so many people of great rank and gorgeous apparel , I blush at the notice draw upon I by this uncourteous fellow ; and silently fall back into the corner by the hanging . 
 you may suppose that my heart beat high , when the King and Queen appear , and enter , follow by the Duke of Norfolk , bear the sword of state , and by several other nobleman , and people of repute . then the door of the chapel be throw wide open ; and though I could only see a little , be in the corner so , I think that it be beautiful . bower of rich silk be there , and plenty of metal shin , and polished wood with lovely carving ; flower too of the noble kind , and candle make by somebody who have learn how to clarify tallow . this last thing amaze I more than all , for our dip never will come clear , melt the mutton - fat how you will . and methought that this hanging of flower about be a pretty thing ; for if a man can worship God good of all beneath a tree , as the natural instinct be , surely when by fault of climate the tree would be too apt to drip , the very good make - believe be to have enough and to spare of flower ; which to the dweller in London seem to have grow on the tree deny they . 
 be that as it may , when the King and Queen cross the threshold , a mighty flourish of trumpet arise , and a wave of banner . the Knights of the Garter   whoever they be   be to attend that day in state ; and some go in , and some stay out , and it make I think of the difference betwixt the ewe and the wether . for the ewe will go wherever you lead they ; but the wether will not , have strong opinion , and mean to abide by they . and one man I notice be of the wether , to wit the Duke of Norfolk ; who stop outside with the sword of state , like a beadle with a rapping - rod . this have take more to tell than the time it happen in . for after all the man be go , some to this side , some to that , accord to their feeling , a number of lady , beautifully dress , be of the Queen 's retinue , begin to enter , and be star at three time as much as the man have be . and indeed they be worth look at   which man never be to my idea , when they trick themselves with gewgaw , but none be so well worth eye - service as my own beloved Lorna . she enter modestly and shyly , with her eye upon the ground , know the rudeness of the gallant , and the large sum she be price at . her dress be of the pure white , very sweet and simple , without a line of ornament , for she herself adorn it . the way she walk , and touch her skirt   rather than seem to hold it up   with a white hand beam one red rose , this and her stately supple neck , and the flowing of her hair would show , at a distance of a hundred yard , that she could be none but Lorna Doone . Lorna Doone of my early love ; in the day when she blush for her name before I by reason of dishonesty ; but now the Lady Lorna Dugal as far beyond reproach as above my poor affection . all my heart , and all my mind , gather themselves upon she . would she see I , or would she pass ? be there instinct in our love ? 
 by some strange chance she see I . or be it through our destiny ? while with eye keep sedulously on the marble floor , to shun the weight of admiration thrust too boldly on they , while with shy quick step she pass , some one   perhaps with purpose   trod on the skirt of her clear white dress , with the quickness teach she by many a scene of danger , she look up , and her eye meet mine . 
 as I gaze upon she , steadfastly , yearningly , yet with some reproach , and more of pride than humility , she make I one of the courtly bow which I do so much det ; yet even that be sweet and graceful , when my Lorna do it . but the colour of her pure clear cheek be nearly as deep as that of my own , when she go on for the religious work . and the shining of her eye be owe to an unpaid debt of tear . 
 upon the whole I be satisfied . Lorna have see I , and have not   accord to the phrase of the high world then   even try to ' cut ' I . whether this low phrase be bear of their own stupid meanness , or whether it come of necessity exercise on a man without money , I know not , and I care not . but one thing I know right well ; any man who ' cut ' a man   except for vice or meanness   should be quarter without quarter . 
 all these proud thought rise within I as the lovely form of Lorna go inside , and be no more see . and then I feel how coarse I be ; how apt to think strong thought , and so on ; without brain to bear I out : even as a hen 's egg , lay without enough of lime , and look only a poor jelly . 
 nevertheless , I wait on ; as my usual manner be . for to be beat , while run away , be ten time bad than to face it out , and take it , and have do with it . so at least I have always find , because of reproach of conscience : and all the thing those clever people carry on inside , at large , make I long for our Parson Bowden that he might know how to act . 
 while I store up , in my memory , enough to keep our parson go through six pipe on a Saturday night to have it as right as could be next day a lean man with a yellow beard , too thin for a good Catholic   which religion always fatten , come up to I , work sideways , in the manner of a female crab . 
 ' this be not to my liking , ' I say : ' if aught thou hast , speak plainly ; while they make that horrible noise inside . ' 
 nothing have this man to say ; but with many sigh , because I be not of the proper faith , he take my reprobate hand to save I : and with several religious tear , look up at I , and wink with one eye . although the skin of my palm be thick , I feel a little suggestion there , as of a gentle leaf in spring , fear to seem too forward . I pay the man , and he go happy ; for the standard of heretical silver be pure than that of the Catholics . 
 then I lift up my little billet ; and in that dark corner read it , with a strong rainbow of colour come from the angle light . and in mine eye there be enough to make rainbow of strong sun , as my anger cloud off . 
 not that it begin so well ; but that in my heart I know   ere three line be through I   that I be with all heart love and beyond that , who may need ? the darling of my life go on , as if I be of her own rank , or even well than she be ; and she dot she ' I be , ' and cross she ' t 's , ' as if I be at least a schoolmaster . all of it be do in pencil ; but as plain as plain could be . in my coffin it shall lie , with my ring and something else . therefore will I not expose it to every man who buy this book , and haply think that he have buy I to the bottom of my heart . enough for man of gentle birth   who never be inquisitive   that my love tell I , in her letter , just to come and see she . 
 I run away , and could not stop . to behold even she , at the moment , would have dash my fancy 's joy . yet my brain be so amiss , that I must do something . therefore to the river Thames , with all speed , I hurry ; and keep all my good clothe on   indue for sake of Lorna , into the quiet stream I leap , and swam as far as London Bridge , and eat nobler dinner afterwards . 




 CHAPTER LXVII 

 LORNA STILL be lorna 

 although a man may be as simple as the flower of the field ; know when , but scarcely why , he close to the bitter wind ; and feel why , but scarcely when , he open to the genial sun ; yet without his quest much into the capsule of himself to do which be a misery he may have a general notion how he happen to be get on . 
 I feel myself to be get on well than at any time since the last wheat - harvest , as I take the lane to Kensington upon the Monday evening . for although no time be give in my Lorna 's letter , I be not inclined to wait more than decency require . and though I go and watch the house , decency would not allow I to knock on the Sunday evening , especially when I find at the corner that his lordship be at home . 
 the lane and field between Charing Cross and the village of Kensington , be , or be at that time , more than reasonably infest with footpad and with highwayman . however , my stature and holly club keep these fellow from do more than cast sheep 's eye at I . for it be still broad daylight , and the view of the distant village , Chelsea , Battersea , Tyburn , and other , as well as a few large house , among the ham and towards the river , make it seem less lonely . therefore I sing a song in the broad Exmoor dialect , which cause no little amazement in the mind of all who meet I . 
 when I come to Earl Brandir 's house , my natural modesty forbid I to appear at the door for guest ; therefore I go to the entrance for servant and retainer . here , to my great surprise , who should come and let I in but little Gwenny Carfax , whose very existence have almost escape my recollection . her mistress , no doubt , have see I come , and send she to save trouble . but when I offer to kiss Gwenny , in my joy and comfort to see a farm - house face again , she look ashamed , and turn away , and would hardly speak to I . 
 I follow she to a little room , furnish very daintily ; and there she order I to wait , in a most ungracious manner . ' well , ' think I , ' if the mistress and the maid be alike in temper , well it have be for I to abide at Master Ramsack 's . ' but almost ere my thought be do , I hear the light quick step which I know as well as ' watch , ' my dog , know mine ; and my breast begin to tremble , like the trembling of an arch ere the keystone be put in . 
 almost ere I hop for fear and hope be so entangled that they hinder one another the velvet hanging of the doorway part , with a little doubt , and then a good face put on it . Lorna , in her perfect beauty , stand before the crimson fold , and her dress be all pure white , and her cheek be rosy pink , and her lip be scarlet . 
 like a maiden , with skill and sense check violent impulse , she stay there for one moment only , just to be admire ; and then like a woman , she come to I , see how alarmed I be . the hand she offer I I take , and raise it to my lip with fear , as a thing too good for I . ' be that all ? ' she whisper ; and then her eye gleam up at I ; and in another instant , she be weep on my breast . 
 ' Darling Lorna , Lady Lorna , ' I cry , in astonishment , yet unable but to keep she close to I , and close ; ' surely , though I love you so , this be not as it should be . ' 
 ' yes , it be , John . yes , it be . nothing else should ever be . oh , why have you behave so ? ' 
 ' I be behave . ' I reply , ' to the very good of my ability . there be no other man in the world could hold you so , without kiss you . ' 
 ' then why do not   you do it , John ? ' ask Lorna , look up at I , with a flash of her old fun . 
 now this matter , proverbially , be not for discussion , and repetition . enough that we say nothing more than , ' oh , John , how glad I be ! ' and ' Lorna , Lorna Lorna ! ' for about five minute . then my darling draw back proudly , with blushing cheek , and tear - bright eye , she begin to cross - examine I . 
 ' Master John Ridd , you shall tell the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth . I have be in Chancery , sir ; and can detect a story . now why have you never , for more than a twelvemonth , take the small notice of your old friend , Mistress Lorna Doone ? ' although she speak in this lightsome manner , as if it make no difference , I see that her quick heart be move , and the flash of her eye control . 
 ' simply for this cause , I answer , ' that my old friend and true love , take not the small heed of I . nor know I where to find she . ' 
 ' what ! ' cry Lorna ; and nothing more ; be overcome with wondering ; and much inclined to fall away , but for my assistance . I tell she , over and over again , that not a single syllable of any message from she , or tiding of her welfare , have reach I , or any one of we , since the letter she leave behind ; except by soldier 's gossip . 
 ' oh , you poor dear John ! ' say Lorna , sigh at thought of my misery : ' how wonderfully good of you , think of I as you must have do , not to marry that little plain thing   or perhaps I should say that lovely creature , for I have never see she , Mistress Ruth I forget her name ; but something like a towel . ' 
 ' Ruth Huckaback be a worthy maid , ' I answer with some dignity ; ' and she alone of all our world , except indeed poor Annie , have keep her confidence in you , and tell I not to dread your rank , but trust your heart , Lady Lorna . ' 
 ' then Ruth be my good friend , ' she answer , ' and be worthy of you , dear John . and now remember one thing , dear ; if God should part we , as may be by nothing short of death , try to marry that little Ruth , when you cease to remember I . and now for the head - traitor . I have often suspect it : but she look I in the face , and wish fearful thing , which I can not repeat . ' 
 with these word , she move an implement such as I have not see before , and which make a ringing noise at a serious distance . and before I have cease wonder for if such thing go on , we might ring the church bell , while sit in our back - kitchen little Gwenny Carfax come , with a grave and sullen face . 
 ' Gwenny , ' begin my Lorna , in a tone of high rank and dignity , ' go and fetch the letter which I give you at various time for despatch to Mistress Ridd . ' 
 ' how can I fetch they , when they be go ? it be no use for he to tell no lie ' 
 ' now , Gwenny , can you look at I ? ' I ask , very sternly ; for the matter be no joke to I , after a year 's unhappiness . 
 ' I do not   want to look at ' ee . what should I look at a young man for , although he do offer to kiss I ? ' 
 I see the spite and impudence of this last remark , and so do Lorna , although she could not quite refrain from smile . 
 ' now , Gwenny , not to speak of that , ' say Lorna , very demurely , ' if you think it honest to keep the letter , be it honest to keep the money ? ' 
 at this the cornish maiden break into a rage of honesty : ' a putt the money by for ' ee . ' Ee shall have every farden of it . ' and so she fling out of the room . 
 ' and , Gwenny , ' say Lorna very softly , follow under the door - hanging ; ' if it be not honest to keep the money , it be not honest to keep the letter , which would have be worth more than any gold to those who be so kind to you . your father shall know the whole , Gwenny , unless you tell the truth . ' 
 ' now , a will tell all the truth , ' this strange maiden answer , talk to herself at least as much as to her mistress , while she go out of sight and hearing . and then I be so glad at have my own Lorna once again , clear of all contempt for we , and true to I through all of it , that I would have forgive Gwenny for treason , or even forgery . 
 ' I trust she so much , ' say Lorna , in her old ill - fortuned way ; ' and look how she have deceive I ! that be why I love you , John   set other thing aside , because you never tell I falsehood ; and you never could , you know . ' 
 ' well , I be not so sure of that . I think I could tell any lie , to have you , darling , all my own . ' 
 ' yes . and perhaps it might be right . to other people besides we two . but you could not do it to I , John . you never could do it to I , you know . ' 
 before I quite perceive my way to the bottom of the distinction although beyond doubt a valid one Gwenny come back with a leathern bag , and toss it upon the table . not a word do she vouchsafe to we ; but stand there , look injure . 
 ' go , and get your letter , John , ' say Lorna very gravely ; ' or at least your mother 's letter , make of message to you . as for Gwenny , she shall go before Lord Justice Jeffreys . ' I know that Lorna mean it not ; but think that the girl deserve a frightening ; as indeed she do . but we both mistook the courage of this child of Cornwall . she step upon a little round thing , in the nature of a stool , such as I never have see before , and thus deliver her sentiment . 
 ' and you may take I , if you please , before the great Lord Jeffreys . I have do no more than duty , though I do it crookedly , and tell a heap of lie , for your sake . and pretty gratitude I get . ' 
 ' much gratitude you have show , ' reply Lorna , ' to Master Ridd , for all his kindness and his goodness to you . who be it that go down , at the peril of his life , and bring your father to you , when you have lose he for month and month ? who be it ? answer I , Gwenny ? ' 
 ' Girt Jan Ridd , ' say the handmaid , very sulkily . 
 ' what make you treat I so , little Gwenny ? ' I ask , for Lorna would not ask lest the reply should vex I . 
 ' because ' ee be'est below she so . her shanna ' have a poor farmering chap , not even if she be a Carnishman . all her land , and all her birth and who be you , I would like to know ? ' 
 ' Gwenny , you may go , ' say Lorna , redden with quiet anger ; ' and remember that you come not near I for the next three day . it be the only way to punish she , ' she continue to I , when the maid be go , in a storm of sob and weeping . ' now , for the next three day , she will scarcely touch a morsel of food , and scarcely do a thing but cry . make up your mind to one thing , John ; if you mean to take I , for well for bad , you will have to take Gwenny with I . 
 ' I would take you with fifty gwennie , ' say I , ' although every one of they hat I , which I do not believe this little maid do , in the bottom of her heart . ' 
 ' no one can possibly hate you , John , ' she answer very softly ; and I be well pleased with this , than if she have call I the most noble and glorious man in the kingdom . 
 after this , we speak of ourselves and the way people would regard we , suppose that when Lorna come to be her own free mistress   as she must do in the course of time   she be to throw her rank aside , and refuse her title , and care not a fig for folk who care less than a fig - stalk for she , should shape her mind to its native bent , and to my perfect happiness . it be not my place to say much , lest I should appear to use an improper and selfish influence . and of course to all man of common sense , and to everybody of middle age   who must know well what be good for youth , the thought which my Lorna entertain would be enough to prove her madness . 
 not that we could not keep she well , comfortably , and with nice clothe , and plenty of flower , and fruit , and landscape , and the knowledge of our neighbour ' affair , and their kind interest in our own . still this would not be as if she be the owner of a county , and a haughty title ; and able to lead the first man of the age , by her mind , and face , and money . 
 therefore be I quite resolve not to have a word to say , while this young queen of wealth and beauty , and of nobleman 's desire , make her mind up how to act for her purest happiness . but to do her justice , this be not the first thing she be think of : the test of her judgment be only this , ' how will my love be happiest ? ' 
 ' now , John , ' she cry ; for she be so quick that she always have my thought beforehand ; ' why will you be backward , as if you care not for I ? do you dream that I be doubt ? my mind have be make up , good John , that you must be my husband , for well , I will not say how long , lest you should laugh at my folly . but I believe it be ever since you come , with your stocking off , and the loach . right early for I to make up my mind ; but you know that you make up your , John ; and , of course , I know it ; and that have a great effect on I . now , after all this age of loving , shall a trifle sever we ? ' 
 I tell she that it be no trifle , but a most important thing , to abandon wealth , and honour , and the brilliance of high life , and be despise by every one for such abundant folly . moreover , that I should appear a knave for take advantage of her youth , and boundless generosity , and ruin   as man would say   a noble maid by my selfishness . and I tell she outright , have work myself up by my own conversation , that she be bind to consult her guardian , and that without his knowledge , I would come no more to see she . her flash of pride at these last word make she look like an empress ; and I be about to explain myself well , but she put forth her hand and stop I . 
 ' I think that condition should rather have proceed from I . you be mistaken , Master Ridd , in suppose that I would think of receive you in secret . it be a different thing in Glen Doone , where all except yourself be thief , and when I be but a simple child , and oppress with constant fear . you be quite right in threaten to visit I thus no more ; but I think you might have wait for an invitation , sir . ' 
 ' and you be quite right , Lady Lorna , in point out my presumption . it be a fault that must ever be find in any speech of mine to you . ' 
 this I say so humbly , and not with any bitterness for I know that I have go too far and make she so polite a bow , that she forgive I in a moment , and we beg each other 's pardon . 
 ' now , will you allow I just to explain my own view of this matter , John ? ' say she , once more my darling . ' it may be a very foolish view , but I shall never change it . please not to interrupt I , dear , until you have hear I to the end . in the first place , it be quite certain that neither you nor I can be happy without the other . then what stand between we ? worldly position , and nothing else . I have no more education than you have , John Ridd ; nay , and not so much . my birth and ancestry be not one whit more pure than your , although they may be well know . your descent from ancient freeholder , for five - and - twenty generation of good , honest man , although you bear no coat of arm , be well than the lineage of nine proud english nobleman out of every ten I meet with . in manner , though your mighty strength , and hatred of any meanness , sometimes break out in violence of which I must try to cure you , dear in manner , if kindness , and gentleness , and modesty be the true thing want , you be immeasurably above any of our court - gallant ; who indeed have very little . as for difference of religion , we allow for one another , neither have be bring up in a bitterly pious manner . ' 
 here , though the tear be in my eye , at the love thing love say of I , I could not help a little laugh at the notion of any bitter piety be find among the Doones , or even in mother , for that matter . Lorna smile , in her sly manner , and go on again : 
 ' now , you see , I have prove my point ; there be nothing between we but worldly position if you can defend I against the Doones , for which , I trow , I may trust you . and worldly position mean wealth , and title , and the right to be in great house , and the pleasure of be envy . I have not be here for a year , John , without learn something . oh , I hate it ; how I hate it ! of all the people I know , there be but two , besides my uncle , who do not either covet , or det I . and who be those two , think you ? ' 
 ' Gwenny , for one , ' I answer . 
 ' yes , Gwenny , for one . and the queen , for the other . the one be too far below I   I mean , in her own opinion , and the other too high above . as for the woman who dislike I , without have even hear my voice , I simply have nothing to do with they . as for the man who covet I , for my land and money , I merely compare they with you , John Ridd ; and all thought of they be over . oh , John , you must never forsake I , however cross I be to you . I think you would have go , just now ; and though I would not move to stop you , my heart would have break . ' 
 ' you do not   catch I go in a hurry , ' I answer very sensibly , ' when the lovely maiden in all the world , and the good , and the dearest , love I . all my fear of you be go , darle Lorna , all my fear ' 
 ' be it possible you could fear I , John , after all we have be through together ? now you promise not to interrupt I ; be this fair behaviour ? well , let I see where I leave off oh , that my heart would have break . upon that point , I will say no more , lest you should grow conceited , John ; if anything could make you so . but I do assure you that half London however , upon that point also I will check my power of speech , lest you think I conceite . and now to put aside all nonsense ; though I have talk none for a year , John , have be so unhappy ; and now it be such a relief to I ' 
 ' then talk it for an hour , ' say I ; ' and let I sit and watch you . to I it be the very sweetest of all sweetest wisdom . ' 
 ' Nay , there be no time , ' she answer , glance at a jewelled timepiece , scarcely large than an oyster , which she draw from her waist - band ; and then she push it away , in confusion , lest its wealth should startle I . ' my uncle will come home in less than half an hour , dear : and you be not the one to take a side - passage , and avoid he . I shall tell he that you have be here ; and that I mean you to come again . ' 
 as Lorna say this , with a manner as confident as need be , I see that she have learn in town the power of her beauty , and know that she could do with most man aught she set her mind upon . and as she stand there , flush with pride and faith in her own loveliness , and radiant with the love itself , I feel that she must do exactly as she please with every one . for now , in turn , and elegance , and richness , and variety , there be nothing to compare with her face , unless it be her figure . therefore I give in , and say , 
 ' darling , do just what you please . only make no rogue of I . ' 
 for that she give I the simple , kind , and sweetest of all kiss ; and I go down the great stair grandly , think of nothing else but that . 




 CHAPTER LXVIII 

 JOHN be JOHN no long 

 it would be hard for I to tell the state of mind in which I live for a long time after this . I put away from I all torment , and the thought of future care , and the sight of difficulty ; and to myself appear , which mean that I become the lucky of lucky fellow , since the world itself begin . I think not of the harvest even , nor of the man who would get their wage without have earn they , nor of my mother 's anxiety and worry about John Fry 's great fatness   which be grow upon he , and how she would cry fifty time in a day , ' ah , if our John would only come home , how different everything would look ! ' 
 although there be no soldier now quarter at Plover 's barrow , all be busy in harass the country , and hang the people where the rebellion have thriven most , my mother , have receive from I a message contain my place of abode , contrive to send I , by the pack - horse , as fine a maund as need be of provision , and money , and other comfort . therein I find address to Colonel Jeremiah Stickles , in Lizzie 's good handwriting , half a side of the dried deer 's flesh , in which he rejoice so greatly . also , for Lorna , a fine green goose , with a little salt towards the tail , and new - lay egg inside it , as well as a bottle of brandied cherry , and seven , or it may have be eight pound of fresh homemade butter . moreover , to myself there be a letter full of good advice , excellently well express , and would have be of the great value , if I have care to read it . but I read all about the farm affair , and the man who have offer himself to our Betty for the five pound in her stocking ; as well as the antic of Sally Snowe , and how she have almost throw herself at Parson Bowden 's head   old enough to be her grandfather , because on the Sunday after the hanging of a Countisbury man , he have preach a beautiful sermon about christian love ; which Lizzie , with her sharp eye , find to be the work of good Bishop Ken . also I read that the Doones be quiet ; the parish round about have unite to feed they well through the harvest time , so that after the day 's hard work , the farmer might go to bed at night . and this plan have be find to answer well , and to save much trouble on both side , so that everybody wonder it have not be do before . but Lizzie think that the Doones could hardly be expect much long to put up with it , and probably would not have do so now , but for a little adversity ; to wit , that the famous Colonel Kirke have , in the most outrageous manner , hang no less than six of they , who be capture among the rebel ; for he say that man of their rank and breeding , and above all of their religion , should have know well than to join plough - boy , and carter , and pickaxeman , against our Lord the king , and his Holiness the Pope . this hang of so many Doones cause some indignation among people who be use to they ; and it seem for a while to check the rest from any spirit of enterprise . 
 moreover , I find from this same letter   which be pin upon the knuckle of a leg of mutton , for fear of be lose in straw   that good Tom Faggus be at home again , and nearly cure of his dreadful wound ; but intend to go to war no more , only to mind his family . and it grieve he more than anything he ever could have imagine , that his duty to his family , and the strong power of his conscience , so totally forbid he to come up and see after I . for now his design be to lead a new life , and be in charity with all man . many well man than he have be hang , he see no cause to doubt ; but by the grace of God he hop himself to cheat the gallow . 
 there be no further news of moment in this very clever letter , except that the price of horse ' shoe be go up again , though already twopence - farthe each ; and that Betty have break her lover 's head with the stocking full of money ; and then in the corner it be write that the distinguished man of war , and worshipful scholar , Master Bloxham , be now promote to take the toll , and catch all the rebel around our part . 
 Lorna be greatly pleased with the goose , and the butter , and the brandied cherry ; and the Earl Brandir himself declare that he never taste well than those last , and would beg the young man from the country to procure he instruction for make they . this nobleman , be as deaf as a post , and of a very solid mind , could never be bring to understand the nature of my thought towards Lorna . he look upon I as an excellent youth , who have rescue the maiden from the Doones , whom he cordially detest ; and learn that I have throw two of they out of window   as the story be tell he , he pat I on the back , and declare that his door would ever be open to I , and that I could not come too often . 
 I think this very kind of his lordship , especially as it enable I to see my darling Lorna , not indeed as often as I wish , but at any rate very frequently , and as many time as modesty   ever my lead principle   would in common conscience approve of . and I make up my mind that if ever I could help Earl Brandir , it would be as we say , when with brandy and water the ' proud moment of my life , ' when I could fulfil the pledge . 
 and I soon be able to help Lord Brandir , as I think , in two different way ; first of all as regard his mind , and then as concern his body : and the latter perhaps be the great service , at his time of life . but not to be too nice about that ; let I tell how these thing be . 
 Lorna say to I one day , be in a state of excitement whereto she be over prone , when reft of my slowness to steady she , 
 ' I will tell he , John ; I must tell he , John . it be mean of I to conceal it . ' 
 I think that she mean all about our love , which we have endeavour thrice to drill into his fine old ear ; but could not make he comprehend , without risk of bring the house down : and so I say , ' by all mean ; darling ; have another try at it . ' 
 Lorna , however , look at I for her eye tell more than tongue as much as to say , ' well , you be a stupid . we agree to let that subject rest . ' and then she see that I be vex at my own want of quickness ; and so she speak very kindly , 
 ' I mean about his poor son , dearest ; the son of his old age almost ; whose loss throw he into that dreadful cold for he go , without hat , to look for he which end in his lose the use of his dear old ear . I believe if we could only get he to Plover 's barrow for a month , he would be able to hear again . and look at his age ! he be not much over seventy , John , you know ; and I hope that you will be able to hear I , long after you be seventy , John . ' 
 ' well , ' say I , ' God settle that . or at any rate , he leave we time to think about those question , when we be over fifty . now let I know what you want , Lorna . the idea of my be seventy ! but you would still be beautiful . ' 
 ' to the one who love I , ' she answer , try to make wrinkle in her pure bright forehead : ' but if you will have common sense , as you always will , John , whether I wish it or otherwise I want to know whether I be bind , in honour , and in conscience , to tell my dear and good old uncle what I know about his son ? ' 
 ' first let I understand quite clearly , ' say I , never be in a hurry , except when passion move I , ' what his lordship think at present ; and how far his mind be urge with sorrow and anxiety . ' this be not the first time we have speak of the matter . 
 ' why , you know , John , well enough , ' she answer , wonder at my coolness , ' that my poor uncle still believe that his one beloved son will come to light and live again . he have make all arrangement accordingly : all his property be settle on that supposition . he know that young Alan always be what he call a " feckless ne'er - do - weel ; " but he love he all the more for that . he can not believe that he will die , without his son come back to he ; and he always have a bedroom ready , and a bottle of Alan 's favourite wine cool from out the cellar ; he have make I work he a pair of slipper from the size of a mouldy boot ; and if he hear of a new tobacco much as he hat the smell of it he will go to the other end of London to get some for Alan . now you know how deaf he be ; but if any one say , " Alan , " even in the place outside the door , he will make his courteous bow to the very high visitor , and be out there in a moment , and search the entire passage , and yet let no one know it . ' 
 ' it be a piteous thing , ' I say ; for Lorna 's eye be full of tear . 
 ' and he mean I to marry he . it be the pet scheme of his life . I be to grow more beautiful , and more highly teach , and graceful ; until it please Alan to come back , and demand I . can you understand this matter , John ? or do you think my uncle mad ? ' 
 ' Lorna , I should be mad myself , to call any other man mad , for hop . ' 
 ' then will you tell I what to do ? it make I very sorrowful . for I know that Alan Brandir lie below the sod in Doone - valley . ' 
 ' and if you tell his father , ' I answer softly , but clearly , ' in a few week he will lie below the sod in London ; at least if there be any . ' 
 ' perhaps you be right , John , ' she reply : ' to lose hope must be a dreadful thing , when one be turn of seventy . therefore I will never tell he . ' 
 the other way in which I manage to help the good Earl Brandir be of less true moment to he ; but as he could not know of the first , this be the one which move he . and it happen pretty much as follow though I hardly like to tell , because it advance I to such a height as I myself be giddy at ; and which all my friend resent greatly   save those of my own family , and even now be sometimes bitter , in spite of all my humility . now this be a matter of history , because the King be concern in it ; and be so strongly misunderstood ,   especially in my own neighbourhood , I will overcome so far as I can   my diffidence in tell it . 
 the good Earl Brandir be a man of the noble charity . true charity begin at home , and so do his ; and be afraid of lose the way , if it go abroad . so this good nobleman keep his money in a handsome pewter box , with his coat of arm upon it , and a double lid and lock . moreover , there be a heavy chain , fix to a staple in the wall , so that none might carry off the pewter with the gold inside of it . Lorna tell I the box be full , for she have see he go to it , and she often think that it would be nice for we to begin the world with . I tell she that she must not allow her mind to dwell upon thing of this sort ; be wholly against the last commandment set up in our church at Oare . 
 now one evening towards September , when the day be draw in , look back at the house to see whether Lorna be look after I , I espy   by a little glimpse , as it be   a pair of villainous fellow   about whom there could be no mistake   watch from the thicket - corner , some hundred yard or so behind the good Earl 's dwelling . ' there be mischief afoot , ' think I to myself , be thoroughly conversant with theft , from my knowledge of the Doones ; ' how will be the moon to - night , and when may we expect the watch ? ' 
 I find that neither moon nor watch could be look for until the morning ; the moon , of course , before the watch , and more likely to be punctual . therefore I resolve to wait , and see what those two villain do , and save   if it be possible   the Earl of Brandir 's pewter box . but inasmuch as those bad man be almost sure to have see I leave the house and look back , and strike out on the London road , I march along at a merry pace , until they could not discern I ; and then I fetch a compass round , and refresh myself at a certain inn , entitle the cross - bone and Buttons . 
 here I remain until it be very nearly as dark as pitch ; and the house be full of footpad and cutthroat , I think it right to leave they . one or two come after I , in the hope of design a stratagem ; but I drop they in the darkness ; and know all the neighbourhood well , I take up my position , two hour before midnight , among the shrub at the eastern end of Lord Brandir 's mansion . hence , although I might not see , I could scarcely fail to hear , if any unlawful entrance either at back or front be make . 
 from my own observation , I think it likely that the attack would be in the rear ; and so indeed it come to pass . for when all the light be quench , and all the house be quiet , I hear a low and wily whistle from a clump of tree close by ; and then three figure pass between I and a whitewashed wall , and come to a window which open into a part of the servant ' basement . this window be carefully raise by some one inside the house ; and after a little whispering , and something which sound like a kiss , all the three man enter . 
 ' oh , you villain ! ' I say to myself , ' this be bad than any Doone job ; because there be treachery in it . ' but without wait to consider the subject from a moral point of view , I creep along the wall , and enter very quietly after they ; be rather uneasy about my life , because I bear no fire - arm , and have nothing more than my holly staff , for even a violent combat . 
 to I this be matter of deep regret , as I follow these vile man inward . nevertheless I be resolve that my Lorna should not be rob again . through we   or at least through our Annie   she have lose that brilliant necklace ; which then be her only birthright : therefore it behove I doubly , to preserve the pewter box ; which must belong to she in the end , unless the thief get hold of it . 
 I go along very delicately   as a man who have learn to wrestle can do , although he may weigh twenty stone , follow carefully the light , bring by the traitorous maid , and shake in her loose dishonest hand . I see she lead the man into a little place call a pantry ; and there she give they cordial , and I could hear they boast . 
 not to be too long over it which they be much inclined to be I follow they from this drinking - bout , by the aid of the light they bear , as far as Earl Brandir 's bedroom , which I know , because Lorna have show it to I that I might admire the tapestry . but I have say that no horse could ever be shod as the horse be shod therein , unless he have the foot of a frog , as well as a frog to his foot . and Lorna have be vex at this   as taste and high art always be , at any small accurate knowledge , and so she have bring I out again , before I have time to admire thing . 
 now , keep well away in the dark , yet near than be necessary to my own dear Lorna 's room , I see these fellow try the door of the good Earl Brandir , know from the maid , of course , that his lordship could hear nothing , except the name of Alan . they try the lock , and push at it , and even set their knee upright ; but a scottish nobleman may be trust to secure his door at night . so they be force to break it open ; and at this the guilty maid , or woman , run away . these three rogue for rogue they be , and no charity may deny it burst into Earl Brandir 's room , with a light , and a crowbar , and fire - arm . I think to myself that this be hard upon an honest nobleman ; and if further mischief could be save , I would try to save it . 
 when I come to the door of the room , be myself in shadow , I behold two bad man try vainly to break open the pewter box , and the third with a pistol - muzzle lay to the night - cap of his lordship . with foul face and yet fouler word , this man be demand the key of the box , which the other man could by no mean open , neither drag it from the chain . 
 ' I tell you , ' say this age Earl , begin to understand at last what these rogue be up for ; ' I will give no key to you . it all belong to my boy , Alan . no one else shall have a farthing . ' 
 ' then you may count your moment , lord . the key be in your old cramped hand . one , two , and at three , I shoot you . ' 
 I see that the old man be abroad ; not with fear , but with great wonder , and the regret of deafness . and I see that rather would he be shoot than let these man go rob his son , bury now , or lay to bleach in the tangle of the wood , three , or it might be four year agone , but still alive to his father . Hereupon my heart be move ; and I resolve to interfere . the thief with the pistol begin to count , as I cross the floor very quietly , while the old Earl fearfully gaze at the muzzle , but clench still tight his wrinkle hand . the villain , with hair all over his eye , and the great horse - pistol level , cry ' three , ' and pull the trigger ; but luckily , at that very moment , I strike up the barrel with my staff , so that the shot pierce the tester , and then with a spin and a thwack I bring the good holly down upon the rascal 's head , in a manner which stretch he upon the floor . 
 meanwhile the other two robber have take the alarm , and rush at I , one with a pistol and one with a hanger ; which force I to be very lively . fear the pistol most , I fling the heavy velvet curtain of the bed across , that he might not see where to aim at I , and then stoop very quickly I catch up the senseless robber , and set he up for a shield and target ; whereupon he be shoot immediately , without have the pain of know it ; and a happy thing it be for he . now the other two be at my mercy , be man below the average strength ; and no hanger , except in most skilful hand , as well as firm and strong one , have any chance to a powerful man arm with a stout cudgel , and thoroughly practise in single - stick . 
 so I take these two rogue , and bind they together ; and leave they under charge of the butler   a worthy and shrewd Scotchman , I myself go in search of the constable , whom , after some few hour , I find ; neither be they so drunk but what they could take roped man to prison . in the morning , these two man be bring before the Justices of the Peace : and now my wonderful luck appear ; for the merit of have defeat , and catch they , would never have raise I one step in the State , or in public consideration , if they have only be common robber , or even notorious murderer . but when these fellow be recognise , by some one in the court , as protestant witness out of employment , companion and understrapper to Oates , and Bedloe , and carstair , and hand in glove with Dangerfield , Turberville ; and Dugdale in a word , the very man against whom his Majesty the King bear the bitter rancour , but whom he have hitherto fail to catch when this be lay before the public   with emphasis and admiration , at least a dozen man come up , whom I have never see before , and pray I to accept their congratulation , and to be sure to remember they ; for all be of neglect merit , and require no more than a piece of luck . 
 I answer they very modestly , and each accord to his worth , as state by himself , who of course could judge the good . the magistrate make I many compliment , ten time more than I deserve , and take good care to have they copy , that his Majesty might see they . and ere the case be thoroughly hear , and those poor fellow be commit , more than a score of generous man have offer to lend I a hundred pound , wherewith to buy a new Court suit , when call before his Majesty . 
 now this may seem very strange to we who live in a well and purer age or say at least that we do so and yet who be we to condemn our father for teach we well manner , and at their own expense ? with these point any virtuous man be bind to deal quite tenderly , make allowance for corruption , and not be too sure of himself . and to tell the truth , although I have see so little of the world as yet , that which astonish I in the matter , be not so much that they pay I court , as that they find out so soon the expediency of do it . 
 in the course of that same afternoon I be send for by his Majesty . he have summon first the good Earl Brandir , and receive the tale from he , not without exaggeration , although my lord be a Scotchman . but the chief thing his Majesty care to know be that , beyond all possible doubt , these be the very precious fellow from perjury turn to robbery . 
 be fully assure at last of this , his Majesty have rub his hand , and order the boot of a strict pattern   which he himself have invent   to be bring at once , that he might have they in the good possible order . and he oil they himself , and express his fear that there be no man in London quite competent to work they . nevertheless he would try one or two , rather than wait for his pleasure , till the torturer come from Edinburgh . 
 the next thing he do be to send for I ; and in great alarm and flurry I put on my good clothe , and hire a fashionable hairdresser , and drink half a gallon of ale , because both my hand be shake . then forth I set , with my holly staff , wish myself well out of it . I be show at once , and before I desire it , into his Majesty 's presence , and there I stand most humbly , and make the good bow I could think of . 
 as I could not advance any far for I see that the Queen be present , which frighten I tenfold his Majesty , in the most gracious manner , come down the room to encourage I . and as I remain with my head bend down , he tell I to stand up , and look at he . 
 ' I have see thee before , young man , he say ; ' thy form be not one to be forget . where be it ? thou art most likely to know . ' 
 ' may it please your Most gracious Majesty the king , ' I answer , find my voice in a manner which surprise myself ; ' it be in the Royal Chapel . ' 
 now I mean no harm whatever by this . I ought to have say the ' Ante - chapel , ' but I could not remember the word , and fear to keep the King look at I . 
 ' I be well - pleased , ' say his Majesty , with a smile which almost make his dark and stubborn face look pleasant , ' to find that our great subject , great I mean in the bodily form , be also a good Catholic . Thou needest not say otherwise . the time shall be , and that right soon , when man shall be proud of the one true faith . ' here he stop , have go rather far ! but the gleam of his heavy eye be such that I durst not contradict . 
 ' this be that great Johann Reed , ' say her Majesty , come forward , because the King be in meditation ; ' for whom I have so much hear , from the dear , dear Lorna . ah , she be not of this black countree , she be of the breet Italie . ' 
 I have try to write it , as she say it : but it want a well scholar to express her mode of speech . 
 ' now , John Ridd , ' say the King , recover from his thought about the true Church , and think that his wife be not to take the lead upon I ; ' thou hast do great service to the realm , and to religion . it be good to save Earl Brandir , a loyal and catholic nobleman ; but it be great service to catch two of the vile bloodhound ever lay on by heretic . and to make they shoot one another : it be rare ; it be rare , my lad . now ask we anything in reason ; thou canst carry any honour , on thy club , like Hercules . what be thy chief ambition , lad ? ' 
 ' well , ' say I , after think a little , and mean to make the most of it , for so the Queen 's eye convey to I ; ' my mother always use to think that have be school at Tiverton , with thirty mark a year to pay , I be worthy of a coat of arm . and that be what she long for . ' 
 ' a good lad ! a very good lad , ' say the King , and he look at the Queen , as if almost in joke ; ' but what be thy condition in life ? ' 
 ' I be a freeholder , ' I answer , in my confusion , ' ever since the time of King Alfred . a Ridd be with he in the isle of Athelney , and we hold our farm by gift from he ; or at least people say so . we have have three very good harvest run , and might support a coat of arm ; but for myself I want it not . ' 
 ' thou shalt have a coat , my lad , ' say the King , smile at his own humour ; ' but it must be a large one to fit thee . and more than that shalt thou have , John Ridd , be of such loyal breed , and have do such service . ' 
 and while I wonder what he mean , he call to some of the people in wait at the farth end of the room , and they bring he a little sword , such as Annie would skewer a turkey with . then he signify to I to kneel , which I do   after dust the board , for the sake of my good breech , and then he give I a little tap very nicely upon my shoulder , before I know what he be up to ; and say , ' Arise , Sir John Ridd ! ' 
 this astonish and amaze I to such extent of loss of mind , that when I get up I look about , and think what the snowe would think of it . and I say to the King , without form of speech , 
 ' Sir , I be very much oblige . but what be I to do with it ? ' 




 CHAPTER LXIX 

 not to be PUT up with 

 the coat of arm , devise for I by the Royal herald , be of great size , and rich colour , and full of bright imagining . they do I the honour to consult I first , and to take no notice of my advice . for I beg that there might be a good - sized cow on it , so as to stamp our pat of butter before they go to market : also a horse on the other side , and a flock snow up at the bottom . but the gentleman would not hear of this ; and to find something more appropriate , they inquire strictly into the annal of our family . I tell they , of course , all about King Alfred ; upon which they settle that one quarter should be , three cake on a bar , with a lion regardant , do upon a field of gold . also I tell they that very likely there have be a Ridd in the battle fight , not very far from Plover 's barrow , by the Earl of Devon against the Danes , when Hubba their chief be kill , and the sacred standard take . as some of the Danes be say to be bury , even upon land of ours , and we call their graf   if such they be   even to this day ' barrow , ' the herald quite agree with I that a Ridd might have be there , or thereabout ; and if he be there , he be almost certain to have do his good , be in sight of hearth and home ; and it be plain that he must have have good leg to be at the same time both there and in Athelney ; and good leg be an argument for good arm ; and suppose a man of this sort to have do his utmost   as the manner of the Ridds be , it be next to certain that he himself must have capture the standard . moreover , the name of our farm be pure proof ; a plover be a wild bird , just the same as a raven be . upon this chain of reasoning , and without any weak misgiving , they charge my grow escutcheon with a black raven on a ground of red . and the next thing which I mention possess absolute certainty , to wit , that a pig with two head have be bear upon our farm , not more than two hundred year agone   although he die within a week , my third quarter be make at once , by a two - head boar with noble tusk , sable upon silver . all this be very fierce and fine ; and so I press for a peaceful corner in the low dexter , and obtain a wheat - sheaf set upright , gold upon a field of green . 
 here I be inclined to pause , and admire the effect ; for even De Whichehalse could not show a bearing so magnificent . but the herald say that it look a mere sign - board , without a good motto under it ; and the motto must have my name in it . they offer I first , ' ridd non ridendu ' ; but I say , ' for God 's sake , gentleman , let I forget my Latin . ' then they propose , ' ridd readeth riddle ' : but I beg they not to set down such a lie ; for no Ridd ever have make , or make out , such a thing as a riddle , since Exmoor itself begin . thirdly , they give I , ' ridd never be ride , ' and fear to make any further objection , I let they inscribe it in bronze upon blue . the herald think that the King would pay for this noble achievement ; but his Majesty , although graciously pleased with their ingenuity , decline in the most decide manner to pay a farthing towards it ; and as I have now no money leave , the herald become as blue as azure , and as red as gule ; until her Majesty the Queen come forward very kindly , and say that if his Majesty give I a coat of arm , I be not to pay for it ; therefore she herself do so quite handsomely , and feel goodwill towards I in consequence . 
 now be in a hurry so far at least as it be in my nature to hurry to get to the end of this narrative , be it likely that I would have dwell so long upon my coat of arm , but for some good reason ? and this good reason be that Lorna take the great pride in it , and think   or at any rate say   that it quite throw into the shade , and eclipse , all her own ancient glory . and half in fun , and half in earnest , she call I ' Sir John ' so continually , that at last I be almost angry with she ; until her eye be bedew with tear ; and then I be angry with myself . 
 begin to be short of money , and grow anxious about the farm , long also to show myself and my noble escutcheon to mother , I take advantage of Lady Lorna 's interest with the Queen , to obtain my acquittance and full discharge from even nominal custody . it have be intend to keep I in waiting , until the return of Lord Jeffreys , from that awful circuit of shamble , through which his name be still use by mother to frighten their child into bed . and right glad be I for even London shrink with horror at the news to escape a man so bloodthirsty , savage , and even to his friend   among whom I be reckon   malignant . 
 Earl Brandir be greatly pleased with I , not only for have save his life , but for save that which he value more , the wealth lay by for Lord Alan . and he introduce I to many great people , who quite kindly encourage I , and promise to help I in every way when they hear how the King have speak . as for the furrier , he could never have enough of my society ; and this worthy man , pray my commendation , demand of I one thing only to speak of he as I find he . as I have find he many a Sunday , furbish up old fur for new , with a glaze to conceal the moth ' ravage , I beg he to reconsider the point , and not to demand such accuracy . he say , ' well , well ; all trade have trick , especially the trick of business ; and I must take he if I be his true friend accord to his own description . ' this I be glad enough to do ; because it save so much trouble , and I have no money to spend with he . but still he request the use of my name ; and I beg he to do the good with it , as I never have keep a banker . and the ' John Ridd cuff , ' and the ' Sir John mantles , ' and the ' Holly - staff cape , ' he put into his window , as the winter be come on , ay and sell   for everybody be burn with gossip about I , must have make this good man 's fortune ; since the excess of price over value be the true test of success in life . 
 to come away from all this stuff , which grieve a man in London when the brisk air of the autumn clear its way to Ludgate Hill , and clever ' prentice run out , and sniff at it , and feed upon it   have little else to eat ; and when the horse from the country be a goodly sight to see , with the rasp of winter bristle rise through and among the soft summer - coat ; and when the new straw begin to come in , golden with the harvest gloss , and smell most divinely at those strange livery - stable , where the nag be put quite tail to tail ; and when all the London folk themselves be ask about white frost   from recollection of childhood ; then , I say , such a yearning seize I for moory crag , and for dewy blade , and even the grunting of our sheep   when the sun go down , that nothing but the new wisps of Samson could have hold I in London town . 
 Lorna be move with equal longing towards the country and country way ; and she speak quite as much of the glistening dew as she do of the smell of our oven . and here let I mention although the two be quite distinct and different that both the dew and the bread of Exmoor may be seek , whether high or low , but never find elsewhere . the dew be so crisp , and pure , and pearly , and in such abundance ; and the bread be so sweet , so kind , and homely , you can eat a loaf , and then another . 
 now while I be walk daily in and out great crowd of man   few of whom have any freedom from the care of money , and many of whom be even morbid with a bad pest call ' politic ' , I could not be quit of think how we jostle one another . God have make the earth quite large , with a spread of land large enough for all to live on , without fight . also a mighty spread of water , lay hand on sand and cliff with a solemn voice in storm - time ; and in the gentle weather move man to thought of equity . this , as well , be full of food ; be two - third of the world , and reserve for devouring knowledge ; by the time the son of man have feed away the dry land . yet before the land itself have acknowledge touch of man , upon one in a hundred acre ; and before one mile in ten thousand of the exhaustless ocean have ever feel the plunge of hook , or comb of the haul - net ; lo , we crawl , in flock together upon the hot ground that sting we , even as the black grub crowd upon the harry nettle ! surely we be too much give to follow the track of each other . 
 however , for a moralist , I never set up , and never shall , while common sense abide with I . such a man must be very wretched in this pure dearth of morality ; like a fisherman where no fish be ; and most of we have enough to do to attend to our own moral . enough that I resolve to go ; and as Lorna could not come with I , it be even bad than stop . nearly everybody vow that I be a great fool indeed , to neglect so rudely which be the proper word , they say the pushing of my fortune . but I answer that to push be rude , and I leave it to people who have no room ; and think that my fortune must be heavy , if it would not move without push . 
 Lorna cry when I come away   which give I great satisfaction , and she send a whole trunkful of thing for mother and Annie , and even Lizzie . and she seem to think , though she say it not , that I make my own occasion for go , and might have stay on till the winter . whereas I know well that my mother would think   and every one on the farm the same   that here I have be in London , lag , and take my pleasure , and look at shop , upon pretence of King 's business , and leave the harvest to reap itself , not to mention the spending of money ; while all the time there be nothing whatever , except my own love of adventure and sport , to keep I from come home again . but I know that my coat of arm , and title , would turn every bit of this grumble into fine admiration . 
 and so it fall out , to a great extent than even I desire ; for all the parish round about united in a sumptuous dinner , at the Mother Melldrum inn for now that good lady be dead , and her name and face set on a sign - post to which I be invite , so that it be as good as a summon . and if my health be no well next day , it be not from want of good wish , any more than from stint of the liquor . 
 it be needless to say that the real gentry for a long time treat my new honour with contempt and ridicule ; but gradually as they find that I be not such a fool as to claim any equality with they , but go about my farm - work , and throw another man at wrestling , and touch my hat to the magistrate , just the same as ever ; some gentleman of the high blood of which we think a great deal more than of gold , around our neighbourhood actually express a desire to make my acquaintance . and when , in a manner quite straightforward , and wholly free from bitterness , I thank they for this   which appear to I the high honour yet offer I , but decline to go into their company because it would make I uncomfortable , and themselves as well , in a different way , they do what nearly all englishman do , when a thing be right and sensible . they shake hand with I ; and say that they could not deny but that there be reason in my view of the matter . and although they themselves must be the loser which be a handsome thing to say they would wait until I be a little old and more aware of my own value . 
 now this remind I how it be that an english gentleman be so far in front of foreign nobleman and prince . I have see at time , a little , both of one and of the other , and make more than due allowance for the difficulty of language , and the difference of training , upon the whole , the balance be in favour of our people . and this , because we have two weight , solid and   even in scale of manner   outweigh all light complaisance ; to wit , the inborn love of justice , and the power of abide . 
 yet some people may be surprised that man with any love of justice , whether inborn or otherwise , could continue to abide the arrogance , and rapacity , and tyranny of the Doones . 
 for now as the winter pass , the Doones be not keep themselves at home , as in honour they be bind to do . twenty sheep a week , and one fat ox , and two stout red deer   for wholesome change of diet , as well as threescore bushel of flour , and two hogshead and a half of cider , and a hundredweight of candle , not to mention other thing of almost every variety which they get by insist upon it surely these might have suffice to keep the people in their place , with no outburst of wantonness . nevertheless , it be not so ; they have make complaint about something too much ewe - mutton , I think it be and in spite of all the pledge give , they have ride forth , and carry away two maiden of our neighbourhood . 
 now these two maiden be know , because they have serve the beer at an ale - house ; and many man who have look at they , over a pint or quart vessel   especially as they be comely girl , think that it be very hard for they to go in that way , and perhaps themselves unwilling . and their mother   although she have take some money , which the Doones be always full of   declare that it be a robbery ; and though it increase for a while the custom , that must soon fall off again . and who would have her two girl now , clever as they be and good ? 
 before we have finish meditate upon this loose outrage for so I at least would call it , though people accustomed to the law may take a different view of it we have news of a thing far bad , which turn the heart of our woman sick . this I will tell in most careful language , so as to give offence to none , if skill of word may help it .  
   the follow story be strictly true ; and true it be that 
  the country - people rise , to a man , at this dastard cruelty , 
  and do what the Government fail to do . Ed . 
 Mistress Margery Badcock , a healthy and upright young woman , with a good rich colour , and one of the fine hen - roost anywhere round our neighbourhood , be nurse her child about six of the clock , and look out for her husband . now this child be too old to be nurse , as everybody tell she ; for he could run , say two yard alone , and perhaps four or five , by hold to handle . and he have a way of look round , and spread his leg , and laugh , with his brave little body well fetch up , after a desperate journey to the end of the table , which his mother say nothing could equal . nevertheless , he would come to be nurse , as regular as a clock , almost ; and , inasmuch as he be the first , both father and mother make much of he ; for God only know whether they could ever compass such another one . 
 Christopher Badcock be a tenant farmer , in the parish of Martinhoe , rent some fifty acre of land , with a right of common attach to they ; and at this particular time , be now the month of February , and fine open weather , he be hard at work plough and prepare for spring corn . therefore his wife be not surprised although the dusk be fall , that farmer Christopher should be at work in ' blind man 's holiday , ' as we call it . 
 but she be surprised , nay astonish , when by the light of the kitchen fire   brighten up for her husband , she see six or seven great armed man burst into the room upon she ; and she scream so that the maid in the back kitchen hear she , but be afraid to come to help . two of the strong and fierce man at once seize poor young Margery ; and though she fight for her child and home , she be but an infant herself in their hand . in spite of tear , and shriek , and struggle , they tear the babe from the mother 's arm , and cast it on the lime ash floor ; then they bear she away to their horse   for by this time she be senseless , and tell the other to sack the house , ride off with their prize to the valley . and from the description of one of those two , who carry off the poor woman , I know beyond all doubt that it be Carver Doone himself . 
 the other Doones be leave behind , and grieve perhaps in some respect , set to with a will to scour the house , and to bring away all that be good to eat . and be a little vex herein   for the Badcocks be not a rich couple   and find no more than bacon , and egg , and cheese , and little item , and nothing to drink but water ; in a word , their taste be offend , they come back , to the kitchen , and stamp ; and there be the baby lie . 
 by evil luck , this child begin to squeal about his mother , have be pet hitherto , and will not to get all he want , by raise his voice but a little . now the mark of the floor be upon his head , as the maid   who have steal to look at he , when the rough man be swear upstairs   give evidence . and she put a dish - cloth under his head , and kiss he , and run away again . her name be Honour Jose , and she mean what be right by her master and mistress ; but could not help be frightened . and many woman have blame she , as I think unduly , for her mode of forsake baby so . if it have be her own baby , instinct rather than reason might have have the day with she ; but the child be bear of her mistress , she wish he good luck , and leave he , as the fierce man come downstairs . and be alarm by their power of language   because they have find no silver , she creep away in a breathless hurry , and afraid how her breath might come back to she . for oftentime she have hiccough . 
 while this good maid be in the oven , by side of back - kitchen fireplace , with a faggot of wood draw over she , and lie so that her own heart beat worse than if she be bake ; the man   as I say before   come downstairs , and stamp around the baby . 
 ' Rowland , be the bacon good ? ' one of they ask with an oath or two ; ' it be too bad of Carver to go off with the only prize , and leave we in a starve cottage ; and not enough to eat for two of we . fetch down the stave of the rack , my boy . what be farmer to have for supper ? ' 
 ' naught but an onion or two , and a loaf and a rasher of rusty bacon . these poor devil live so badly , they be not worth rob . ' 
 ' no game ! then let we have a game of loriot with the baby ! it will be the good thing that could befall a lusty infant heretic . ride a cock - horse to Banbury Cross . Bye , bye , baby bunting ; toss he up , and let I see if my wrist be steady . ' 
 the cruelty of this man be a thing it make I sick to speak of ; enough that when the poor baby fall   without attempt at cry or scream , think it part of his usual play , when they toss he up , to come down again , the maid in the oven of the back - kitchen , not be any door between , hear they say as follow , 
  ' if any man asketh who kill thee , 
  say ' twa the Doones of Bagworthy . '  

    always pronounce ' Badgery . ' 
 now I think that when we hear this story , and poor Kit Badcock come all around , in a sort of half - crazy manner , not look up at any one , but drop his eye , and ask whether we think he have be well - treat , and seem void of regard for life , if this be all the style of it ; then have know he a lusty man , and a fine singer in an ale - house , and much incline to lay down the law , as show a high hand about woman , I really think that it move we more than if he have go about rant , and raving , and vow revenge upon every one . 




 CHAPTER LXX 

 compel to volunteer 

 there have be some trouble in our own home during the previous autumn , while yet I be in London . for certain note fugitive from the army of King Monmouth   which he himself have desert , in a low and currish manner , have fail to obtain free shipment from the coast near Watersmouth , have return into the wild of Exmoor , trust to lurk , and be comfort among the common people . neither be they disappointed , for a certain length of time ; nor in the end be their disappointment cause by fault on our part . Major Wade be one of they ; an active and well - mean man ; but prone to fail in courage , upon last trial ; although in a moment ready . Squire John Whichehalse   not the baron   and Parson Powell   catch he   two or three month before my return   in Farley farmhouse , near Brendon . he have be up at our house several time ; and Lizzie think a great deal of he . and well I know that if at that time I have be in the neighbourhood , he should not have be take so easily . 
    not our parson Bowden , nor any more a friend of his . our 
  Parson Bowden never have naught whatever to do with it ; and 
  never smoke a pipe with Parson Powell after it . J.R. 
 John Birch , the farmer who have shelter he , be so fearful of punishment , that he hang himself , in a few day ' time , and even before he be apprehend . but nothing be do to Grace Howe , of Bridgeball , who have be Wade 's great comforter ; neither be anything do to we ; although Eliza have add greatly to mother 's alarm and danger by fall upon Rector Powell , and most soundly rat he for his meanness , and his cruelty , and cowardice , as she call it , in set man with firearm upon a poor helpless fugitive , and rob all our neighbourhood of its fame for hospitality . however , by mean of Sergeant Bloxham , and his good report of we , as well as by virtue of Wade 's confession   which prove of use to the Government   my mother escape all penalty . 
 it be likely enough that good folk will think it hard upon our neighbourhood to be threaten , and sometimes heavily punish , for kindness and humanity ; and yet to be leave to help ourselves against tyranny , and base rapine . and now at last our gorge be risen , and our heart in tumult . we have bear our trouble long , as a wise and wholesome chastisement ; quite content to have some few thing of our own unmeddle with . but what could a man dare to call his own , or what right could he have to wish for it , while he leave his wife and child at the pleasure of any stranger ? 
 the people come flock all around I , at the blacksmith 's forge , and the Brendon alehouse ; and I could scarce come out of church , but they get I among the tombstone . they all agree that I be bind to take command and management . I bid they go to the magistrate , but they say they have be too often . then I tell they that I have no wit for ordering of an armament , although I could find fault enough with the one which have not succeed . but they would hearken to none of this . 
 all they say be ' try to lead we ; and we will try not to run away . ' 
 this seem to I to be common sense , and good stuff , instead of mere bragging ; moreover , I myself be move by the bitter wrong of Margery , have know she at the Sunday - school , ere ever I go to Tiverton ; and have in those day , serious thought of make she my sweetheart ; although she be three year my elder . but now I feel this difficulty the Doones have behave very well to our farm , and to mother , and all of we , while I be away in London . therefore , would it not be shabby , and mean , for I to attack they now ? 
 yet be press still hard and hard , as day by day the excitement grow   with more and more talk over it , and no one else come forward to undertake the business , I agree at last to this ; that if the Doones , upon fair challenge , would not endeavour to make amend by give up Mistress Margery , as well as the man who have slay the babe , then I would lead the expedition , and do my good to subdue they . all our man be content with this , be thoroughly well assure from experience , that the haughty robber would only shoot any man who durst approach they with such proposal . 
 and then arise a difficult question who be to take the risk of make overture so unpleasant ? I wait for the rest to offer ; and as none be ready , the burden fall on I , and seem to be of my own inviting . hence I undertake the task , soon than reason about it ; for to give the cause of everything be bad than to go through with it . 
 it may have be three of the afternoon , when leave my witness behind   for they prefer the background   I appear with our Lizzie 's white handkerchief upon a kidney - bean stick , at the entrance to the robber ' dwelling . scarce know what might come of it , I have take the wise precaution of fasten a Bible over my heart , and another across my spinal column , in case of have to run away , with rude man shoot after I . for my mother say that the Word of God would stop a two - inch bullet , with three ounce of powder behind it . now I take no weapon , save those of the Spirit , for fear of be misunderstood . but I could not bring myself to think that any of honourable birth would take advantage of an unarmed man come in guise of peace to they . 
 and this conclusion of mine hold good , at least for a certain length of time ; inasmuch as two decent Doones appear , and hearing of my purpose , offer , without violence , to go and fetch the captain ; if I would stop where I be , and not begin to spy about anything . to this , of course , I agree at once ; for I want no more spying , because I have thorough knowledge of all in and out already . therefore , I stand wait steadily , with one hand in my pocket feel a sample of corn for market ; and the other against the rock , while I wonder to see it so brown already . 
 those man come back in a little while , with a sharp short message that Captain Carver would come out and speak to I by - and - by , when his pipe be finish . accordingly , I wait long , and we talk about the sign of bloom for the come apple season , and the rain that have fall last Wednesday night , and the principal dearth of Devonshire , that it will not grow many cowslip which we quite agree to be the prettiest of spring flower ; and all the time I be wonder how many black and deadly deed these two innocent youth have commit , even since last Christmas . 
 at length , a heavy and haughty step sound along the stone roof of the way ; and then the great Carver Doone draw up , and look at I rather scornfully . not with any speak scorn , nor flash of strong contumely ; but with that air of think little , and pray not to be trouble , which always vex a man who feel that he ought not to be despise so , and yet know not how to help it . 
 ' what be it you want , young man ? ' he ask , as if he have never see I before . 
 in spite of that strong loathing which I always feel at sight of he , I command my temper moderately , and tell he that I be come for his good , and that of his worshipful company , far more than for my own . that a general feeling of indignation have arise among we at the recent behaviour of certain young man , for which he might not be answerable , and for which we would not condemn he , without know the right of the question . but I beg he clearly to understand that a vile and inhuman wrong have be do , and such as we could not put up with ; but that if he would make what amend he could by restore the poor woman , and give up that odious brute who have slay the harmless infant , we would take no further motion ; and thing should go on as usual . as I put this in the few word that would meet my purpose , I be grieve to see a disdainful smile spread on his sallow countenance . then he make I a bow of mock courtesy , and reply as follow , 
 ' Sir John , your new honour have turn your poor head , as might have be expect . we be not in the habit of desert anything that belong to we ; far less our sacred relative . the insolence of your demand well - nigh outdo the ingratitude . if there be a man upon Exmoor who have grossly ill - use we , kidnap our young woman , and slay half a dozen of our young man , you be that outrageous rogue , Sir John . and after all this , how have we behave ? we have lay no hand upon your farm , we have not carry off your woman , we have even allow you to take our queen , by creep and crawl treachery ; and we have give you leave of absence to help your cousin the highwayman , and to come home with a title . and now , how do you requite we ? by inflame the boorish indignation at a little frolic of our young man ; and by come with insolent demand , to yield to which would ruin we . ah , you ungrateful viper ! ' 
 as he turn away in sorrow from I , shake his head at my badness , I become so overcome   never have be quite assure , even by people 's praise , about my own goodness ; moreover , the light which he throw upon thing differ so greatly from my own , that , in a word not to be too long I fear that I be a villain . and with many bitter pang for I have bad thing to repent of I begin at my leisure to ask myself whether or not this bill of indictment against John Ridd be true . some of it I know to be   however much I condemn myself   altogether out of reason ; for instance , about my go away with Lorna very quietly , over the snow , and to save my love from be starve away from I . in this there be no creep neither crawl treachery ; for all be do with slide ; and yet I be so out of training for be charge by other people beyond mine own conscience , that Carver Doone 's harsh word come on I , like prickly spinach sow with rake . therefore I reply , and say , 
 ' it be true that I owe you gratitude , sir , for a certain time of forbearance ; and it be to prove my gratitude that I be come here now . I do not think that my evil deed can be set against your own ; although I can not speak flowingly upon my good deed as you can . I take your queen because you starve she , have steal she long before , and kill her mother and brother . this be not for I to dwell upon now ; any more than I would say much about your murdering of my father . but how the balance hang between we , God know well than thou or I , thou low miscreant , Carver Doone . ' 
 I have work myself up , as I always do , in the manner of heavy man ; grow hot like an ill - washered wheel revolving , though I start with a cool axle ; and I feel ashamed of myself for heat , and ready to ask pardon . but Carver Doone regard I with a noble and fearless grandeur . 
 ' I have give thee thy choice , John Ridd , ' he say in a lofty manner , which make I drop away under he ; ' I always wish to do my good with the bad people who come near I . and of all I have ever meet with thou art the very bad , Sir John , and the most dishonest . ' 
 now after all my labour to pay every man to a penny , and to allow the woman over , when among the couch - grass   which be a sad thing for their gown , to be charge like this , I say , so amazed I that I stand , with my leg quite open , and ready for an earthquake . and the scornful way in which he say ' Sir John , ' go to my very heart , remind I of my littleness . but see no use in bandy word , nay , rather the chance of mischief , I do my good to look calmly at he , and to say with a quiet voice , ' Farewell , Carver Doone , this time , our day of reckoning be nigh . ' 
 ' Thou fool , it be come , ' he cry , leap aside into the niche of rock by the doorway ; ' fire ! ' 
 save for the quickness of spring , and readiness , learn in many a wrestling bout , that knavish trick must have end I ; but scarce be the word ' fire ! ' out of his mouth ere I be out of fire , by a single bind behind the rocky pillar of the opening . in this jump I be so brisk , at impulse of the love of life   for I see the muzzle set upon I from the darkness of the cavern , that the man who have train their gun upon I with goodwill and daintiness , could not check their finger crook upon the heavy trigger ; and the volley sing with a roar behind it , down the avenue of crag . 
 with one thing and another , and most of all the treachery of this dastard scheme , I be so amazed that I turn and run , at the very top of my speed , away from these vile fellow ; and luckily for I , they have not another charge to send after I . and thus by good fortune , I escape ; but with a bitter heart , and mind at their treacherous usage . 
 without any further hesitation ; I agree to take command of the honest man who be burn to punish , ay and destroy , those outlaw , as now beyond all bearing . one condition , however , I make , namely , that the Counsellor should be spar if possible ; not because he be less a villain than any of the other , but that he seem less violent ; and above all , have be good to Annie . and I find hard work to make they listen to my wish upon this point ; for of all the Doones , Sir Counsellor have make himself most hat , by his love of law and reason . 
 we arrange that all our man should come and fall into order with pike and musket , over against our dung - hill , and we settle early in the day , that their wife might come and look at they . for most of these man have good wife ; quite different from sweetheart , such as the militia have ; woman indeed who could hold to a man , and see to he , and bury he if his luck be evil and perhaps have no one afterwards . and all these woman press their right upon their precious husband , and bring so many child with they , and make such a fuss , and hugging , and race after little leg , that our farm - yard might be take for an out - door school for baby rather than a review ground . 
 I myself be to and fro among the child continually ; for if I love anything in the world , foremost I love child . they warm , and yet they cool our heart , as we think of what we be , and what in young clothe we hop to be ; and how many thing have come across . and to see our motif move in the little thing that know not what their aim or object be , must almost or ought at least , to lead we home , and soften we . for either end of life be home ; both source and issue be God . 
 nevertheless , I must confess that the child be a plague sometimes . they never could have enough of I be a hundred to one , you might say but I have more than enough of they ; and yet be not content . for they have so many way of talk , and of tug at my hair , and of sit upon my neck   not even two with their leg alike , and they force I to jump so vehemently , seem to court the peril of my come down neck and crop with they , and urge I still to go fast , however fast I might go with they ; I assure you that they be sometimes so hard and tyrannical over I , that I might almost as well have be among the very Doones themselves . 
 nevertheless , the way in which the child make I useful prove also of some use to I ; for their mother be so pleased by the exertion of the ' great Gee - gee ' as all the small one entitle I that they give I unlimited power and authority over their husband ; moreover , they do their utmost among their relative round about , to fetch recruit for our little band . and by such mean , several of the yeomanry from Barnstaple , and from Tiverton , be add to our number ; and inasmuch as these be arm with heavy sword , and short carabine , their appearance be truly formidable . 
 Tom Faggus also join we heartily , be now quite heal of his wound , except at time when the wind be easterly . he be make second in command to I ; and I would gladly have have he first , as more fertile in expedient ; but he decline such rank on the plea that I know most of the seat of war ; besides that I might be hold in some measure to draw authority from the king . also Uncle Ben come over to help we with his advice and presence , as well as with a band of stout warehouseman , whom he bring from Dulverton . for he have never forgive the old outrage put upon he ; and though it have be to his interest to keep quiet during the last attack , under Commander Stickles for the sake of his secret gold mine yet now he be in a position to give full vent to his feeling . for he and his partner when fully - assured of the value of their digging , have obtain from the Crown a licence to adventure in search of mineral , by payment of a heavy fine and a yearly royalty . therefore they have now no long any cause for secrecy , neither for dread of the outlaws ; have so add to their force as to be a match for they . and although Uncle Ben be not the man to keep his miner idle an hour more than might be help , he promise that when we have fix the moment for an assault on the valley , a score of they should come to aid we , head by Simon Carfax , and arm with the gun which they always keep for the protection of their gold . 
 now whether it be Uncle Ben , or whether it be Tom Faggus or even my own self for all three of we claim the sole honour be more than I think fair to settle without allow they a voice . but at any rate , a clever thing be devise among we ; and perhaps it would be the fair thing to say that this bright stratagem   worthy of the great Duke himself   be contribute , little by little , among the entire three of we , all have pipe , and schnapps - and - water , in the chimney - corner . however , the world , which always judge accord to reputation , vow that so fine a stroke of war could only come from a highwayman ; and so Tom Faggus get all the honour , at less perhaps than a third of the cost . 
 not to attempt to rob he of it for robber , more than any other , contend for right of property let I try to describe this grand artifice . it be know that the Doones be fond of money , as well as strong drink , and other thing ; and more especially fond of gold , when they could get it pure and fine . therefore it be agree that in this way we should tempt they ; for we know that they look with ridicule upon our rustic preparation ; after repulse King 's trooper , and the militia of two county , be it likely that they should yield their fortress to a set of ploughboy ? we , for our part , feel of course , the power of this reasoning , and that where regular troop have fail , half - arm countryman must fail , except by superior judgment and harmony of action . though perhaps the militia would have suffice , if they have only fight against the foe , instead of against each other . from these thing we take warning ; have fail through over - confidence , be it not possible now to make the enemy fail through the selfsame cause ? 
 hence , what we devise be this ; to delude from home a part of the robber , and fall by surprise on the other part . we cause it to be spread abroad that a large heap of gold be now collect at the mine of the Wizard 's Slough . and when this rumour must have reach they , through woman who come to and fro , as some entirely faithful to they be allow to do , we send Captain Simon Carfax , the father of little Gwenny , to demand an interview with the Counsellor , by night , and as it be secretly . then he be to set forth a list of imaginary grievance against the owner of the mine ; and to offer partly through resentment , partly through the hope of gain , to betray into their hand , upon the Friday night , by far the great weight of gold as yet send up for refining . he be to have one quarter part , and they to take the residue . but inasmuch as the convoy across the moor , under his command , would be strong , and strongly arm , the Doones must be sure to send not less than a score of man , if possible . he himself , at a place agree upon , and fit for an ambuscade , would call a halt , and contrive in the darkness to pour a little water into the priming of his company 's gun . 
 it cost we some trouble and a great deal of money to bring the sturdy Cornishman into this deceitful part ; and perhaps he never would have consent but for his obligation to I , and the wrong   as he say   of his daughter . however , as he be the man for the task , both from his coolness and courage , and be know to have charge of the mine , I press he , until he undertake to tell all the lie we require . and right well he do it too , have once make up his mind to it ; and perceive that his own interest call for the total destruction of the robber . 




 CHAPTER LXXI 

 a long account settled 

 have resolve on a night - assault   as our undisciplined man , three - fourth of whom have never be shoot at , could not fairly be expect to march up to visible musket - mouth , we care not much about drill our force , only to teach they to hold a musket , so far as we could supply that weapon to those with the clever eye ; and to give they familiarity with the noise it make in explode . and we fix upon Friday night for our venture , because the moon would be at the full ; and our powder be come from Dulverton on the Friday afternoon . 
 Uncle Reuben do not mean to expose himself to shoot , his time of life for risk of life be now well over and the residue too valuable . but his counsel , and his influence , and above all his warehouseman , well practise in beat carpet , be of true service to we . his miner also do great wonder , have a grudge against the Doones ; as indeed who have not for thirty mile round their valley ? 
 it be settle that the yeoman , have good horse under they , should give account   with the miner ' help   of as many Doones as might be despatch to plunder the pretended gold . and as soon as we know that this party of robber , be it more or less , be out of hear from the valley , we be to fall to , ostensibly at the Doone - gate   which be impregnable now , but in reality upon their rear , by mean of my old water - slide . for I have choose twenty young fellow , partly miner , and partly warehouseman , and sheep farmer , and some of other vocation , but all to be rely upon for spirit and power of climbing . and with proper tool to aid we , and myself to lead the way , I feel no doubt whatever but that we could all attain the crest where first I have meet with Lorna . 
 upon the whole , I rejoice that Lorna be not present now . it must have be irksome to her feeling to have all her kindre and old associate   much as she keep aloof from they   put to death without ceremony , or else put all of we to death . for all of we be resolve this time to have no more shilly - shallying ; but to go through with a nasty business , in the style of honest Englishmen , when the question come to ' your life or mine . ' 
 there be hardly a man among we who have not suffer bitterly from the miscreant now before we . one have lose his wife perhaps , another have lose a daughter accord to their age , another have lose his favourite cow ; in a word , there be scarcely any one who have not to complain of a hayrick ; and what surprise I then , not now , be that the man least injure make the great push concern it . but be the wrong too great to speak of , or too small to swear about , from poor Kit Badcock to rich Master Huckaback , there be not one but go heart and soul for stamp out these firebrand . 
 the moon be lift well above the shoulder of the upland , when we , the choose band , set forth , have the short cut along the valley to foot of the Bagworthy water ; and therefore have allow the rest an hour , to fetch round the moor and hill ; we be not to begin our climb until we hear a musket fire from the height on the left - hand side , where John Fry himself be station , upon his own and his wife 's request ; so as to keep out of action . and that be the place where I have be use to sit , and to watch for Lorna . and John Fry be to fire his gun , with a ball of wool inside it , so soon as he hear the hurly - burly at the Doone - gate beginning ; which we , by reason of waterfall , could not hear , down in the meadow there . 
 we wait a very long time , with the moon march up heaven steadfastly , and the white fog tremble in chord and column , like a silver harp of the meadow . and then the moon draw up the fog , and scarf herself in white with they ; and so be proud , gleam upon the water , like a bride at her look - glass ; and yet there be no sound of either John Fry , or his blunderbuss . 
 I begin to think that the worthy John , be out of all danger , and have bring a counterpane   accord to his wife 's direction , because one of the child have a cold , must veritably have go to sleep ; leave other people to kill , or be kill , as might be the will of God ; so that he be comfortable . but herein I do wrong to John , and be ready to acknowledge it ; for suddenly the most awful noise that anything short of thunder could make , come down among the rock , and go and hang upon the corner . 
 ' the signal , my lad , ' I cry , leap up and rub my eye ; for even now , while condemn John unjustly , I be give he right to be hard upon I . ' now hold on by the rope , and lie your quarter - staff across , my lad ; and keep your gun point to heaven , lest haply we shoot one another . ' 
 ' we shall not   never shutt one anoother , wi ' our goon at that mark , I reckon , ' say an oldish chap , but as tough as leather , and esteem a wit for his dryness . 
 ' you come next to I , old Ike ; you be enough to dry up the water ; now , remember , all lean well forward . if any man throw his weight back , down he go ; and perhaps he may never get up again ; and most likely he will shoot himself . ' 
 I be still more afraid of their shoot I ; for my chief alarm in this steep ascent be neither of the water nor of the rock , but of the loaded gun we bore . if any man slip , off might go his gun , and however good his meaning , I be first be most likely to take far more than I fain would apprehend . 
 for this cause , I have debate with Uncle Ben and with Cousin Tom as to the expediency of our climbing with gun unload . but they , not be in the way themselves , assure I that there be nothing to fear , except through uncommon clumsiness ; and that as for charge our gun at the top , even veteran troop could scarcely be trust to perform it properly in the hurry , and the darkness , and the noise of fighting before they . 
 however , thank God , though a gun go off , no one be any the bad for it , neither do the Doones notice it , in the thick of the firing in front of they . for the order to those of the sham attack , conduct by Tom Faggus , be to make the great possible noise , without exposure of themselves ; until we , in the rear , have fall to ; which John Fry be again to give the signal of . 
 therefore we , of the choose band , steal up the meadow quietly , keep in the blots of shade , and hollow of the watercourse . and the early notice the Counsellor have , or any one else , of our presence , be the blazing of the log - wood house , where live that villain Carver . it be my especial privilege to set this house on fire ; upon which I have insist , exclusively and conclusively . no other hand but mine should lay a brand , or strike steel on flint for it ; I have make all preparation carefully for a goodly blaze . and I must confess that I rub my hand , with a strong delight and comfort , when I see the home of that man , who have fire so many house , have its turn of smoke , and blaze , and of crackle fury . 
 we take good care , however , to burn no innocent woman or child in that most righteous destruction . for we bring they all out beforehand ; some be glad , and some be sorry ; accord to their disposition . for Carver have ten or a dozen wife ; and perhaps that have something to do with his take the loss of Lorna so easily . one child I notice , as I save he ; a fair and handsome little fellow , whom   if Carver Doone could love anything on earth beside his wretched self   he do love . the boy climb on my back and ride ; and much as I hat his father , it be not in my heart to say or do a thing to vex he . 
 leave these poor injure people to behold their burn home , we draw aside , by my direction , into the covert beneath the cliff . but not before we have lay our brand to three other house , after call the woman forth , and bid they go for their husband , and to come and fight a hundred of we . in the smoke and rush , and fire , they believe that we be a hundred ; and away they run , in consternation , to the battle at the Doone - gate . 
 ' all Doone - town be on fire , on fire ! ' we hear they shriek as they go ; ' a hundred soldier be burn it , with a dreadful great man at the head of they ! ' 
 presently , just as I expect , back come the warrior of the Doones ; leave but two or three at the gate , and burn with wrath to crush under foot the presumptuous clown in their valley . just then the waxing fire leap above the red crest of the cliff , and dance on the pillar of the forest , and lap like a tide on the stone of the slope . all the valley flow with light , and the limpid water redden , and the fair young woman shine , and the naked child glisten . 
 but the fine sight of all be to see those haughty man stride down the causeway darkly , reckless of their end , but resolute to have two life for every one . a fine dozen of young man could not have be find in the world perhaps , nor a braver , nor a viler one . 
 see how few there be of they , I be very loath to fire , although I cover the leader , who appear to be dash Charley ; for they be at easy distance now , brightly shine by the fire - light , yet ignorant where to look for we . I think that we might take they prisoner though what good that could be God know , as they must have be hang thereafter anyhow I be loath to shoot , or to give the word to my follower . 
 but my follower wait for no word ; they see a fair shot at the man they abhor , the man who have rob they of home or of love , and the chance be too much for their charity . at a signal from old Ikey , who level his own gun first , a dozen musket be discharge , and half of the Doones drop lifeless , like so many log of firewood , or chop - block roll over . 
 although I have see a great battle before , and a hundred time the carnage , this appear to I to be horrible ; and I be at first incline to fall upon our man for behave so . but one instant show I that they be right ; for while the valley be fill with howling , and with shriek of woman , and the beam of the blaze house fall , and hiss in the bubble river ; all the rest of the Doones leap at we , like so many demon . they fire wildly , not see we well among the hazel bush ; and then they club their musket , or draw their sword , as might be ; and furiously drive at we . 
 for a moment , although we be twice their number , we fall back before their valorous fame , and the power of their onset . for my part , admire their courage greatly , and count it slur upon manliness that two should be down upon one so , I withhold my hand awhile ; for I care to meet none but Carver ; and he be not among they . the whirl and hurry of this fight , and the hard blow rain down for now all gun be empty take away my power of seeing , or reasoning upon anything . yet one thing I see , which dwell long with I ; and that be Christopher Badcock spend his life to get Charley 's . 
 how he have find out , none may tell ; both be dead so long ago ; but , at any rate , he have find out that Charley be the man who have rob he of his wife and honour . it be Carver Doone who take she away , but Charleworth Doone be beside he ; and , accord to cast of dice , she fall to Charley 's share . all this Kit Badcock   who be mad , accord to our measure   have discover , and treasure up ; and now be his revenge - time . 
 he have come into the conflict without a weapon of any kind ; only beg I to let he be in the very thick of it . for he , he say , life be no matter , after the loss of his wife and child ; but death be matter to he , and he mean to make the most of it . such a face I never see , and never hope to see again , as when poor Kit Badcock spy Charley come towards we . 
 we have think this man a patient fool , a philosopher of a little sort , or one who could feel nothing . and his quiet manner of go about , and the gentleness of his answer   when some brute ask he where his wife be , and whether his baby have be well - truss , these have mislead we to think that the man would turn the mild cheek to everything . but I , in the loneliness of our barn , have listen , and have weep with he . 
 therefore be I not surprised , so much as all the rest of we , when , in the foremost of red light , Kit go up to Charleworth Doone , as if to some inheritance ; and take his seisin of right upon he , be himself a powerful man ; and beg a word aside with he . what they say aside , I know not ; all I know be that without weapon , each man kill the other . and Margery Badcock come , and weep , and hang upon her poor husband ; and die , that summer , of heart - disease . 
 now for these and other thing   whereof I could tell a thousand   be the reckoning come that night ; and not a line we miss of it ; soon as our bad blood be up . I like not to tell of slaughter , though it might be of wolf and tiger ; and that be a night of fire and slaughter , and of very long - harbour revenge . enough that ere the daylight break upon that wan March morning , the only Doones still leave alive be the Counsellor and Carver . and of all the dwelling of the Doones   inhabit with luxury , and luscious taste , and licentiousness   not even one be leave , but all make potash in the river . 
 this may seem a violent and unholy revenge upon they . and I   who lead the heart of it   have in these my latter year doubt how I shall be judge , not of man for God only know the error of man 's judgment but by that great God Himself , the front of whose forehead be mercy . 




 CHAPTER LXXII 

 the COUNSELLOR and the carver 

 from that great confusion for nothing can be break up , whether lawful or unlawful , without a vast amount of dust , and many people grumble , and mourn for the good old time , when all the world be happiness , and every man a gentleman , and the sun himself far brighter than since the brassy idol upon which he shine be break from all this loss of ancient landmark   as unrobbed man begin to call our clearance of those murderer   we return on the follow day , almost as full of anxiety as we be of triumph . in the first place , what could we possibly do with all these woman and child , throw on our hand as one might say , with none to protect and care for they ? again how should we answer to the justice of the peace , or perhaps even to Lord Jeffreys , for have , without even a warrant , take the law into our own hand , and abate our nuisance so forcibly ? and then , what be to be do with the spoil , which be of great value ; though the diamond necklace come not to public light ? for we see a mighty host of claimant already leap up for booty . every man who have ever be rob , expect usury on his loss ; the lord of the manor demand the whole ; and so do the King 's Commissioner of revenue at Porlock ; and so do the man who have fight our battle ; while even the parson , both Bowden and Powell , and another who have no parish in it , threaten we with the just wrath of the Church , unless each have tithe of the whole of it . 
 now this be not as it ought to be ; and it seem as if by burn the nest of robber , we have but hatch their egg ; until be make sole guardian of the capture treasure   by reason of my know honesty   I hit upon a plan , which give very little satisfaction ; yet carry this advantage , that the grumbler argue against one another and for the most part come to blow ; which renew their goodwill to I , as be abuse by the adversary . 
 and my plan be no more than this not to pay a farthing to lord of manor , parson , or even King 's Commissioner , but after make good some of the recent and prove loss where the man could not afford to lose to pay the residue   which might be worth some fifty thousand pound   into the Exchequer at Westminster ; and then let all the claimant file what will they please in Chancery . 
 now this be a very noble device , for the mere name of Chancery , and the high repute of the fee therein , and low repute of the lawyer , and the comfortable knowledge that the woolsack itself be the golden fleece , absorb gold for ever , if the standard be but pure ; consideration of these thing stave off at once the lord of the manor , and all the little farmer , and even those whom most I fear ; videlicet , the parson . and the King 's Commissioner be compel to profess himself content , although of all he be most aggrieve ; for his picking would have be goodly . 
 moreover , by this plan I make although I never think of that a mighty friend worth all the enemy , whom the loss of money move . the first man now in the kingdom   by virtue perhaps of energy , rather than of excellence   be the great Lord Jeffreys , appoint the head of the Equity , as well as the law of the realm , for his kindness in hang five hundred people , without the mere brief of trial . nine out of ten of these people be innocent , it be true ; but that prove the merit of the Lord Chief Justice so much the great for hang they , as show what might be expect of he , when he truly get hold of a guilty man . now the King have see the force of this argument ; and not be without gratitude for a high - season dish of cruelty , have promote the only man in England , combine the gift of both butcher and cook . 
 nevertheless , I do beg you all to believe of I and I think that , after follow I so long , you must believe it that I do not even know at the time of Lord Jeffreys 's high promotion . not that my knowledge of this would have lead I to act otherwise in the matter ; for my object be to pay into an office , and not to any official ; neither if I have know the fact , could I have see its bearing upon the receipt of my money . for the King 's Exchequer be , meseemeth , of the Common Law ; while Chancery be of Equity , and well name for its many chance . but the true result of the thing be this Lord Jeffreys be now head of the law , and almost head of the kingdom , get possession of that money , and be kindly pleased with it . 
 and this meet our second difficulty ; for the law have win and laugh over the spoil , must have injure its own title by impugn our legality . 
 next , with regard to the woman and child , we be long in a state of perplexity . we do our very good at the farm , and so do many other to provide for they , until they should manage about their own subsistence . and after a while this trouble go , as nearly all trouble go with time . some of the woman be take back by their parent , or their husband , or it may be their sweetheart ; and those who fail of this , go forth , some upon their own account to the New World plantation , where the fair sex be valuable ; and some to english city ; and the plainer one to field work . and most of the child go with their mother , or be bind apprentice ; only Carver Doone 's handsome child have lose his mother and stay with I . 
 this boy go about with I everywhere . he have take as much of like to I first show in his eye by the firelight as his father have of hatred ; and I , perceive his noble courage , scorn of lie , and high spirit , become almost as fond of Ensie as he be of I . he tell we that his name be ' Ensie , ' mean for ' Ensor , ' I suppose , from his father 's grandfather , the old Sir Ensor Doone . and this boy appear to be Carver 's heir , have be bear in wedlock , contrary to the general manner and custom of the Doones . 
 however , although I love the poor child , I could not help feel very uneasy about the escape of his father , the savage and brutal Carver . this man be leave to roam the country , homeless , foodless , and desperate , with his giant strength , and great skill in arm , and the whole world to be revenge upon . for his escape the miner , as I shall show , be answerable ; but of the Counsellor 's safe departure the burden lie on myself alone . and inasmuch as there be people who consider themselves ill - use , unless one tell they everything , straiten though I be for space , I will glance at this transaction . 
 after the desperate charge of young Doones have be meet by we , and break , and just as Poor Kit Badcock die in the arm of the dead Charley , I happen to descry a patch of white on the grass of the meadow , like the head of a sheep after washing - day . observe with some curiosity how carefully this white thing move along the bar of darkness betwixt the panel of firelight , I run up to intercept it , before it reach the little postern which we use to call Gwenny 's door . perceive I , the white thing stop , and be for make back again ; but I run up at full speed ; and lo , it be the flow silvery hair of that sage the Counsellor , who be scuttle away upon all four ; but now rise and confront I . 
 ' John , ' he say , ' Sir John , you will not play falsely with your ancient friend , among these violent fellow , I look to you to protect I , John . ' 
 ' honoured sir , you be right , ' I reply ; ' but surely that posture be unworthy of yourself , and your many resource . it be my intention to let you go free . ' 
 ' I know it . I could have swear to it . you be a noble fellow , John . I say so , from the very first ; you be a noble fellow , and an ornament to any rank . ' 
 ' but upon two condition , ' I add , gently take he by the arm ; for instead of display any desire to commune with my nobility , he be edge away toward the postern ; ' the first be that you tell I truly   for now it can matter to none of you   who it be that slew my father . ' 
 ' I will tell you truly and frankly , John ; however painful to I to confess it . it be my son , Carver . ' 
 ' I think as much , or I feel as much all along , ' I answer ; ' but the fault be none of your , sir ; for you be not even present . ' 
 ' if I have be there , it would not have happen . I be always opposed to violence . therefore , let I haste away ; this scene be against my nature . ' 
 ' you shall go directly , Sir Counsellor , after meet my other condition ; which be , that you place in my hand Lady Lorna 's diamond necklace . ' 
 ' ah , how often I have wish , ' say the old man with a heavy sigh , ' that it might yet be in my power to ease my mind in that respect , and to do a thoroughly good deed by lawful restitution . ' 
 ' then try to have it in your power , sir . surely , with my encouragement , you might summon resolution . ' 
 ' alas , John , the resolution have be ready long ago . but the thing be not in my possession . Carver , my son , who slay your father , upon he you will find the necklace . what be jewel to I , young man , at my time of life ? bauble and trash , I detest they , from the sin they have lead I to answer for . when you come to my age , good Sir John , you will scorn all jewel , and care only for a pure and bright conscience . ah ! ah ! let I go . I have make my peace with God . ' 
 he look so hoary , and so silvery , and serene in the moonlight , that verily I must have believe he , if he have not draw in his breast . but I happen to have notice that when an honest man give vent to noble and great sentiment , he spread his breast , and throw it out , as if his heart be swell ; whereas I have see this old gentleman draw in his breast more than once , as if it happen to contain well good than sentiment . 
 ' will you applaud I , kind sir , ' I say , keep he very tight , all the while , ' if I place it in your power to ratify your peace with God ? the pledge be upon your heart , no doubt , for there it lie at this moment . ' 
 with these word , and some apology for have recourse to strong measure , I thrust my hand inside his waistcoat , and draw forth Lorna 's necklace , purely sparkle in the moonlight , like the dancing of new star . the old man make a stab at I , with a knife which I have not espy ; but the vicious onset fail ; and then he knelt , and clasp his hand . 
 ' oh , for God 's sake , John , my son , rob I not in that manner . they belong to I ; and I love they so ; I would give almost my life for they . there be one jewel I can look at for hour , and see all the light of heaven in it ; which I never shall see elsewhere . all my wretched , wicked life oh , John , I be a sad hypocrite but give I back my jewel . or else kill I here ; I be a babe in your hand ; but I must have back my jewel . ' 
 as his beautiful white hair fall away from his noble forehead , like a silver wreath of glory , and his powerful face , for once , be move with real emotion , I be so amazed and overcome by the grand contradiction of nature , that verily I be on the point of give he back the necklace . but honesty , which be say to be the first instinct of all the Ridds   though I myself never find it so , happen here to occur to I , and so I say , without more haste than might be expect , 
 ' Sir Counsellor , I can not give you what do not belong to I . but if you will show I that particular diamond which be heaven to you , I will take upon myself the risk and the folly of cut it out for you . and with that you must go content ; and I beseech you not to starve with that jewel upon your lip . ' 
 see no hope of well term , he show I his pet love of a jewel ; and I think of what Lorna be to I , as I cut it out   with the hinge of my knife sever the snake of gold   and place it in his careful hand . another moment , and he be go , and away through Gwenny 's postern ; and God know what become of he . 
 now as to Carver , the thing be this so far as I could ascertain from the valiant miner , no two of whom tell the same story , any more than one of they tell it twice . the band of Doones which sally forth for the robbery of the pretend convoy be meet by Simon Carfax , accord to arrangement , at the ruin house call the Warren , in that part of Bagworthy Forest where the river Exe   as yet a very small stream   run through it . the Warren , as all our people know , have belong to a fine old gentleman , whom every one call ' the squire , ' who have retreat from active life to pass the rest of his day in fishing , and shooting , and help his neighbour . for he be a man of some substance ; and no poor man ever leave the Warren without a bag of good victual , and a few shilling put in his pocket . however , this poor squire never make a great mistake , than in hop to end his life peacefully upon the bank of a trout - stream , and in the green forest of Bagworthy . for as he come home from the brook at dusk , with his fly - rod over his shoulder , the Doones fall upon he , and murder he , and then sack his house , and burn it . 
 now this have make honest people timid about go past the Warren at night ; for , of course , it be say that the old Squire ' walk , ' upon certain night of the moon , in and out of the trunk of tree , on the green path from the river . on his shoulder he bear a fishing - rod , and his book of trout - fly , in one hand , and on his back a wicker - creel ; and now and then he would burst out laugh to think of his come so near the Doones . 
 and now that one turn to consider it , this seem a strangely righteous thing , that the scene of one of the great crime even by Doones commit should , after twenty year , become the scene of vengeance fall   like hail from heaven   upon they . for although the Warren lie well away to the westward of the mine ; and the gold , under escort to Bristowe , or London , would have go in the other direction ; Captain Carfax , find this place well suit for work of his design , have persuade the Doones , that for reason of Government , the ore must go first to Barnstaple for inspection , or something of that sort . and as every one know that our Government send all thing westward when eastward bind , this have win the more faith for Simon , as be accord to nature . 
 now Simon , have meet these flower of the flock of villainy , where the rise moonlight flow through the weir - work of the wood , beg they to dismount ; and lead they with an air of mystery into the Squire 's ruin hall , black with fire , and green with weed . 
 ' captain , I have find a thing , ' he say to Carver Doone , himself , ' which may help to pass the hour , ere the lump of gold come by . the smuggler be a noble race ; but a miner 's eye be a match for they . there lie a puncheon of rare spirit , with the Dutchman 's brand upon it , hide behind the break hearth . set a man to watch outside ; and let we see what this be like . ' 
 with one accord they agree to this , and Carver pledge Master Carfax , and all the Doones grow merry . but Simon be bind , as he say , to see to their strict sobriety , draw a bucket of water from the well into which they have throw the dead owner , and beg they to mingle it with their drink ; which some of they do , and some refuse . 
 but the water from that well be pour , while they be carouse , into the priming - pan of every gun of theirs ; even as Simon have promise to do with the gun of the man they be come to kill . then just as the giant Carver arise , with a glass of pure holland in his hand , and by the light of the torch they have strike , propose the good health of the Squire 's ghost in the broken doorway stand a press of man , with pointed musket , cover every drunken Doone . how it fare upon that I know not , have none to tell I ; for each man work , neither thought of telling , nor whether he might be alive to tell . the Doones rush to their gun at once , and point they , and pull at they ; but the Squire 's well have drown their fire ; and then they know that they be betray , but resolve to fight like man for it . upon fight I can never dwell ; it breed such savage delight in I ; of which I would fain have less . enough that all the Doones fight bravely ; and like man   though bad one   die in the hall of the man they have murder . and with they die poor young De Whichehalse , who , in spite of his good father 's prayer , have cast in his lot with the robber . Carver Doone alone escape . partly through his fearful strength , and his yet more fearful face ; but mainly perhaps through his perfect coolness , and his mode of take thing . 
 I be happy to say that no more than eight of the gallant miner be kill in that combat , or die of their wound afterwards ; and add to these the eight we have lose in our assault on the valley   and two of they excellent warehouseman , it cost no more than sixteen life to be rid of nearly forty Doones , each of whom would most likely have kill three man in the course of a year or two . therefore , as I say at the time , a great work be do very reasonably ; here be nigh upon forty Doones destroy   in the valley , and up at the Warrens   despite their extraordinary strength and high skill in gunnery ; whereas of we ignorant rustic there be only sixteen to be count dead though other might be lamed , or so , and of those sixteen only two have leave wife , and their wife do not happen to care for they . 
 yet , for Lorna ' s sake , I be vex at the bold escape of Carver . not that I seek for Carver 's life , any more than I do for the Counsellor 's ; but that for we it be no light thing , to have a man of such power , and resource , and desperation , leave at large and furious , like a famished wolf round the sheepfold . yet greatly as I blame the yeoman , who be post on their horse , just out of shot from the Doone - gate , for the very purpose of intercept those who escape the miner , I could not get they to admit that any blame attach to they . 
 but lo , he have dash through the whole of they , with his horse at full gallop ; and be nearly out of shot before they begin to think of shoot he . then it appear from what a boy say for boy manage to be everywhere that Captain Carver ride through the Doone - gate , and so to the head of the valley . there , of course , he behold all the house , and his own among the number , flame with a handsome blaze , and throw a fine light around such as he often have revel in , when of other people 's property . but he swear the deadly of all oath , and see himself to be vanquish   so far as the luck of the moment go , spur his great black horse away , and pass into the darkness . 




 CHAPTER LXXIII 

 how to get out of chancery 

 thing at this time so befell I , that I can not tell one half ; but be like a boy who have leave his lesson   to the master 's very footfall   unready , except with false excuse . and as this make no good work , so I lament upon my lingering , in the time when I might have get through a good page , but go astray after trifle . however , every man must do accord to his intellect ; and look at the easy manner of my constitution , I think that most man will regard I with pity and goodwill for try , more than with contempt and wrath for have try unworthily . even as in the wrestling ring , whatever man do his good , and make an honest conflict , I always lay he down with softness , ease off his dusty fall . 
 but the thing which next betide I be not a fall of any sort ; but rather a most glorious rise to the summit of all fortune . for in good truth it be no less than the return of Lorna my Lorna , my own darling ; in wonderful health and spirit , and as glad as a bird to get back again . it would have do any one good for a twelve - month to behold her face and doing , and her beam eye and smile   not to mention blush also at my salutation , when this queen of every heart run about our room again . she do love this , and she must see that , and where be our old friend the cat ? all the house be full of brightness , as if the sun have come over the hill , and Lorna be his mirror . 
 my mother sit in an ancient chair , and wipe her cheek , and look at she ; and even Lizzie 's eye must dance to the freshness and joy of her beauty . as for I , you might call I mad ; for I run out and fling my good hat on the barn , and kiss mother Fry , till she make at I with the sugar - nipper . 
 what a quantity of thing Lorna have to tell we ! and yet how often we stop her mouth at least mother , I mean , and Lizzie and she quite as often would stop she own , run up in her joy to some one of we ! and then there arise the eat business which people now call ' refreshment , ' in these dandyfie day of our language for how be it possible that our Lorna could have come all that way , and to her own Exmoor , without be terribly hungry ? 
 ' oh , I do love it all so much , ' say Lorna , now for the fiftieth time , and not mean only the victual : ' the scent of the gorse on the moor drive I wild , and the primrose under the hedge . I be sure I be mean for a farmer 's I mean for a farm - house life , dear Lizzie ' for Lizzie be look saucily ' just as you be mean for a soldier 's bride , and for write despatch of victory . and now , since you will not ask I , dear mother , in the excellence of your manner , and even John have not the impudence , in spite of all his coat of arm I must tell you a thing , which I vow to keep until tomorrow morning ; but my resolution fail I . I be my own mistress what think you of that , mother ? I be my own mistress ! ' 
 ' then you shall not be so long , ' cry I ; for mother seem not to understand she , and seek about for her glass : ' darling , you shall be mistress of I ; and I will be your master . ' 
 ' a frank announcement of your intent , and beyond doubt a true one ; but surely unusual at this stage , and a little premature , John . however , what must be , must be . ' and with tear spring out of smile , she fall on my breast , and cry a bit . 
 when I come to smoke a pipe over it   after the rest be go to bed , I could hardly believe in my good luck . for here be I , without any merit , except of bodily power , and the absence of any falsehood   which surely be no commendation , so place that the noble man in England might envy I , and be vex with I . for the noble lady in all the land , and the pure , and the sweetest hang upon my heart , as if there be none to equal it . 
 I dwell upon this matter , long and very severely , while I smoke a new tobacco , bring by my own Lorna for I , and next to herself most delicious ; and as the smoke curl away , I think , ' surely this be too fine to last , for a man who never deserve it . ' 
 see no way out of this , I resolve to place my faith in God ; and so go to bed and dream of it . and have no presence of mind to pray for anything , under the circumstance , I think it well to fall asleep , and trust myself to the future . yet ere I fall asleep the roof above I swarm with angel , have Lorna under it . 
 in the morning Lorna be ready to tell her story , and we to hearken ; and she wear a dress of most simple stuff ; and yet perfectly wonderful , by mean of the shape and her figure . Lizzie be wild with jealousy , as might be expect   though never would Annie have be so , but have praise it , and crave for the pattern , and mother not understand it , look forth , to be teach about it . for it be strange to note that lately my dear mother have lose her quickness , and be never quite brisk , unless the question be about myself . she have see a great deal of trouble ; and grief begin to close on people , as their power of life decline . we say that she be hard of hearing ; but my opinion be , that see I inclined for marriage make her think of my father , and so perhaps a little too much , to dwell on the courting of thirty year agone . anyhow , she be the very good of mother ; and would smile and command herself ; and be   or try to believe herself   as happy as could be , in the doing of the young folk , and her own skill in detect they . yet , with the wisdom of age , renounce any opinion upon the matter ; since none could see the end of it . 
 but Lorna in her bright young beauty , and her knowledge of my heart , be not to be check by any thought of haply come evil . in the morning she be up , even soon than I be , and through all the corner of the hen , remember every one of they . I catch she and salute she with such warmth   be now none to look at we , that she vow she would never come out again ; and yet she come the next morning . 
 these thing ought not to be chronicle . yet I be of such nature , that find many part of life adverse to our wish , I must now and then draw pleasure from the blessed portion . and what portion can be more blessed than with youth , and health , and strength , to be love by a virtuous maid , and to love she with all one 's heart ? neither be my pride diminish , when I find what she have do , only from her love of I . 
 Earl Brandir 's ancient steward , in whose charge she have travel , with a proper escort , look upon she as a lovely maniac ; and the mixture of pity and admiration wherewith he regard she , be a strange thing to observe ; especially after he have see our simple house and manner . on the other hand , Lorna consider he a worthy but foolish old gentleman ; to whom true happiness mean no more than money and high position . 
 these two last she have be ready to abandon wholly , and have in part escape from they , as the enemy of her happiness . and she take advantage of the time , in a truly clever manner . for that happen to be a time as indeed all time hitherto   so far as my knowledge extend , have , somehow , or other , happen to be when everybody be only too glad to take money for do anything . and the great money - taker in the kingdom   next to the King and Queen , of course , who have due pre - eminence , and have teach the maid of honour   be generally acknowledge to be the Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys . 
 upon his return from the bloody assize , with triumph and great glory , after hang every man who be too poor to help it , he please his gracious Majesty so purely with the description of their delightful agony , that the King exclaim , ' this man alone be worthy to be at the head of the law . ' accordingly in his hand be place the Great Seal of England . 
 so it come to pass that Lorna 's destiny hang upon Lord Jeffreys ; for at this time Earl Brandir die , be take with gout in the heart , soon after I leave London . Lorna be very sorry for he ; but as he have never be able to hear one tone of her sweet silvery voice , it be not to be suppose that she weep without consolation . she grieve for he as we ought to grieve for any good man go ; and yet with a comforting sense of the benefit which the bless exchange must bring to he . 
 now the Lady Lorna Dugal appear to Lord Chancellor Jeffreys so exceed wealthy a ward that the lock would pay for turn . therefore he come , of his own accord , to visit she , and to treat with she ; have hear   for the man be as big a gossip as never care for anybody , yet love to know all about everybody   that this wealthy and beautiful maiden would not listen to any young lord , have pledge her faith to the plain John Ridd . 
 thereupon , our Lorna manage so to hold out golden hope to the Lord High Chancellor , that he , be not more than three part drunk , see his way to a heap of money . and there and then   for he be not the man to daily long about anything   upon surety of a certain round sum the amount of which I will not mention , because of his kindness towards I he give to his fair ward permission , under sign and seal , to marry that loyal knight , John Ridd ; upon condition only that the King 's consent should be obtain . 
 his Majesty , well - dispose towards I for my previous service , and regard I as a good Catholic , be move moreover by the Queen , who desire to please Lorna , consent , without much hesitation , upon the understanding that Lorna , when she become of full age , and the mistress of her property   which be still under guardianship , should pay a heavy fine to the Crown , and devote a fix portion of her estate to the promotion of the holy Catholic faith , in a manner to be dictate by the King himself . inasmuch , however , as King James be drive out of his kingdom before this arrangement could take effect , and another king succeed , who desire not the promotion of the catholic religion , neither hanker after subsidy ,   whether French or English , that agreement be pronounce invalid , improper , and contemptible . however , there be no get back the money once pay to Lord Chancellor Jeffreys . 
 but what think we of money at this present moment ; or of position , or anything else , except indeed one another ? Lorna tell I , with the sweetest smile , that if I be minded to take she at all , I must take she without anything ; inasmuch as she mean , upon come of age , to make over the residue of her estate to the next - of - kin , as be unfit for a farmer 's wife . and I reply with the great warmth and a readiness to worship she , that this be exactly what I long for , but have never dare to propose it . but dear mother look most exceeding grave ; and say that to be sure her opinion could not be expect to count for much , but she really hop that in three year ' time we should both he a little wise , and have more regard for our interest , and perhaps those of other by that time ; and Master Snowe have daughter only , and nobody come to marry they , if anything happen to the good old man and who could tell in three year ' time what might happen to all or any of we ? why perhaps his farm would be for sale , and perhaps Lady Lorna 's estate in Scotland would fetch enough money to buy it , and so throw the two farm into one , and save all the trouble about the brook , as my poor father have long to do many and many a time , but not have a title could not do all quite as he want . and then if we young people grow tired of the old mother , as seem only too likely , and be accord to nature , why we could send she over there , and Lizzie to keep her company . 
 when mother have finish , and wipe her eye , Lorna , who have be blush rosily at some portion of this great speech , fling her fair arm around mother 's neck , and kiss she very heartily , and scold she   as she well deserve   for her want of confidence in we . my mother reply that if anybody could deserve her John , it be Lorna ; but that she could not hold with the rashness of give up money so easily ; while her next - of - kin would be John himself , and who could tell what other , by the time she be one - and - twenty ? 
 Hereupon , I feel that after all my mother have common sense on her side ; for if Master Snowe 's farm should be for sale , it would be far more to the purpose than my coat of arm , to get it ; for there be a different pasture there , just suit for change of diet to our sheep as well as large cattle . and beside this , even with all Annie 's skill   and of course yet more now she be go , their butter would always command in the market from one to three farthing a pound more than we could get for our . and few thing vex we more than this . whereas , if we get possession of the farm , we might , without breach of the market - law , or any harm do to any one   the price being but a prejudice , sell all our butter as Snowe butter , and do good to all our customer . 
 think thus , yet remember that Farmer Nicholas might hold out for another score of year as I heartily hop he might or that one , if not all , of his comely daughter might marry a good young farmer   or farmer , if the case be so   or that , even without that , the farm might never be put up for sale ; I beg my Lorna to do as she like ; or rather to wait and think of it ; for as yet she could do nothing . 




 CHAPTER LXXIV 

 DRIVEN beyond ENDURANCE 

  also know as blood upon the altar in other edition 
 everything be settle smoothly , and without any fear or fuss , that Lorna might find end of trouble , and myself of eager waiting , with the help of Parson Bowden , and the good wish of two county . I could scarce believe my fortune , when I look upon her beauty , gentleness , and sweetness , mingle with enough of humour and warm woman 's feeling , never to be dull or tiring ; never themselves to be weary . 
 for she might be call a woman now ; although a very young one , and as full of playful way , or perhaps I may say ten time as full , as if she have know no trouble . to wit , the spirit of bright childhood , have be so curb and straiten , ere its time be over , now break forth , enrich and vary with the garb of conscious maidenhood . and the sense of steadfast love , and eager love enfold she , colour with so many tinge all her look , and word , and thought , that to I it be the noble vision even to think about she . 
 but this be far too bright to last , without bitter break , and the plunging of happiness in horror , and of passionate joy in agony . my darling in her soft moment , when she be alone with I , when the spark of defiant eye be veil beneath dark lash , and the challenge of gay beauty pass into sweetest invitation ; at such time of her pure love and warm faith in I , a deep abide fear would flutter in her bound heart , as of deadly fate 's approach . she would cling to I , and nestle to I , be scared of coyishness , and lie one arm around my neck , and ask if I could do without she . 
 hence , as all emotion haply , of those who be more to we than ourselves , find within we strong echo , and more perfect answer , so I could not be regardless of some hide evil ; and my dark misgiving deepen as the time draw nearer . I keep a steadfast watch on Lorna , neglect a field of bean entirely , as well as a litter of young pig , and a cow somewhat give to jaundice . and I let Jem Slocombe go to sleep in the tallat , all one afternoon , and Bill Dadds draw off a bucket of cider , without so much as a ' by your leave . ' for these man know that my knighthood , and my coat of arm , and   most of all   my love , be greatly against good farming ; the sense of our country be and perhaps it may be sensible that a man who stick up to be anything , must allow himself to be cheat . 
 but I never do stick up , nor would , though all the parish bid I ; and I whistle the same tune to my horse , and hold my plough - tree , just the same as if no king , nor Queen , have ever come to spoil my tune or hand . for this thing , nearly all the man around our part upbraid I ; but the woman praise I : and for the most part these be right , when themselves be not concern . 
 however humble I might be , no one know anything of our part of the country , would for a moment doubt that now here be a great to do and talk of John Ridd and his wedding . the fierce fight with the Doones so lately , and my leading of the combat   though I fight not more than need be , and the vanishing of Sir Counsellor , and the gallop madness of Carver , and the religious fear of the woman that this last be go to hell for he himself have declare that his aim , while he cut through the yeomanry also their remorse , that he should have be make to go thither with all his child leave behind these thing , I say   if ever I can again contrive to say anything , have lead to the broad excitement about my wedding of Lorna . we hear that people mean to come from more than thirty mile around , upon excuse of see my stature and Lorna 's beauty ; but in good truth out of sheer curiosity , and the love of meddle . 
 our clerk have give notice , that not a man should come inside the door of his church without shilling - fee ; and woman   as sure to see twice as much   must every one pay two shilling . I think this wrong ; and as church - warden , beg that the money might be pay into mine own hand , when take . but the clerk say that be against all law ; and he have order from the parson to pay it to he without any delay . so as I always obey the parson , when I care not much about a thing , I let they have it their own way ; though feel inclined to believe , sometimes , that I ought to have some of the money . 
 dear mother arrange all the in and out of the way in which it be to be do ; and Annie and Lizzie , and all the Snowes , and even Ruth Huckaback   who be there , after great persuasion , make such a sweeping of dress that I scarcely know where to place my foot , and long for a staff , to put by their gown . then Lorna come out of a pew half - way , in a manner which quite astonish I , and take my left hand in her right , and I pray God that it be do with . 
 my darling look so glorious , that I be afraid of glance at she , yet take in all her beauty . she be in a fright , no doubt ; but nobody should see it ; whereas I say   to myself at least , ' I will go through it like a grave - digger . ' 
 Lorna 's dress be of pure white , cloud with faint lavender   for the sake of the old Earl Brandir , and as simple as need be , except for perfect loveliness . I be afraid to look at she , as I say before , except when each of we say , ' I will , ' and then each dwell upon the other . 
 it be impossible for any who have not love as I have to conceive my joy and pride , when after ring and all be do , and the parson have bless we , Lorna turn to look at I with her glance of subtle fun subdue by this great act . 
 her eye , which none on earth may ever equal , or compare with , tell I such a depth of comfort , yet await further commune , that I be almost amazed , thoroughly as I know they . darle eye , the sweet eye , the lovely , the most love eye the sound of a shot rang through the church , and those eye be fill with death . 
 Lorna fall across my knee when I be go to kiss she , as the bridegroom be allow to do , and encourage , if he need it ; a flood of blood come out upon the yellow wood of the altar step , and at my foot lie Lorna , try to tell I some last message out of her faithful eye . I lift she up , and pet she , and coax she , but it be no good ; the only sign of life remain be a spirt of bright red blood . 
 some man know what thing befall they in the supreme time of their life far above the time of death but to I come back as a hazy dream , without any knowledge in it , what I do , or feel , or think , with my wife 's arm flagging , flagging , around my neck , as I raise she up , and softly put they there . she sigh a long sigh on my breast , for her last farewell to life , and then she grow so cold , and cold , that I ask the time of year . 
 it be Whit - Tuesday , and the lilac all in blossom ; and why I think of the time of year , with the young death in my arm , God or his angel , may decide , have so strangely give we . enough that so I do , and look ; and our white lilac be beautiful . then I lay my wife in my mother 's arm , and beg that no one would make a noise , go forth for my revenge . 
 of course , I know who have do it . there be but one man in the world , or at any rate , in our part of it , who could have do such a thing such a thing . I use no harsh word about it , while I leap upon our good horse , with bridle but no saddle , and set the head of Kickums towards the course now point out to I . who show I the course , I can not tell . I only know that I take it . and the man fall back before I . 
 weapon of no sort have I. Unarmed , and wonder at my strange attire   with a bridal vest , work by our Annie , and red with the blood of the bride , I go forth just to find out this ; whether in this world there be or be not God of justice . 
 with my vicious horse at a furious speed , I come upon Black Barrow down , direct by some shout of man , which seem to I but a whisper . and there , about a furlong before I , ride a man on a great black horse , and I know that the man be Carver Doone . 
 ' your life or mine , ' I say to myself ; ' as the will of God may be . but we two live not upon this earth , one more hour together . ' 
 I know the strength of this great man ; and I know that he be arm with a gun if he have time to load again , after shoot my Lorna or at any rate with pistol , and a horseman 's sword as well . nevertheless , I have no more doubt of kill the man before I than a cook have of spit a headless fowl . 
 sometimes see no ground beneath I , and sometimes heed every leaf , and the crossing of the grass - blade , I follow over the long moor , reckless whether see or not . but only once the other man turn round and look back again , and then I be beside a rock , with a reedy swamp behind I . 
 although he be so far before I , and rid as hard as ride he might , I see that he have something on the horse in front of he ; something which need care , and stop he from look backward . in the whirling of my wit , I fancy first that this be Lorna ; until the scene I have be through fall across hot brain and heart , like the drop at the close of a tragedy . rush there through crag and quag , at utmost speed of a maddened horse , I see , as of another 's fate , calmly   as on canvas lay , the brutal deed , the piteous anguish , and the cold despair . 
 the man turn up the gully lead from the moor to Cloven Rocks , through which John Fry have track Uncle Ben , as of old relate . but as Carver enter it , he turn round , and behold I not a hundred yard behind ; and I see that he be bear his child , little Ensie , before he . Ensie also descry I , and stretch his hand and cry to I ; for the face of his father frighten he . 
 Carver Doone , with a vile oath , thrust spur into his flagging horse , and lay one hand on a pistol - stock ; whence I know that his slung carbine have receive no bullet since the one that have pierce Lorna . and a cry of triumph rise from the black depth of my heart . what care I for pistol ? I have no spur , neither be my horse one to need the rowel ; I rather hold he in than urge he , for he be fresh as ever ; and I know that the black steed in front , if he breast the steep ascent , where the track divide , must be in our reach at once . 
 his rider know this ; and , have no room in the rocky channel to turn and fire , draw rein at the crossway sharply , and plunge into the black ravine lead to the Wizard 's Slough . ' be it so ? ' I say to myself with a brain and head cold as iron ; ' though the foul fiend come from the slough , to save thee ; thou shalt carve it , Carver . ' 
 I follow my enemy carefully , steadily , even leisurely ; for I have he , as in a pitfall , whence no escape might be . he think that I fear to approach he , for he know not where he be : and his low disdainful laugh come back . ' laugh he who win , ' think I. 
 a gnarled and half - starve oak , as stubborn as my own resolve , and smite by some storm of old , hang from the crag above I . rise from my horse 's back , although I have no stirrup , I catch a limb , and tear it   like a mere wheat - awn   from the socket . man show the rent even now , with wonder ; none with more wonder than myself . 
 Carver Doone turn the corner suddenly on the black and bottomless bog ; with a start of fear he rein back his horse , and I think he would have turn upon I . but instead of that , he again ride on ; hop to find a way round the side . 
 now there be a way between cliff and slough for those who know the ground thoroughly , or have time enough to search it ; but for he there be no road , and he lose some time in seek it . upon this he make up his mind ; and wheeling , fire , and then ride at I . 
 his bullet strike I somewhere , but I take no heed of that . fear only his escape , I lay my horse across the way , and with the limb of the oak strike full on the forehead his charge steed . Ere the slash of the sword come nigh I , man and horse roll over , and wellnigh bear my own horse down , with the power of their onset . 
 Carver Doone be somewhat stunned , and could not arise for a moment . meanwhile I leap on the ground and await , smooth my hair back , and bar my arm , as though in the ring for wrestling . then the little boy run to I , clasp my leg , and look up at I , and the terror in his eye make I almost fear myself . 
 ' Ensie , dear , ' I say quite gently , grieve that he should see his wicked father kill , ' run up yonder round the corner and try to find a pretty bunch of bluebell for the lady . ' the child obey I , hang back , and look back , and then laugh , while I prepare for business . there and then I might have kill mine enemy , with a single blow , while he lie unconscious ; but it would have be foul play . 
 with a sullen and black scowl , the Carver gather his mighty limb , and arise , and look round for his weapon ; but I have put they well away . then he come to I and gaze ; be will not to frighten thus young man . 
 ' I would not harm you , lad , ' he say , with a lofty style of sneer : ' I have punish you enough , for most of your impertinence . for the rest I forgive you ; because you have be good and gracious to my little son . go , and be content . ' 
 for answer , I smite he on the cheek , lightly , and not to hurt he : but to make his blood leap up . I would not sully my tongue by speak to a man like this . 
 there be a level space of sward between we and the slough . with the courtesy derive from London , and the procession I have see , to this place I lead he . and that he might breathe himself , and have every fibre cool , and every muscle ready , my hold upon his coat I loose , and leave he to begin with I , whenever he think proper . 
 I think that he feel that his time be come . I think he know from my knit muscle , and the firm arch of my breast , and the way in which I stand ; but most of all from my stern blue eye ; that he have find his master . at any rate a paleness come , an ashy paleness on his cheek , and the vast calf of his leg bow in , as if he be out of training . 
 see this , villain as he be , I offer he first chance . I stretch forth my left hand , as I do to a weak antagonist , and I let he have the hug of I . but in this I be too generous ; have forget my pistol - wound , and the cracking of one of my short low rib . Carver Doone catch I round the waist , with such a grip as never yet have be lay upon I . 
 I hear my rib go ; I grasp his arm , and tear the muscle out of it    as the string come out of an orange ; then I take he by the throat , which be not allow in wrestling ; but he have snatch at mine ; and now be no time of dalliance . in vain he tug , and strain , and writhe , dash his bleed fist into my face , and fling himself on I with gnash jaw . beneath the iron of my strength for God that day be with I I have he helpless in two minute , and his fiery eye loll out . 
    a far more terrible clutch than this be hand down , to 
  weak age , of the great John Ridd . Ed . 
 ' I will not harm thee any more , ' I cry , so far as I could for panting , the work be very furious : ' Carver Doone , thou art beat : own it , and thank God for it ; and go thy way , and repent thyself . ' 
 it be all too late . even if he have yield in his ravening frenzy for his beard be like a mad dog 's jowl even if he would have own that , for the first time in his life , he have find his master ; it be all too late . 
 the black bog have he by the foot ; the sucking of the ground draw on he , like the thirsty lip of death . in our fury , we have heed neither wet nor dry ; nor thought of earth beneath we . I myself might scarcely leap , with the last spring of o'er - labour leg , from the engulf grave of slime . he fall back , with his swarthy breast   from which my gripe have rent all clothing , like a hummock of bog - oak , stand out the quagmire ; and then he toss his arm to heaven , and they be black to the elbow , and the glare of his eye be ghastly . I could only gaze and pant ; for my strength be no more than an infant 's , from the fury and the horror . scarcely could I turn away , while , joint by joint , he sink from sight . 




 CHAPTER LXXV 

 LIFE and lorna COME again 

 when the little boy come back with the bluebell , which he have manage to find as child always do find flower , when old eye see none the only sign of his father leave be a dark brown bubble , upon a newly form patch of blackness . but to the center of its pulpy gorge the greedy slough be heave , and sullenly grind its weltering jaw among the flag and the sedge . 
 with pain , and ache , both of mind and body , and shame at my own fury , I heavily mount my horse again , and , look down at the innocent Ensie . would this playful , love child grow up like his cruel father , and end a godless life of hatred with a death of violence ? he lift his noble forehead towards I , as if to answer , " Nay , I will not " : but the word he speak be these : 
 ' Don , ' for he could never say ' John ' ' oh , Don , I be so glad that nasty naughty man be go away . take I home , Don . take I home . ' 
 it have be say of the wicked , ' not even their own child love they . ' and I could easily believe that Carver Doone 's cold - hearted way have scar from he even his favorite child . no man would I call truly wicked , unless his heart be cold . 
 it hurt I , more than I can tell , even through all other grief , to take into my arm the child of the man just slay by I . the feeling be a foolish one , and a wrong one , as the thing have be for I would fain have save that man , after he be conquer nevertheless my arm go coldly round that little fellow ; neither would they have go at all , if there have be any help for it . but I could not leave he there , till some one else might fetch he ; on account of the cruel slough , and the raven which have come hover over the dead horse ; neither could I , with my wound , tie he on my horse and walk . 
 for now I have spend a great deal of blood , and be rather faint and weary . and it be lucky for I that Kickums have lose spirit , like his master , and go home as mildly as a lamb . for , when we come towards the farm , I seem to be rid in a dream almost ; and the voice both of man and woman   who have hurry forth upon my track , as they meet I , seem to wander from a distant muffling cloud . only the thought of Lorna 's death , like a heavy knell , be toll in the belfry of my brain . 
 when we come to the stable door , I rather fall from my horse than get off ; and John Fry , with a look of wonder take Kickum 's head , and lead he in . into the old farmhouse I totter , like a weanle child , with mother in her common clothe , help I along , yet fear , except by stealth , to look at I . 
 ' I have kill he , ' be all I say ; ' even as he kill Lorna . now let I see my wife , mother . she belong to I none the less , though dead . ' 
 ' you can not see she now , dear John , ' say Ruth Huckaback , come forward ; since no one else have the courage . ' Annie be with she now , John . ' 
 ' what have that to do with it ? let I see my dead one ; and pray myself to die . ' 
 all the woman fall away , and whisper , and look at I , with side glance , and some sobbing ; for my face be hard as flint . Ruth alone stand by I , and drop her eye , and tremble . then one little hand of hers steal into my great shake palm , and the other be lay on my tattered coat : yet with her clothe she shun my blood , while she whisper gently , 
 ' John , she be not your dead one . she may even be your live one yet , your wife , your home , and your happiness . but you must not see she now . ' 
 ' be there any chance for she ? for I , I mean ; for I , I mean ? ' 
 ' God in heaven know , dear John . but the sight of you , and in this sad plight , would be certain death to she . now come first , and be heal yourself . ' 
 I obey she , like a child , whisper only as I go , for none but myself know her goodness ' Almighty God will bless you , darling , for the good you be do now . ' 
 tenfold , ay and a thousandfold , I pray and I believe it , when I come to know the truth . if it have not be for this little maid , Lorna must have die at once , as in my arm she lie for dead , from the dastard and murderous cruelty . but the moment I leave her Ruth come forward and take the command of every one , in right of her firmness and readiness . 
 she make they bear her home at once upon the door of the pulpit , with the cushion under the droop head . with her own little hand she cut off , as tenderly as a pear be peel , the bridal - dress , so steeped and stain , and then with her dainty transparent finger   no large than a pencil   she probe the vile wound in the side , and fetch the reek bullet forth ; and then with the cold water stanch the flowing of the life - blood . all this while my darling lie insensible , and white as death ; and need nothing but her maiden shroud . 
 but Ruth still sponge the poor side and forehead , and watch the long eyelash flat upon the marble cheek ; and lay her pure face on the faint heart , and bid they fetch her spanish wine . then she part the pearly tooth   feebly clench on the hover breath , and pour in wine from a christen spoon , and raise the graceful neck and breast , and stroke the delicate throat , and wait ; and then pour in a little more . 
 Annie all the while look on with horror and amazement , count herself no second - rate nurse , and this as against all theory . but the quiet lifting of Ruth 's hand , and one glance from her dark bright eye , tell Annie just to stand away , and not intercept the air so . and at the very moment when all the rest have settle that Ruth be a simple idiot , but could not harm the dead much , a little flutter in the throat , follow by a short low sigh , make they pause , and look and hope . 
 for hour , however , and day , she lie at the very verge of death , keep alive by nothing but the care , the skill , the tenderness , and the perpetual watchfulness of Ruth . Luckily Annie be not there very often , so as to meddle ; for kind and clever nurse as she be , she must have do more harm than good . but my broken rib , which be set by a doctor , who chance to be at the wedding , be allot to Annie 's care ; and great inflammation ensue , it be quite enough to content she . this doctor have pronounce poor Lorna dead ; wherefore Ruth refuse most firmly to have aught to do with he . she take the whole case on herself ; and with God 's help she bear it through . 
 now whether it be the light and brightness of my Lorna 's nature ; or the freedom from anxiety for she know not of my hurt ; or , as some people say , her birthright among wound and violence , or her manner of not drink beer I leave that doctor to determine who pronounce she dead . but anyhow , one thing be certain ; sure as star of hope above we ; Lorna recover , long ere I do . 
 for the grief be on I still of have lose my love and lover at the moment she be mine . with the power of fate upon I , and the black cauldron of the wizard 's death boil in my heated brain , I have no faith in the tale they tell . I believe that Lorna be in the churchyard , while these rogue be lie to I . for with strength of blood like mine , and power of heart behind it , a broken bone must burn itself . 
 mine go hard with fire of pain , be of such size and thickness ; and I be ashamed of he for break by reason of a pistol - ball , and the mere hug of a man . and it fetch I down in conceit of strength ; so that I be careful afterwards . 
 all this be a lesson to I . all this make I very humble ; illness be a thing , as yet , altogether unknown to I . not that I cry small , or skulk , or fear the death which some foretold ; shake their head about mortification , and a green appearance . only that I seem quite fit to go to heaven , and Lorna . for in my sick distracted mind   stir with many tossing , like the bead in the spread of frog - spawn carry by the current , hang the black and central essence of my future life . a life without Lorna ; a tadpole life . all stupid head ; and no body . 
 many man may like such life ; anchorite , fakir , high - priest , and so on ; but to my mind , it be not the native thing God mean for we . my dear mother be a show , with cry and with fret . the Doones , as she think , be bear to destroy we . Scarce have she come to some liveliness   though sprinkle with tear , every now and then   after her great bereavement , and ten year ' time to dwell on it when lo , here be her husband 's son , the pet child of her own good John , murder like his father ! well , the way of God be wonderful ! 
 so they be , and so they be ; and so they ever will be . let we debate they as we will , our way be his , and much the same ; only second - hand from he . and I expect something from he , even in my bad of time , know that I have do my good . 
 this be not edify talk as our Nonconformist parson say , when he can get no more to drink therefore let I only tell what become of Lorna . one day , I be sit in my bedroom , for I could not get downstair , and there be no one strong enough to carry I , even if I would have allow it . 
 though it cost I sore trouble and weariness , I have put on all my Sunday clothe , out of respect for the doctor , who be come to bleed I again   as he always do twice a week ; and it strike I that he have seem hurt in his mind , because I wear my bad clothe to be bleed in for lie in bed I would not , after six o'clock ; and even that be great laziness . 
 I look at my right hand , whose grasp have be like that of a blacksmith 's vice ; and it seem to myself impossible that this could be John Ridd 's . the great frame of the hand be there , as well as the muscle , stand forth like the guttering of a candle , and the broad blue vein , go up the back , and cross every finger . but as for colour , even Lorna 's could scarcely have be whiter ; and as for strength , little Ensie Doone might have come and hold it fast . I laugh as I try in vain to lift the basin set for bleed I . 
 then I think of all the lovely thing go on out - of - door just now , concern which the drowsy song of the bee come to I . these must be among the thyme , by the sound of their great content . therefore the rose must be in blossom , and the woodbine , and clove - gilly - flower ; the cherry on the wall must be turn red , the yellow Sally must be on the brook , wheat must be callow with quaver bloom , and the early meadow swathe with hay . 
 yet here be I , a helpless creature quite unfit to stir among they , gift with no sight , no scent of all the change that move our love , and lead our heart , from month to month , along the quiet path of life . and what be bad , I have no hope of care ever for they more . 
 presently a little knock sound through my gloomy room , and suppose it to be the doctor , I try to rise and make my bow . but to my surprise it be little Ruth , who have never once come to visit I , since I be place under the doctor 's hand . Ruth be dress so gaily , with rosette , and flower , and what not , that I be sorry for her bad manner ; and think she be come to conquer I , now that Lorna be do with . 
 Ruth run towards I with sparkle eye , be rather short of sight ; then suddenly she stop , and I see entire amazement in her face . 
 ' can you receive visitor , Cousin Ridd ? why , they never tell I of this ! ' she cry : ' I know that you be weak , dear John ; but not that you be die . whatever be that basin for ? ' 
 ' I have no intention of dying , Ruth ; and I like not to talk about it . but that basin , if you must know , be for the doctor 's purpose . ' 
 ' what , do you mean bleed you ? you poor weak cousin ! be it possible that he do that still ? ' 
 ' twice a week for the last six week , dear . nothing else have keep I alive . ' 
 ' nothing else have kill you , nearly . there ! ' and she set her little boot across the basin , and crush it . ' not another drop shall they have from you . be Annie such a fool as that ? and Lizzie , like a zany , at her book ! and kill her brother , between they ! ' 
 I be surprised to see Ruth excited ; her character be so calm and quiet . and I try to soothe she with my feeble hand , as now she kneel before I . 
 ' dear cousin , the doctor must know well . Annie say so , every day . what have he be bring up for ? ' 
 ' bring up for slay and murder . twenty doctor kill King Charles , in spite of all the woman . will you leave it to I , John ? I have a little will of my own ; and I be not afraid of doctor . will you leave it to I , dear John ? I have save your Lorna 's life . and now I will save your ; which be a far , far easy business . ' 
 ' you have save my Lorna 's life ! what do you mean by talk so ? ' 
 ' only what I say , Cousin John . though perhaps I overprize my work . but at any rate she say so . ' 
 ' I do not understand , ' I say , fall back with bewilderment ; ' all woman be such liar . ' 
 ' have you ever know I tell a lie ? ' Ruth in great indignation more feigned , I doubt , than real ' your mother may tell a story , now and then when she feel it right ; and so may both your sister . but so you can not do , John Ridd ; and no more than you can I do it . ' 
 if ever there be virtuous truth in the eye of any woman , it be now in Ruth Huckaback 's : and my brain begin very slowly to move , the heart be almost torpid from perpetual loss of blood . 
 ' I do not understand , ' be all I could say for a very long time . 
 ' will you understand , if I show you Lorna ? I have fear to do it , for the sake of you both . but now Lorna be well enough , if you think that you be , Cousin John . surely you will understand , when you see your wife . ' 
 follow she , to the very utmost of my mind and heart , I feel that all she say be truth ; and yet I could not make it out . and in her last few word there be such a power of sadness rise through the cover of gaiety , that I say to myself , half in a dream , ' Ruth be very beautiful . ' 
 before I have time to listen much for the approach of footstep , Ruth come back , and behind her Lorna ; coy as if of her bridegroom ; and hang back with her beauty . Ruth bang the door , and run away ; and Lorna stand before I . 
 but she do not stand for an instant , when she see what I be like . at the risk of all thick bandage , and upset a dozen medicine bottle , and scatter leech right and leave , she manage to get into my arm , although they could not hold she . she lay her pant warm young breast on the place where they mean to bleed I , and she set my pale face up ; and she would not look at I , have great faith in kiss . 
 I feel my life come back , and warm ; I feel my trust in woman flow ; I feel the joy of live now , and the power of do it . it be not a moment to describe ; who feel can never tell of it . but the rush of Lorna 's tear , and the challenge of my bride 's lip , and the throbbing of my wife 's heart   now at last at home on mine , make I feel that the world be good , and not a thing to be weary of . 
 little more have I to tell . the doctor be turn out at once ; and slowly come back my former strength , with a darling wife , and good victual . as for Lorna , she never tired of sit and watch I eat and eat . and such be her heart that she never tire of be with I here and there , among the beautiful place , and talk with her arm around I so far at least as it can go , though half of mine may go round she of the many fear and trouble , danger and discouragement , and bad of all the bitter parting , which we use to have , somehow . 
 there be no need for my farming hard than become a man of weight . Lorna have great store of money , though we never draw it out , except for some poor neighbor ; unless I find she a sumptuous dress , out of her own perquisite . and this she always look upon as a wondrous gift from I ; and kiss I much when she put it on , and walk like the noble woman she be . and yet I may never behold it again ; for she get back to her simple clothe , and I love she the well in they . I believe that she give half the grandeur away , and keep the other half for the child . 
 as for poor Tom Faggus , every one know his bitter adventure , when his pardon be recall , because of his journey to Sedgemoor . not a child in the country , I doubt , but know far more than I do of Tom 's most desperate doing . the law have ruin he once , he say ; and then he have be too much for the law : and now that a quiet life be his object , here the base thing come after he . and such be his dread of this evil spirit , that be catch upon Barnstaple Bridge , with soldier at either end of it   yet doubtful about approach he , he set his strawberry mare , sweet Winnie , at the left - hand parapet , with a whisper into her dove - colour ear . without a moment 's doubt she leap it , into the foaming tide , and swam , and land accord to order . also his flight from a public - house   where a trap be set for he , but Winnie come and break down the door , and put two man under , and trod on they ,   be as well know as any ballad . it be report for awhile that poor Tom have be catch at last , by mean of his fondness for liquor , and be hang before Taunton Jail ; but luckily we know well . with a good wife , and a wonderful horse , and all the country attach to he , he keep the law at a wholesome distance , until it become too much for its master ; and a new king arise . upon this , Tom sue his pardon afresh ; and Jeremy Stickles , who suit the time , be glad to help he in get it , as well as a compensation . thereafter the good and respectable Tom live a godly   though not always sober   life ; and bring up his child to honesty , as the first of all qualification . 
 my dear mother be as happy as possibly need be with we ; have no cause for jealousy , as other arise around she . and everybody be well pleased , when Lizzy come in one day and toss she bookshelf over , and declare that she would have Captain Bloxham , and nobody should prevent she . for that he alone , of all the man she have ever meet with , know good writing when he see it , and could spell a word when tell . as he have now succeed to Captain Stickle 's position   Stickles go up the tree , and have the power of collect , and of keep , what he like , there be nothing to be say against it ; and we hop that he would pay she out . 
 I send little Ensie to Blundell 's school , at my own cost and charge , have change his name , for fear of what anyone might do to he . I call he Ensie Jones ; and we get he a commission , and after many scrape of spirit , he do great thing in the Low Countries . he look upon I as his father ; and without my leave will not lay claim to the heritage and title of the Doones , which clearly belong to he . 
 Ruth Huckaback be not married yet ; although upon Uncle Reuben 's death she come into all his property ; except , indeed , 2000 pound , which Uncle Ben , in his dry manner , bequeath ' to Sir John Ridd , the worshipful knight , for grease of the testator 's boot . ' and he leave almost a mint of money , not from the mine , but from the shop , and the good use of usury . for the mine have bring in just what it cost , when the vein of gold end suddenly ; leave all concerned much old , and some , I fear , much poor ; but no one utterly ruin , as be the case with most of they . Ruth herself be his true mine , as upon death - bed he find . I know a man even worthy of she : and though she be not very young , he love she , as I love Lorna . it be my firm conviction , that in the end he will win she ; and I do not mean to dance again , except at dear Ruth 's wedding ; if the floor be strong enough . 
 of Lorna , of my lifelong darling , of my more and more loved wife , I will not talk ; for it be not seemly that a man should exalt his pride . year by year her beauty grow , with the growth of goodness , kindness , and true happiness above all with loving . for change , she make a joke of this , and play with it , and laugh at it ; and then , when my slow nature marvel , back she come to the earnest thing . and if I wish to pay she out for something very dreadful as may happen once or twice , when we become too gladsome I bring she to forget sadness , and to I for cure of it , by the two word ' Lorna Doone . ' 
