 


 SPRINGHAVEN : 

 a Tale of the Great War 

 by R. D. Blackmore 

 1887 





 content 


 CHAPTER I 

 CHAPTER II 

 CHAPTER III 

 CHAPTER IV 

 CHAPTER V 

 CHAPTER VI 

 CHAPTER VII 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 CHAPTER ix 

 CHAPTER x 

 CHAPTER XI 

 CHAPTER XII 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 CHAPTER XV 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 chapter XVII 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 CHAPTER XX 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXIX 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 CHAPTER XXXII 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 CHAPTER XL 

 CHAPTER XLI 

 CHAPTER XLII 

 CHAPTER XLIII 

 CHAPTER XLIV 

 CHAPTER XLV 

 CHAPTER XLVI 

 CHAPTER XLVII 

 CHAPTER XLVIII 

 CHAPTER XLIX 

 CHAPTER L 

 CHAPTER LI 

 CHAPTER LII 

 CHAPTER LIII 

 CHAPTER LIV 

 CHAPTER LV 

 CHAPTER LVI 

 CHAPTER LVII 

 CHAPTER LVIII 

 CHAPTER LIX 

 CHAPTER LX 

 CHAPTER LXI 

 CHAPTER LXII 

 CHAPTER LXIII 

 CHAPTER LXIV 

 CHAPTER LXV 

 CHAPTER LXVI 





 CHAPTER I 

 when the SHIP come home 

 in the day when England trust mainly to the vigor and valor of one man , against a world of enemy , no part of her coast be in great peril than the fair vale of Springhaven . but lie to the west of the narrow sea , and the shout both of menace and vigilance , the quiet little village in the tranquil valley forbore to be uneasy . 
 for the nature of the place and race , since time have outlive memory , continually have be , and must be , to let the world pass easily . little to talk of , and nothing to do , be the healthy condition of mankind just there . to all who love repose and shelter , freedom from the care of money and the cark of fashion , and   in lieu of these   refreshing air , bright water , and green country , there be scarcely any valley leave to compare with that of Springhaven . this valley do not interrupt the land , but come in as a pleasant relief to it . no glaring chalk , no grim sandstone , no rugged flint , outface it ; but deep rich meadow , and foliage thick , and cool arcade of ancient tree , defy the noise that man make . and above the tree , in shelve distance , rise the crest of upland , a soft gray lia , where orchard thrive , and greensward stroke down the rigor of the rock , and quick rill lace the bosom of the slope with tag of twisted silver . 
 in the murmur of the valley twenty little water meet , and discourse their way to the sea , give name to the bay that receive they and the anchorage they make . and here no muddy harbor reek , no foul mouth of rat - haunted drain , no slimy and scraggy wall run out , to mar the meeting of sweet and salt . with one or two mooring post to watch it , and a course of stepping - stone , the brook slide into the peaceful bay , and be lose in large water . even so , however , it be kindly still , for it form a tranquil haven . 
 because , where the ruffle of the land stream merge into the heavy disquietude of sea , slope of shell sand and white gravel give welcome pillow to the weary keel . no southerly tempest smite the bark , no long groundswell upheave she ; for a bold point , know as the " haven - head , " baffle the storm in the offing , while the bulky roller of a strong spring - tide , that need no wind to urge they , be break by the shifting of the shore into a tier of white - frille step . so the deep - waiste smack that fish for many generation , and even the famous " London trader "   a schooner of five - and - forty ton , have rest from their labor , whenever they wish or whenever they can afford it , in the arm of the land , and the mouth of the water , and under the eye of Springhaven . 
 at the corner of the wall , where the brook come down , and pebble turn into shingle , there have always be a good white gate , respect   as a white gate always be   from its strong declaration of purpose . outside of it , thing may belong to the Crown , the Admiralty , Manor , or Trinity Brethren , or perhaps the sea itself accord to the late ebb or flow of the fickle tide of Law Courts but inside that gate everything belong to the fine old family of Darling . 
 concern the origin of these darling diver tale be tell , accord to the good - will or otherwise of the diver . the darling themselves contend and prove that stock and name be Saxon , and the true form of the name be " Deerlung , " as witness the family bearing . but the foe of the race , and especially the Carnes , of ancient Sussex lineage , declare that the name describe itself . Forsooth , these darling be nothing more , to their contemptuous certainty , than the offset of some court favorite , too low to have win nobility , in the reign of some light - affectione king . 
 if ever there be any truth in that , it have be wear out long ago by friction of its own antiquity . Admiral Darling own that gate , and all the land inside it , as far as a preventive man can see with his spy - glass upon the top bar of it . and this include nearly all the village of Springhaven , and the Hall , and the valley , and the hill that make it . and how much more do all this redound to the credit of the family when the gazer reflect that this be nothing but their young tenement ! for this be only Springhaven Hall , while Darling Holt , the headquarters of the race , stand far inland , and belong to Sir Francis , the Admiral 's eld brother . 
 when the tide be at their spring , and the year 1802 of our era in the same condition , Horatia Dorothy Darling , young daughter of the aforesaid Admiral , choose a very quiet path among thick shrub and under - wood , come all alone to a wooden building , which her father call his round - house . in the war , which have be patch over now , but would very soon break out again , that veteran officer hold command of the coast defense   westward of Nelson 's charge   from Beachy Head to Selsey Bill . no real danger have exist then , and no solid intent of invasion , but many sharp outlook have be set up , and among they be this at Springhaven . 
 here be establish under thatch , and with slide light before it , the Admiral 's favorite Munich glass , mount by an old ship 's carpenter   who have follow the fortune of his captain   on a stand which would have puzzle anybody but the maker , with the add security of a lanyard from the roof . the gear , though rough , be very strong and solid , and afford more range and firm rest to the seven - foot tube and adjustment than a costly mount by a London optician would have be likely to supply . it be a pleasure to look through such a glass , so clear , and full of light , and firm ; and one who could have bear to be look at through it , or examine even by a microscope , come now to enjoy that pleasure . 
 Miss dolly Darling could not be happy though her chief point be to be so without a little bit of excitement , though it be of her own construction . her imagination , be bright and tender and lively , rather than powerful , be compel to make its own material , out of very little stuff sometimes . she be always long for something sweet and thrilling and romantic , and what chance of find it in this dull place , even with the long telescope ? for the war , with all its stir rumor and perpetual motion on shore and sea , and access of gallant visitor , be go for the moment , and dull peace be sign . 
 this evening , as yet , there seem little chance of anything to enliven she . the village , in the valley and up the stream , be hide by turn of the land and tree ; her father 's house beneath the hill crest be out of sight and hearing ; not even a child be on the beach ; and the only movement be of wavelet leisurely advance toward the sea - wall fringe with tamarisk . the only thing she could hope to see be the happy return of the fishing - smack , and perhaps the " London trader , " inasmuch as the fisherman   now release from fencible duty and from french alarm   do their good to return on Saturday night to their mooring , their home , the disposal of fish , and then the deep slumber of Sunday . if the breeze should enable they to round the Head , and the tide avail for landing , the lane to the village , the beach , and even the sea itself would swarm with life and bustle and flurry and incident . but Dolly 's desire be for scene more warlike and actor more august than these . 
 Beauty , however , have an eye for beauty beyond its own look - glass . deeply as dolly begin to feel the joy of her own loveliness , she have manage to learn , and to feel as well , that so far as the strength and vigor of beauty may compare with its grace and refinement , she have her own match at Springhaven . quite a hardworke youth , of no social position and no needless education , have such a fine countenance and such bright eye that she neither could bear to look at he nor forbear to think of he . and she know that if the fleet come home she would see he on board of the Rosalie . 
 flinging on a shelf the small white hat which have scarcely cover her dark brown curl , she lift and shore with a wooden prop the southern casement of leaded glass . this be up , free range be give to the swing telescope along the beach to the right and left , and over the open sea for mile , and into the measureless haze of air . she could manage this glass to the good advantage , through her father 's teaching , and could take out the slide and clean the lens , and even part the object - glass , and refix it as well as possible . she belong to the order of the clever virgin , but scarcely to that of the wise one . 




 CHAPTER II 

 with her crew and cargo 

 long after the time of those who write and those who read this history , the name of Zebedee Tugwell will be flourish at Springhaven . 
 to achieve unmerited honor be the special gift of thousand , but to deserve and win befall some few in every century , and one of these few be Zebedee . to be the head - man of any other village , and the captain of its fishing fleet , might prove no lofty eminence ; but to be the leader of Springhaven be true and arduous greatness . from Selsey Bill to Orfordness , take in all the Cinque Ports and all the port of London , there be not a place that insist on , and therefore possess , all its own right so firmly as this village do . not less than seven stout fishing - smack six of they sloop , and the seventh a dandy form the marine power of this place , and behave as one multiply by seven . all the bold fisherman hold their line from long - establish ancestry , and stick to the stock of their grandfather , and their wisdom and freedom from prejudice . Strength be condense into clear law with they as sinew boil down into jelly and character carry out its force as the stamp of solid impress . what the father have be , the son become , as the generation square itself , and the slate for the child to do their copy be the tombstone of their granddad . thus brave Etruria grow , and thus the Rome which be not build in a day become the flower of the world , and girt in unity of self seven citadel . 
 there be roman blood of the Tenth Legion , perhaps in the general vein of Springhaven . there be scarcely a man who pretend to know much outside of his own business , and there be not a woman unable to wait   when her breath be quite go   for sound reason . solidity , self - respect , pure absence of frivolous humor , ennoble the race and enable they to hold together , so that everybody not bear in Springhaven might lament , but never repair , his loss . 
 this people have many ancient rule befit a fine corporation , and among they be the follow : " never do a job for a stranger ; sleep in your own bed when you can ; be at home in good time on a Saturday ; never work hard than you need ; throw your fish away rather than undersell it ; answer no question , but ask another ; spend all your money among your friend ; and above all , never let any strange come a - nigh your proper fishing ground , nor land any fish at Springhaven . " 
 these be golden law , and make a snug and plump community . from the Foreland to the Isle of Wight their net and line be sacred , and no other village could be find so thriving , orderly , well - conduct , and almost well - content . for the man be not of rash enterprise , hot labor , or fervid ambition ; and although they count thing by money , they do not count one another so . they never encourage a friend to work so hard as to grow too wealthy , and if he do so , they expect he to grow more generous than he like to be . and as soon as he fail upon that point , instead of adore , they growl at he , because every one of they might have have as full a worsted stocking if his mind have be small enough to forget the difference betwixt the land and sea , the tide of labor and the time of leisure . 
 to these local and tribal distinction they add the lofty expansion of son of the sea . the habit of rise on the surge and fall into the trough behind it enable a biped , as soon as he land , to take thing that be flat with indifference . his head and leg have get into a state of firm confidence in one another , and all these declare with the rest of the body perform as chorus gratis that now they be come to a small affair , upon which they intend to enjoy themselves . so that , while strenuous and quick of movement whenever they could not help it and sometimes even brisk of mind   if anybody strove to cheat they , these man generally make no grief beyond what they be bear to . 
 Zebedee Tugwell be now their chief , and well deserve to be so . every community of common - sense demand to have somebody over it , and nobody could have feel ashamed to be under Captain Tugwell . he have build with his own hand , and buy for no man 's work be his own until he have pay for as well as make it the big and smart of all the fleet , that dandy - rig smack , the Rosalie . he be proud of she , as he well might be , and spend most of his time in thinking of she ; but even she be scarcely up to the size of his idea . " Stiff in the joint , " he now say daily ' stiff in the joint be my complaint , and I never would have believe it . but for all that , you shall see , my son , if the Lord should spare you long enough , whether I do not   beat she out and out with the craft as have be in my mind this ten year . " 
 but what man could be build to beat Zebedee himself , in an age like this , when yacht and man take the prize by profundity of false keel ? tugwell yearn for no hot speed in his friend , or his house , or his wife , or his walk , or even his way of thinking . he have see more harm come from one hour 's hurry than a hundred year of care could cure , and the long he live the more loath he grow to disturb the air around he . 
 " Admirable Nelson , " he use to say for his education have not be so large as the part allot to receive it ; " to my mind he be a brave young man , with great understanding of his dootie . but he goeth too fast , without clearing of his way . with a man like I ' longside of ' un , he would have bring they boat out of Bulong . see how I bring my boat in , most particular of a Saturday ! " 
 it be Saturday now , when Miss dolly be wait to see this great performance , of which she consider herself , as the daughter of an admiral , no mean critic . and sure enough , as punctual as in a well - conduct scheme of war , and with nice forecast of wind and tide , and science of the supper - time , around the westward headland come the bold fleet of Springhaven ! 
 seven ship of the line the fishing line arrange in perfect order , with the Rosalie as the flag - ship leading , and three upon either quarter , in the comfort and leisure of the new - bear peace , they spread their sail with sunshine . even the warlike dolly could not help some thought of peacefulness , and a gentle tide of large good - will submerge the rock of glory . 
 " why should those poor man all be kill ? " she ask herself , as a new thing , while she make out , by their face , hat , fle of knee or elbow , patch upon breech , or sprawl of walk toward the attentive telescope , pretty nearly who everybody of they be , and whatever else there be about he . " after all , it be very hard , " she say , " that they should have to lose their life because the country fight so . " 
 but these jolly fellow have no idea of lose their life , or a hair of their head , or anything more than their appetite , after wag hot war upon victual . peace be proclaim , and peace be reign ; and the proper british feeling of contempt for snivelly Frenchmen , which produce the entente cordiale , have replace the wholesome dread of they . not that Springhaven have ever know fear , but still it be glad to leave off terrify the enemy . lightness of heart and good - will prevail , and every man 's sixpence be go to be a shilling . 
 in the tranquil afternoon the sun be make it clear to the coast of Albion that he have cross the line once more , and rediscover a charming island . after a chilly and foggy season , bad than a brave cold winter , there be joy in the greeting the land hold out , and in the more versatile expression of the sea . and not beneath the contempt of one who strive to get into everything , be the crease and patch of the sail of smack , and the pattern of the resin - wood they call their mast , and even the little striped thing   like frog with hat on , in the distance   which have grow to believe themselves the only object the sun be make to shine upon . 
 but he shine upon the wide sea far behind , and the broad stretch of land before they , and among their slowly glide canvas scatter soft touch of wander light . especially on the spritsail of the Rosalie , whereunder be sit , with the tiller in his hand and a very long pipe in his mouth , Captain Zebedee Tugwell . his mighty leg be spread at ease , his shoulder solid against a cask , his breast   like an elephant 's back in width , and bear a bright blue crown tattooed   shine out of the scarlet woolsey , whose plait be fill with the golden shower of a curly beard , untouched with gray . and his face be quite as worthy as the substance lead up to it , be large and strengthful and slow to move , though quick to make other do so . the forehead be heavy , and the nose thickset , the low jaw back up the resolution of the other , and the wide apart eye , of a bright steel blue , be as steady as a brace of pole - star . 
 " what a wonderful man ! " fair dolly think , as the great figure , look even grander in the glass , come rise upon a long slow wave " what a wonderful man that Tugwell be ! so firmly resolve to have his own way , so thoroughly dauntless , and such a grand beard ! ten time more like an admiral than old Flapfin or my father be , if he only know how to hold his pipe . there be something about he so dignified , so calm , and so majestic ; but , for all that , I like the young man well . I have a great mind to take half a peep at he ; somebody might ask whether he be there or not . " 
 be a young and bashful maid , as well as by birth a lady , she have feel that it might be a very nice thing to contemplate sailor in the distance , abstract sailor , old man who pull rope , or lounge on the deck , if there be one . but to steal an unsuspected view at a young man very well know to she , and acknowledge   not only by his mother and himself , but also by every girl in the parish   as the Adonis of Springhaven this be a very different thing , and difficult to justify even to one 's self . the proper plan , therefore , be to do it , instead of wait to consider it . 
 " how very hard upon he it do seem , " she whisper to herself , after a good gaze at he , " that he must not even dream of have any hope of I , because he have not happen to be bear a gentleman ! but he look a thousand time more like one than nine out of ten of the great gentleman I know or at any rate he would if his mother do not   make his clothe . " 
 for Zebedee Tugwell have a son call " Dan , " as like he as a tender pea can be like a tough one ; promise also to be tough , in course of time , by chafing of the world and weather . but at present Dan Tugwell be as tender to the core as a marrowfat dally till its young duck should be ready ; because Dan be pod into his first love . to the sympathetic telescope his heart be low , and his mind go beyond astronomical range , and his hand   instead of briskly pair sol   hang asunder , and sprawl like a star - fish . 
 " indeed he do look sad , " say Miss Dolly , " he be think of I , as he always do ; but I do not   see how anybody can blame I . but here come daddy , with dear old Flapfin ! I be not a bit afraid of either of they ; but perhaps I have well run away . " 




 CHAPTER III 

 and her true commander 

 the nature of " Flapfin " as Miss Dolly Darling and other young people be pleased to call he be to make his enemy run away , but his friend keep very near to he . he be one of the simple - minded man that ever trod the british oak . whatever he think he generally say ; and whatever he say he mean and do . yet of trick and fraud he have quick perception , whenever they be try against he , as well as a marvellous power of see the short way to everything . he enjoy a little gentle piece of vanity , not vainglory , and he never could sec any justice in lose the credit of any of his exploit . moreover , he be gift with the high faith in the hand of the Almighty over he   to help he in all his righteous deed , and over his enemy , to destroy they . though he never insist on any deep piety in his own behavior , he have a good deal in his heart when time allow , and the linstock be wait the signal . his trust be supreme in the Lord and himself ; and he love to be call " my Lord Admiral . " 
 and a man of this noble type deserve to be meet with his own nobility . but the english government , accord to its light which appear to be everlaste regard he as the right man , when want , but at other time the wrong one . they like he to do they a very good turn , but would not let he do himself one ; and whenever he look for some fair chance of a little snug prize - money , they take he away from the likely place , and set he to hard work and hard knock . but his sense of duty and love of country enable he to bear it , with grumble . 
 " I do not   care a rope 's end , " he be say , with a truthfulness simple and solid as beefsteak be , " whether we have peace or war ; but let we have one or the other of they . I love peace it be a very fine thing and I hate to see poor fellow kill . all I want be to spend the rest of my life ashore , and lie out the garden . you must come and see what a bridge I have make to throw across the fish - pond . I can do well enough with what I have get , as soon as my farm begin to pay , and I hope I may never hear another shot cannon ; but , my dear Lingo , you know as well as I do how much chance there be of that . " 
 " Laudo manentem . let we praise she while we have get she . Parson Twemlow keep up my Latin , but you have forget all your , my friend . I bring you down here to see the fish come in , and to choose what you like well for dinner . in the day when you be my small youngster , and as proud as Punch to dine with I , your taste be the fine in the ship , because your stomach be the weak . how often I think that the fish would eat you ! and but for your wonderful spirit , my friend , that must have happen long ago . but your nature be to fight , and you fight through , as you always do . a drumstick for your praise of peace ! " 
 Admiral Darling , a tall , stout man in the sixty - fifth year of his age , look down at his welcome and famous guest as if he know a great deal more of his nature than the owner do . and this make that owner , who think very highly of his own perception , look up and laugh . 
 " here come the fish ! " he cry . " come along , Darling . never lose a moment that be my rule . you can not   get along as fast as I can . I will go and settle all the business for you . " 
 " why should you be in such a hurry always ? you will never come to my age if you carry on so . you ought to tow a spar astern . thank God , they do not   know who he be , and I will take good care not to let they know . if this be what come of quick promotion , I be glad that I get on slowly . well , he may do as he like for I . he always do that be one thing . " 
 stoutly grumble thus , the eld and far heavy Admiral descend the hill to the white gate slowly , as behoove the owner . and , by the time he halt there , the other have be upon the beach five minute , and take command of the fishing fleet . 
 " Starboard there ! brail up your gaff ! be that the way to take the ground ? ease helm , Rosalie . smartly , smartly . have a care , you lubber there . fender out ! so , so . now stand by , all ! there be two smart lad among you , and no more . all the rest be no well than a pack of Crappos . you want six month in a man - of - war 's launch . this be what come of peace already ! " 
 the fisherman star at this extraordinary man , who have take all the business out of Master Tugwell 's hand ; but without think twice about it , all obey he with a speed that must have rob they of a quantity of rust . for although he be not in uniform , and bear no sword , his dress be conspicuous , as he like to have it , and his look and deed keep suit with it . for he wear a blue coat   very badly make , with gilt button and lappet too big for he , a waistcoat of dove - color silk , very long , come over the place where his stomach should have be , and white plush breech , make while he be blockade Boulogne in 1801 , and therefore have scarcely any flesh upon his bone . peace have fatten he a little , these breech have tighten upon he   as their way be with a boy have six week ' holiday ; but still they could not make his leg look big , though they show they sharp and muscular . below they be brisk little sinewy calf in white silk hose , with a taper descent to ankle as fine as a lady 's , and instep bright with large silver buckle . yet that which surpass all the beauty of the clothe be the vigor of the man inside they , who seem to quicken and invigorate the whole , even to the right sleeve , double up from the want of any arm inside it . but the loss of the right arm , and the right eye also , seem to be of no account to the former owner , so hard do he work with the residue of his body , and so much do he express with it . 
 his noble cock hat be in its leathern box yet , for he be only just come from Merton ; but the broad feel he wear be loop up in front , and display all the power of his countenance , or rather the vigor ; for power be heavy , and his face be light and quickness . softness also , and a melancholy gift of dreaminess and reflection , enlarge and impress the effect of a gaze and a smile which have conquer history . 
 " why do not   ' ee speak up to ' un , Cap'en Zeb ? " cry young Harry Shanks , of the Peggy , the smart smack next to the Rosalie . " whoever can ' a be , to make thee so dumb ? Doth ' a know our own business afore our own self ? if ' ee do not   speak up to ' un , Cap'en Zeb , I will never take no more command from thee . " 
 " Harry Shanks , you be always a fool , and you always will be , " Master Tugwell reply , with his deep chest voice , which no gale of wind could blow away . " whether he be wrong or right and I will not   say but what I might have do it well none but a fool like you would dare to set his squeak up against Admirable Lord Nelson . " 




 CHAPTER IV 

 and her FAITHFUL CHAPLAIN 

 " I be not a man of the world , but a man of the Word , " say Parson Twemlow , the Rector of Springhaven ; " and I shall not feel that I have do my duty unless I stir he up to - morrow . his valor and glory be nothing to I , nor even his value to the country . he do his duty , and I shall do mine . it be useless to talk to I , Maria ; I never shall have such a chance again . " 
 " well , dear , you know well , " reply Mrs. Twemlow ; " and duty be always the high and good and most sacred consideration . but you surely should remember , for Eliza 's sake , that we never shall dine at the Hall again . " 
 " I do not   care a snap for their dinner , or the chance of Eliza catch some young officer ; and very few come while this peace go on . I will not   shirk my duty for any of that . " 
 " nothing would ever make you shirk your duty , Joshua . and I hope that you know I too well to suppose that I ever would dream of suggest it . but I do want to see you a Canon , and I know that he begin to have influence in the Church , and therefore the Church be not at all the place to allude to his private affair in . and , after all , what do we know about they ? it do seem so low to be lead away by gossip . " 
 " Maria , " say the Rector , severely sorry , " I must beg you to leave I to my conscience . I shall not refer to his private affair . I shall put leading truth in a general way , and let he make the home application . " 
 " put the cap on if it fit . very well : you will injure yourself , and do no one any good . Lord Nelson will not   know it ; he be too simple - minded . but Admiral Darling will never forgive we for insult he while he be stay at the Hall . " 
 " Maria ! well , I have long give up all attempt at reasoning with you . if I see a man walk into a furnace , do I insult he by say beware ? " 
 " as I be beyond all reason , Joshua , it be far above I to understand that . but if you escape insult he , what you do be far bad , and quite unlike a gentleman . you heap a whole pile of insult upon your own brother clergyman . " 
 " I do not at all understand you , Maria : you fly off in such a way from one thing to another ! " 
 " not at all . anybody who be not above pay attention must understand I . when he be at Merton he go to church , and his Rector be bind to look after he . when he be at sea , he have his Chaplain , who preach whenever the weather permit , and dare not neglect his duty . but the strong point of all be this his very own father and brother be clergyman , and bind to do their good for he . all these you insult , and in so many word condemn for neglect their duty , because you be unable to resist the pleasure of a stray shot at a celebrated man when he come down here for hospitality . " 
 " my dear , you have put the matter in a new light , " say the Rev. Joshua Twemlow ; " I would be the last man in the world to cast a slur upon any brother clergyman . but it be a sad denial to I , because I have put it so neatly , and a line of Latin at the end of it . " 
 " never mind , dear . that will do for some one else who deserve it , and have get no influence . and if you could only put instead of it one of your beautifully turn expression about our debt of gratitude to the noble defender of our country " 
 " no , no , Maria ! " say her husband , with a smile ; " be content without push your victory far than Nelson himself would push it . it may be my duty to spare he , but I will not fall down and worship he . " 
 Joshua Twemlow , Bachelor of Divinity , be not very likely to worship anybody , nor even to admire , without due cause show . he do not pretend to be a learn man , any more than he make any other pretense which he could not justify . but he love a bit of Latin , whenever he could find anybody to share it with he , and even in lack of intelligent partner he indulge sometimes in that utterance . this be a grievance to the squire of the parish , because he be expect to enjoy at ear - shot that which have pass out of the other ear in boyhood , with a painful echo behind it . but the Admiral have his revenge by pass the Rector 's bit of Latin on when he could remember they to some one entitle to an explanation , which he , with a pleasant smile , vouchsafed . this be one of the many benefit of a classical education . 
 but what be such little tag , compare with the pith and marrow of the man himself ? Parson Twemlow be no prig , no pedant , and no popinjay , but a sensible , upright , honorable man , whose chief defect be a quick temper . in parish affair he love to show his independence of the Hall , and have a strong will than Admiral Darling , he mostly conquer he . but he know very well how far to go , and never press the supremacy of the Church beyond endurance . 
 his wife , who be one of the Carnes of Carne Castle , some few mile to the westward , encourage he strongly in hold his own when the Admiral strove to override he . that be her manner of put the case ; while Admiral Darling would rather have a score of nightmare than override any one . but the Carnes be a fall as much as the Darlings be a rise family , and offense come down the hill like stone dislodge by the upward traveller . Mrs. Twemlow know nothing she dislike so much as any form of haughtiness ; it be so small , so petty , so opposed to all true christianity . and this make she think that the darling be always endeavor to patronize she a thing she would much rather die than put up with . 
 this excellent couple have allow , however , their only son Erle , a very fine young man , to give his heart entirely to Faith Darling , the Admiral 's eld daughter , and to win her to an equal extent ; and instead of display any haughtiness , her father have simply say : " let they wait two year ; they be both very young , and may change their mind . if they keep of the same mind for two year , they be welcome to one another . " 
 for a kinder - hearted man than Admiral Darling never see the sun . there be nothing about he wonderful in the way of genius , heroism , large - mindedness , or unselfishness . but people like he much well than if he combine all those vast rarity ; because he be lively , genial , simple , easily move to wrath or grief , free - handed , a little fond , perhaps , of quiet and confidential brag , and very fond of gossip . 
 " I tell you , " he say to Lord Nelson now , as they walk down the hill to the church together that lovely Sunday morning , " you will not have see a fine sight than our fisherman in church I dare say never . of course they do not   all go . nobody could expect it . but as many as a reasonable man could desire come there , because they know I like it . Twemlow think that they come to please he ; but he find a mighty difference in his congregation when I and my daughter be out of the parish . but if he go away , there they be all the same , or perhaps even more , to get a change from he . that will show which of we they care about pleasing . " 
 " and they be quite right . I hate the levelling system , " the hero of the Nile reply . " a man should go to church to please his landlord , not to please the parson . be the Chaplain to settle how many come to prayer ? " 
 " that be the right way to look at the thing , " say the larger - bodied Admiral ; " and I only wish Twemlow could have hear you . I ask he to dine with we yesterday , as you know , because you would have do he so much good ; but he send some trumpery excuse , although his wife be ask to come with he . she stop he , no doubt ; to look big , I dare say ; as if they could dine with a Lord Nelson every day ! " 
 " they can do that every day , when they dine with a man who have do his duty . but where be my pretty godchild dolly ? Horatia seem too long for you . what a long name they give I ! it may have do very well for my granduncle . but , my dear Lingo , look sharp for your Dolly . she have no mother , nor even a duenna she have turn she off , she say yesterday . your daughter Faith be an angel , but dolly " 
 " my dolly be a little devil , I suppose ! you always find out everything . what have you find my Dolly at ? perhaps she get it at her baptism . " a word against his pet child be steel upon flint to Admiral Darling . 
 " I be not concerned with your opinion , " Lord Nelson answer , loftily . " but Horatia Dorothy Darling be my godchild by baptism , and you will find she down in my will for a thousand pound , if she behave well , and if it should please the Lord to send I some of the prize - money I deserve . " 
 this be announce in such a manner , with the future testator 's useful eye bear brightly on his comrade , and his cocked hat lift as he speak of the great Awarder of prize , that no one able to smile could help a friendly and simple smile at he . so Admiral Darling forget his wrath , which never have long memory , and scorn even to look round for dolly , in whom he feel such confidence , take the mighty warrior by the good arm and lead he toward the peaceful bell . 
 " hurry ; we shall be late , " he say . " you remember when we call you ' hurry , ' because of be always foremost ? but they know well than to stop the bell till they see I in the church porch . Twemlow want to upset that , for the parson want to upset everything . and I say : ' very well ; then I shall square it by lock the gate from your shrubbery . that will give I five minute to come down the hill . ' for my grandfather put up that gate , you must know , and of course the key belong to I . it save Twemlow a cable's - length every time , and the parson go to church so often now , he would have to make at least another knot a month . so the bell go on as they use to do . how many bell do you make it , Mr. Nelson ? " 
 " eight bell , sir , " Lord Nelson reply , salute like the middy in charge of the watch . and at this little turn they both laugh , and go on , with memory of ancient day , to church . 




 CHAPTER V 

 OPINION , MALE and FEMALE 

 the fine young parson of the present generation be too fond of ask we why we come to church , and assign fifty reason out of their own head , not one of which be to our credit or theirs ; whereas their proper business be to cure the fish they have catch , instead of ask how they catch they . Mr. Twemlow have sense enough for this , and treat the large congregation he have ever preach to as if they be come for the good of their soul , and should have it , in spite of Lord Nelson . but , alas ! their body fare not so well , and scarcely a man get his Sunday dinner accord to his liking . never a woman would stay by the fire for the sake of a ten - pound leg of mutton , and the baker put his shutter up at half past ten against every veal pie and every loin of pork . because in the church there would be see this day   as the servant at the Hall tell every one   the man whom no Englishman could behold without pride , and no Frenchman with it the victor of the Nile , and of Copenhagen , and countless other conflict . know that he would be star at well , he be equal to the occasion , and the people who see he be so proud of the sight that they would talk of it now if they be alive . 
 but those who be not there would exhibit more confidence than conscience by describe every item of his raiment , which verily even of those who behold it none could do well , except a tailor or a woman . enough that he shine in the light of the sun   which come through a windowful of bull' - eye upon he , and be surprised to see star by daylight , but the glint of his jewel and glow of his gold divert no eye from the calm , sad face which in the day of battle could outflash they all . that sensitive , mild , complaisant face   humble , and even homely now , with scathe and scald and the line of middle age   present itself as a great surprise to the many who come to gaze at it . with its child - like simplicity and latent fire , it be rather the face of a dreamer and poet than of a warrior and hero . 
 Mrs. Cheeseman , the wife of Mr. Cheeseman , who keep the main shop in the village , put this conclusion into well English , when Mrs. Shanks   Harry 's mother   come on Monday to buy a rasher and compare opinion . 
 " if I could have fetch it to my mind , " she say , " that Squire Darling be a tarradiddle , and all his wench liar which some of they be , and no mistake and if I could refuse my own eye about gold - lace , and crown jewel , and arm off , happy would I sleep in my bed , ma'am , every night the Lord seeth good for it . I would soon have find hopper in the good ham in the shop than have go to church so to delude myself . but there ! that Cheeseman would make I do it . I do believe as we have somebody fit to do battle for we against Boney , and I laugh about all they invasion and scare . but now why , ' a can not   say bo to a goose ! if ' a be to come and stand this moment where you be a - standing , and say , ' Mrs. Cheeseman , I want a fine rasher , ' not a bit of gristle would I trim out , nor put it up in paper for he , as I do for you , ma'am . " 
 and Widow Shanks quite agree with she . 
 " never can I tell you what my feeling be , when I seed he a - stand by the monument , ma'am . but I say to myself ' why , my poor John , as be now in heaven , poor fellow , would ' a take you up with one hand , my lord , star and garter and crown and all , and put you into his sow - west pocket . ' and so he could have do , Mrs. Cheeseman . " 
 but the opinion of the man be different , because they know a bee from a bull 's foot . 
 " he may not be so very big , " they say , " nor so outrageous thunderin ' , as the missus look out for from what she have read . they always go by their own opinion , and wrong a score of time out of twenty . but any one with a fork to his leg can see the sort of stuff he be make of . he ' tend his duty in the house of the Lord , and he would not   look after the woman ; but he keep his live eye upon every young chap as be fit for a man - of - war' - man Dan Tugwell especial , and young Harry Shanks . you see if he do not   have both of they afore ever the war come on again ! " 
 conscious of fill the public eye , with the privilege of be upon private view , Lord Nelson have face the position without flinching , and draw all the fire of the enemy . after that he begin to make reprisal , accord to his manner , take no trouble to regard the woman which debar they from think much of he but settle with a steady gaze at each sea - fare man , whether he be make of good stuff or of pie - crust . and to the credit of the place it must be say that he find very little of that soft material , but plenty of good stuff , slow , perhaps , and heavy , but need only such a soul as his to rouse it . 
 " what a fine set of fellow you have in your village ! " he say to Miss Darling after dinner , as she sit at the head of her father 's table , for the Admiral have long be a widower . " the fine I have see on the south coast anywhere . and they look as if they have be under some training . I suppose your father have most of they in the Fencibles , last summer ? " 
 " not one of they , " Faith answer , with a sweet smile of pride . " they have their own opinion , and nothing will disturb they . nobody could get they to believe for a moment that there be any danger of invasion . and they carry on all their fishing business almost as calmly as they do now . for that , of course , they may thank you , Lord Nelson ; but they have not the small sense of the obligation . " 
 " I be use to that , as your father know ; but more among the noble than the simple . for the good thing I ever do I get no praise , or at any rate very little . as to the Boulogne affair , Springhaven be quite right . there be never much danger of invasion . I only wish the villain would have try it . Horatia , would you like to see your godfather at work ? I hope not . young lady should be peaceful . " 
 " then I be not peaceful at all , " cry dolly , who be sit by the maimed side of her " Flapfin , " as her young brother Johnny have nickname he . " why , if there be always peace , what on earth would any but very low people find to do ? there could scarcely be an admiral , or a general , or even a captain , or well , a boy to beat the drum . " 
 " but no drum would want to be beat , Horatia , " her eld sister Faith reply , with the superior mind of twenty - one ; " and the admiral and the general would have to be " 
 " doctor , or clergyman , or something of that sort , or perhaps even bad nasty lawyer . " then dolly   whose name be " Horatia " only in presence of her great godfather   blush , as befit the age of seventeen , at her daring , and look at her father . 
 " that last cut be mean for I , " Frank Darling , the eld of the family , explain from the opposite side of the table . " your lordship , though so well know to we , can hardly be expect to know or remember all the little particular of our race . we be four , as you know ; and the eld two be peaceful , while the young pair be warlike . and I be to be the ' nasty lawyer , ' call to the bar in the fullness of time which mean after din sufficiently to the great disgust of your little godchild , whose desire from her babyhood have be to get I shot . " 
 " LITTLE , indeed ! what a word to use about I ! you tell a great story . but now you will make it true . " 
 " to wit as we say at Lincoln 's Inn she have not long always for my death in battle , but henceforth will do so ; but I never shall afford she that gratification . I shall keep out of danger as zealously as your lordship rush into it . " 
 " Franky go on , I suppose , with some of his usual nonsense , " Admiral Darling , who be rather deaf , call out from the bottom of the table . " nobody pay much attention to he , because he do not mean a word of it . he belong to the peace peace peace - at - any - price lot . but when a man want to rob he last winter , he knock he down , and take he by the throat , and very nearly kill he . " 
 " that be the only game to play , " exclaim Lord Nelson , who have be look at Frank Darling with undisguised disgust . " my young friend , you be not such a fool after all . and why should you try to be one ? " 
 " my brother , " say the sweet - temper faith , " never try to be a fool , Lord Nelson ; he only try to be a poet . " 
 this make people laugh ; and Nelson , feel that he have be rude to a youth who could not fairly answer he , jump from his chair with the lightness of a boy , and go round to Frank Darling , with his thin figure lean forward , and his gray unpowdered hair toss about , and upon his wrinkle face that smile which none could ever resist , because it be so warm and yet so sad . 
 " shake hand , my dear young friend , " he cry , " though I can not offer the right one . I be wrong to call you a fool because you do not   look at thing as I do . poet be almost as good as sailor , and a great deal well than soldier . I have feel a gift that way myself , and turn out some very tidy line . but I believe they be mainly about myself , and I never have time to go on with they . " 
 such little touch of simplicity and kindness , from a man who never know the fear of man , help largely to produce that love of Nelson which England feel , and will always feel . 
 " my lord , " reply the young man , bend low for he be half a cubit high than the mighty captain " it be good for the world that you have no right arm , when you disarm it so with your left one . " 




 CHAPTER VI 

 as other see US 

 Admiral Darling be very particular in try to keep his ground and garden tolerably tidy always . but he never succeed , for the simple reason that he listen to every one 's excuse ; and not understand a walk or a lawn half so well as the deck of a battle - ship , he be always defeat in argument . 
 " here be a state of thing ! " he use to say in summer - time ; " thistle full of seed within a biscuit - heave of my front door , and other thing I forget their name with head like the head of a capstan bursting , all as full of seed as a purser be of lie ! " 
 " your lordship do not understand they subject , " Mr. Swipes , the head gardener , be in the habit of replying ; " and small blame to you , in my opinion , after so many year upon the briny wave . ah ! they can not   grow they thing there . " 
 " Swipes , that be true , but to my mind not at all a satisfactory reason for grow they here , just in front of the house and the window . I do not   mind a few in the kitchen - garden , but you know as well as I do , Swipes , that they can have no proper business here . " 
 " I do hear tell down to the Club , last night , " Mr. Swipes would reply , after wipe his forehead , as if his whole mind be perspire away , " though I do not   pretend to say how far true it may be , that all the land of England be to be cultivate for the public good , same as on the continence , without no propriety or privacy , my lord . but I do not   altogether see how they be to do it . so I think I would well ask your lordship . " 
 " for the public good ! the public - house good , you mean . " the Admiral answer nine time out of ten , be easily lead from the track of his wrath , and tired of tell Swipes that he be not a lord . " how many time more must I tell you , Swipes , that I hate that Jacobin association ? can you tell I of one seaman belong to it ? a set of fish - jobber , and man with barrow , and cheap - jack from up the country . not one of my tenant would be such a fool as to go there , even if I allow he . I make great allowance for you , Swipes , because of your obstinate nature . but do not   let I hear of that Club any more , or you may go and cultivate for the public good . " 
 " your lordship know that I go there for nothing except to keep up my burial . and with all the work there be upon this place , the Lord only know when I may be require of it . ah ! I never see the like ; I never do . and a blade of grass the wrong way come down on poor old Swipes ! " 
 Hereupon the master , have do his duty , be relieve from overdo it , and go on other business with a peaceful mind . the feeling , however , of Mr. Swipes be not to be appease so lightly , but demand the immediate satisfaction of a pint of beer . and so large be his charity that if his master fall short of duty upon that point , he accredit he with the good intention , and enable he to discharge it . 
 " my dear soul , " he say , with symptom of exhaustion , to good Mrs. Cloam , the housekeeper , who have all the key at her girdle , about ten o'clock on the Monday morning , " what a day we do have yesterday ! " 
 " a mercy upon I , Mr. Swipes , " cry Mrs. Cloam , who be also short of breath , " how you do exaggerate my poor narve , a - rush up so soft , with the cold steel in both your hand ! " 
 " ah ! ma'am , it have right to be a good deal wuss than that , " the chivalrous Swipes make answer , with the scythe beside his ear . " it do not   consarn what the master say , though enough to take one 's leg off . but the lady , Mrs. Cloam , the lady it be they as take our head off . " 
 " go ' long with you , Mr. Swipes ! you be so disastrous at turn thing . and how much do he say you be to have this time ? here 's Jenny Shanks come up the passage . " 
 " well , he leave it to myself ; he have that confidence in I . and little it be I should ever care to take , with the power of my own will , ma'am . why , the little brown jug , ma'am , be as much as I can manage even of our small beer now . ah ! I know the time when I would no more have think of round of my mouth for such small stuff than of your grow up , ma'am , to be a young woman with the sponsorship of this big place upon you . wonderful ! wonderful ! and only yesterday , as a man with a gardening mind look at it , you be the prettiest young maiden on the green , and the same barring marriage if you be to encounter with the young man now . " 
 " oh , " say Mrs. Cloam , who be fifty , if a day , " how you do make I think of sad trouble , Mr. Swipes ! Jenny , take the yellow jug with the three beef - eater on it , and go to the third cask from the door the key turn upside down , mind and let I hear you whistle till you bring I back the key . do not   tell I nonsense about your lip be dry . you can whistle like a blackbird when you choose . " 
 " here be to your excellent health , Mrs. Cloam , and as bloom as it find you now , ma'am ! as pretty a tap as I taste since Christmas , and another dash of malt would ' a make it worthy a'most to speak your health in . well , ma'am , a leetle drop in crystal for yourself , and then for my business , which be to inquire after your poor dear health to - day . bloom as you be , ma'am , you must bear in mind that beauty be only skin - deep , Mrs. Cloam ; and the purtier a flower be , the more delicate it grow . I have   a - be a - thinking of you every night , ma'am , know how you must ' a be put about and drive . the Admiral have go down to the village , and Miss dolly to stare at the boat go out . " 
 " then I may speak a word for once at ease , Mr. Swipes , though the Lord alone know what a load be on my tongue . it require a fine gardener , be use to delicacy , to enter into half the worry we have to put up with . hero of the Nile , indeed , and buckler of the country ! why , he could not buckle his own shoe , and Jenny Shanks have to do it for he . not that I blame he for have one arm , and a brave man he be to have lose it , but that he might have say something about the thing I get up at a quarter to five every morning to make up for he . for cook be no more than a smoke - jack , Mr. Swipes ; if she keep the joint turning , that be as much as she can do . " 
 " and a little too fond of good beer , I be afeard , " reply Mr. Swipes , have empty his pot . " man 's head be make for it , but not woman 's , till they come to superior station in life . but , oh , Mrs. Cloam , what a life we lead with the crotchet of they gentry ! " 
 " it be not   that so much , Mr. Swipes , if only there be any way of give satisfaction . I wish everybody who be bear to it to have the very good of everything , likewise all who have fight up to it . but to make all the thing and have nothing make of they , whether indigestion or want of appetite , turn one quite into the Negroes almost , that two or three people go on with . " 
 " I do not   look at what he hath aten or leave , " Mr. Swipes make answer , loftily ; " that lieth between he and his own stommick . but what hath a ' left for I , ma'am ? he hath look out over the garden when he please , and this time of year no weed be up , and he do not   know enough of thing to think nothing of they . when his chaise come down I be out by the gate with a broom in my hand , and I pull off my hat , but his eye never seem to lay hold of I . " 
 " his eye lay hold of everything , whether he make them feel or no . one thing I be sure of he be quite up to Miss dolly , and the way she carry on with you know who , every bless Sunday . if that be what they go to church for " 
 " but , my dear soul , " say the genial Swipes , whose heart be enlarge with the power of good beer , " when you and I be young folk , what do we go to church for ? I can not   speak for you , ma'am , be ever so much young , and a baby in the gallery in long clothe , if bear by that time ; but so far as myself go , it be the girl I go to look at , and most of them come as well to have it do to they . " 
 " that never be my style , Mr. Swipes , though I know there be some not above it . and amongst equal I will not   say that there need be much harm in it . but for a young man in the gallery , with a long stick of the vile - base in his hand , and the only clean shirt of the week on his back , and nothing but a plank of pitch to keep he , however good - look he may be , to be look at the daughter , and the prettiest one too , though not the good , some people think , of the gentleman that own all the house and the haven presumption be the small word that I can find to use for it ; and for she to allow it , fat fat something in the nation . " 
 " well , ma'am , " say Mr. Swipes , whose view be loose and liberal , " it seem a little shock at first to those on trust in family . but Dannel be a brave boy , and might fight his way to glory , and then they have the pick of the femmel up to a thousand pound a year . you know what happen the miller 's son , no far off than Upton . and if it have not   be for Dannel , when she be a little chit , where would proud Miss dolly be , with her feather and her furbelow ? Natur ' be the thing I hold by , and I see a deal of it . and betwixt you and I and the bedpost , ma'am , whoever hath Miss dolly will have to ride to London on this here scythe . Miss Faith be the lass for a good quiet man , without no air and grace , and to my judgment every bit as comely , and more of she to hold on by . but the Lord ' a mercy upon we . Mrs. Cloam , you have   a - be married like my poor self ; and you know what we be , and we know what you be . look ' be not   much to do with it after the first week or two . it be the cooking , and the natur ' , and the not go contrairy . B'lieve Miss dolly would go contrairy to a hangel , if she be j'ine to he three day . " 
 " Prejudice ! prejudice ! " the housekeeper reply , while shake her finger severely at he . " you ought to be above such opinion , Mr. Swipes , a superior man , such as you be . if Miss Faith come into your garden reading book , and find fault here and there , and sniff at the flower , a quarter so often as pretty dolly do , perhaps you would not   make such a perfect angel of she , and run down her sister in comparison . but your wonderful Miss Faith come peep here and poke there into pot and pan , and ask the maid how their mother be , as if her father keep no housekeeper . she provoke I so in the simple - room last week , as if I be hide thief there , that I ask she at last whether she expect to find Mr. Erle there . and you should have see how she burst out cry ; for something have turn on her mind before . " 
 " well , I could not   have say that to she , " quoth the tender - hearted Swipes " not if she have come and rout out every key and every box , pot , pan , and panni in the tool - house and stoke - hole and vinery ! the pretty dear ! the pretty dear ! and such a lady as she be ! ah , you woman be hard - hearted to one another , when your mind be up ! but take my word for it , Mrs. Cloam , no one will ever have the chance of make your beautiful Miss dolly cry by ask she where her sweetheart be . " 




 CHAPTER VII 

 a squadron in the downs 

 " my dear girl , all your courage be go , " say Admiral Darling to his daughter at luncheon , that same Monday ; " depart perhaps with Lord Nelson and Frank . I hate the new style of such come - and - go visit , as if there be no time for anything . directly a man know the way of the house , and you can take he easily , off he go . just like Hurry , he never can stop quiet . he talk as if peace be the joy of his life , and a quiet farm his paradise , and very likely he believe it . but my belief be that a year of peace would kill he , now that he have make himself so famous . when that sort of thing begin , it seem as if it must go on . " 
 " but , father dear , " exclaim the eld daughter , " you could have do every single thing that Lord Nelson have ever contrive to do , if you have only happen to be there , and equally eager for destruction . I have hear you say many time , though not of course before he , that you could have manage the battle of the Nile considerably well than he do . and instead of allow the great vessel to blow up , you would have bring she safe to Spithead . " 
 " my dear , you must have quite misunderstood I . be sure that you never express such opinion , which be entirely your own , in the presence of naval officer . though I will not say that they be quite without foundation . " 
 " why , papa , " cry Miss Dolly , who be very truthful , when her own interest be not involve , " you have often say twice as much as that . how well I remember have hear you say " 
 " you young people always back up one another , and you do not   care what you make your poor father say . I wonder you do not   vow that I declare I could jump over the moon with my uniform on . but I will tell you what we will do , to bring back your sens we will go for a long ride this fine afternoon . I have   a great mind to go as far as Stonnington . " 
 " now how many time have you tell we that ? I will not   believe it till we get there , " young dolly answer , with her bright eye full of joy . " you must be ashamed of yourself , papa , for neglect your old friend 's son so long . " 
 " well , to tell you the truth , I be , my dear , " confess the good - natured Admiral ; " but no one but myself have the least idea of the quantity of thing I have to do . " 
 " exactly what old Swipes say this very morning , only much more impressively . and I really do believe he , till I see a yellow jug , and a horn that hold a pint , in the summer - house . he throw his coat over they , but it be too late . " 
 " dolly , I shall have to put you in the blackhole . you belong too much to the rise generation , or the upstart generation be the proper word . what would Lord Nelson say ? I must have he back again . he be the man for strict discipline . " 
 " oh , I want to ask one thing about my great godfather . you know he only come down with one portmanteau , and his cocked - hat box , and two hamper . but when I go into his bedroom to see , as a goddaughter should , that his pillow be smooth , there he have get tack up at the head of his bed a picture of some very beautiful lady , and another at the side , and another at the foot ! and Jenny Shanks , who could not   help peep in , to see how a great hero go to sleep , wish that she may be an old maid forever if she do not see he say his prayer to they . now the same fate befall I if I do not   find out who it be . you must know , papa , so you have well tell at once . " 
 " that hussy shall leave the house tomorrow . I never hear of anything so shameless . Mrs. Cloam seem to have no authority whatever . and you too , dolly , have no business there . if any one go to see the room comfortable , it should have be Faith , as the lady of the house . ever since you persuade I that you be too old for a governess , you seem to be under no discipline at all . " 
 " now you know that you do not   mean that , papa . you say those cruel thing just to make I kiss you , " cry dolly , with the action suit to the word , and with her bright hair fall upon his snowy beard the father could not help return the salute ; " but I must know who that lady be . and what can he want with three picture of she ? " 
 " how should I know , dolly ? perhaps it be his mother , or perhaps it be the Queen of Naples , who make a Duke of he for what he do out there . now be quick , both of you , or no ride to - day . it be fifteen long mile to Stonnington , I be sure , and I be not go to break my neck . as it be , we must put dinner off till half past six , and we shall all be starve by that time . quick , girl , quick ! I can only give you twenty minute . " 
 the Admiral , rid with all the vigor of an ancient mariner , look well between his two fair daughter , as they turn their horse ' head inland , and make over the down for Stonnington . here be beautiful cantering ground , without much furze or many rabbit - hole , and lovely air flow over green wave of land , to greet and to deepen the rose upon young cheek . behind they be the broad sea , look steadfast , and spread with slowly travel tint ; before they and around lie the beauty of the earth , with the goodness of the sky throw over it . the bright world quiver with the breath of spring , and her smile be shed on everything . 
 " what a lovely country we have be through ! I should like to come here every day , " say Faith , as they strike into the London road again . " if Stonnington be as nice as this , Mr. Scudamore must be happy there . " 
 " well , we shall see , " her father answer . " my business have be upon the coast so much , that I know very little about Stonnington . but Scudamore have such a happy nature that nothing would come much amiss to he . you know why he be here , of course ? " 
 " no , I do not , papa . you be get so mysterious that you never tell we anything now , " reply dolly . " I only know that he be in the navy , and now he be in a grammar school . the last time I see he he be about a yard high . " 
 " he be a good bit short of two yard now , " say the Admiral , smile as he think of he , " but quite tall enough for a sailor , dolly , and the most active young man I ever see in my life , every inch of he sound and quick and true . I shall think very little of your judgment unless you like he heartily ; not at first , perhaps , because he be so shy , but as soon as you begin to know he . I mean to ask he to come down as soon as he can get a holiday . his captain tell I , when he serve in the Diomede , that there be not a man in the ship to come near he for nimbleness and quiet fearlessness . " 
 " then what make he take to his book again ? oh , how terribly dull he must find they ! why , that must be Stonnington church , on the hill ! " 
 " yes , and the old grammar school close by . I be very near go there once myself , but they send I to winchester instead . it be partly through I that he get his berth here , though not much to thank I for , I be afraid . sixty pound a year and his ration be not   much for a man who have be at Cambridge . but even that he could not get in the navy when the slack time come last year . he hold no commission , like many other fine young fellow , but have enter as a first - class volunteer . and so he have no rating when this vile peace be patch up excuse I , my dear , what I mean to say be , when the blessing of tranquillity be restore . and before that his father , my dear old friend , die very suddenly , as you have hear I say , without leave more than would bury he . do not   talk any more of it . it make I sad to think of it . " 
 " but , " persist dolly , " I could never understand why a famous man like Sir Edmond Scudamore a physician in large practice , and head doctor to the king , as you have often tell we could possibly have die in that sort of way , without leave any money , or at least a quantity of valuable furniture and jewel . and he have not a number of child , papa , to spend all his money , as I do your , whenever I get the chance ; though you be grow so dreadfully stingy now that I never can look even decent . " 
 " my dear , it be a very long sad story . not about my stinginess , I mean though that be a sad story , in another sense , but will not move my compassion . as to Sir Edmond , I can only tell you now that , while he be a man of great scientific knowledge , he know very little indeed of money matter , and be not only far too generous , but what be a thousand time bad , too trustful . be of an honorable race himself , and an honorable sample of it , he suppose that a man of good family must be a gentleman ; which be not always the case . he advance large sum of money , and sign bond for a gentleman , or rather a man of that rank , whose name do not concern you ; and by that man he be vilely betray ; and I would rather not tell you the rest of it . poor Blyth have to leave Cambridge first , where he be sure to have do very well indeed , and at his wish he be send afloat , where he would have do even well ; and then , as his father 's trouble deepen , and end in his death of heart complaint , the poor boy be leave to keep his break - hearted mother upon nothing but a Latin Grammar . and I fear it be like a purser 's dip . but here we be at Stonnington a long steep pitch . let we slacken sail , my dear , as we have bring no cockswain . neither of you need land , you know , but I shall go into the schoolroom . " 
 " one thing I want to know , " say the active - minded dolly , as the horse come blow their breath up the hill : " if his father be Sir Edmond , and he be the only child , accord to all the law of nature , he ought to be Sir Blyth Scudamore . " 
 " it show how little you have be out as good Mrs. Twemlow express it that you do not even understand the law of nature as between a baronet and a knight . " 
 " oh , to be sure ; I recollect ! how very stupid of I ! the one go on , and the other do not , after the individual stop . but whose fault be it that I go out so little ? so you see you be catch in your own trap , papa . " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 a lesson in the AENEID 

 in those day Stonnington be a very pretty village , and such it continue to be until it be ravage by a railway . with the railway come all that be hideous and foul , and from it flee all that be comely . the cattle - shed , call by rail - highwayman " the Station , " with its roof of iron pan - pipe and red bull' - eye stick on stack - pole , whistle and stare where the grand tree stand and the village green lie sleep . on the site of the gray - stone grammar school be an " Operative Institute , " whose front   not so thick as the skin of a young ass   be gayly tattooed with a ringworm of wind - brick . and the old manor - house , where great author use to dine , and look out with long pipe through the ivy , have be strip of every shred of leaf , and paint red and yellow , and barge - board into " the Temperance Tap . " 
 Ere ever these heathen so furiously rag , there be peace and content , and the pleasure of the eye , and of neighborly feel abundance . the man never burst with that bubble of hurry which every man now be inflate with ; and the woman have time enough to mind one another 's affair , without which they grow scandalous . and the tree , that keep company with the house , find matter for reflection in their calm blue smoke , and the green crop that promise a little grove upon the roof . so that as the road go up the hill , the traveller be content to leave his leg to nature , while his eye take their leisure of pleasant view , and of just enough people to dwell upon . 
 at the top of the hill rise the fine old church , and next to it , face on the road itself , without any kind of fence before it , stand the grammar school of many generation . this be a long low building , ridge with mossy slab , and rib with green , where the drip ooze down the buttress . but the long reach of the front be divide by a gable project a little into the broad high - road . and here be the way , beneath a low stone arch , into a porch with oak beam bulge and a bell - rope dangling , and thence with an oaken door fling back into the dark arcade of learn . 
 this be the place to learn thing in , with some possibility of keep they , and herein lie the wisdom of our ancestor . could they ever have know half as much as they do , and ten time as much as we know , if they have let the sun come in to dry it all up , as we do ? will even the fourteen - coat onion root , with its bottom expose to the sun , or will a clever puppy grow long ear , in the power of strong daylight ? 
 the nature and nurture of solid learning be well understand when school be build from which come Shakespeare and Bacon and Raleigh ; and the glare of the sun be not let in to baffle the light of the eye upon the mind . and another consideration be that wherever there be light , boy make a noise , which conduce but little to doctrine ; whereas in soft shadow their muscle relax , and their mind become apprehensive . thus have this ancient grammar school of Stonnington foster many scholar , some of whom have write grammar for themselves and their posterity . 
 the year be only at the end of March , and the day go on for five o'clock , the light be just right , in the long low room , for correction of manner and for discipline . two boy have be horse and brush up well , which have strengthen the conscience of all the rest , while sob and rub of the part affect diffuse a tender silence . Dr. Swinks , the head - master , be lean back in his canopy oaken chair , with the pride inspire by noble action . 
 " what wonderfully good boy ! " dolly whisper , as she peep in through the dark porch with Faith , while her father be give the horse in charge to the hostler from the inn across the way ; " I declare that I shall be frighten even to look at Mr. Scudamore , if this be a speciman of what he do . there be scarcely a boy look off his book . but how old he do look ! I suppose it must be the effect of so much hard teaching . " 
 " you silly thing , " her sister answer ; " you be look at the great head - master . Mr. Scudamore be here at the bottom of the school . between these big hinge you can see he ; and he look as young as you do . " 
 Miss Dolly , who dearly love any sly peep , keep her light figure back and the long skirt pull in , as she bring her bright eye to the slit between the heavy black door and the stone - work . and she speedily give her opinion . 
 " he be nothing but a regular frump . I declare I be dreadfully disappointed . no wonder the title do not come on ! he be nothing but a very soft - natured stupe . why , the boy can do what they like with he ! " 
 certainly the scholar of the Virgil class , which Blyth Scudamore be deal with , have recover from the querimonie of those two son of Ovid , on the further side of Ister , and be have a good laugh at the face of " Captain Scuddy , " as they call their beloved preceptor . for he , be gift with a gentle sense of humor , together with a patient love of the origin of thing , be quest in his quiet mind what have lead a boy to render a well - know line as follow : " such a quantity of salt there be , to season the roman nation . " presently he hit upon the clue to this great mystery . " Mola , the salt cake , " he say ; " and the next a little error of conjugation . you have look out your word , Smith , but chance upon the wrong one . " 
 " oh , Captain Scuddy , " cry the head boy , grin wisely , though he might have make just the same blunder himself ; " after that , do tell we one of your sea - story . it will strike five in about five minute . something about Nelson , and kill ten great Frenchmen . " 
 " oh , do , " cry the other little fellow , crowd round he . " it be ever so much well than Virgil , Captain Scuddy ! " 
 " I be not Captain Scuddy , as I tell you every day . I be afraid I be a great deal too good - natured with you . I shall have to send a dozen of you up to be can . " 
 " no , you could not   do that if you try , Captain Scuddy . but what be you think of , all this time ? there be two pretty lady in riding - habit peep at you from the bell porch . why , you have get sweetheart , Captain Scuddy ! what a shame of you never to have tell we ! " 
 the young and fairest of all the boy there could scarcely have blush more deeply than their classical tutor do , as he stoop for his hat , and shyly go between the old desk to the door in the porch . all the boy look after he with the deep interest , and make up their mind to see everything he do . this be not at all what he desire , and the sense of it increase his hesitation and confusion . of the Admiral 's lovely daughter he have hear while in the navy , and now he be frightened to think that perhaps they be come here to reconnoitre he . but luckily the Admiral be by this time to the fore , and he march into the school - room and salute the head - master . 
 " Dr. Swinks , " he say , " I be your very humble servant , Vice - Admiral of the Blue , Charles Darling , and beg a thousand pardon for intrusion on deep learning . but they tell I that your watch be over in some half a minute . allow I to ask for the son of an old friend , Blyth Scudamore , late of the Diomede frigate , but now of this ancient and learn grammar school . when his labor be over , I would gladly speak with he . " 
 " boy may go , " the head - master pronounce , as the old clock wheeze instead of strike . " Sir , my value young coadjutor be advance from the fourth form toward you . " 
 the Doctor be nice in his choice of word , and pride himself on Johnsonian precision , but his young coadjutor 's advance be hardly to be distinguish from a fine retreat . like leaf before the wind , the boy rush out by a back door into the play - ground , while the master solemnly pass to his house , with a deep slow bow to the lady ; and there be poor Scudamore most diffident of man whenever it come to lady - work leave to face the visitor with a pleasing knowledge that his neckcloth be dishevel , and his hair sheafe up , the furrow of his coat broadcast with pounce , and one of his hand go to sleep from hold a heavy Delphin for three - quarter of an hour . 
 as he come out thus into the evening light , which daze his blue eye for a moment , Miss dolly turn away to hide a smile , but Faith , upon her father 's introduction , take his hand and look at he tenderly . for she be a very soft - hearted young woman , and the tale of his trouble and goodness to his mother have move her affection toward he , while as one who be forever pledge accord to her own idea to a hero beyond comparison , she be able to regard young man with mercy , and with pity , if they have none to love . " how hard you have be at work ! " she say ; " it make we seem so lazy ! but we never can find any good thing to do . " 
 " that be a cut at I , " cry the Admiral . " Scudamore , when you come to my age , be wise than to have any daughter . sure enough , they find no good to do ; and they not only put all the fault of that on I , but they make I the victim of all the mischief they invent . dolly , my darling , wear that cap if it fit . but you have not shake hand with Mr. Scudamore yet . I hope you will do so , some hundred of time . " 
 " not all at once , papa ; or how thankful he would be ! but stop , I have not get half my glove off ; this fur make they stick so . " 
 Miss dolly be proud of her hand , and lose few chance of get they look at . then with a little smile , partly at herself for petulance , partly to he for forgiveness , she offer her soft warm rich white hand , and look at he beautifully as he take it . Alack and ala for poor " Captain Scuddy " ! 
 his eye , with a quick shy glance , meet her ; and her with soft inquiry answer , " I wonder what you think of I ? " whenever she meet a new face , this be her manner of consider it . 
 " Scudamore , I shall not allow you any time to think about it , " Admiral Darling break in suddenly , so that the young man almost jump . " although you have cut the service for a while , because of our stingy peacefulness , you be sure to come back to we again when England want English , not latin and Greek . I be your commanding officer , and my order be that you come to we from Saturday till Monday . I shall send a boat or at least I mean a buggy to fetch you , as soon as you be off duty , and return you the same way on Monday . come , girl , ' twill be dark before we be home ; and since the patrol be withdraw , I hear there be a highwayman down this road again . that be one of the blessing of peace , Scudamore ; even as Latin and Greek be . ' Apertis otia portis ' open the gate for laziness . ah , I should have do well at old Winton , they tell I , if I have not happen to run away to sea . " 




 CHAPTER ix 

 the MAROON 

 if yet there remain upon our southern coast a home for the rarer virtue , such as gratitude , content , liberality   not of other people 's good alone , faith in a gracious providence , and strict abstinence from rash labor , that home and stronghold be Springhaven . to most man good success bring neither comfort , nor tranquillity , nor so much as a stool to sit upon , but come as a tread - mill which must be tread without any getting to the top of it . not so do these wise man take their luck . if ever they come from the fickle wave - bosom to the firm breast of land on a Saturday , with a fine catch of fish , and sell it well and such be their sagacity that soon would they keep it for cannibal temptation than sell it badly do they rush into the wave again , before they have dry their breech ? not they ; nor do their wife , who be nearly all good woman , stir they up to be off again . especially at this time of year , with the day pull out , and the season quickening , and the fish come back to wag their tail upon the shallow , a pleasant race of man should take their pleasure , and leave flint to be skin by the son of flint . 
 this be the reason why Miss Dolly Darling have watch in vain at the Monday morning tide for the bold issue of the fishing fleet . the weariless tide come up and lift the bedded keel and the plunged forefoot , and gurgle with a quiet wash among the straky bend , then lurch the boat to this side and to that , to get their heft correctly , and dandle they at last with their bowsprit dip and their little mast - head nodding . every brave smack then be mount , and riding , and ready for a canter upon the broad sea : but not a blessed man come to set she free . tether by head and by heel , she could only enjoy the poise pace of the rock - horse , instead of the racer 's delight in career across the free sweep of the distance . 
 Springhaven have do so well last week , that this week it mean to do still well , by stop at home till the money be go , and make short work afterward . every man thoroughly enjoy himself , keep sober whenever good manner allow , forego all business , and saunter about to see the folk hard at work who have get no money . on Wednesday , however , an order be issue by Captain Zebedee Tugwell that all must be ready for a three day ' trip when the tide should serve , which would be at the first of the ebb , about ten in the morning . the tide be slacken now , and the smack have require some change of berth , but still they be not very far from the Admiral 's white gate . 
 " I shall go down to see they , papa , if you please , " dolly say to her father at breakfast - time . " they should have go on Monday ; but they be too rich ; and I think it very shameful of they . I dare say they have not get a halfpenny left , and that make they look so lively . of course they have   be stuff , and they will not   move fast , and they can not   expect any more dinner till they catch it . but they have get so much bacon that they do not   care . " 
 " what could they have well , I should like to know ? " ask the Admiral , who have see hard time . " why , I give seven man three dozen apiece for turn their nose up at salt horse , just because he whisk his tail in the copper . Lord bless my soul ! what be the nation come to , when a man can not   dine upon cold bacon ? " 
 " no , it be not that , papa . they be very good in that way , as their wife will tell you . Jenny Shanks tell I the very same thing , and of course she know all about they . she know they would never think of go out on Monday , and if I have ask she I might have know it too . but she say that they be sure to catch this tide . " 
 " very well , dolly . go you and catch they . you be never content without see something . though what there be to see in a lot of lubberly craft push off with punt - pole " 
 " hush , papa , hush ! do not   be so contemptuous . what do my godfather say the other day ? and I suppose he understand thing . " 
 " do not   quote your godfather against your father . it be never intend in the Catechism . and if it be , I would never put up with it . " 
 dolly make off ; for she know that her father , while proud of his great impartiality , candor , and scorn of all trumpery feeling , be sometimes unable to make out the reason why a queer little middy of his own should now stand upon the giddy truck of fame , while himself , still ahead of he in the Navy List , might pace his quarter - deck and have hat touch to he , but never a heart beat one pulse quick . jealous he be not ; but still , at least in his own family 
 leave her dear father to his meditation , which faith run up to kiss away , fair dolly put on a plain hat and scarf , quite good enough for the fisherman , and set off in haste for the Round - house , to see the expedition start . by the time she be there , and have lift the sash , and get the spy - glass ready , the flow of the tide be almost spend , and the brimming moment of the slack be nigh . for this all the folk of the village wait , accord to the tradition of the place ; the manhood and boyhood , to launch forth ; old age , womanhood , and childhood , to contribute the comfort of kind look and good - by . the tide , though not to be compare to the wind in fickleness , be capricious here , have sally of irregularity when there have be a long period of northeast wind , bring a counter - flow to the atlantic influx . and a man must be thoroughly acquaint with the coast , as well as the moon and the weather , to foretell how the water will rise and fall there . for the present , however , there be no such puzzle . the last lift of the quiet tide shine along the beach in three straight wave , shallow step that arise inshore , and spend themselves without break . 
 " toorn o ' the tide ! " the Captain shout ; " all aboord , aboord , my lad ! the more ' ee bide ashore , the wuss ' ee be . see to Master Cheeseman 's craft ! got a good hour afront of we . Dannel , what be moon at ? Fetch ' un a clout on his head , Harry Shanks ; or Tim , you run up and do it . doubt the young hosebird be strike last moon , and his brain put to salt in a herring - tub . home with you , wife ! and take Dan , if you will . he would do more good at the chipping job , with the full moon in his head so . " 
 " then home I will take my son , Master Tugwell , " his wife answer , with much dignity , for all the good wife of Springhaven hear he , and what would they think of she if she say nothing ? " home I will take my son and your , and the wise place for he to abide in , with his father set agin he so . Dannel , you come along of I . I will not   have my eld boy gainsay so . " 
 Zebedee Tugwell close his lip , and go on with his proper business . all the woman would side with he if he leave they the use of their own mind , and the sound of his wife 's voice last ; while all the man in their heart feel wisdom . but the young man , loath to be leave behind , come doubtfully down to the stern of the boat , which be push off for the Rosalie . and he look at the place where he generally sit , and then at his father and the rest of they . 
 " no gappermouth here ! " cry his father , sternly . " get theezell home with the vemmelvolk . shove off without he , Tim ! how many more tide would ' ee lose ? " 
 Young Dan , whose stout leg be in the swirl water , snatch up his striped woolsey from under the tiller , throw it on his shoulder , and walk off , without a farewell to any one . the whole of Springhaven that could see see it , and they never have see such a thing before . Captain Zeb stand up and star , with his big forehead come out under his hat , and his golden beard shin in the morning sun ; but the only satisfaction for his eye be the back of his son grow small and small . 
 " chip of the old block ! " " Sarve ' ee right , Cap'en ! " " starve ' un back to his manner again ! " the inferior chieftain of the expedition cry , accord to their several view of life . but Zebedee Tugwell pay no heed to thought outside of his own hat and coat . " spake when I ax you , " he say , urbanely , but with a glance which convey to any too urgent sympathizer that he would be knock down , when accessible . 
 but , alas ! the less - discipline woman rejoice , with a wink at their depart lord , as Mrs. Zebedee set off in chase of her long - stride Daniel . the mother , enrich by home affection and course of duty well perform , be of a rounded and ample figure , while the son be tall , and thin as might be one of strong and well - knit frame . and the sense of wrong would not permit he to turn his neck , or take a glance at the enterprise which have reject he . 
 " how grand he do look ! what a noble profile ! " think dolly , who have see everything without the glass , but now bring it to bear upon his countenance . " he be like the centurion in the paint window , or a roman medallion with a hat on . but that old woman will never catch he . she might just as well go home again . he be walk about ten mile an hour , and how beautifully straight his leg be ! what a shame that he should not be a gentleman ! he be ten time more like one than most of the officer that use to come bother I so . I wonder how far he mean to go ? I do hope he will not   make away with himself . it be almost enough to make he do it , to be so insult by his own father , and disgrace before all the village , simply because he can not   help have his poor head so full of I ! nobody shall ever say that I do anything to give he the faint encouragement , because it would be so very wicked and so cruel , consider all he have do for I . but if he come back , when his father be out of sight , and he have walk off his righteous indignation , and all these people be go to dinner , it might give a turn to his thought if I be to put on my shell - color frock and the pale blue sash , and just go and see , on the other side of the stepping - stone , how much long they mean to be with that boat they begin so long ago . " 




 CHAPTER x 

 across the STEPPING - STONES 

 very good boat be build at this time in the south of England , stout , that be to say , and strong , and fit to ride over a heavy sea , and plunge gallantly into the trough of it . but as the strong man be seldom swift of foot or light of turn , so these robust and sturdy boat must have their own time and swing allow they , ere ever they would come round or step out . have meet a good deal of the sea , they know , like a man who have feel a good deal of the world , that heavy endurance and patient bluffness be safe to get through the wave somehow than sensitive fibre and elegant frame . 
 but the sea - go folk of Springhaven have learn , by lore of generation , to build a boat with an especial sheer forward , beam far back , and deep run of stern , so that she be lively in the heavy of weather , and strong enough to take a good thump smiling , when unable to dance over it . yet as a little thing often make all the difference in great thing , it be very difficult for anybody to find out exactly the difference between a boat build here and a boat build ten or twenty mile off , in imitation of she . the sea , however , know the difference in a moment between the true thing and the counterfeit , and encourage the one to go merrily on , while it send back the other staggering . the secret lie chiefly in a hollow curve forward of nine or ten plank upon either side , which could only be compass by skilful use of adze and chisel , frame - saw and small tool , after choice of the very good timber , free from knot , tough , and flexible . and the good judge of these point be Zebedee Tugwell . 
 not have cash enough just at present   by reason of family expense , and the high price of bread and of everything else   to set upon the stock the great smack of the future , which should sail round the Rosalie , Captain Tugwell be ease his mind by build a boat for stormy weather , such as they very seldom have inshore , but be likely to meet with outside the Head . as yet there be not many rowing boat here fit to go far in tumble water , though the few that could do it do it well , and Tugwell 's intention be to beat they all , in power , and spring , and buoyancy . the fame of his meaning be spread for as much as twenty league along the coast ; and jealous people laugh , instead of wait for he to finish it . 
 Young Daniel have be well bring up in the mystery of his father 's craft , and have a vigorous turn of wrist , as well as a true eye and quick brain , he be even outgrow the paternal skill , with experiment against experience . he have beautiful theory of his own , and feel certain that he could prove they , if any one with cash could be bring to see their beauty . his father admit that he have good idea , and might try they , if any fool would find the money . 
 Wroth as he have be at the sharp rebuff and contumely of his father , young Daniel , after a long strong walk , begin to look at thing more peaceably . the power of the land and the greatness of the sea and the goodness of the sky unangere he , and the air that come from some oyster bed , as the tide be fall , hunger he . home he go , in good time for dinner , as the duty of a young man be ; and instead of laugh when he come by , the maid of Springhaven smile at he . this quite right he in his own opinion , yet leave he the benefit of the doubt which come from a shake in that cradle lately . he make a good dinner , and shoulder his adze , with a frail of tool hang on the neck of it , and trouble with nothing but love which be a woe of self - infliction whistle his way to the beach , to let all the woman understand that he be not a bit ashamed . and they feel for he all the more , because he stand up for himself a little . 
 doubtful right go cheap ; and so the foreshore westward of the brook be claim by diver authority , a tidy little cantle of it have be lease by Admiral Darling , lord of the manor , to Zebedee Tugwell , boat - builder , for the yearly provent of two and sixpence sterling . the Admiral 's man of law , Mr. Furkettle , have strongly advise , and well prepare the necessary instrument , which would grow into value by - and - by , as evidence of title . and who could serve summary process of ejectment upon an interloper in a manner so valid as Zebedee 's would be ? possession be certain as long as he live ; ouster and filibuster , in the form of railway company and communist , be a bubble as yet in the womb of age . 
 this piece of land , or sand , or rush , seem very unlikely to be worth dispute . if seisin corporeal , user immemorial , and prescription for levance and couchance confer any title indefeasible , then be the rabbit the owner in fee - simple , absolute , paramount , and source of pedigree . but they , while thoroughly aware of this , take very little heed to go into it , nor trouble their gentle nature much about a few yard of sand or grass , as the two - legged creature near they do . inasmuch as they have soft bank of herb and vivid moss to sit upon , sweet crisp grass and juicy clover for unlabored victual as well as a thousand other nibble which we be too gross to understand and for beverage not only all the abundance of the brook   whose brilliance might taste of man , but also a little spring of their own which come out of its hole like a rabbit ; and then for scenery all the sea , with strange thing run over it , as well as a great park of their own have countless avenue of rush , ragwort , and thistle - stump where would they have deserve to be , if they have not be content ? content they be , and even joyful at the proper time of day . joyful in the morning , because the sun be come again ; joyful in the middle day to see how well the world go ; and in the evening merry with the trick of their own shadow . 
 quite fifteen step - stone step up if you count three that be make of wood to soothe the dignity of the brook in its last fresh - water moment , rather than to gratify the dry - skin'd sol of gentlefolk . for any one , with a five - shilling pair of boot to terminate in , might skip dry - footed across the sandy purling of the rivulet . and only when a flood come down , or the head of some springtide come up , do any but playful child tread the lichene crack of the stepping - stone . and nobody know this well than Horatia Dorothy Darling . 
 the bunny who live to the west of the brook have reconcile their mind entirely now to the rise of that boat among they . at first it make a noise , and scratch the sand , and creak thing come down to it ; and when the moon come through its rib in the evening , tail be the quarter to show to it . but as it go on naturally grow , seldom appear to make much noise , unless there be a man very near it , and even then keep he from do any harm outside the disturbance that he live in without so much as a council call , they tolerate this encroachment . some of the bold father come and sit inside to consider it , and leave their compliment all round to the master of the enterprise . and even when Daniel come to work , as he happen to do this afternoon , they carry on their own work in its high form that of play upon the premise they lend he . 
 though not very large , it be a lively , punctual , well - conduct , and pleasant rabbit - warren . sudden death be avoidable on the part of most of its member , net , ferret , gin , and wire be alike forbidden , fox scarcely ever see , and even gun a rare and very memorable visitation . the headland stave the southern storm , sand - hill shevelle with long rush disarm the western fury , while inland gale from north and east leap into the cloud from the upland . well aware of all their bliss , and feel worthy of it , the blameless citizen pour forth , upon a mild spring evening , to give one another the time of day , to gaze at the labor of man upon the sea , and to take the sweet leisure , the breeze , and the browse . the gray old cony of curule rank , prime senator of the sandy beach , and father of the father - land , hold a just session upon the head borough , and look like brown loaf in the distance . but these be cony of great mark and special character , full of light and leading , because they have be shoot at , and understand how to avoid it henceforth . they be satisfied to chew very little bit of stuff , and particular to have no sand in it , and they hunch their round back almost into one another , and double up their leg to keep they warm , and reflect on their friend ' gray whisker . and one of their true pleasure be , sit snug at their own door , to watch their child 's gambol . 
 for this be the time , with the light upon the slope , and the freshness of salt flow in from the sea , when the spirit of youth must be free of the air , and the quickness of life be abound . without any heed of the care that be come , or the prick - eare fear of the elder , a fine lot of young bunny with tail on the frisk scour everywhere over the warren . up and down the grassy dip and yellow pile of wind - drift , and in and out of the ferny cove and tussock of rush and ragwort , they scamper , and caper , and chase one another , in joy that the winter be banish at last , and the glorious sun come back again . 
 suddenly , as at the wave of a wand , they all stop short and listen . the sun be behind they , low and calm , there be not a breath of wind to stir their flax , not even the feather of a last year 's bloom have move , unless they move it . yet signal of peril have pass among they ; they curve their soft ear for the sound of it , and open their sensitive nostril , and pat upon the ground with one little foot to encourage themselves against the panting of their heart and the traitorous length of their shadow . 
 ha ! not for nothing be their fear this day . an active and dangerous speciman of the human race be come , lightly and gracefully skim the moss , above salt - water reach , of the stepping - stone . the step be say to be a thousand year old , and probably be of half that age , belong to a time when sound work be , and a monastery flourish in the valley . even though they come down from great Hercules himself , never have they be cross by a pretty foot or a fair form than now come gayly over they . but the rabbit make no account of that . to the young man with the adze they be quite accustom , and they like he , because he mind his own business , and care nothing about theirs ; but of this wandering maiden they have no safe knowledge , and judge the bad , and all rush away , some tenscore strong , give notice to he as they pass the boat that he also have well be cautious . 
 Daniel be in a sweet temper now , by virtue of hard labor and gratified wit . by skill and persistence and bodily strength he have compass a curve his father have declare impossible without a dock - yard . three plank be fix , he be sure of the rest , and could well afford to stop , to admire the effect , and feel proud of his work , and of himself the worker . then the panic of the cony make he turn his head , and the quick beat of his heart be quicken by bad than bodily labor . 
 Miss dolly Darling be saunter sweetly , as if there be only one sex in the world , and that an entirely divine one . the gleam of spring sunset be bright in her hair , and in the soft garnish of health on her cheek , and the vigorous play of young life in her eye ; while the silvery glance of the slop shore , and breezy ruffle of the darken sea , do nothing but offer a foil for the form of the shell - color frock and the sky - blue sash . 
 Young Daniel fall back upon his half - shape work , and despise it , and himself , and everything , except what he be afraid to look at . in the hollow among the sand - hill where the cradle of the boat be , fine rush grow , and tuft of ragwort , and stalk of last year 's thistle , and sea - osier where the spring ooze down . through these the white rib of the rise boat shine forth like an elephant 's skeleton ; but the builder entertain some hope , as well as some fear , of be unperceive . 
 but a far great power than his own be here . curved and hollow ship be female in almost all language , not only because of their curve and hollow , but also because they be craft so to speak . 
 " oh , Captain Tugwell , be you at work still ? why , you really ought to have go with the smack . but perhaps you send your son instead . I be so glad to see you ! it be such nice company to hear you ! I do not expect to be leave alone , like this . " 
 " if you please , miss , it be not   father at all . Father be go with the fishing long ago . it be only I , Daniel , if you please , miss . " 
 " no , Daniel , I be not pleased at all . I be quite surprised that you should work so late . it scarcely seem respectable . " 
 at this the young man be so much amazed that he could only stare while she walk off , until the clear duty of right himself in her good opinion strike he . then he throw on his coat and run after she . 
 " if you please , Miss dolly will you please , Miss dolly ? " he call , as she make off for the stepping - stone ; but she do not turn round , though her name be " Miss dolly " all over Springhaven , and she like it . " you be bind to stop , miss , " he say , sternly ; and she stop , and cry , " what do you mean by such word to I ? " 
 " not any sort of harm , miss , " he answer , humbly , inasmuch as she have obey he ; " and I ask your pardon for speak so . but if you think twice you be bind to explain what you say concern I , now just . " 
 " oh , about your work so late , you mean . I offer good advice to you . I think it be wrong that you should go on , when everybody else have leave off long ago . but perhaps your father make you . " 
 " Father be a just man , " say young Tugwell , draw up his own integrity ; " now and then he may take a crooked twist , or such like ; but he never goeth out of fair play to his knowledge . he hath a - be hard upon I this day ; but the main of it be to check mother of her way . you understand , miss , how the woman - folk go on in a house , till the other woman hear of it . and then out - of - door they be the same as lamb . " 
 " it be most ungrateful and traitorous of you to your own mother to talk so . your mother spoil you , and this be all the thank she get ! wait till you have a wife of your own , Master Daniel ! " 
 " wait till I be dead then I may , Miss dolly , " he answer , with a depth of voice which frighten she for a moment ; and then he smile and say , " I beg your pardon , " as gracefully as any gentleman could say it ; " but let I see you safe to your own gate ; there be very rough people about here now , and the time be not quite as they use to be , when we be a - fight daily . " 
 he follow she at a respectful distance , and then run forward and open the white gate . " good - night , Daniel , " the young lady say , as he lift his work cap to she , show his bright curl against the darken sea ; " I be very much oblige to you , and I do hope I have not say anything to vex you . I have never forget all you do for I , and you must not mind the way I have of say thing . " 
 " what a shame it do appear what a fearful shame it be , " she whisper to herself as she hurry through the tree " that he should be nothing but a fisherman ! he be a gentleman in everything but birth and education ; and so strong , and so brave , and so good - looking ! " 




 CHAPTER XI 

 NO PROMOTION 

 " do it again now , Captain Scuddy ; do it again ; you know you must . " 
 " you touch the rim with your shoe , last time . you be bind to do it clean , once more . " 
 " no , he do not . you be a liar ; it be only the ribbon of his shoe . " 
 " I will punch your head if you say that again . it be his heel , and here be the mark . " 
 " oh , Scuddy dear , do not   notice they . you can do it fifty time run , if you like . nobody can run or jump like you . do it just once more to please I . " 
 Kitty Fanshawe , a boy with large blue eye and a purely gentle face , look up at Blyth Scudamore so faithfully that to resist he be impossible . 
 " very well , then ; once more for Kitty , " say the sweetest - temper of mankind , as he vault back into the tub . " but you know that I always leave off at a dozen . thirteen thirteen I could never stop at . I shall have to do fourteen at least ; and it be too bad , just after dinner . now all of you watch whether I touch it anywhere . " 
 a barrel almost five foot in height , and less than a yard in breadth , stand under a clump of tree in the play - ground ; and Blyth Scudamore have make a clean leap one day , for his own satisfaction , out of it . sharp eye see he , and sharp wit be pleased , and a strong demand have arise that he should perform this feat perpetually . good nerve , as well as strong spring , and compactness of power be need for it ; and even in this athletic age there be few who find it easy . 
 " come , now , " he say , as he land lightly , with both heel together ; " one of you big fellow come and do it . you be three inch tall than I be . and you have only get to make up your mind . " 
 but all the big fellow hang back , or begin to stimulate one another , and to prove to each other how easy it be , by every proof but practice . " well , then , I must do it once more , " say Blyth , " for I dare not leave off at thirteen , for fear of some great calamity , such as I never could jump out of . " 
 but before he could get into the tub again , to prepare for the clear spring out of it , he behold a man with silver button come across the playing - field . his heart fall into his heel , and no more agility remain in he . he have make up his mind that Admiral Darling would forget all about he by Saturday ; and though the fair image of dolly would abide in that quiet mind for a long while , the balance of his wish   cast by shyness   be heavily against this visit . and the boy , who understand his nature , with a poignant love like that of our friend in this world begin to probe his tender place . 
 " one more jump , Captain Scuddy ! you must ; to show the flunky what you can do . " 
 " oh , do not   I wish I be go ? he will have turtle soup , and venison , and two man behind his chair . " 
 " and the beautiful young lady look at he every time he take a mouthful . " 
 " but he dare not go court after thirteen jump . and he have vow that he will have another . come , Captain Scuddy , no time to lose . " 
 but Scudamore set off to face his doom , with his old hat hang on the back of his head as it generally do and his ruddy face and mild blue eye full of humorous diffidence and perplexity . 
 " if you please , sir , his honour the Hadmiral have send I to fetch ' e and your thing ; and hoss be bait along of the Blue Dragon . " 
 " I be sorry to say that I forget all about it , or , at least , I think that he would . how long before we ought to start ? " 
 " my name be Gregory , sir Coachman Gregory accustom always to a pair , but do not   mind a single hoss , to oblige the Hadmiral , once in a way . about half an hour , sir , will suit I , unless they come down to the skittle - alley , as ought to be always on a Saturday afternoon ; but not a soul there when I look in . " 
 any man in Scudamore 's position , except himself , would have grieve and groan . for the evening dress of that time , though less gorgeous than of the age before , be still an expensive and elaborate affair ; and the young man , in this ebb of fortune , be poorly stock with raiment . but he pass this trouble with his usual calmness and disregard of trifle . " if I wear the good I have get , " he think , " I can not be charge with disrespect . the Admiral know what a sailor be ; and , after all , who will look at I ? " accordingly he go just as he be , for he never wear an overcoat , but take a little canvas kit , with pump and silk stocking for evening wear , and all the good that he could muster of his Volunteer equipment . 
 the Admiral come to the door of the Hall , and meet he with such hearty warmth , and a glance of such kind approval at his open throat and glowing cheek , that the young man feel a bound of love and tender veneration towards he , which endure for lifetime . 
 " your father be my dear friend , and the very good man I ever know . I must call you ' Blyth , ' " say the Admiral , " for if I call you ' Scudamore , ' I shall think perpetually of my loss . " 
 at dinner that day there be no other guest , and nothing to disturb the present one , except a young lady 's quick glance , of which he endeavor to have no knowledge . Faith Darling , a gentle and beautiful young woman , have take a natural liking to he , because of his trouble , and simplicity , and devotion to his widow mother . but to the young , dolly Darling , he be only a visitor , dull and stupid , require , without at all repaying , the trouble of some attention . he be not tall , nor handsome , nor of strike appearance in any way ; and although he be clearly a gentleman , to her judgment he be not an accomplished , or even a clever one . his inborn modesty and shyness place he at great disadvantage , until well know ; and the simple truth of his nature forbid any of the large talk and bold utterance which please she as yet among young officer . 
 " what a plague he will be all day tomorrow ! " she say to her sister in the drawing - room . " Father be oblige , I suppose , to invite he ; but what can we do with he all the day ? sunday be dull enough , I be sure , already , without our have to amuse a gentleman who have scarcely get two idea of his own , and be afraid to say ' bo ' to a goose , I do believe . do you hear what he say when I ask he whether he be fond of rid ? " 
 " yes ; and I think it so good of he , to answer so straightforwardly . he say that he use to be very fond of it , but be afraid that he should fall off now . " 
 " I should like to see he . I tell you what we will do . we will make he ride back on Monday morning , and put he on ' Blue Bangles , ' who will not   have see daylight since Friday . will not   he jump about a bit ! what a shame it be , not to let we ride on Sundays ! " 
 Ignorant of these kind intention , Scudamore be enjoy himself in his quiet , observant way . Mr. Twemlow , the rector of the parish , have chance as he often chance on a Saturday , after buckle up a brace of sermon to issue his mind   with his body outside it   for a little relief of neighbourhood . and these little airing of his chasten love for he love everybody , when he have do his sermon come , whenever there be a fair chance of it , to a glass of the fine old port which be the true haven for an ancient Admiral . 
 " just in time , Rector , " cry Admiral Darling , who have add by many a hardship to his inborn hospitality . " this be my young friend Blyth Scudamore , the son of one of my old friend . you have hear of Sir Edmond Scudamore ? " 
 " and see he and feel he . and to he I owe , under a merciful providence , the power of drink in this fine port the health of his son , which I do with deep pleasure , for the excellence both of end and mean . " 
 the old man bow at the praise of his wine , and the young one at that of his father . then , after the usual pinch of snuff from the Rector 's long gold box , the host return to the subject he have be full of before this interruption . 
 " the question we have in hand be this . what be to be do with our friend Blyth ? he be get on famously , till this vile peace come . Twemlow , you call it that yourself , so that argument about word be useless . Blyth 's lieutenancy be on the book , and the way they carry thing on now , and shoot poor fellow ' head off , he might have be a post - captain in a twelvemonth . and now there seem nothing on earth before he well than Holy - Orders . " 
 " Admiral Darling be kind enough to think , " say Scudamore , in his mild , hesitative way , blush outwardly , but smile inwardly , " that I be too good to be a clergyman . " 
 " and so you be , and Heaven know it , Blyth , unless there be a chance of get on by goodness , which there be in the Navy , but not in the Church . Twemlow , what be your opinion ? " 
 " it would not be modest in I , " say the Rector , " to stand up too much for my own order . we do our duty , and we do not   get on . " 
 " exactly . you could not have put it well . you get no vacancy by shot and shell , and be fit for another world , you keep out of it . have you ever hear I tell the story about Gunner MacCrab , of the Bellerophon ? " 
 " fifty time , and more than that , " reply the sturdy parson , who like to make a little cut at the Church sometimes , but would not allow any other hand to do it . " but now about our young friend here . surely , with all that we know by this time of the character of that Bony , we can see that this peace be a mere trick of his to bamboozle we while he get ready . in six month we shall be at war again , hammer and tong , as sure as my name be Twemlow . " 
 " so be it ! " cry the Admiral , with a stamp on his oak floor , while Scudamore 's gentle eye flash and fall ; " if it be the will of God , so be it . but if it once begin again , God alone know where France will be before you and I be in our graf . they have drain all our patience , and our pocket very nearly ; but they have scarcely put a tap into our energy and endurance . but what be they ? a gang of slave , ram into the cannon by a Despot . " 
 " they seem to like it , and the question be for they . but the struggle will be desperate , mountain of carnage , ocean of blood , universal mourning , lamentation , and woe . and I have have enough trouble with my tithe already . " 
 " tithe be dependent on the will of the Almighty , " say the Admiral , who pay more than he altogether like ; " but a war go by reason and good management . it encourage the good man of the day , and it bring out the difference between right and wrong , which be quite smother up in peace time . it keep out a quantity of foreign rubbish and stuff only make to be look at , and it make people trust one another , and know what country they belong to , and feel how much they have leave to be thankful for . and what be the use of a noble fleet , unless it can get some fighting ? Blyth , what say you ? you know something about that . " 
 " no , sir , I have never be at close quarter yet . and I doubt or at least I be certain that I should not like it . I be afraid that I should want to run down below . " 
 Mr. Twemlow , have never smell hostile powder , gaze at he rather loftily , while the young man blush at his own truth , yet look up bravely to confirm it . 
 " of all I have ever know or meet , " say Admiral Darling , quietly , " there be but three Nelson and two other , and one of those two be half - witted who could fetch up muzzle to muzzle without a feeling of that sort . the true courage lie in resist the impulse , more than be free from it . I know that I be in a precious fright the first time I be shoot at , even at a decent distance ; and I do not   pretend to like it even now . but I be pretty safe now from any further chance , I fear . when we cut our wisdom - tooth , they shelf we . Twemlow , how much wise you be in the Church ! the old a man get , the high they promote he . " 
 " then let they begin with I , " the Rector answer , smile ; " I be old enough now for almost anything , and the only promotion I get be stiff joint , and tooth that crave peace from an olive . Placitam paci , Mr. Scudamore know the rest , be fresh from the learn Stonnington . but , Squire , you know that I be content . I love Springhaven , Springhaven love I , and we chasten one another . " 
 " a man who know all the Latin you know , Rector for I own that you beat I to the spelling - book should be at least an Archdeacon in the Church , which be equal to the rank of Rear - Admiral . but you never have push as you should do ; and you let it all off in quotation . those be very comforting to the mind , but I never know a man do good with they , unless they come out of the Bible . when Gunner Matthew of the Erigdoupos be wait to have his leg off , with no prospect before he except a well world you know what our Chaplain say to he ; and the effect upon his mind be such , that I have get he to this day upon my land . " 
 " of course you have the big old poacher in the county . he shoot half your pheasant with his wooden leg by moonlight . what your Chaplain say to he be entirely profane in the turn of a text of Holy - Writ ; and it show how our cloth be spoil by contact with your " for the Admiral be laugh to himself at this old tale , which he would not produce before young Scudamore , but love to have out with the Rector " and I hope it will be a good warning to you , Squire , to settle no more old gunner on your property . you must understand , Mr. Scudamore , that the Admiral make a sort of Naval Hospital , for all his old salt , on his own Estates . " 
 " I be sure it be wonderfully kind in he , " the young man answer , bravely , " for the poor old fellow be throw to the dog by the country , when it have disable they . I have not see much of the service , but quite enough to know that , Mr. Twemlow . " 
 " I have see a great deal , and I say that it be so . and my good friend know it as well as I do , and be one of the first to lend a help hand . in all such case he do more than I do , whenever they come within his knowledge . but let we return to the matter in hand . here be a young man , a first - rate sailor , who would have be under my guardianship , I know , but for but for sad circumstance . be he to be grind at Virgil and Ovid till all his spirit go out of he , because we have patch up a very shabby peace ? it can never last long . every Englishman hat it , although it may seem to save his pocket . twemlow , I be no politician . you read the paper more than I do . how much long will this wretched compact hold ? you have predict the course of thing before . " 
 " and so I will again , " reply the Rector . " Atheism , mockery , cynicism , blasphemy , lust , and blood - thirstyness can not rage and raven within a few league of a godly and just nation without stink in their nostril . Sir , it be our mission from the Lord to quench Bony , and to conquer the bully of Europe . we do not   look like do it now , I confess . but do it we shall , in the end , as sure as the name of our country be England . " 
 " I have no doubt of it , " say the Admiral , simply ; " but there will be a deal of fight betwixt this and then . Blyth , will you leave I to see what I can do , whenever we get to work again ? " 
 " I should think that I would , sir , and never forget it . I be not fond of fighting ; but how I have long to feel myself afloat again ! " 




 CHAPTER XII 

 AT the YEW - tree 

 all the common - sense of England , more abundant in those day than now , feel that the war have not be fight out , and the way to the lap of peace could only be win by vigorous use of the arm . some few there be even then , as now there be a cackle multitude , besotte enough to believe that fact can be undo by blink they . but our forefather on the whole be wise , and know that nothing be trample more basely than right that will not right itself . 
 therefore they set their face hard , and toughen their heart like knot oak , against all that man could do to they . there be no magnificent proclamation , no big vaunt of victory at the buckling on of armour , but the quiet strength of steadfast will , and the stern resolve to strike when stricken , and try to last the long . and so their mother - land become the mother of man and freedom . 
 in November , 1802 , the speech from the throne apprise the world that England be prepare . the wide , long , and deadly war , since the date of gunpowder , be lower ; and the heart of all who love their kin be heavy , but find no help for it . 
 the sermon which Mr. Twemlow preach in Springhaven church be magnificent . some parishioner , keep memory more alert than conscience , declare that they have receive it all nine , or it might be ten , year since , when the fighting first be call for . if so , that prove it none the bad , but themselves , for again require it . their Rector tell they that they think too much of their own flesh - pot and fish - kettle , and their country might go to the bottom of the sea , if it leave they their own fishing - ground . and he say that they would wake up some day and find themselves turn into Frenchmen , for all thing be possible with the Lord ; and then they might smite their breast , but must confess that they have deserve it . neither would year of prayer and fast fetch they back into decent Englishmen ; the abomination of desolation would be set up over their doorway , and the scarlet woman of Babylon would revel in their sanctuary . 
 " now do not   let none of we be in no hurry , " Captain Tugwell say , after dwelling and sleep upon this form of doctrine ; " a man knoweth his own trade the good , the very same way as the parson doth . and I never know no good to come of any hurry . our life be give we by the Lord . and he never would ' a make them threescore and ten , or for man of any strength fourscore , if his will have be to jerk we over they . never do I see no Frenchman as could be turn to an Englishman , not if he be to fast and pray all day , and cut himself with knife at the go down of the sun . my opinion be that Parson Twemlow be touch up by his own conscience for have a nephew more french than English ; and ' Caryl Carne ' be the name thereof , with more french than English sound to it . " 
 " why , he have be go for year and year , " say the landlord of the Darling Arms , where the village be hold council ; " he have never be see in these part since the death of the last Squire Carne , to my knowledge . " 
 " and what do the old Squire die of , John Prater ? not that he be to be call old young , I dare say , than I be now . what do he die of , but marry with a long outlandish ' ooman ? a femmel as could not   speak a word of English , to be anyhow sure of her meaning ! ah , they be bad time at Carne Castle ; and as nice a place as need be then , until they dip the property . six grey horse they be use to go with to London Parliament every year , before the last squire come of age , as I have heere my father say score of time , and no lie ever come from his mouth , no more than it could from mine , almost . then they drop to four , and then to two , and pretend that the road be easy . " 
 " when I be down the coast , last week , so far as Littlehampton , " say a stout young man in the corner , " a very coorous thing happen I , leastway by my own opinion , and glad shall I be to have the judgment of Cappen Zeb consarne it . there come in there a queer - rig craft of some sixty ton from Halvers , desire to set up trade again , or to do some smoogling , or spy perhaps . her name be the Doctor Humm , which seem a great favorite with they Crappos , and her skipper have a queer name too , as if he be two man in one , for he call himself ' jack ' ; a fellow about forty year old , as I haul out of the sea with a boat - hook one night on the varner . well , he seem to think a good deal of that , though contrary to their nature , and nothing would do but I must go to be fat with he everywhere , if the folk would change his money . he have pick up a decent bit of talk from ship in the oyster line before the war ; and I put his lingo into order for he , for which he be very thankful . " 
 " and so he be bind to be . but you have no call to do it , Charley Bowles . " Captain Tugwell speak severely , and the young man feel that he be wrong , for the elder shake their head at he , as a traitor to the English language . 
 " well , main likely , I go amiss . but he seem to take it so uncommon kind of I hitch he with a boat - hook , that we get on together wonderful , and he call I ' Friar Sharley , ' and he try to take up with our manner and custom ; but his head be outlandish for English grog . one night he be three sheet in the wind , at a snug little crib by the river , and he take to the brag as be bear with they . ' all dis contray in one year now , ' say he , nod over his glass at I , ' shall be of the grand nashong , and I will make a great man of you , Friar Sharley . do you know what prawn be , my good friend ? ' well , I say I have catch a good many in my time ; but he laugh and say , ' prawn will catch you this time . one tousand prawn , all with two hondre man inside he , and the leetle prawn will come to land at your house , Sharley . bootiful place , quiet sea , no bad rock . you look out in the morning , and the white coast be make black with they . ' now what do you say to that , Cappen Tugwell ? " 
 " I have   a - heere that style of talk many time afore , " Master Tugwell answer , solidly ; " and all I can say be that I should have punch his head . and you deserve the same thing , Charley Bowles , unless you have   get more than that to tell we . " 
 " so I might , Cappen , and I will not   deny you there . but the discourse be consarne Squire Carne now just , and the trouble he fall into , before I be come to my judgment yet . why , an uncle of mine serve footman there Jeremiah Bowles , know to every one , until he be no more hear of . " 
 nod of assent to the fame of Jeremiah encourage the stout young man in his tale , and a wedge of tobacco rekindle he . 
 " yes , it be a coorous thing indeed , and coorous for I to hear of it , out of all mast - head of Springhaven . say Moosoo Jacks to I , that night when I bouse he up unpretende : ' you keep your feather eye open , my tear , ' for such be his way of pronounce it , ' and you shall arrive to laglore , laglore and what be still nobler , de monnay . in one two tree month , you shall see a young captain return to his contray dominion , and then you will go to his side and say jack , and he will make present to you a sack of silver . ' well , I hail the chance of this pretty smart , you may suppose , and I ask he what the sailor 's name would be , and surprise I be when he answer Carne , or Carny , for he give it in two syllable . next morning 's tide , the Doctor Humm clear out , and I have no other chance of discourse with Moosoo Jacks . but I want to know what you think , Cappen Zeb . " 
 " so you shall , " say the captain of Springhaven , sternly . " I think you have well call your Moosoo Jacks ' Master Jackass , ' or ' Master Jackanapes , ' and put your own name on the back of he . you be with a Frenchman hob and nobbing , and you do not   even know how they pronounce themselves , unchristian as it be to do so . ' Jarks ' be his name , the very same as Navy beef , and a common one in that country . but to speak of any Carne come nigh we with french plotting , and of prawn land here at Springhaven ' tis as likely as I should drop french money into the till of this baccy - box . and you can see that I be not go to play such a trick as that , John Prater . " 
 " why to my mind there never be big stuff talk , " the landlord speak out , without fear of offence , for there be no other sign - board within three mile , " than to carry on in that way , Charley . what they may do at Littlehampton be beyond my knowledge , never have keep a snug crib there , as you be pleased to call it . but at Springhaven ' twould be the wrong place for hatch of french treachery . we all know one another a deal too well for that , I hope . " 
 " Prater , you be right , " exclaim Mr. Cheeseman , owner of the main shop in the village , and universally respect . " Bowles , you must have an imagination the same as your uncle Jerry have . and to speak of the Carnes in a light way of talk , after all their misfortune , be terrible . why , I pass the old castle one night last week , with the moon to one side of it , and only I in my one - horse shay to the other , and none but a man with a first - rate conscience would have have the stomach to do so . however , I seed no ghost that time , though I do hear some noise as make I use the whip ; and the swing of the ivy be black as a hearse . a little drop more of my own rum , John : it give I quite a chill to think of it . " 
 " I do not   take much account of what people say , " Harry Shanks , who have a deep clear voice , observe , " without it be in my own family . but my own cousin Bob be come home one night from a bit of sweethearte at Pebbleridge , when , to save the risk of rabbit - hole in the dark , for he put out his knee - cap one time , what do he do but take the path inland through the wood below Carne Castle the opposite side to where you be , Master Cheeseman , and the same side as the moon would be , only she be not   up that night . well , he have some misgiving , as anybody must ; still he push along , whistle and swing his stick , and say to himself that there be no such thing as cowardice in our family ; till just at the corner where the big yew - tree be , that we sometimes starboard helm by when the tide be make with a nor'w wind ; there Bob seed a sight as make his hair crawl . but I will not   say another word about it now , and have to go home in the dark by myself arter'ards . " 
 " come , now , Harry ! " " oh , we can not   stand that ! " " we will see you to your door , lad , if you out with it , fair and forcible . " 
 of these and other exhortation Harry take no notice , but fold his arm across his breast , and gaze at something which his mind present . 
 " Harry Shanks , you will have the manner " Captain Tugwell speak impressively , not for his own sake , for he know the tale , and have be consult about it , but from sense of public dignity " to finish the story which you begin . to begin a yarn of your own accord , and then drop it all of a heap , be not respectful to present company . Springhaven never do allow such trick , and will not put up with they from any young fellow . if your meaning be to drop it , you should never have begin . " 
 Glasses and even pipe rang sharply upon the old oak table in applause of this british sentiment , and the young man , with a sheepish look , submit to the voice of the public . 
 " well , then , all of you know where the big yew - tree stand , at the break of the hill about half a mile inland , and how black it loom among the other stuff . but Bob , with his sweetheart in his head , no doubt , be that full of courage that he forget all about the old tree , and the murder do inside it a hundred and twenty year ago , they say , until there it be , over his head a'most , with the gap in it star like rib at he . ' bout ship be the word , pretty sharp , you may be sure , when he come to his wit consarne it , and the purse of his lip , as be whistle a jig , go as dry as a bag with the bottom out . through the grey of the night there be sound come to he , such as have no right to be in the air , and a sort of a shiver lay hold of his heart , like a cold hand fling over his shoulder . as hard as he could lay foot to the ground , away he go down hill , forget of his kneecap , for such be the condition of his mind and body . 
 " you must understand , mate , that he have not   see nothing to skeer he , but only hear sound , which come into his ear to make his hair rise ; and his mind might have put into they more than there be , for the want of intarprete . perhaps this come across he , as soon as he feel at a well distance with his wind short ; anyhow , he bring up again ' a piece of rock - stuff in a hollow of the ground , and begin to look skeerily backward . for a bit of a while there be nothing to distemper he , only the dark of the hill and the tree , and the grey light a - come from the sea in front . but just as he be begin for to call himself a fool , and to pick himself onto his leg for trudge home , he seed a thing as skeere he bad than ever , and fetch he flat upon his low end . 
 " from the black of the yew - tree there burst a big light , bright than a lighthouse or a blue thunder - bolt , and fly with a long streak down the hollow , just as if all the world be a - blazing . three time it come , with three different colour , first blue , and then white , and then red as new blood ; and poor Bob be in a condition of mind must be see before say more of it . if he have be bring up to follow the sea , instead of the shoemaking , maybe his wit would have be more about he , and the narve of his symptom more ship - shape . but it never be bear into his mind whatever , to keep a lookout upon the offing , nor even to lie snug in the fern and watch the yew - tree . all he be up for be to make all sail , the moment his stick would carry it ; and he fear to go nigh his sweetheart any more , till she take up with another fellow . " 
 " and sarve he quite right , " be the judgment of the room , in high fettle with hot rum and water ; " to be skeere of his life by a smuggler 's signal ! eh , Cappen Zebedee , you know that be it ? " 
 but the captain of Springhaven shake his head . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 WHENCE , and WHEREFORE ? 

 at the rectory , too , ere the end of that week , there be no little shake of head almost as wise as Zebedee Tugwell 's . Mrs. Twemlow , though nearly sixty year of age , and acquaint with many a sorrow , be as lively and busy and notable as ever , and even more determined to be the mistress of the house . for by this time her daughter Eliza , begin to be twenty - five year old a job which take some year in finishing begin at the same time to approve her birth by a vigorous aim at the mastery . for , as everybody say , Miss Eliza be a Carne in blood and breed and fibre . there be little of the Twemlow stock about she for the Twemlows be mild and humorous but plenty of the strength and dash and wildness and contemptuous spirit of the ancient carne . 
 carne a carne , as Mr. Twemlow say , when his wife be inclined to be masterful a derivation confirm by the family motto , " Carne non caret carne . " in the case , however , of Mrs. Twemlow , age , affliction , experience , affection , and perhaps above all her good husband 's large benevolence and placidity , have work a great change for the well , and make a nice old lady of she . she be tall and straight and slender still ; and know how to make the most , by grave attire and graceful attitude , of the bodily excellence entail for age on the lineage of Carne . of moral goodness there have not be an equally strict settlement , at least in male heredity . so that Mrs. Twemlow 's thought about she kith and kindre be rather sad than proud , unless some ignorance be show about they . 
 " poor as I be , " say Mr. Twemlow , now consult with she , " and poor as every benefice clergyman must be , if this war return , I would rather have lose a hundred pound than have hear what you tell I , Maria . " 
 " my dear , I can not quite see that , " his wife make thoughtful answer ; " if he only have money to keep up the place , and clear off those nasty incumbrance , I should rejoice at his come back to live where we have be for century . " 
 " my dear , you be too poetical , though the feeling be a fine one . within the old wall there can scarcely be a room that have a sound floor to it . and as for the roof , when that thunder - storm be , and I take shelter with my pony well , you know the state I come home in , and all my good clothe on for the Visitation . luckily there seem to be no rheumatism in your family , Maria ; and perhaps he be too young as yet to pay out for it till he get old . but if he come for business , and to see to the relic of his property , surely he might have a bedroom here , and come and go at his liking . after all his foreign fanglement , a course of quiet english life and the tone of english principle might be of the great use to he . he would never wish to see the continent again . " 
 " it be not to be think of , " say Mrs. Twemlow . " I would not have he to live in this house for fifty thousand pound a year . you be a great deal wise than I be , Joshua ; but of his nature you know nothing , whereas I know it from his childhood . and Eliza be so strong - willed and stubborn you dislike , of course , to hear I say it , but it be the fact it be , my dear . and I would rather stand by our daughter 's grave than see her fall in love with Caryl Carne . you know what a handsome young man he must be now , and full of french style and frippery . I be sure it be most kind of you to desire to help my poor family ; but you would rue the day , my dear , that bring he beneath our quiet roof . I have lose my only son , as it seem , by the will of the Lord , who afflict we . but I will not lose my only daughter , by any such folly of my own . " 
 tear roll down Mrs. Twemlow 's cheek as she speak of her mysterious affliction ; and her husband , who know that she be not weak - minded , console she by share her sorrow . 
 " it shall be exactly as you like , " he say , after a quiet interval . " you say that no answer be need ; and there be no address to send one to . we shall hear of it , of course , when he take possession , if , indeed , he be allow to do so . " 
 " who be to prevent he from come , if he choose , to live in the home of his ancestor ? the estate be all mortgage , and the park be go , turn into a pound for Scotch cattle - breeding . but the poor old castle belong to we still , because no one would take the expense of it . " 
 " and because of the story concern it , Maria . your nephew Caryl be a brave young fellow if he mean to live there all alone , and I fear he can afford himself no company . you understand he so much well : what do you suppose his motive be ? " 
 " I make no pretence to understand he , dear , any more than his poor father could . my dear brother be of headstrong order , and it do he no good to contradict he , and indeed it be dangerous to do so ; but his nature be as simple as a child 's almost , to any one accustom to he . if he have not marry that grand french lady , who revel in every extravagance , though she know how we all be impoverished , he might have be live and in high position now , though a good many year my senior . and the bad of it be that he do it at a time when he ought to have know so much well . however , he pay for it bitterly enough , and his only child be set against he . " 
 " a very sad case altogether , " say the rector . " I remember , as if it be yesterday , how angry poor Montagu be with I . you remember what word he use , and his threat of attack I with his horsewhip . but he beg my pardon , most humbly , as soon as he see how thoroughly right I be . you be like he in some thing , as I often notice , but not quite so generous in confess you be wrong . " 
 " because I do not   do it as he do , Joshua . you would never understand I if I do . but of course for a man you can make allowance . my rule be to do it both for man and woman , quite as fairly as if one be the other . " 
 " certainly , Maria certainly . and therefore you can do it , and have always do it , even for poor Josephine . no doubt there be much to be plead , by a candid and gentle mind , on her behalf . " 
 " what ! that dreadful creature who ruin my poor brother , and call herself the Countess de Lune , or some such nonsense ! no , Joshua , no ! I have not so entirely lose all english principle as to quite do that . instead of be largeness , that would be mere looseness . " 
 " there be many thing , however , that we never understand , and perhaps never shall in this world , " Mr. Twemlow continue , as if talk to himself , for reason on that subject would be misaddress to she ; " and nothing be more natural than that young Caryl should side with his mother , who so pet he , against his poor father , who be violent and harsh , especially when he have to pay such bill . but perhaps our good nephew have amass some cash , though there seem to be but little on the continent , after all this devastation . be there anything , Maria , in his letter to enable we to hope that he be come home with money ? " 
 " not a word , I be afraid , " Mrs. Twemlow answer , sadly . " but take it , my dear , and read it to I slowly . you make thing so plain , because of practice every Sunday . oh , Joshua , I never can be sure which you be great in the Lessons or the Sermon . but before you begin I will shoot the bolt a little , as if it have catch by accident . eliza do rush in upon we sometimes in the most unbecoming , unladylike way . and I never can get you to reprove she . " 
 " it would be as much as my place be worth , as the maid say when imagine to have steal sugar . and I must not read this letter so loud as the Lessons , unless you wish Lizzie to hear every word , for she have all her mother 's quick sens . there be not much of it , and the scrawl seem hasty . we might have have more for three and fourpence . but I be not the one to grumble about bad measure as the boy say about old Busby . now , Maria , listen , but say nothing ; if feminine capacity may compass it . why , bless my heart , every word of it be french ! " the rector throw down his spectacle , and gaze at his wife reproachfully . but she smile with superior innocence . 
 " what else could you expect , after all his year abroad ? I can not make out the whole of it , for certain . but surely it be not beyond the compass of masculine capacity . " 
 " yes , it be , Maria ; and you know it well enough . no honest Englishman can endure a word of French . Latin , or Greek , or even Hebrew though I take to that rather late in life . but French be only fit for woman , and very few of they can manage it . let we hear what this Frenchman say . " 
 " he be not a Frenchman , Joshua . he be an Englishman , and probably a very fine one . I will not   be sure about all of his letter , because it be so long since I be at school ; and french book be generally unfit to read . but the general meaning be something like this : 
 ' MY BELOVED and HIGHLY valued aunt , since I hear from you there be many year now , but I hope you have hold I in memory . I have the intention of return to the country of England , even in this bad time of winter , when the climate be most funereal . I shall do my good to call back , if possible , the scatter ruin of the property , and to institute again the name which my father make displeasing . in this good work you will , I have faith , afford I your good assistance , and the influence of your high connection in the neighbourhood . accept , dear aunt , the assurance of my high consideration , of the most sincere and the most devoted , and allow I the honour of write myself your most loving and respectful nephew , 
 ' CARYL CARNE . ' 
 now , Joshua , what do you think of that ? " 
 " fine word and no substance ; like all french stuff . and he never even mention I , who give he a top , when he should have have the whip . I will not pretend to understand he , for he always be beyond I . dark and excitable , moody and capricious , haughty and sarcastic , and devoid of love for animal . you remember his pony , and what he do to it , and the little dog that crawl upon her stomach towards he . for your sake I would have put up with he , my dear , and striven to improve his nature , which be sure to be much bad at six - and - twenty , after so many year abroad . but I confess it be a great relief to I that you wisely prefer not to have he in this house , any more at least than we can help it . but who come here ? what a hurry we be in ! Lizzie , my darling , be patient . " 
 " here be this plague of a door bar and bolt again ! be I not to have an atom of breakfast , because I just happen to oversleep myself ? the morning get dark and dark ; it be almost impossible to see to dress oneself . " 
 " there be plenty of tinder in the house , Eliza , and plenty of good tallow candle , " Mrs. Twemlow reply , have put away the letter , while her husband let the complainant in . " for the third time this week we have have prayer without you , and the example be shocking for the servant . we shall have to establish the rule you suggest too late to pray for food , too late to get it . but I have keep your help of bacon hot , quite hot , by the fire . and the teapot be under the cozy . " 
 " thank you , dear mother , " the young lady answer , careless of word , if deed be in her favour , and too clever to argue the question . " I suppose there be no kind of news this morning to reward one for get up so early . " 
 " nothing whatever for you , Miss Lizzie , " say her father , as soon as he have kiss she . " but the paper be full of the prospect of war , and the extent of the preparation . if we be drive to fight again , we shall do it in earnest , and not spare ourselves . " 
 " nor our enemy either , I do hope with all my heart . how long be we to be afraid of they ? we have always invade the French till now . and for they to talk of invade we ! there be not a bit of spirit leave in this island , except in the heart of Lord Nelson . " 
 " what a hot little patriot this child be ! " say the father , with a quiet smile at she . " what would she say to an Englishman , who be more french than English , and would only write french letter ? and yet it might be possible to find such people . " 
 " if such a wretch exist , " cry Miss Twemlow , " I should like to crunch he as I crunch this toast . for a Frenchman I can make all fair allowance , because he can not help his birth . but for an Englishman to turn Frenchman " 
 " however reluctant we may be to allow it , " the candid rector argue , " they be the foremost nation in the world , just now , for energy , valour , decision , discipline , and I fear I must add patriotism . the most wonderful man who have appear in the world for century be their leader , and by land his success have be almost unbroken . if we must have war again , as I fear we must , and very speedily , our chief hope must be that the Lord will support his cause against the scoffer and the infidel , the libertine and the assassin . " 
 " you see how beautifully your father put it , Eliza ; but he never abuse people . that be a habit in which , I be sorry to say , you indulge too freely . you show no good feeling to anybody who differ from you in opinion , and you talk as if Frenchmen have no religion , no principle , and no humanity . and what do you know about they , pray ? have you ever speak to a Frenchman ? have you ever even see one ? would you know one if you even set eye upon he ? " 
 " well , I be not at all sure that I should , " the young lady reply , be thoroughly truthful ; " and I have no wish for the opportunity . but I have see a french woman , mother ; and that be quite enough for I . if they be so , what must the man be ? " 
 " there be a name for this process of feminine reasoning , this cumulative and syncopetic process of the mind , entirely feminine   but regard by itself as rational , a name which I use to know well in the day when I have the ten Fallacies at my finger ' end , more tenaciously perhaps than the Decalogue . strange to say , the name be go from my memory ; but but " 
 " but then you have well go after it , my dear , " his wife suggest with authority . " if your only impulse when you hear reason be to search after hard name for it , you be safe outside of its sphere altogether . " 
 " I be strike with the truth of that remark , " observe the rector ; " and the more so because I descry a male member of our race approach , with a hat at once the emblem and the crown of sound reason . away with all fallacy ; it be church - warden Cheeseman ! " 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 a horrible suggestion 

 " can you guess what have bring I down here in this hurry ? " Lord Nelson ask Admiral Darling , have jump like a boy from his yellow post - chaise , and shake his old friend 's broad right hand with his slender but strenuous leave one , even as a big bell be swing by a thin rope . " I have no time to spare not a day , not an hour ; but I make up my mind to see you before I start . I can not expect to come home alive , and , except for one reason , I should not wish it . " 
 " nonsense ! " say the Admiral , who be saunter near his upper gate , and enjoy the world this fine spring morning ; " you be always in such a confounded hurry ! when you come to my time of life , you will know well . what be it this time ? the Channel fleet again ? " 
 " no , no ; Billy Blue keep that , thank God ! I hate look after a school of herring - boat . the Mediterranean for I , my friend . I receive the order yesterday , and shall be at sea by the twentieth . " 
 " I be very glad to hear it , for your sake . if ever there be a restless fellow in the good old time we be not like that . come up to the house and talk about it ; at least they must take the horse out . they be not like you ; they can not   work forever . " 
 " and they do not   get knock about like I ; though one of they have lose his starboard eye , and he sail and steer all the well for it . let they go up to the stable , Darling , while you come down to the beach with I . I want to show you something . " 
 " what crotchet be in his too active brain now ? " the eld and strong man ask himself , as he find himself hook by the right arm , and lead down a track through the tree scarcely know to himself , and quite out of sight from the village . " why , this be not the way to the beach ! however , it be never any good to oppose he . he get his own way so because of his fame . or perhaps that be the way he get his fame . but to show I about over my own land ! but let he go on , let he go on . " 
 " you be wonder , I dare say , what I be about , " cry Nelson , stop suddenly , and fix his sound eye which be wonderfully keen , though he be always in a fright about it upon the large and peaceful blinker of his ancient commander ; " but now I shall be able to convince you , though I be not a land - surveyor , nor even a general of land - force . if God Almighty prolong my life which be not very likely it will be that I may meet that scoundrel , Napoleon Bonaparte , on dry land . I hear that he be eager to encounter I on the wave , himself command a line - of - battle ship . I should send he to the devil in a quarter of an hour . and ashore I could astonish he , I think , a little , if I have a good army to back I up . remember what I do at Bastia , in the land that produce this monster , and where I be call the Brigadier ; and again , upon the coast of Italy , I show that I understand all their dry - ground business . tush ! I can beat he , ashore and afloat ; and I shall , if I live long enough . but this time the villain be in earnest , I believe , with his trumpery invasion ; and as soon as he hear that I be go , he will make sure of have his own way . we know , of course , there be fifty man as good as myself to stop he , include you , my dear darling ; but everything go by reputation the noise of the people praise - puff . that be all I get ; while the lucky fellow , like Cathcart , get the prize - money . but I do not   want to grumble . now what do you see ? " 
 " well , I see you , for one thing , " the Admiral answer , at his leisure , be quite inured to his friend 's quick fire , " and wear a coat that would be a disgrace to any other man in the navy . and far on I see some land that I never shall get my rent for ; and beyond that nothing but the sea , with a few fishing - craft inshore , and in the offing a sail , an outward - bind East Indiaman some fool who would not   wait for convoy , with war as good as proclaim again . " 
 " nothing but the sea , indeed ? the sweep of the land , and the shelter of the bay , the shoaling of the shore without a rock to break it , the headland that shut out both wind and wave ; and outside the headland , off Pebbleridge , deep water for a fleet of line - of - battle ship to anchor and command the land approach moreover , a stream of the pure water from deep and never - fail spring Darling , the place of all place in England for the French to land be opposite to your front door . " 
 " I be truly oblige to you for predict , and to they for do it , if ever they attempt such impudence . if they find out that you be away , they can also find out that I be here , as commander of the sea defence , from Dungeness to Selsey - Bill . " 
 " that will make it all the more delightful to land at your front door , my friend ; and all the easy to do it . my own plan be to strike with all force at the head - quarter of the enemy , because the most likely to be unprepared . about a year ago , when I be down here , a little before my dear father 's death , without your commission I take command of your fishing - craft come home for their Sunday , and show they how to take the beach , partly to confirm my own suspicion . there be no other landing on all the south coast , this side of Hayling Island , fit to be compare with it for the use of flat - bottom craft , such as most of Boney 's be . and remember the set of the tide , which make the fortune of your fisherman . to be sure , he know nothing of that himself ; but he have sharp rogue about he . if they once make good their landing here , it would be difficult to dislodge they . it must all be do from the land side then , for even a 42 - gun frigate could scarcely come near enough to pepper they . they love shoal water , the skulk and that have enable they to baffle I so often . not that they would conquer the country all brag but still it would be a nasty predicament , and scare the poor cockney like the very devil . " 
 " but remember the distance from Boulogne , Hurry . if they can not cross twenty - five mile of channel in the tooth of our ship , what chance would they have when the distance be near eighty ? " 
 " a much well chance , if they know how to do it . all our cruiser would be to the eastward . one afternoon perhaps , when a haze be on , they make a feint with light craft toward the Scheldt every british ship crowd sail after they . then , at dusk , the main body of the expedition slip with the first of the ebb to the westward ; they meet the flood tide in mid - channel , and use their long sweep be in Springhaven , or at any rate the light of they , by the top of that tide , just when you be shave . you laugh at such a thought of mine . I tell you , my dear friend , that with skill and good luck it be easy ; and do it they should , if they be under my command . " 
 if anybody else have even talk of such a plan as within the bound of likelihood , Admiral Darling would have be almost enraged . but now he look doubtfully , first at the sea   as if it might be thick with prame already , and then at the land which be his own as if the rent might go into a Frenchman 's pocket , and then at his old and admired friend , who have ruin his sleep for the summer . 
 " happily they be not under your command , and they have no man to compare with you ; " he speak rather nervously ; while Nelson smile , for he love the praise which he have so well earn ; " and if it be possible for you to talk nonsense , I should say that you have do it now . but two thing surely you have overlook . in the first place , the French can have no idea of the special opportunity this place afford . and again , if they have , they could do nothing , without a pilot well acquainted with the spot . though the landing be so easy , there be shoal outside , very intricate and dangerous , and know to none except the native of the place , who be jealous to the last degree about their knowledge . " 
 " that be true enough ; and even I should want a pilot here , though I know every spit of sand eastward . but away fly both your difficulty if there should happen to be a local traitor . " 
 " a traitor at Springhaven ! such a thing be quite impossible . you would laugh at yourself , if you only know the character of our people . there never have be , and there never will be , a Springhaven man capable of treachery . " 
 " that be good news , ay , and strange news too , " the visitor answer , with his left hand on his sword , for he be now in full though rather shabby uniform . " there be not many traitor in England , I believe ; but they be as likely to be find in one place as another , accord to my experience . well , well , I be very glad you have no such scoundrel here . I will not   say a single word against your people , who be as fine a lot as any in the south of England , and as obstinate as any I could wish to see . of an obstinate man I can always make good ; with a limp one I can do nothing . but bear in mind every word you have hear I say , because I come down on purpose about it ; and I generally penetrate the device of the enemy , though they lead I on a wild - goose - chase sometimes , but only when our own folk back they up , either by lie or stupidity . now look once more , for you be slow as well as a great deal wise than I be . you see how this land - lock bight of Springhaven seem make by the Almighty for flat - bottom craft , if once they can find their way into it ; while the trend of the coast towards Pebbleridge be equally suit for the cover fleet , unless a gale from southwest come on , in which case they must run for it . and you see that the land force , by crown the hill above your house and across the valley , might defy our noble volunteer , and all that could be bring against they , till a hundred thousand cutthroat be establish here . and Boney would make his head - quarter at the Hall , with a french cook in your kitchen , and a german butler in your cellar , and my pretty godchild to wait upon he , for the rogue love pretty maiden . " 
 " that will do . that be quite enough . no wonder you have write poem , Nelson , as you tell we the last time you be here . if my son have only get your imagination but perhaps you know something more than you have tell I . perhaps you have be tell " 
 " never mind about that , " the great sea - captain answer , turn away as if on spring ; " it be high time for I to be off again , and my chaise have spring on her cable . " 
 " not she . I have order she to be dock . Dine with we you shall this day , if we have to dine two hour early , and though Mother Cloam rage furiously . how much long do you suppose you can carry on at this pace ? look at I . I have double your bodily substance ; but if I go on as you do you remember the twenty - four - pounder old hotcopper put into the launch , and fire it , in spite of all I could say to he ? well , you be just the same . you have not get the scantling for the metal you carry and be always work . you will either blow up , or else scuttle yourself . look here , how your seam be open ! " here Admiral Darling thrust his thumb through the ravel seam of his old friend 's coat , which make he jump back , for he love his old coat . " yes , and you will go in the very same way . I wonder how any coat last so much as a month , with you inside it . " 
 " this coat , " say Nelson , who be most sweet - temper with any one he love , though hot as pepper when stir up by stranger " this coat be the one I wear at Copenhagen , and a sounder and kind coat never come on a man 's back . Charles Darling , you have make a bad hit this time . if I be no more worn out than this coat be , I be fit to go to sea for a number of year yet . and I hope to show it to a good many frenchman , and take as many ship , every time they show fight , as there be button on it . " 
 " then you will double all your capture at the Nile ; " such a series of button have this coat , though mostly loose upon their mooring , for his guardian angel be not " domestic " ; " but you may be trust not to let they drift so . you have give I a lesson in coast - defence , and now you shall be board by the lady . you possess some gift of the tongue , my friend , as well as great gift of hand and eye ; but I will back my daughter to beat you there . come up to the house . no turning of tail . " 
 " I speak very well in the House of Lords , " say Nelson , in his simple way , " in reply to the speech of his Majesty , and again about the Commissioner 's bill ; or at least everybody tell I so . but in the House of Ladies I hold my tongue , because there be abundance without it . " 
 this , however , he fail to do when the matter come to the issue ; for his godchild Horatia , more commonly call dolly , happen to be in the mood for take outrageous liberty with he . she possess very little of that gift most precious among woman the sense of veneration ; and to she a hero be only a man heroic in act of utility . " he shall do it , " she say to Faith , when she hear that he be come again ; " if I have to kiss he , he shall do it ; and I do not   like kiss those old man . " 
 " hush ! " say her eld sister . " dolly , you do say thing so recklessly . one would think that you like to kiss young man ! but I be sure that be not your meaning . I would rather kiss Lord Nelson than all the young man in the kingdom . " 
 " well do , Faith ! all the young man in the kingdom ! how recklessly you do say thing ! and you can not   kiss he he be MY godfather . but just see how I get round he , if you have wit enough to understand it . " 
 so these two join in their kind endeavour to make the visitor useful , the object be so good that doubtful mean might be excuse for it . in different way and for diver reason , each of these young lady now have take to like Blyth Scudamore . faith , by power of pity first , and of grief for her own misfortune , and of admiration for his goodness to his widow mother which make his good breech shine hard at the knee ; and dolly , because of his shy adoration , and dauntless defence of she against a cow   whose calf be on the road to terminate in veal , as well as his special skill with his pocket - knife in cut out figure that could dance , and almost sing ; also his great gift , when the tide be out , of make rare creature run after he . what avail to explore female reason precisely ? their mind be make up that he must be a captain , if Nelson have to build the ship with his one hand for he . 
 " after that , there be nothing more to be say , " confess the vanquished warrior ; " but the daughter of an Admiral should know that no man can be post until he have serve his time as lieutenant ; and this young hero of yours have never even hold the King 's commission yet . but as he have see some service , and be beyond the age of a middy , in the present rush he might get appoint as junior lieutenant , if he have any stout seconder . your father be the man , he be always at hand , and can watch his opportunity . he know more big - wig than I do , and he have not give offence where I have . get your father , my dear , to attend to it . " 
 but the lady be not to be so put off , for they understand the difference of character . Lord Nelson be as sure to do a thing as Admiral Darling be to drop it if it grow too heavy . hence it come to pass that Blyth Scudamore , though fail of the Victory and amphion which he would have choose , if the choice be his receive with that cheerful philosophy   which have make he so dear to the school - boy , and be largely require among they   his appointment as junior lieutenant to the 38 - gun frigate Leda , attach to the Channel fleet under Cornwallis , whose business it be to deal with the french flotilla of invasion . 




 CHAPTER XV 

 ORDEAL of AUDIT 

 England see the grow danger , and prepare , with an even mind and well - girt body , to confront it . as yet stand up no other country to help or even comfort she , so cowed be all the continent by the lash , and spur of an upstart . alone , encumber with the pack of Ireland , pinch with hunger and dearth of victual , and cramp with the colic of Whiggery , she set her strong shoulder to the wheel of fortune , and so keep it till the hill be behind she . some nation   which owe their existence to she   have forget these thing conveniently ; an Englishman hat to speak of they , through his unjust abhorrence of self - praise ; and so do a Frenchman , by virtue of motif equally respectable . 
 but now the especial danger lie in the special strength of England . scarcely any man along the coast , who have ever come across a Frenchman , could be lead   by quotation from history or even from newspaper   to believe that there be any sense in this menace of his to come and conquer we . even if he land , which be not likely for none of they could box the compass the only thing he take would be a jolly good thrashing , and a few pill of lead for his garlic . this lofty contempt on the part of the seafaring man have be enhance by Nelson , and throve with stoutest vigour in the enlightened breast of Springhaven . 
 yet military man think otherwise , and so do the owner of crop and rick , and so do the dealer in bacon and egg and crockery , and even hardware . Mr. Cheeseman , for instance , who leave nothing unsold that he could turn a penny by , be anything but easy in his mind , and dream such dream as he could not impart to his wife on account of her tendency to hysteric but tell with much power to his daughter Polly , now the recognise belle of Springhaven . this vigilant grocer and butterman , tea , coffee , tobacco , and snuffman , hosi also , and general provider for the outer as well as the inner man , have much of that enterprise in his nature which the country believe to come from London . his possession of this be ascribe by all person of a thoughtful turn to his ownership of that well - build schooner the London Trader . sailing as she do , when the weather be fine , nearly every other week , for London , and return with equal frequency , to the woman who have never be ten mile from home she be a mystery and a watchword . not one of they would allow lad of hers to join this romantic galleon , and tempt the black cloud of the distance ; neither do Mr. Cheeseman yearn   for reason of his own about city price   to navigate this good ship with native . moreover , it be absurd , as he say , with a keen sense of his own cheapness , to suppose that he could find the fund to buy and ply such a ship as that ! 
 truth be a fugitive creature , even when she deign to be visible , or even to exist . the truth of Mr. Cheeseman 's statement have exist , but be long since fly . such be his worth that he could now afford to buy the London Trader three time over , and pay ready money every time . but when he first invest hard cash in she against the solid tear of his prudent wife true enough it be that he could only scrape together one quarter of the sum require . Mrs. Cheeseman , who be then in a condition of absorb interest with Polly , make it her last request in this world for she never expect to get over it that Jemmy should not run in debt on a goose - chase , and fetch her poor spirit from its grave again . James Cheeseman be compel as the noble man may be to dissemble and even deny his intention until the blessed period of caudle - cup , when , the weather be pleasant and the wind along the shore , he find himself encourage to put up the window gently . the tide be come in with a long seesaw , and upon it , like the baby in the cradle full of sleep , lie rock another little strange , or rather a very big one , to the lady 's conception . 
 let bygone be bygone . there be some reproach ; but the weak vessel , Mrs. Cheeseman , at last strike flag , without sink , as she threaten to do . and when little Polly go for her first airing , the London Trader have accomplish her first voyage , and be sail in triumphantly with a box of " top and bottom " from the ancient firm in Threadneedle Street , which have save so many infant from the power that cut the thread . after that , everything go as it should go , include this addition to the commercial strength of Britain , which the lady be enable soon to talk of as " our ship , " and to cite when any question rise of the late London fashion . but even now , when a score of year , save one , have make their score and go , Mrs. Cheeseman only guess and doubt as to the purchase of her ship . James Cheeseman know the value of his own counsel , and so keep it ; and be pat on both shoulder by the world , while he pat his own butter . 
 he wear an apron of the pure white , with shoulder - strap of linen tape , and upon his counter he have a desk , with a carve oak rail in front of it and return at either end . the joy of his life be here to stand , with goodly shirt sleeve shin , his bright cheek also shin in the sun , unless it be hot enough to hurt his good . he be not a great man , but a good one in the opinion of all who owe he nothing , and even in his own estimate , though he owe so much to himself . it be enough to make any one who possess a shilling hungry to see he so clean , so ready , and ruddy among the many good thing which his look and manner , as well as his word , commend . and as soon as he begin to smack his rosy lip , which nature have fit up on purpose , over a rasher , or a cut of gammon , or a keg of good Aylesbury , or a fine red herring , no customer have a penny in his pocket might struggle hard enough to keep it there . for the half - hearted policy of finger one 's money , and ask a price theoretically , would recoil upon the constitution of the strong man , unless he could detach from all cooperation the congenial research of his eye and nose . when the weather be cool and the air full of appetite , and a fine smack of salt from the sea be sparkle on the margin of the plate of expectation , there be Mr. Cheeseman , with a knife and fork , amid a presence of hungrifye good that beat the weak effort of imagination . ham of the first rank and high education , spring of pork sweet than the pure spring of poetry , pat of butter fragrant as the most delicious flattery , chick with breast too ample to require to be break , and sometimes prawn from round the headland , fresh enough to saw one another 's head off , but for be boil already . 
 memory fail to record one - tenth of all the good thing gather there . and why ? because hope be the power arouse , and how seldom can memory endorse it ! even in the case of Mr. Cheeseman 's ware there be people who say , after make short work with they , that short weight have enable they to do so . and every one live in the village be surprised to find his own scale require balance again every time he send his little girl to Cheeseman 's . 
 this upright tradesman be attend to his business one cold day in May , 1803 , soon after Nelson sail from Portsmouth , and he stand with his beloved pound of farm - house butter , bladder of lard , and new - lay egg , and square of cream - cheese behind he , with a broad butter - spathe of white wood in his hand , a long goose - pen tuck over his left ear , and the great copper scale hang handy . so strict be his style , though he be not above a joke , that only his own hand might serve forth an ounce of good butter to the public . and whenever this be weigh , and the beam adjust handsomely to the satisfaction of the purchaser , down go the butter to be pack upon a shelf uninvade by the public eye . person too scantily endow with the great of all christian virtue have the hardihood to say that Mr. Cheeseman here indulge in a process of high art discover by himself . discourse of the weather , or the crop , or perhaps the war , and mourn the dishonesty of statesman nowadays , by dexterous undersweep of keen steel blade , from the bottom of the round , or pat , or roll , he would have away a thin slice , and with that motion jerk it into the barrel which he keep beneath his desk . 
 " be this , then , the establishment of the illustrious Mr. Cheeseman ? " the time be yet early , and the gentleman who put this question be in rid dress . the worthy tradesman look at he , and the rosy hue upon his cheek be marble with a paler tint . 
 " this be the shop of the ' umble James Cheeseman , " he answer , but not with the alacrity of business . " all thing good that be in season , and nothing keep unseasonable . with what can I have the honor of serve you , sir ? " 
 " with a little talk . " the stranger 's manner be not unpleasantly contemptuous , but lofty , and such as the english shopman love , and call " aristocratic . " 
 " to talk with a gentleman be a pleasure as well as an honour , " say Cheeseman . 
 " but not in this public establishment . " the visitor wave both hand as he speak , in a style not then common with Englishmen though they be learn eloquent gesticulation now . " it be fine , Mr. Cheeseman ; but it be not bah , I forget your english word . " 
 " it be fine , sir , as you be good enough to observe " the humble James Cheeseman be proud of his shop " but not , as you remark , altogether private . that can hardly be expect , where business be conduct to suit universal requirement . polly , my dear , if your mother can spare you , come and take my place at the desk a few minute . I have business inside with this gentleman . you may sell almost anything , except butter . if any one want that , they must wait till I come back . " 
 a very pretty damsel , with a cap of foreign lace both adorn and adorn by her beautiful bright hair , come shyly from a little door behind the counter , receive with a quick blush the stranger 's earnest gaze , and return with a curtsey the courteous flourish of his loop - up riding - hat . " what a handsome gentleman ! " say polly to herself ; " but there be something very sad and very wild in his appearance . " her father 's conclusion be the same , and his heart misgave he as he lead in this unexpected guest . 
 " there be no cause for apology . this place be a very good one , " the stranger reply , lay down his heavy whip on the table of a stone - floor room , to which he have be show . " you be a man of business , and I be come upon dry business . you can conjecture be it not so ? who I be by this time , although I be tell that I do not bear any strong resemblance to my father . " 
 he take off his hat as he speak , shake back his long black hair , and fix his jet - black eye upon Cheeseman . that upright dealer have not recover his usual self - possession yet , but manage to look up for he be short by a head than his visitor with a doubtful and enquire smile . 
 " I be Caryl Carne , of Carne Castle , as you be pleased to call it . I have not be in England these many year ; from the death of my father I have be afar ; and now , for cause of my own , I be return , with hope of collect the fragment of the property of my ancestor . it appear to have be their custom to scatter , but not gather up again . my intention be to make a sheaf of the relic spread by squanderer , and snap up by scoundrel . " 
 " to be sure , to be sure , " cry the general dealer ; " this be vastly to your credit , sir , and I wish you all success , sir , and so will all who have so long respect your ancient and honourable family , sir . take a chair , sir please to take a chair . " 
 " I find very little to my credit , " Mr. Carne say , dryly , as he take the offer chair , but keep his eye still upon Cheeseman 's ; " but among that little be a bond from you , give nearly twenty year agone , and of which you will retain , no doubt , a vivid recollection . " 
 " a bond , sir a bond ! " exclaim the other , with his bright eye twinkle , as in some business enterprise . " I never sign a bond in all my life , sir . why , a bond require surety , and nobody ever go surety for I . " 
 " bond may not be the proper legal term . it be possible . I know nothing of the english law . but a document it be , under hand and seal , and your signature be witness , Mr. Cheeseman . " 
 " ah well ! let I consider . I begin to remember something . but my memory be not as it use to be , and twenty year make a great hole in it . will you kindly allow I to see this paper , if you have it with you , sir ? " 
 " it be not a paper ; it be write upon parchment , and I have not bring it with I . but I have write down the intention of it , and it be as follow : 
 " ' this indenture make between James Cheeseman   with a long description , of the one part , and Montagu Carne   treat likewise , of the other part , after a long account of some arrangement make between they , witnesseth that in consideration of the sum of 300 pound well and truly pay by the say Montagu Carne to Cheeseman , he , the say Cheeseman , doth assign , transfer , set over , and so on , to the said Carne , etc . , one equal undivided moiety and one half part of the other moiety of and in a certain vessel , ship , trading - craft , and so forth , know or thenceforth to be know as the London Trader , of Springhaven , in the county of Sussex , by way of security for the interest at the rate of five per cent . per annum , payable half - yearly , as well as for the principal sum of 300 pound , so advanced as aforesaid . ' " 
 " if it should prove , sir , that money be owe , " Mr. Cheeseman say , with that exalt candour which make a weak customer condemn his own eye and nose , " no effort on my part shall be want , bad as the time be , to procure it and discharge it . in every commercial transaction I have find , and my experience be now considerable , that confidence , as between man and man , be the only true footing to go upon . and how can true confidence exist , unless " 
 " unless a man show some honesty . and a man who keep book such as these , " pursue the visitor , suggest a small kick to a pile of ledger , " can hardly help know whether he owe a large sum or whether he have pay it . but that be not the only question now . in continuation of that document I find a condition , a clause provisional , that it shall be at the option of the aforesaid Montagu Carne , and his representative , either to receive the interest at the rate before mention and thereby secure , or , if he or they should so prefer , to take for their own benefit absolutely three - fourth of the net profit , proceed , or other increment realise by the trading venture , or other employment from time to time , of the say London Trader . also there be a covenant for the insurance of the say vessel , and a power of sale , and some other provision about access to trading book , etc . , with which you have , no doubt , a good acquaintance , Mr. Cheeseman . " 
 that enterprise merchant , importer of commodity , and wholesale and retail dealer be fond of assure his numerous friend that " nothing ever come amiss to he . " but some of they now would have doubt about this if they have watch his face as carefully as Caryl Carne be watch it . Mr. Cheeseman could look a hundred people in the face , and with great vigour too , when a small account be run . but the sad , contemptuous , and pierce gaze as if he be hardly worth penetrate and the twirl of the black tuft above the lip , and the firm conviction on the broad white forehead that it be confront a rogue too common and shallow to be worth frown at all these , and the fact that be under they , come amiss to the true James Cheeseman . 
 " I scarcely see how to take this , " he say , be clever enough to suppose that a dash of candour might sweeten the embroilment . " I will not deny that I be under obligation to your highly respected father , who be greatly beloved for his good - will to his neighbour . ' Cheeseman , ' he use to say , ' I will stand by you . you be the only man of enterprise in these here part . whatever you do be for the good of Springhaven , which belong to my family for century before those new - fangle darling come . and , Cheeseman , you may trust to the honour of the Carnes not to grind down a poor man who have his way to make . ' they be his word , sir ; how well I recollect they ! " 
 " too well almost , " reply the young man , coldly , " consider how scanty be your memory just now . but it may save time , and painful effort of your memory , if I tell you at once that I be not concerned in any way with the sentiment of my father . I owe he very little , as you must be well aware ; and the matter betwixt you and I be strictly one of business . the position in which I be leave be such that I must press every legal claim to the extreme . and have the option under this good document , I have determine to insist upon three - quarter of the clear proceed of this trading - ship , from the date of the purchase until the present day , as well as the capital sum invest on this security . " 
 " very well , sir , if you do , there be only one course leave I to go into the Court of Bankruptcy , see all my little stock in trade sell up , and start in life again at the age of fifty - seven , with a curse upon all old family . " 
 " your curse , my good friend , will not add sixpence to your credit . and the heat you exhibit be not well adapt for calculation commercial . there be one other course which I be able to propose , though I will not give a promise yet to do so a course which would relieve I from take possession of this noble ship which have make your fortune , and perhaps from enforce the strict examination of your trading - book , to which I be entitle . but before I propose any such concession , which will be a grand abdication of right , one or two thing become necessary . for example , I must have some acquaintance with your character , some certitude that you can keep your own counsel , and not divulge everything that arrive within your knowledge ; also that you have some courage , some freedom of mind from small insular sentiment , some desire to promote the true interest of mankind , and the destruction of national prejudice . " 
 " certainly , sir ; all of those I can approve of . they be very glorious thing , " cry Cheeseman a man of fine liberal vein , whenever two half - crown be as good as a crown . " we be cramp and trample and down - trodden by the air big people give themselves , and the longing of such of we as think be to speak our mind about it . upon that point of freedom , sir , I can heartily go with you , and every stick upon my premise be well insure . " 
 " include , I hope , the London Trader , accord to your covenant . and that remind I of another question be it well - find , well - man , and a good rapid ship to make the voyage ? no falsehood , if you please , about this matter . " 
 " she be the fast sailer on the english coast , build at Dunkirk , and as sound as a bell . she could show her taffrail , in light weather , to any british cruiser in the Channel . she could run a fine cargo of french cognac and foreign lace any day . " 
 " it be not my desire , " Caryl Carne reply , " to cheat the British Revenue . for that purpose exist already plenty of british tradesman . for the present I impress upon you one thing only , that you shall observe silence , a sacred silence , regard this conversation . for your own sake you will be incline to do so , and that be the only sake a man pay much attention to . but how much for your own sake you be oblige to keep your counsel , you will very soon find out if you betray it . " 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 FOX - HILL 

 when it be know in this fine old village that young Squire Carne from foreign part be come back to live in the ancient castle , there be much large outlay   both of word and thought   about that than about any french invasion . " let they land if they can , " say the able - bodied man , in discussion of the latter question ; " they will not   find it so easy to get away again as they seem to put into their reckoning . but the plague of it all be the damage to the fishing . " 
 not that the squadron of Captain Tugwell be shorn as yet of its number , though all the young man be under notice to hold themselves ready as " Sea - Fencibles . " the injury to their trade lie rather in the difficulty of get to their fishing - ground , and in the disturbance of these by cruiser , with little respect for their net and line . again , as the tiding of french preparation wax more and more outrageous , Zebedee have as much as he could do to keep all his young hand loyal . all their solid interest lie   as he tell they every morning   in stick to the Springhaven flag a pair of sol couchant , herring salient , and mackerel regardant , all upon a bright sea - green rather than in hanker after roll of drum and Union - Jack . what could come of these but hardship , want of victual , wound , and death ; or else to stump about on one leg , and hold out a hat for a penny with one arm ? they feel that it be true ; they have see enough of that ; it have happen in all their own family . 
 yet such be the love of the native land and the yearning to stand in front of it , and such be the hate of be triumph over by fellow who kiss one another and weep , and such be the tingling of the knuckle for a blow when the body have be kick in sore place , that the heart will at last get the well of the head or at least it use to be so in England . wherefore Charley Bowles be in arm already against his country 's enemy ; and Harry Shanks wait for little except a clear proclamation of prize - money ; and even young Daniel be tear at his kedge like a lively craft riding in a brisk sea - way . he have see Lord Nelson , and have speak to Lord Nelson , and that great man would have pat he on the head so patriotic be his sentiment if the great man have be a little tall . 
 but the one thing that keep Dan Tugwell firm to his mooring at Springhaven be the deep hold of his steadfast heart in a love which it know to be hopeless . to die for his country might become a stern duty , about which he would rather not be hurry ; but to die for Miss dolly would be a wild delight ; and how could he do it unless he be at hand ? and now there be so many young officer again , land in boat , come in post - chaise , or charge down the road on horseback , that Daniel , while touch up the finish of his boat with paint and varnish and Venetian Red , be not so happy as an artist should be who know how to place the whole . sometimes , with the paint stir up and creaming , and the ooze of the brush trim warily , through the rush and ragwort and sea - willow his keen , unconquerable eye would spy the only figure that quell they , faraway , show against the shin water , or shadow upon the flat mirror of the sand . but , alas ! there be always another figure near it , big , bulkier , frame with ugly angle , jerk about with the elbow stick out , instead of glide gracefully . likely enough the lovely form , bring near to the eye and heart by love , would flit about beautifully for two sweet moment , fill with rapture all the flash of the sea and calm of the evening sky beyond ; and then the third moment would be hideous . for the figure of the ungainly foe would stride across the delicious vision , huge against the wave like cyclop , and like he gesticulant , but unhappily not so single - eyed that the slippery fair might despise he . then away would fly all sense of art and joy in the touch of perfection , and a very nasty feeling would ensue , as if nothing be worth live for , and nobody could be believe in . 
 that plaguesome Polypheme be Captain Stubbard , begirt with a wife , and endow with a family almost in excess of benediction , and dance attendance upon Miss Dolly , too stoutly for his own comfort , in the hope of procure for his own Penates something to eat and to sit upon . some evil genius have whisper , or rather trumpet , into his ear for he have but one left , and that work very seldom , through alarm about the bullet which have carry off its fellow that if he desire , as he do with heart and stomach , to get a clear widening by 200 pound of his strait way and restrict mean , through Admiral Darling it might be do , and Miss dolly be the proper one to make he do it . for the Inspectorship of Sea - Fencibles from Selsea - bill to Dungeness be worth all that money in hard cash yearly ; and the late Inspector have quit this life through pork boil in a copper kettle the situation be naturally vacant ; and the Admiral be the man for whose check the Inspectorship be appoint , it be needless to say that   in the spirit of fair play   the appointment be vest in the Admiral . 
 the opinion of all who know he be that Captain Stubbard be fairly entitle to look for something high . and he share that opinion , take loftier aim than figure could be make to square with , till the latter prevail , as they generally do , because they can work without victual . for although the brave Captain have lose three rib or at any rate more than he could spare of they   not be a pig   in the service of his country , he require as much as ever to put inside they ; and his child , not have inherit that loss as scientifically as they should have do , be hard to bring up upon the 15 pound yearly allow by Great Britain for each of the go bone . from the ear that be go he derive no income , have rashly compound for 25 pound . 
 in the nature of thing , which the name have follow , the father be the feed ; and the world be full of remark unless he become a good clothier also . but everything go against this father , with nine little Stubbards run after he , and no ninepence in any of his pocket , because he be shelfe upon half - pay , on account of the depression of the time and of his rib . but Miss Dolly Darling be resolve to see he right , for she hat all national meanness . 
 " what be the use of have any influence , " she ask her good father , " unless you employ it for your own friend ? I should be quite ashamed to have it say of I , or think , that I could get a good thing for any one I be fond of , and be mean enough not to do it , for fear of paltry jealousy . Mean be much too weak a word ; it be downright dishonest , and what be much bad , cowardly . what be the government mean for , unless it be to do good to people ? " 
 " certainly , my dear child , certainly . to the people at large , that be to say , and the high interest of the country . " 
 " can there be any people more at large than Captain Stubbard and his wife and child ? their elbow be come out of their clothe , and they have scarcely get a bed to sleep upon . my income be not enough to stop to count , even when I get it pay punctually . but every farthing I receive shall go that be to say , if it ever do come into the lap of Mrs. Stubbard , anonymously and respectfully . " 
 " pay your bill , first , " say the Admiral , take the weather - gage of the discussion : " a little bird tell I that you owe a good trifle , even in Springhaven . " 
 " then the little bird have get a false bill , " reply dolly , who be not very easy to fluster . " who be there to spend sixpence with in a little hole of this kind ? I be not a customer for tea , coffee , tobacco , snuff , or pepper , nor even for whiting , sol , or conger . Old Cheeseman import all the fashion , as he say ; but I go by my own judgment . and trumpery as my income be , very little of it go into his till . but I should like to know who tell you such a wicked story , father ? " 
 " thing be mention in confidence , and I put they together , " say the Admiral . " do not   say another word , or look as if you would be happy if you have something to cry about . your dear mother use to do it ; and it beat I always . I have long have my eye upon Captain Stubbard , and I remember well that gallant action when his three rib fly away . we call he Adam , because of his wife come just when his middle rib go , and his name be Adam Stubbard , sure enough . such man , in the prime of their life , should be promote , instead of be disable , for a scratch like that . why , he walk every bit as well as I do , and his watch - ribbon cover it . and nine child ! Lord bless my heart ! I scarcely know which way to turn , with only four ! " 
 within a short fortnight Captain Stubbard be appoint , with an office establish at the house of Widow shank though his real office naturally be at the public - house and Royal Proclamations arouse the valour of nearly everybody who could read they . nine little Stubbards soon be rig too smart to know themselves , as the style be of all dandy ; and even Mrs. Stubbard have a new belt make to go round she , when the weather be elastic . 
 " these be the thing that prove the eye of an all - wise Providence over we , " say the Captain to the Admiral , point out six pair of short leg , galligaskine from one roll of cloth ; " these be the thing that make one feel the force of the word of David . " 
 " certainly , yes , to be sure ! " reply the gallant senior officer , all at sea as to the passage suggest . " good leg they have get , and no mistake ; like the polished corner of the temple . let they go and dip they in the sea , while you give the benefit of your opinion here . not here , I mean , but upon Fox - hill yonder ; if Mrs. Stubbard will spare you for a couple of hour , most kindly . " 
 of the height that look down with a breezy air upon the snug nest of Springhaven , the fair to see from a distance , and to tread with brisk foot , be Fox - hill . for the down , which be channel with the spring that form the brook , keep this for their own last spring into the air , before bath in the vigorous composure of the sea . all the other hill fall back a little , to let Fox - hill have the first choice of aspect or bear the first brunt , as itself would state the matter . and to anybody come up , and ten time to a stranger , this resolute foreland offer more invitation to go home again , than to come visit . for the bulge of the breast be steep , and rib with hoop come up in denial , concrete with chalk , muricate with flint , and thornily crest with good stout furze . and the forefront of the head , when gain , be stiff with bramble , and stub with sloe , and mitre with a choice band of stanch sting - nettle . 
 " it would take a well frenchman , " say the Admiral , with that brevity which be the happy result of stoutness up steep hill , " than any of ' they flat - bottom , ' as Swipes , my gardener , call they , to get through these prickle , Stubbard , without Sark - blewing . such a wonderfully thin - skinned lot they be ! do I ever tell you the story of our boatswain 's mate ? but that take a well sailing breeze than I have   get now . you see where we be , do not   you ? " 
 " certainly , Admiral , " reply Captain Stubbard , disdain to lay hand to his injure side , painfully as it yearn for pressure ; " we have have a long pull , and we get a fine outlook over the country for league , and the Channel . how close at hand everything look ! I suppose we shall have rain , and we want it . I could thump that old castle among the tree into smash , and your church look as if I could put a shot with a rifle - gun into the bell - chamber . " 
 " and so you could . what I want to show you be that very point , and the importance of it . with a battery of long twenty - four up here , the landing , the bay , and all the road be at our mercy . my dear old friend Nelson draw my attention to it . " 
 " it be plain as a pikestaff to Tom , Dick , or Harry : " Captain Stubbard be a frank , straightforward man , and much as he owe to the Admiral 's aid , not a farthing would he pay in flattery . " but why should we want to command this spot ? there be nothing to protect but a few common house , and some half - score of fishing - craft , and a schooner that trade to London , and yonder old church , and oh yes , to be sure , your own house and property , Admiral . " 
 " those must take their chance , like other . I hope I know well than to think of they in comparison with the good of the country . but if we fail to occupy this important post , the enemy might take we by surprise , and do so . " 
 " possible , but most improbable . this little place lie , by the trend of the coast , quite out of their course from Boulogne to London ; and what be there here to tempt they ? no rich town to sack , no great commerce to rob , no valuable shipping to lay hand on . " 
 " no ; but there be my house and my two girl ; and I do not   want my old roof burn , and my daughter put to wait on Boney . but to think of self - interest be below contempt , with our country go through such trial . neither should we add any needless expense to a treasury already overburden . " 
 " certainly not . it would be absolutely wicked . we have a long and costly war before we , and not a shilling should be spend except in case of clear necessity . " 
 " I be very glad indeed to find your opinion so decide , so untainted with petty self - interest . " as Admiral Darling speak he close a little silver telescope , with which he have be gaze through the woode coronet of the hill . " I think it my duty to consult you , Stubbard , before despatch this letter , which , be back by Nelson 's opinion , would probably have receive attention . if a strong battery be throw up here , as it would be in a fortnight from the receipt of this bit of foolscap , the appointment of commandant would rest with I , and I could appoint nobody but your good self , because of your well - know experience in earthwork . the appointment would have double your present pay , which , though well than nothing , be far below your merit . but your opinion settle the question otherwise , and I must burn my letter . let we lose no more time . Mrs. Stubbard will call I a savage , for keep you away so long . " 
 " important business , " reply the Captain , " will not wait even for lady , or , rather , they must try to wait for it , and give way to more reasonable urgency . some time be require for consider this matter , and decide what be most for the interest of the nation . oblige I with your spy - glass , Admiral . there be one side on which I have neglect to look out , and that may of all be the most important . a conclusion arrive at by yourself and Nelson be not to be hastily set aside . your knowledge of the country be so far beyond mine , though I may have have more to do with land - work . we ought to think twice , sir , if the government will pay for it , about a valuable job of this kind . " 
 with these word Captain Stubbard begin to use the telescope carefully , form his opinion through it , and wisely shake his head , now and then , with a long and long focus . then he close the glass , and his own lip firmly whereby a man announce that no other should open his against they and sternly stride the yard exact , take measurement for the battery . the hill be crown with a ring of Scotch fir , cast a quiet shade upon the warlike haste of the Captain . if Admiral Darling smile , it be to the landscape and the offing , for he know that Stubbard be of rather touchy fibre , and relish no joke unless of home production . his slow , solid face be enough to show this , and the squareness of his outline , and the forward thrust of his knee as he walk , and the larkspur impress of his linger heel . and he seldom say much , without something to say . 
 " well , " cry the Admiral , grow tired of sit so long upon a fall trunk , " what conclusion do you feel inclined to come to ? ' tis a fine breezy place to clear the brain , and a briny air to sharpen the judgment . " 
 " only one tree need come down this crooked one at the southeast corner . " Captain Stubbard begin to swing his arm about , like a windmill uncertain of the wind . " all gentleman hate to have a tree cut down , all blackguard delight in the process . admiral , we will not hurt your tree . they will add to our strength , by mask it . six long twenty - four of the new make , here in front , and two eighteen upon either flank , and I should like to see the whole of the Boulogne flotilla try to take yonder shore by daylight . that be to say , of course , if I command , with good old salt to second I . with your common artillery officer , landlubber , smell - the - wick , cross - the - brace son of gun , there have well not be anything at all put up . they can not   make a fortification ; and when they have make it , they can not   work it . Admiral Darling , you know that , though you have not have the bad luck to deal with they as I have . I may thank one of they for be up here on the shelf . " 
 " of one thing you may be quite certain , " reply the commander of the sea defence ; " if we have any battery on this Fox - hill , it shall be construct and man by blue - jacket . I have a large draft of they now at discretion . every man in Springhaven will lend a hand , if pay for it . it would take at least a twelvemonth to get it do from Woolwich . a seaman do a thing before a landsman think about it . " 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 SEA - SIDE LODGINGS 

 to set a dog barking be easy than to stop he by the sound reasoning . even if the roof above his honest head , grow loose on its nail , be be mend , he come out to ask about the matter , and in strong term proclaim his opinion to the distance . 
 after this kind behave the people about to be protect by this battery . they have dream of no danger till they see their house begin to be protect , and for this though it add to their importance they be not truly thankful . they take it in various way , accord to their rich variety of reflection ; but the way in which nobody take it be that of gratitude and humility . 
 " everything upside down , " they say , " everything go clean topsy - turvy ! and the deep meaning of it be to rob our fishing , under pretence of the national . it may bring a good bit of money to the place , for the lining of one or two pocket , such as John Prater 's and Cheeseman 's ; but I never do hold so much with money , when shattery way come along of it . no daughter of mine stir out - of - door after sundown , I can tell they . " 
 thus be the mind of the man disturb , or at any rate those of the elder one ; while the woman , on the whole , be pleased , although they pretend to be contemptuous . " I will tell you what I think , ma'am , " Mrs. Cheeseman say to Widow Shanks quite early , " if you take a farthing less than half a guinea a week for your dimity - parlour , with the window up the hill , and the little door under the big sweet - briar , I shall think that you be not as you use to be . " 
 " and right you would be , ma'am , and too right there ; " Mrs. Shanks sigh deeply as she think of it . " there be nobody but you can understand it , and I do not   mind say it on that account to you . whenever I have want for a little bit of money , as the nature of lone widow generally do , it have always be out of your power , Mrs. Cheeseman , to oblige I , and quite right of you . but I have a good son , thank the Lord , by the name of Harry , to provide for I ; and a guinea a week be the agreement now for the dimity - parlour , and the three leg'd bed , and cold dinner to be pay for extra , such as I might send for to your good shop , with the money ready in the hand of my little girl , and jug below her apron for refreshment from the Darling . " 
 " well , I never ! my dear soul , you have take all my breath away . why , it must be the captain of all the gunner . how gunpowder do pay , to be sure ! " 
 " Lor , ma'am , why , do not   you know , " reply Mrs. Shanks , with some contempt , " that the man with three rib be the captain of the gunner the man in my back sitting - room ? no dimity - parlour for he with his family , not for a guinea and a half a week . but if I be to tell you who the gentleman be , and one of the high all round these part , truthful as you know I , Mrs. Cheeseman , you would say to yourself , what a liar she be ! " 
 " Mrs. Shanks , I never use coarse expression , even to myself in private . and perhaps I could tell you a thing or two would astonish you more than I , ma'am . suppose I should tell you , to begin with , who your guinea lodger be ? " 
 " that you could never do , Mrs. Cheeseman , with all your time a - counting change . he be not of the rank for a twopenny rasher , or a wedge of cheese pack in old petticoat . " 
 these two lady now look at one another . they have not have a quarrel for almost three month , and a large arrear of little prick on either side be pende . soon or later it would have to be fight out   like a feud between two nation , with a houseful of loss and woe to either side , but a thimbleful of pride and glory . yet so much wise be these woman than the most sagacious nation that they put off to a cheap time their grudge against each other . 
 " his rank may be royal , " say the wife of Mr. Cheeseman , " though a go - downhill kind of royalty , perhaps , and yet he might be glad , Mrs. Shanks , to come where the butter have the milk spot , and none be in the cheese , ma'am . " 
 " if such should be his wish , ma'am , for supper or for breakfast , or even for dinner on a Sunday when the rain come through the Castle , you may trust I to know where to send he , but not to guarantee he at all of his money . " 
 " they high one be very apt to slip in that , " Mrs. Cheeseman answer , thoughtfully ; " they seem to be less particular in pay for a thing than they be to have it good . but a burn child dread the fire , as they say ; and a young man with a castleful of owl and rat , by reason of go for these hundred year on credit , will have it bring home to he to pay ready money . but the Lord be over we ! if I do not   see he a - go your way already ! good - by , my dear soul good - by , and preserve you ; and if at any time short of table or bed linen , a loan from an old friend , and come back well wash , and it sha'n't   be , as the child sing , ' a friend with a loan have the pick of your bone , and he will not   let you very long alone . ' " 
 " many thank to you for friendly meaning , ma'am , " say the widow , as she take up her basket to go home , " and glad I may be to profit by it , with the time commanding . but as yet I have have neither sleeper or feeder in my little house , but the child . though both of they reserve the right to do it , if nature should so compel they the three - rib gentleman with one ear , at five shilling a week , in the sitting - room , and the young man up over he . their meaning be for business , and study , and keeping of account , and have of a quiet place in bad weather , though feed they must , soon or later , I depend ; and then who be there but Mr. Cheeseman ? " 
 " how grand he do look upon that black horse , quite as solid as if he be glue to it ! " the lady of the shop reply , as she put away the money ; " and to do that without victual be beyond a young man 's power . he look like what they use to call a knight upon an errand , in the picture - book , when I be romantic , only for the hair that come under his nose . ah ! his errand will be to break the heart of the young lady that go down upon the sand in their blue gown , I be afraid , if they can only manage with the hair below his nose . " 
 " and do they good , some of they , and be a judgment from the Lord , for the french style in their skirt be a shocking thing to see . what should we have say when you and I be young , my dear ? but quick step be the word for I , for I expect my Jenny home on her day out from the Admiral , and no Harry in the house to look after she . ah ! dimity - parlour be a thing as may happen to cut both way , Mrs. Cheeseman . " 
 Widow Shanks have good cause to be proud of her cottage , which be the prettiest in Springhaven , and one of the most commodious . she have fight a hard fight , when her widowhood begin , and the child be too young to help she , rather than give up the home of her love - time , and the cradle of her little one . some of her neighbour   who want the house   be sadly pain at her stubbornness , and even dishonesty , as they put it , when she know that she never could pay her rent . but " never be a long time , " accord to the proverb ; and with the forbearance of the Admiral , the kindness of his daughter , and the growth of her own child , she stand clear of all debt now , except the sweet one of gratitude . 
 and now she could listen to the moaning of the sea   which use to make she weep all night   with a milder sense of the cruel woe that it have drown her husband , and a lull of sorrow that be almost hope ; until the dark vision of wreck and corps melt into sweet dream of her son upon the water , finish his supper , and get ready for his pipe . for Harry be make his own track well in the wake of his dear father . 
 now if she have go inland to dwell , from the stroke of her great calamity as most people tell she to make haste and do not only the sympathy of the sea , but many of the little care , which be the ant that bury heavy grief , would have be wholly lose to she . and amongst these care the foremost always , and the most distracting , be that of keep her husband 's cottage as she still would call it tidy , comfortable , bright , and snug , as if he be come on Saturday . 
 where the brook run into the first hearing of the sea , to defer its own extinction it take a lively turn inland , leave a pleasant breadth of green between itself and its destiny . at the breath of salt the large tree hang back , and turn their bough up ; but plenty of pretty shrub come forth , and shade the cottage garden . neither have the cottage wall any lack of leafy mantle , where the summer sun work his own defeat by foster cool obstruction . for here be the tamarisk , and jasmin , and the old - fashioned corchorus flower all the summer through , as well as the myrtle that love the shore , with a thicket of stiff young sprig arise , slow of growth , but hide yearly the havoc make in its head and body by the frost of 1795 , when the mark of every wave upon the sand be ice . and a vine , that seem to have be evolve from a miller , or to have prejecte he , clamber with grey silver pointrel through the more glossy and darker green . and over these you behold the thatch , thick and long and parti - colour , eave with little window , where a bird may nest for ever . 
 but it be not for this outward beauty that Widow Shanks , stick to her house , and pay the rent at interval . to her steadfast and well - manage mind , the number of room , and the separate staircase which a solvent lodger might enjoy , be the choice grant of the household god . the time be bad as they always be when conscientious people think of they and poor Mrs. Shanks be desirous of pay her rent , by the payment of somebody . every now and then some well - feed family , hunger   after long carnage   for fish , would come from village pasture or town shamble , to gaze at the sea , and to taste its content . for in those day fish be still in their duty , to fry well , to boil well , and to go into the mouth well , instead of be dissolute as nowadays the good be with dirty ice , and flabby with arrest fermentation . in the pleasant dimity - parlour then , command a fair view of the lively sea and the stream that sparkle into it , be noble dinner of sole , and mackerel , and smell that smell of cucumber , and dainty dory , and pearl - button turbot , and sometimes even the crisp sand - lance , happily for himself , unhappily for whitebait , still unknown in London . then , after long roving ashore or afloat , these diner come back with a new light shed upon they that of the moon outside the house , of the supper candle inside . there be sure to be a crab or lobster ready , and a dish of prawn sprig with parsley ; if the sea be begin to get cool again , a keg of philanthropic oyster ; or if these be not hospitably on their hinge yet , certainly there would be choice - bodied creature , dry with a dash of salt upon the sunny shingle , and lacking of perfection nothing more than to be warm through upon a toasting - fork . 
 by none , however , of these delight be the newly win lodger tempt . all that he want be peace and quiet , time to go through a great trunk full of paper and parchment , which he bring with he , and a breath of fresh air from the down on the north , and the sea to the south , to enliven he . and in good truth he want to be enliven , as Widow Shanks say to her daughter Jenny ; for his eye be gloomy , and his face be stern , and he seldom say anything good - natured . he seem to avoid all company , and to be wrap up wholly in his own concern , and to take little pleasure in anything . as yet he have not use the bed at his lodging , nor break his fast there to her knowledge , though he ride down early every morning and put up his horse at Cheeseman 's , and never ride away again until the dark have fall . neither have he care to make the acquaintance of Captain Stubbarb , who occupy the room beneath his for a Royal Office as the landlady proudly entitle it ; nor have he receive , to the good of her knowledge , so much as a single visitor , though such might come by his private entrance among the shrub unnoticed . all these thing stir with deep interest and wonder the enquire mind of the widow . 
 " and what do they say of he up at the Hall ? " she ask her daughter Jenny , who be come to spend holiday at home . " what do they say of my new gentleman , young squire Carne from the Castle ? the Carnes and the darling be never great friend , as every one know in Springhaven . still , it do seem hard and unchristianlike to keep up they old enmity ; most of all , when the one side be down in the world , with the owl and the bat and the coney . " 
 " no , mother , no . they be not a bit like that , " reply Jenny a maid of good loyalty ; " it be only that he have not call upon they . all gentlefolk have their proper rule of behaviour . you can not   be expect to understand they , mother . " 
 " but why should he go to they more than they should come to he , particular with young lady there ? and he with only one horse to their seven or eight . I be right , you may depend upon it , Jenny ; and my mother , your grandmother , be a lady's - maid in a high family than Darling it depend upon they to come and look he up first , and he have no call to knock at their door without it . why , it stand to reason , poor young man ! and not a bit hath he eat from Monday . " 
 " well , I believe I be right , but I will ask Miss Dolly . she be that sharp , she know everything , and I do not   mind what I say to she , when she think that she look handsome . and it take a very bad dress , I can tell you , to put she out of that opinion . " 
 " she be right enough there : " Mrs. Shanks shake her head at her daughter for speak in this way . " the ugly frock as ever come from France could not   make she any but a booty . and the Lord know the quality have come to queer shape now . Undecent would be the name for it in our rank of woman . why , the last of her frock she give you , Jenny , how much do I put on , at top and bottom , and you three inch short than she be ! and the slip they tie round they oh dear ! oh dear ! as if that be to hold they up and buckle they together ! will not   they have the groaning by the time they come to my age ? " 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 FRENCH and ENGLISH 

 Admiral Darling be now so busy , and so continually call from home by the duty of his commandership , that he could not fairly be expect to call upon Mr. Caryl Carne . yet that gentleman , be rather sensitive which sometimes mean very spiteful resent as a personal slight this failure ; although , if the overture have be make , he would have ascribe it to intrusive curiosity , and a low desire to behold he in his ruin . but truly in the old man 's kindly heart there be no sour corner for ill blood to lurk in , and no dull fibre for ill - will to feed on . he keep on meaning to go and call on Caryl Carne , and he have quite make up his mind to do it , but something always happen to prevent he . 
 neither do he care a groat for his old friend Twemlow 's advice upon that subject . " do not   go near he , " say the Rector , take care that his wife be quite safe out of hearing ; " it would ill become I to say a word against my dear wife 's own nephew , and the representative of her family . and , to the utmost of my knowledge , there be nothing to be say against he . but I can not   get on with he at all . I do not   know why . he have only honor we with a visit twice , and he would not even come to dinner . nice manner they learn on the continent ! but none of we weep when he decline ; not even his good aunt , my wife . though he must have get a good deal to tell we , and an extraordinary knowledge of foreign way . but instead of do that , he seem to sneer at we . I can look at a question from every point of view , and I defy anybody to call I narrow - minded . but still , one must draw the line somewhere , or throw overboard all principle ; and I draw it , my dear Admiral , against infidel and against Frenchmen . " 
 " no rational person can do otherwise " the Admiral 's opinion be decisive " but this young man be of good english birth , and one can not   help feel sorry for his circumstance . and I assure you , Twemlow , that I feel respect as well for the courage that he show , and the perseverance , in come home and face those vile usurer . and your own wife 's nephew ! why , you ought to take his part through thick and thin , whatever you may think of he . from all I hear he must be a young man of exceedingly high principle ; and I shall make a point of call upon he the first half - hour I get to spare . to - morrow , if possible ; or if not , the day after , at the very late . " 
 but the needful half - hour have not yet be find ; and Carne , who be will not to think the bad of everybody , conclude that the Darling race still cherish the old grudge , which have always be on his own side . for this he care little , and perhaps be rather glad of it . for the old dwelling - place of his family   the Carne Castle besiege by the roundhead a hundred and sixty year agone   now threaten to tumble about the ear of any one knock at the gate too hard . or rather the remnant of its wall do so ; the great part , have already fall , lie harmless , and produce fine blackberry . 
 as a castle , it have be well respect in its day , though not of mighty bulwark or impregnable position . stand on a knoll , between the ramp of high land and the slope of shore , it would still have be conspicuous to traveller and to voyager but for the tall tree around it . these hide the moat , and the relic of the drawbridge , the groin archway , and cloven tower of the keep which have twice be strike by lightning as well as the window of the armoury , and the chapel hush with ivy . the banqueting hall be in well repair , for the Carnes have be hospitable to the last ; but the window keep no wind off , neither do the roof repulse the rain . in short , all the front be in a pretty state of ruin , very nice to look at , very nasty to live in , except for toad , and bat , and owl , and rat , and eft , and brindle slug with yellow stripe ; or on a summer eve the cockroach and the carrion - beetle . 
 at the back , however , and above the road which Cheeseman travel in his pony - chaise , be a range of room still fit to dwell in , though poorly furnish , and floor with stone . in well time these have be the domain of the house - keeper and the butler , the cook and the other upper servant , who have mind their duty and heed their comfort more truly than the master and mistress do . for the downfall of this family , as of very many other , have be chiefly cause by unwise marriage . instead of choose sensible and active wife to look after their home affair and regulate the household , the Carnes for several generation now have wed flighty lady of good birth and pretty manner , none of whom bring they a pipkinful of money , while all help to spend a potful . therefore their descendant be now live in the kitchen , and have no idea how to make use of they , in spite of his french education ; of comfort also he have not much idea , which be all the well for he ; and he scarcely know what it be to earn and enjoy soft quietude . 
 one night , when the summer be in full prime , and the weather almost blameless , this young Squire Carne ride slowly back from Springhaven to his wear - out castle . the beauty of the night have keep he back , for he hat to meet people on the road . the linger gossip , the tired fagot - bearer , the youth go home from the hay - rick , the man with a gun who know where the hare play , and beyond they all the truant sweetheart , who can not have enough of one another , and wish " good - night " at every corner of the lane , till they tumble over one another 's cottage step all these to Caryl Carne be a smell to be avoid , an eyesore to shut the eye at . he let they get home and pull their boot off , and set the frying - pan a - bubble for they end the day with a bit of bacon , whenever they could cash or credit it and then he set forth upon his lonely ride , strike fear into the heart of any bad child that lie awake . 
 " almost as good as France be this , " he mutter in French , though for once enjoy the pleasure of good english air ; " and well than France would it be , if only it be not cut short so suddenly . there will come a cold wind by - and - by , or a chilly black cloud from the east , and then all be shiver and rawness . but if it only remain like this , I could forgive it for produce I . after all , it be my native land ; and I see the lovely girl to - day that ever I set eye on . none of their make - up and highly finish demoiselle be fit to look at her such simple beauty , such charm of nature , such enchant innocence ! ah , that be where those french girl fail they be always study how they look , instead of leave we to think of it . bah ! what odd to I ? I have high stake to play for . but accord to old Twemlow 's description , she must be the daughter of that old bear Darling , with whom I shall have to pick a bone some day . ha ! how amusing be that battery to I ! how little John Bull know the nature of french troop ! to - morrow we be to have a grand practice - day ; and I hope they will not   shoot I in my new lodging . nothing be impossible to such an idiot as Stubbard . what a set of imbecile I have find to do with ! they have scarcely wit enough to amuse oneself with . Pest of my soul ! be that you , Charron ? again you have break my order . " 
 " name should be avoid in the open air , " answer the man , who be swing on a gate with the simple delight of a Picard . " the climate be of France so much to - night that I find it my duty to encourage it . for what reason shall not I do that ? it be not so often that I have occasion . my dear friend , scold not , but accept the compliment very seldom truthful to your native land . there be none of your clod - pate about to - night . " 
 " come in at once . the mere sound of your breath be enough to set the neighbourhood wonder . could I ever have be burden with a more french Frenchman , though you speak as good English as I do ? " 
 " it be all of that miserable Cheray , " the french gentleman say , when they sit in the kitchen , and Jerry Bowles be feed the fine black horse . " fruit be a thing that my mouth prepare for , directly there be any warmth in the sun . it put itself up , it be elevate , it will not have meat , or any substance coarse . wine of the softest and fruit of the fine be what it must then have , or unmouth itself . that miserable Cheray , his maledictioned name put I forth to be on fire for the good thing he design . cheray you call they , and for cheray I despatch he , suspend between the leaf in the good sun . Bah ! there be nothing ever fit to eat in England . the cheray look very fine , very fine indeed ; and so many do I consume that to travel on a gate be the only palliation . would you have I stay all day in this long cellar ? no diversion , no solace , no change , no conversation ! Old Cheray may sit with his hand upon his knee , but to renaud Charron that be not sufficient . how much long before I sally forth to do the thing , to fight , to conquer the nation ? where be even my little ship of despatch ? " 
 " captain , " answer Caryl Carne , prepare calmly for his frugal supper , " you be place under my command , and another such speech will despatch you to Dunkirk , bind hand and foot , in the hold of the Little Corporal , with which I be now in communication . unless by the time I have sever this bone you hand I your sword in submission , my supper will have to be postpone , while I march you to the yew - tree , signal for a boat , and lie you strapped beneath the oarsman . " 
 Captain Charron , who have hold the command of a french corvette , star furiously at this man , young than himself , so strongly establish over he . Carne be not concerned to look at he ; all he care about be to divide the joint of a wing - rib of cold roast beef , where some good picking lurk in the hollow . then the french man , whose chance would have be very small in a personal encounter with his chief , arise and take a naval sword , short but rather heavy , from a hook which in well day have hold a big dish - cover , and make a salute rather graceful than gracious , present the fringed handle to the carver . 
 " this behaviour be sensible , my friend , and worthy of your distinguished ability . " Carne 's resolute face seldom yield to a smile , but the smile when it come be a sweet one . " pardon I for speak strongly , but my instruction must be the law to you . if you be my commander   as , but for local knowledge , and question of position here , you would be , do you think then that you would allow I to rebel , to grumble , to wander , to demand my own pleasure , when you know that it would ruin thing ? " 
 " Bravo ! it be well speak . my captain , I embrace you . in you live the spirit of the Grand Army , which we of the sea and of the ship admire always , and always desire to emulate . ah , if England possess many englishman like you , she would be hard to conquer . " 
 the owner of this old English castle shoot a glance at the Frenchman for any sign of irony in his word . see none , he continue , in the friendly vein : 
 " our business here demand the great caution , skill , reserve , and self - denial . we be fortunate in have no man of any keen penetration in the neighbourhood , at least of those in authority and concern with public matter . as one of an ancient family , possess the land for century , I have every right to be here , and to pursue my private business in privacy . but if it once get talk about that a french officer be with I , these stupid people will awake their suspicion more strongly by their own stupidity . in this queer island you may do what you like till the neighbourhood turn against you ; and then , if you revolve upon a pin , you can not suit they . you understand ? you have hear I before . it be this that I never can knock into you . " 
 Renaud Charron , who consider himself as all frenchman do then , and perhaps do now far swifter of intellect than any Englishman , find himself not well pleased at this , and desire to know more about it . 
 " nothing can be simple , " the Englishman reply ; " and therefore nothing surer . you know the old proverb ' everything in turn , except scandal , whose turn be always . ' and again another saying of our own land ' the second side of the bread take less time to toast . ' we must not let the first side of ours be toast ; we will shun all the fire of suspicion . and to do this , you must not be see , my dear friend . I may go abroad freely ; you must hide your gallant head until matter be ripe for action . you know that you may trust I not to keep you in the dark a day long than be needful . I have get the old shopkeeper under my thumb , and can do what I please with his trading - ship . but before I place you in command I must change some more of the crew , and do it warily . there be an obstinate cornishman to get rid of , who stick to the plank like a limpet . if we throw he overboard , we shall alarm the other ; if we discharge he without show cause , he will go to the old Admiral and tell all his suspicion . he must be get rid of in London with skill , and then we ship three or four Americans , first - rate seaman , afraid of nothing , who will pass here as fellow from Lancashire . after that we may run among the cruiser as we like , with the boldness and skill of a certain Captain Charron , who must be ill in his cabin when his ship be board . " 
 " it be famous , it be very good , my friend . the patience I will have , and the obedience , and the courage ; and so much the more readily because my pay be good , and keep itself go on dry land as well as sea . " 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 in the line of FIRE 

 no wonder there have be a great deal of talk in the village all that evening , for the following notice have appear in a dozen conspicuous place , begin with the gate of the church - yard , and end with two of the big mooring - post , and not even spar the Admiral 's white gate , where it flap between the two upper rail . it be not print , but write in round hand , with a liberal supply of capital , on a stiff sheet of official paper , stamp with the Royal Arms at the top . and those who be in the secret know that Master Bob Stubbard , the Captain 's eld son , have accomplish this great literary feat at a guerdon of one shilling from the public service fund every time he suck his pen at the end of it . 
 " by order of his Majesty King George III . to - morrow be Wednesday , and the fishing - boat at sea , Artillery practice from Fox - hill fort will be carry on from twelve at noon until three P.M. at a mark - boat moor half a mile from the shore . therefore his Majesty 's loyal subject be warn to avoid the beach westward of the brook between the white flagstaff , as well as the sea in front of it , and not to cross the line of fire below the village but at their own risk and peril . 
 " sign   ADAM JACKSON STUBBARD , R.N. , command Fox - hill Battery . " 
 some indignation be arouse by this ; for Mrs. Caper junior   who be Mrs. Prater 's cousin   have be confine , out of proper calculation , and for the very first time , the moment the boat be go on Monday ; and her house , be near to the fort , and in a hollow where the noise would be certain to keep go round and round , the effect upon her head , not to mention the dear baby 's , be more than any one dare to think of , with the poor father so far away . and if Squire Darling have only be at home , not a woman who could walk would have think twice about it , but go all together to insist upon it that he should stop this wicked bombardment . and this be most unselfish of all of they , they be sure , because they have so long look forward to put cotton - wool in their ear , and see how all the enemy of England would be demolish . but Mrs. Caper junior , and Caper , natu minimus , fall fast asleep together , as thing turn out , and hear not a single bang of it . 
 and so it turn out , in another line of life , with thing against all calculation , resent to be reckon as they always do , like the countless child of Israel . for Admiral Darling be go far away inspect , leave his daughter to inspect themselves . 
 " you may just say exactly what you consider right , dear , " say Miss dolly Darling to her sister Faith ; " and I dare say it make you more comfortable . but you know as well as I do , that there be no reason in it . Father be a darling ; but he must be wrong sometimes . and how can he tell whether he be wrong or right , when he go away fifty mile to attend to other people ? of course I would never disobey his order , anymore than you would . but fact change accord to circumstance , and I feel convinced that if he be here he would say , ' go down and see it , dolly . ' " 
 " we have no right to speculate as to what he might say , " reply Faith , who be very clear - headed . " his order be definite : ' keep within the ground , when notice be give of artillery practice . ' and those order I mean to obey . " 
 " and so do I ; but not to misunderstand they . the beach be a part of our ground , as I have hear he say fifty time in argument , when people try to come encroach . and I mean to go on that part of his ground , because I can not   see well from the other part . that be clearly what he mean ; and he would laugh at we , if we could tell he nothing when he come home . why , he promise to take we as far as Portsmouth to see some artillery practice . " 
 " that be a different thing altogether , because we should be under his control . if you disobey he , it be at your own risk , and I shall not let one of the servant go with you , for I be mistress of the household , if not of you . " 
 " what trumpery air you do give yourself ! one would think you be fifty year old at least . stay at home , if you be such a coward ! I be sure dear daddy would be quite ashamed of you . they be pop already , and I mean to watch they . " 
 " you will not   go so very far , I be quite sure of that , " answer Faith , who understand her sister . " you know your own value , darle dolly , and you would not go at all , if you have not be forbid . " 
 " when people talk like that , it goad I up to almost anything . I intend to go , and stand , as near as can be , in the middle of the space that be mark off ' dangerous . ' " 
 " do , that be a dear . I will lend you my shell - silk that measure twenty yard , that you may be sure of be hit , dear . " 
 " inhuman , selfish , wicked creature ! " cry dolly , and it be almost cry ; " you shall see what come of your cold - bloodedness ! I shall pace to and fro in the direct line of fire , and hang on my back the king 's proclamation , inside out , and write on it in large letter ' by order of my sister I do this . ' then what will be say of you , if they only kill I ? my feeling might be very sad , but I should not envy your , Faith . " 
 " kiss I , at any rate , before you perish , in token of forgiveness ; " and dolly   who dearly love her sister at the keen height of rebellion   run up and kiss Faith , with a smile for she , and a tear for her own self - sacrifice . " I shall put on my shell - pink , " she say , " and they will not   have the heart to fire shell at it . " 
 the dress of the lady of the present passing period have be largely affect by the recent peace , which allow the " french baby " as the milliner ' doll be call to come in as quickly as they be conceive . in war time score of these " doxy - dummy " as the rough tar call they be toss overboard from capture vessel or set up as a mark for tobacco - juice , while sweet eye in London weep for want of they . and even Mr. Cheeseman have fail to bring any type genuinely french from the wholesale house in St. Mary 's Axe , which be fame for canonical issue . but bless be the patient , if their patience last long enough . the lady of England be now in full enjoyment of all the new french discovery , which prove to be the right name , inasmuch as they banish all reputable form of cover . at least , so Mrs. Twemlow say ; and the Rector go far than she do , obtain for his sympathy a recommendation to attend to his own business . but when he show the Admiral his wife 's last book of pattern from a drawer which he have no right to go to great laughter be hold between the twain , with some glance over shoulder , and much dread of bad example . " whatever you do , do not   let my girl see it ; I will be bind you will not   let your eliza , " say the Admiral , after a pinch of snuff to restore the true balance of his principle ; " faith would pitch it straight into the fire ; but I be not quite so sure that my dolly would . she love a bit of finery , and she look well in it . " 
 " tonnish female , " as the magazine of fashion call the high class of popinjay , would have star with contempt at both Faith and Dolly Darling in their simple walking - dress that day . dowdy would have be the name for they , or frump , or fright , or country gawk , because their attire be not statuesque or classic , as it should have be , which mean that they be not half naked . 
 Faith , the eld sister , have mean to let young dolly take the course of her own stubbornness ; but no soon do she see she go forth alone than she throw on cloak and hat , and follow . the day be unsuited for classic apparel , as english day be apt to be , and a lady of fashion would have look more foolish , and even more indecent , than usual . a brisk and rather crisp east wind have arise , which have no respect for person , and even Faith and dolly in their high - neck country dress have to handle their tackle warily . 
 dolly have a good start , and grow much excited with the petulance of the wind and with her own audacity , cross the mouth of the brook at a very fine pace , with the easterly gust to second she . she could see the little mark - boat well out in the offing , with a red flag flaring merrily , defy all the effort of the gunner on the hill to plunge it into the bright dance of the wave . and now and then she hear what she know to be the rush of a round shoot far above her head , and follow the sound see a little silver fountain leap up into the sunshine and skim before the breeze ; then glance up the hill she see the gray puff drift , and presently feel the dull rumble of the air . at the root of the smoke - puff , once or twice , she descry a stocky figure move leisurely , and in spite of the distance and huddle of vapour could declare that it be Captain Stubbard . then a dense mass of smoke be bring down by an eddy of wind , and set her coughing . 
 " come away , come away this very moment , dolly , " cry Faith , who have hurry up and seize her hand ; " you be past the danger - post , and I meet a man back there who say they be go to fire shell , and they have get two short gun on purpose . he say it will be very dangerous till they get the range , and he beg I most earnestly not to come on here . if I be anybody else , he say , he would lay hand on I and hold I back . " 
 " some old fisherman , no doubt . what do they know about gun practice ? I can see Captain Stubbard up there ; he would rather shoot himself than I , he say yesterday . " 
 while dolly be repeat this assurance , the follow word be be exchange upon the smoky parapet : " if you please , sir , I can see two woman on the beach , half - way between the post a'most . " " can not   help it would not   stop for all the petticoat in the kingdom . if they choose to go there , they must take their chance . a bit more up , and to you , my good man . be you sure you put in twenty - three ? Steady ! so , so that be beautiful . " 
 " what a noisy thing ! what do it come here for ? I never see it fall . there must be some mistake . I hope there be nothing nasty inside it . run for your life , faith ; it mean to burst , I do believe . " 
 " down on your face ! " cry a loud , stern voice ; and dolly obey in an instant . but Faith stand calmly , and say to the man who rush past she , " I trust in the Lord , sir . " 
 there be no time to answer . the shell have leave off roll , and sputter more fiercely as the fuse thicken . the man lay hold of this , and try to pull it out , but could not , and jump with both foot on it ; while Faith , who quite expect to be blow to piece , say to herself , " what pretty boot he have ! " 
 " a fine bit of gunnery ! " say the young man , stoop over it , after tread the last spark into the springy sand . " the little artillery man be want here . lady , you may safely stay here now . they will not make two hit in proximity to each other . " 
 " you shall not go , " say Faith , as he be hurry away , " until we know who have be so reckless of his life , to save the life of other . both your hand be burn very seriously , I fear . " 
 " and your clothe , sir , " cry dolly , run up in hot terror , as soon as the danger be over ; " your clothe be spoil sadly . oh , how good it be of you ! and the whole fault be mine or at least Captain Stubbard 's . he will never dare to face I again , I should hope . " 
 " young lady , if I have be of any service to you , " say the stranger , with a smile at their excitement , " I beg you to be silent to the Captain Stubbard concern my share in this occasion . he would not be gratify by the interest I feel in his beautiful little bombardment , especially that of fair lady . ha , there go another shell ! they will make well aim now ; but you must not delay . I beseech you to hasten home , if you would do I kindness . " 
 the fair daughter of the Admiral have enjoy enough of warfare to last they till the end of their honeymoon , and they could not reject the entreaty of a man who have risk his life to save they . tremble and bewildered , they make off at the quick step permit by maiden dignity , with one or two kindly turn of neck , to show that he be mean to follow they . but another sulphurous cloud rush down from the indefatigable Stubbard , and when it have pass they , they look back vainly for the gentleman who have spoil his boot . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 among the lady 

 it would have surprise the stout Captain Stubbard , who think no small beer of his gunnery , to hear that it be hold in very light esteem by the " frenchified young man overhead , " as he call Caryl Carne , to his landlady . and it would have amaze he to learn that this young man be a captain of artillery , in the grand army muster across the sea , and one of the most able among plenty of ability , and favour by the great First Consul . 
 in the gully where the Tugwell boat be build , behind a fringe of rough longshore growth , young Carne have be sit with a good field - glass , observe the practice of the battery . he have also be able to observe unseen the disobedient practice of young lady , when their father be widely out of sight . upon Faith , however , no blame could fall , for she go against her wish , and only to retrieve the rebellious dolly . 
 secure from the danger , these two hold council in the comfort of the Admiral 's Round - house . there Miss Dolly , who consider it her domain , keep sundry snug appliance congenial to young lady , for remove all trace of sudden excitement , and make they fit to be see again . simple and unfashionable as they be in dress , they be sure to have something to do to themselves after the late derangement , ere ever they could run the risk of meet any of the brave young officer , who be so mysteriously fond of come for order to Springhaven Hall . 
 " you look well enough , dear , " say faith at last , " and much well than you deserve to look , after lead I such a dance by your self - will . but one thing must be settle before we go back be we to speak of this matter , or not ? " 
 " how can you ask such a question , faith ? " Miss dolly love a bit of secrecy . " of course we must rather bite our tongue out , than break the solemn pledge which we have give . " she have cry a good deal , and she begin to cry again . 
 " do not   cry , that be a darling , " say the simple - hearted sister . " you make the whole world seem so cruel when you cry , because you look so innocent . it shall be as you please , if I can only think it right . but I can not see how we give a pledge of any sort , consider that we run away without speak . the question be have we any right to conceal it , when father have a right to know everything ? " 
 " he would be in such a sad passion , " plead dolly , with a stock of fresh tear only wait , " and he never would look again at poor Captain Stubbard , and what would become of all his family ? " 
 " Father be a just and conscientious man , " reply the daughter who inherit those quality ; " he would not blame Captain Stubbard ; he would blame we , and no other . " 
 " oh , I could not bear to hear you blame , Faith . I should have to say that it be all my fault . and then how I should catch it , and be punish for a month ! confine to the ground for a month at least , and never have a bit of appetite . but I be not think of myself , I be quite sure of that . you know that I never do that much . I be think of that heroic gentleman , who stamp out the spark so cleverly . all the time I lay on the sand I watch he , though I expect to be blow to piece every single moment . oh ! what a nasty sensation it be ! I expect to find all my hair turn grey . but , thank Heaven , I do not   see a streak in it ! " to make sure of that , she go to the glass again . 
 " if all mine have turn grey , ' twould be no odd to nobody as Captain Zeb say about his income because I be intend for an old maid . " Miss Darling , whose beauty still lack many year of its prime , turn away for a moment , because her eye be glisten , and her sister be tired of the subject . " but for yours there be fifty to weep , dolly . especially perhaps this young gentleman , towards whom you feel so much gratitude . " 
 " how unkind you be , Faith ! all the gratitude I owe he be for save your life . as for myself , I be flat upon the sand , with a heap of sea - weed between I and the thing . if it have go off , it would have go over I ; but you choose to stand up , like a stupid . your life be save , beyond all doubt , by he ; and the way you acknowledge it be to go and tell his chief enemy that he be there observe he ! " 
 " well , I never ! " Faith exclaim , with more vigour than grace of language . " a minute ago you know nothing of he , and even wonder who he be , and now you know all about his enemy ! I be afraid that you stick at nothing . " 
 " I do not   stick thinking , as you do , Miss , " dolly answer , without abashment , and know that the elder hat to be so address ; " but thing come to I by the light of nature , without a twelvemonth of brown - study . when I say what you remind I of , in such a hurry , it be perfectly true so true that you need have no trouble about it , with all your truth . but since that , a sudden idea flash across I , the sort of idea that prove itself . your hero you be in such a hurry to betray can be nobody but the mysterious lodger in Widow Shanks ' dimity - parlour , as she call it ; and Jenny have tell I all she know about he , which be a great deal less than she ought to know . I mean to have tell you , but you be so grand in your lofty contempt of what you call gossip , but which I call good neighbourly intercourse ! you know that he be Mr. Caryl Carne , of course . everybody know that , and there the knowledge seem to terminate . even the Twemlows , his own aunt and uncle , be scarcely ever favour with his company ; and I , who be always on the beach , or in the village , have never have the honour of behold he , until until it come to this " here she imitate with her lip the spluttering of the fuse so well that her sister could not keep from laugh . " he never go out , and he never ask question , any more than he answer they , and he never care to hear what fish they have catch , or anything else , about anybody . he never eat or drink , and he never say a word about the flower they put upon his table ; and what he do all day long nobody know , except that he have a lot of book with he . Widow Shanks , who have the good right to know all about he , have make up her mind that his head have be turn by the trouble of his family , except for his go without dinner , which no lunatic ever do , accord to her knowledge . and he seem to have get ' Butter Cheeseman , ' as they call he , entirely at his beck and call . he leave his black horse there every morning , and rid home at night to his ancestral ruin . there , now , you know as much as I do . " 
 " there be mischief at the bottom of all this , " say Faith ; " in these dangerous time , it must not be neglect . we be bind , as you say , to consider his wish , after all that he have do for we . but the tale about we will be over the place in a few hour , at the late . the gunner will have know where their bad shot fall , and perhaps they will have see we with their glass . how will it be possible to keep this affair from gossip ? " 
 " they may have see we , without see he at all , on account of the smoke that come afterwards . at any rate , let we say nothing about it until we hear what other people say . the shell will be wash away or bury in the sand , for it fall upon the shingle , and then roll towards the sea ; and there need be no fuss unless we choose to make it , and so perhaps ruin Captain Stubbard and his family . and his wife have make such pretty thing for we . if he know what he have do , he would go and shoot himself . he be so excessively humane and kind . " 
 " we will not urge his humanity to that extreme . I hate all mystery , as you know well . but about this affair I will say nothing , unless there be cause to do so , at least until father come back ; and then I shall tell he if it seem to be my duty . " 
 " it will not   be your duty , it can not   be your duty , to get good people into trouble , Faith . I find it my duty to keep out of trouble , and I like to treat other the same as myself . " 
 " you be such a lover of duty , dear dolly , because everything you like become your duty . and now your next duty be to your dinner . Mrs. Twemlow be come I forgot to tell you as well as Eliza , and Mrs. Stubbard . and if Johnny come home in time from Harrow , to be Jack among the lady , we shall hear some wonder , you may be quite sure . " 
 " oh , I vow , I forget all about that wicked Johnny . what a blessing that he be not here just now ! it be my black Monday when his holiday begin . instead of get steady , he grow more plaguesome . and the wonder of it be that he would tie your kid shoe ; while he pull out my jaconet , and sit on my french hat . how I wish he be old enough for his commission ! to - morrow he will be dance in and out of every cottage , boat , or gun , or rabbit - hole , and nothing shall be hide from his eye and ear . let he come . ' I be accustomed to have all thing go awry , ' as somebody say in some tragedy . the only chance be to make he fall in love , deeply in love , with Miss Stubbard . he do it with somebody for his Easter week , and become as harmless as a sucking dove , till he find his nymph eat onion raw with a pocketful of boil limpet . Maggie Stubbard be too perfect in her style for that . she be twelve year old , and have lot of hair , and eye as large as oyster . I shall introduce Johnny to - morrow , and hope to keep he melancholy all his holiday . " 
 " perhaps it will be for his good , " say Faith , " because , without some high idea , he get into such dreadful scrape ; and certainly it will be for our good . " 
 after make light of young love thus , these girl deserve the shaft of Cupid , in addition to Captain Stubbard 's shell . and it would have be hard to find fair mark when they come down dress for dinner . Mrs. Twemlow arrive with her daughter Eliza , but without her husband , who be to fetch she in the evening ; and Mrs. Stubbard come quite alone , for her walkable child as she call they be all up at the battery . " can not   smell powder too young in such day as these , " be the Captain 's utterance ; and , sure enough , they take to it , like son of gun . 
 " I should be so frightened , " Mrs. Twemlow say , when Johnny   who sit at the foot of the table represent his father most gallantly   have say grace in Latin , to astonish their weak mind , ' so nervous all the time , so excessively anxious , the whole time that dreadful din be proceed ! it be over now , thank goodness ! but how can you have endure it , how can you have go about your household duty calmly , with seven of your child I think you say go about in that fiery furnace ? " 
 " because , ma'am , " reply Mrs. Stubbard , who be dry of speech , and fit mother of hero , " the cannon be so make , if you can understand , that they do not shoot out of their back end . " 
 " we be quite aware of that " Miss Twemlow come to her mother 's relief very sharply " but still they be apt to burst , or to be overload , or badly direct , or even to fly back suddenly , as I have hear on good authority . " 
 " very likely , miss , when they be command by young woman . " 
 Eliza Twemlow colour , for she be rather quick of temper ; but she do not condescend to pay rudeness in kind . 
 " it would hardly be a lady - like position , I suppose , " she answer , with a curve of her graceful neck the Carnes have be celebrate for their neck , which be long than those of the darling ; " but even under the command of a most skilful man , for instance Captain Stubbard , little accident will happen , like the fall of a shell upon the beach this afternoon . some people be close to it , accord to the rumour ; but luckily it do not explode . " 
 " how providential ! " cry Mrs. Twemlow ; " but the stupid people would have go without much pity , whatever have befall they , unless they be blind , or too ignorant to read . do not   you think so , Faith , my dear ? " 
 " I do not   believe a single word of that story , " Mrs. Stubbard cut short the question ; " for the simple reason that it never could have happen . my husband be to direct every gun himself . be it likely he would have shell the beach ? " 
 " well , the beach be the proper place for shell ; but if I have only know it , would not   I have come a few hour early ? " say Johnny . " even now there must be something leave to see ; and I be bind to understand that sort of thing . lady , I entreat you not to think I rude , if I go as soon as ever you can do without I . I think I have get you nearly everything you want ; and perhaps you would rather be without I . " 
 with many thank and compliment such a pretty boy he be the lady release he gladly ; and then Mrs. Twemlow , have reason of her own , draw nigh to Mrs. Stubbard with lively interest in her child . at first , she receive short answer only ; for the Captain 's wife have draw more sour juice than sweet us from adversity . but the wife of the man of peace outflank the well half of the man of war , drive in her outpost , and secure the key of all her communication . 
 " I can scarcely believe that you be so kind . my dear Mrs. Twemlow , how good you be ! my Bob be a nice boy , so manly and clever , so gentle and well - behave , even when he know that I be not likely to find he out . but that you should have notice it , be what surprise I so few people now know the difference ! but in the House of God as you so well observe you can very soon see what a boy be . when I tell he that he may ride your grey pony , I wish you could be there to watch the fine expression of his face . how he do love dumb animal ! it be only last Saturday , he knock down a boy nearly three time his own size for poke a pin into a poor donkey with the fish . and Maggie to have a flower - bed on your front lawn ! they will not   let she touch a plant , at our cottage , though she understand garden so thoroughly . she will not   sleep a wink to - night , if I tell she , and I have well keep that for the morning . poor child ! they have have a hard time of it ; but they have come out like pure gold from the fire I mean as many of they as can use their leg . but to be on horseback what will Bob say ? " 
 " you must have meet with very little kindness , Mrs. Stubbard , to attach any importance to such mere trifle . it make I blush to think that there can be a spot in England where such child as yours could pass unnoticed . it be not a question of religious feeling only . far from it ; in fact , quite the opposite ; though my husband , of course , be quite right in insist that all our opinion and action must be refer to that one standard . but I look at thing also from a motherly point of view , because I have suffer such sad trial . three dear one in the churchyard , and the dear of all the Almighty only know where he be . sometimes it be more than I can bear , to live on in this dark and most dreadful uncertainty . my medical man have forbid I to speak of it . but how can he know what it be to be a mother ? but hush ! or darling Faith may hear I . sometimes I lose all self - command . " 
 Mrs. Twemlow 's eye be in need of wiping , and stout Mrs. Stubbard 's in the same condition . " how I wish I could help you , " say the latter , softly : " be there anything in the world that I can do ? " 
 " no , my dear friend ; I wish there be , for I be sure that it would be a pleasure to you . but another anxiety , though far less painful , be worry I as well just now . my poor brother 's son be behave most strangely . he hardly ever come near we , and he seem to dislike my dear husband . he have take room over your brave husband 's Office , and he come and go very mysteriously . it be my duty to know something about this ; but I dare not ask Captain Stubbard . " 
 " my dear Mrs. Twemlow , it have puzzle I too . but think that you know all about it , I conclude that everything must be quite right . what you tell I have surprise I more than I can tell . I shall go to work quietly to find out all about it . mystery and secrecy be such hateful thing ; and a woman be always the good hand at either . " 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 a gracious mercy 

 as a matter of course , every gunner at the fort be ready to make oath by every colour of the rainbow , that never shoot , shell , wad , sponge , or even powder - flake could by any possibility have fall on the beach . and before they have time to grow much more than doubly positive that be to say , within three day ' time the sound of gun fire in earnest drown all question of bad practice . 
 for the following Sunday beheld Springhaven in a state of excitement beyond the memory of the very old inhabitant , or the imagination of the young . Excitement be a crop that , to be large , must grow though it thrive all the well without much root and in this particular field it begin to grow before noon of Saturday . for the man who be too old to go to sea , and the boy who be too young , and the woman who be never of the proper age , all these keep look from the good lookout , but nothing could they see to enable they to say when the kettle , or the frying - pan , or gridiron , would be want . they rub their eye grievously , and spin round three time , if time have bring or leave they the power so to spin ; and they pull an irish halfpenny , with the harp on , from their pocket , and moisten it with saliva which in English mean spat on it and then throw it into the pocket on the other side of body . but none of these accredit appeal to heaven put a speck upon the sea where the boat ought to have be , or cast upon the cloud a shade of any sail approach . uneasily wonder , the granny , wife , and little one go home , when the nightfall quench all eyesight , and tell one another ancient tale of woe . 
 yet there be a salve for every sore , a bung for every bunghole . upon the Sunday morning , when the tide be come in , and a golden haze hang upon the peaceful sea , and the seven bell of the old grey church be speak of the service cheerfully , suddenly a deep boom move the bosom of distance , and palpitate all along the shore . six or seven hale old gaffer   not too stiff to walk , with the help of a staff , a little far than the rest   be come to hear parson by the path below the warren , where a smack of salt would season they for doctrine . they know from long experience , the grandmother of science , that the mist of the sea , come on at breakfast - time , in the month of August   with the wind where it be and the tide as they be , would be sure to hold fast until dinner - time . else , good as they be , and prepare punctually once a week for a well world , the hind button of their Sunday coat would have be towards the church , and the front one to the headland . for the body of their son be dearer to they , substantially dearer , than their own old soul . 
 they be all begin to be deaf , or rather go on with it very agreeably , lose thereby a great deal of disturbance , and gain great room for reflection . and now when the sound of a gun from the sea hang shake in the web of vapour , each of these wise man gaze steadfastly at the rest , to see his own conclusion reflect , or conclude . a gun it be indeed a big well - shot gun , and no deafness could throw any doubt on it . there might not be anything to see , but still there would be plenty to hear at the headland a sound more arouse than the parson 's voice , a roar beyond that of all the gallery . " ' tis a battle ! " say one , and his neighbour cry , " a rare one ! " they turn to the parish church the quarter of farewell , and those of salutation to the battle out at sea . 
 it be all over the village , in the time it take to put a hat on , that the british and the french fleet be hammer and tong at it , within the distance you may throw an apple off Springhaven headland . 
 even the young woman know that this be quite impossible , because there be no water there for a colly - brig to anchor ; nevertheless , in the hurry and scare , the thought of that new battery and Lord Nelson , and above all in the fog , they believe it . so that there be scarcely any room to stand , at the Watch - point , inside the shag - rock ; while in church there be no one who could help be there , by force of holy office , or example . 
 these latter be not in a devout frame of mind , and   but for the look of it   would have do more good by join the other congregation . for the sound of cannon - shot come into their ear , like ball of unadulterated pepper , and every report make they look at one another , and whisper " ah ! there go some poor fellow 's head . " for the sacred building be construct so that the sound outside of it have more power than the good thing offer in the inside . 
 however , as many , or as few , as do their duty , by join the good company of the minister , find themselves all the well for it , and more fresh for a start than the runagate . inasmuch as these latter have nearly get enough of listen without see anything , while the steady church - goer have refresh the entire system by look about without listen . and to show the truant people where their duty should have bind they , the haze have be thicken all over the sea , while the sun keep the time on the old church dial . this be speak of for many year , throughout the village , as a Scriptural token of the proper thing to do . 
 " well , and what have ' e see ? " ask the senior church - warden not Cheeseman , who be only the junior , and have neither be at church nor on the headland but Farmer Graves , the tenant of the Glebe and of up - farm , the Admiral 's good holding ; " what have ' e see , good people all , to leave parson to prache to hisself a'most a sarmon as he be hathn't   prache for five year , to my knowledge ? have ' e see fat bull of Basan ? " 
 " Naw ; but we have heer'd un roar , " reply one who be sure to say something . " Wust of it be , there be no making out what language un do roar in . " 
 " one Englishman , I tell ' e , and two frenchman , " say an ancient tar who have serve under Keppel ; " by the ring of the gun I could swear to that much . and they load they so different , that they do . " 
 before the other have well finish laugh at he , it become his turn to laugh at they . the wind be in the east , and the weather set fair , and but for the sea - mist the power of the sun would have be enough to dazzle all beholder . already this vapour be begin to clear off , coil up in fleecy wisp above the glistening water , but cling still to any bluff or cliff it could lay hold on . 
 " Halloa , Jem ! where be go of now ? " shout one or two voice from the Oar - stone point , the furth outlook of the Havenhead hill . 
 " to see they frenchy hopper get a jolly hiding , " Jem Prater reply , without ease his scull . he be John Prater 's nephew , of the " Darling Arms , " and have stop behind the fishing to see his uncle 's monthly beer in . " you can not   see up there , I reckon , the same as I do here . one english ship have get a job to tackle two crappos . but , by George ! she will do it , mate . good bye , and the Lord defend you ! " 
 he have nobody but his little brother Sam , who be hold the tiller , to help he , and his uncle 's boat   which he have take without leave   be neither stout nor handy . but the stir of the battle have fetch he forth , and he mean to see the whole of it without take harm . every Englishman have a full right to do this , in a case of such french audacity , and the English sea and air begin to give he fair occasion . for now the sun have sweep the mist with a besom of gold wire , widen every sweep , and throw brilliant prospect down it . the gentle heave of the sea flash forth with the white bird hover over it , and the curdle of fugitive vapour glow like pillar of fire as they float off . then out of the drift appear three ship , partly shroud in their own fog . 
 the wind be too light for manoeuvre much , and the combatant swing to their broadside , have take the breath of the air away by the fury of their fire . all three be stand to the north - north - west , under easy sail , and on the starboard tack , but scarcely hold steerage - way , and take little heed of it . close quarter , close and close still , muzzle to muzzle , and beard to beard , clinched tooth , and hard pounding , be the order of the day , with the crash of shattered timber and the cry of die man . and still the ship come onward , forget where they be , heave too much iron to have think of heaving lead , ready to be shipwreck , if they could but wreck the enemy . 
 between the bulky curl of smoke could be see the scar of furious battle , splinter mast and shiver yard , tattere sail and yawn bulwark , and great gap even of the solid side ; and above the ruck of smoke appear the tricolor flag upon the right hand and the left , and the Union - jack in the middle . 
 " She've   a'got more than she can do , I reckon , " say an old man famous in the lobster line ; " other a one of they be as big as she be , and two to one seemeth onfair odd . wish she well out of it that be all as can be do . " 
 " Kelks , you be a fool , " reply the ancient navyman , steady his spy - glass upon a ledge of rock . " in my time we make very little of that ; and the breed may be slack off a little , but not quite so bad as that would be . ah ! you should a ' hear what old Keppel on the twenty - seventh day of July it be , in the year of our Lord 1778 . talk about Nelson ! to my mind old Keppel could have box his compass backward . not but what these man know how to fight quite as well as need be nowadays . why , if I be aboard of that there frigate , I could not   do much more than she have do . she will have one of they , you see if she do not , though she look to have the bad of it , till you come to understand . the Leader her name be , of thirty - eight gun , and she will lead one of they into Portsmouth , to refit . " 
 it be hard to understand the matter , in its present aspect , at all as the ancient sailor do ; for the fire of the Leda cease suddenly , and she fall behind the other , as if hamper with her canvas . a thrill of pain run through all the gaze Britons . 
 " how now , old Navy - Mike ? " cry the lobster man . " strike be the word , and no mistake . and small blame to she either . she hathn't   get a sound thread to draw , I do believe . who be the fool now , Mike ? though vex I be to ask it . " 
 " wait a bit , old lobster - pot . ah , there now , she breeze ! whistle for a wind , lad , whistle , whistle . sure as I be a sinner , yes ! she be lay her course to board the Frenchman on the weather quarter . with a slant of wind she will do it , too , if it only hold two minute . whistle on your nail , my boy , for the glory of old England . " 
 in reply to their shrill appeal for even the woman try to whistle or perhaps in compulsory sequence of the sun , the wind freshen briskly from the sunny side of east . the tattered sail of the brave ship fill , with the light fall through they upon one another , the head swing round at the command of helm , the pennon fly gaily and the ensign flap , and she bear down smoothly on the outer and therefore unwounde side of the enemy . 
 " that be what I call judgmatical , " old Mike shout , with a voice that rival cannon ; " whoever think of that deserve three epulet , one on each shoulder and one upon his head . doubt if old Keppel would have think of that , now . you see , mate , the other Crappo can not   fire at she without first hit of her own consort . and well than that ever so much well the tilt of the charge will throw she over on her wound . Master Muncher hath two great hole ' twixt wind and water on his larboard side , and will not   they suck the briny , with the weight of our bow upon the starboard beam ? ' twill take fifty hand to stop leak , instead of stop boarder . " 
 the smoke be drift off , and the sun shine bravely . the battle have be glide toward the foot of the spectator ; and now from the height of the cliff they could descry the deck , the gun , the coil of rope , the turmoil , and dark rush of man to their fate . small fight , man to man , demand still the power of a telescope , and distance make the trenchant arm of hero , work right and left , appear like the nipper of an earwig . the only thing certain be that man be be kill , and glory be be manufacture largely . 
 " She've   a do it , she've   a do it rarely . there be not a d d froggy leave to go to heaven ; or if there be so he be a ' batten down below , " old Mike shout , flourish his spy - glass , which rattle in its joint as much as he do ; " down come the blood , froth , and blue blaze , as they call the republican emrod , and up go the Union - jack , my heartie . three cheer ! three cheer ! again ! again ! again ! " 
 from the sea far below , and far away , come also the volume of a noble english shout , as the flag begin to flutter in the quickening breeze , and the sea arise and dance with sunshine . no one , who have get all his blood leave in he , could think of anything but glory . 
 " my certy , they have well mind their sounding , though ! " say the old navy - man , with a stitch in his side and a lump in his throat , from loud utterance ; " five fathom be every inch of it where they be now , and the tide make strong , and precious little wind to claw off with . Jem Prater ! Jem Prater ! oar up , and give signal . ah , he be too far off to do any good . in five minute more they will be on the White Pig , where no ship ever get off again . oh , thank the Lord , mate , thank the Lord , for his mercy endureth forever ! the other froggy be stick hard and fast , and our lad will just fetch out in time . " 
 Old Navy - Mike have make no mistake . the consort of the capture frigate , a corvette of twenty - four gun , have boldly stand on with the intention of round to the wind , cross the bow of the other twain , and retrieve the fortune of the day perhaps , by a broadside into the shattered upper work of the terribly hamper british ship . the idea be clever and spirited , and have a very fair chance of success ; but the land below the sea forefend it . full of fine ardour and the noble thirst for fame , speed on for the palm of high enterprise and the glory of the native land , alas , they stick fast in a soft bit of english sand ! it be in their power now to swear by all they disbelieve in , and in everything visible and too tangible ; but their power be limit strictly to that ; and the fast they swear , the fast they be bind to stick . 
 Springhaven din well , with its enemy so place , and a message from the Leda by Jem Prater , that the fishing fleet be rescue , and would be home to early supper , and so much to be talk about all dinner - time , that for once in his life nearly everybody find it more expedient to eat with his fork than his knife . then all who could be spar from wash up , and get ready for further cookery , go duly to church in the afternoon , to hear the good rector return humble thank for a gracious Mercy to the british arm , and to see a young man , who have land with despatch , put a face full of gunpowder in at window , to learn whether Admiral Darling be there . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 a SPECIAL urgency 

 Admiral Darling be not in church . his duty to his country keep he up the hill , and in close consultation with Captain Stubbard , who be burn to fire his battery . 
 " I never know such bad luck in all my life . the devil have be appoint First Lord of the weather ever since I come to Springhaven . " as Stubbard declare these great truth he stride about in his little fortress , deliver a kick at the heel of thing which have no right to be lumber there . " to think that I should never have see those beggar , when but for the fog I could have smash they right and leave . admiral , these thing make a Christian an infidel . " 
 " Nonsense , sir ! " say the Admiral , sternly , for a man of his kind nature ; " you forget that without the fog , or rather the mist for it be only that those fellow would never have come within range . we have very great blessing to be thankful for , though the credit fall not to our battery . the Frenchmen fight wonderfully well , as well as the good Englishman could have do , and to capture they both be a miracle of luck , if indeed we can manage to secure they . my friend , young Honyman , of the Leda , have prove himself just what I say he would be ; and have perform a very gallant exploit , though I fear he be severely wound . but we shall know more now , for I see a young fellow jump up the hill , like a kangaroo , and probably he come for order . one thing we have learn , Stubbard , and must take the hint to - morrow put a hut on the Haven head , and keep a watchman there . why , bless my heart , it be Blyth Scudamore that be come ! there be nobody else that can skip like that . " 
 the young lieutenant enter between two gun the gunner be dismiss in great disgust to dinner with his pleasant face still a little grime with gunpowder , and flush by his hurry up the steep hill - side . 
 " this for you , sir , " he say , salute the Admiral , present his letter , and then draw back ; " and I be to wait your convenience for reply . " 
 " what next will the service come to , " ask the Admiral of Captain Stubbard , " when a young man just commission give himself such mighty air ? shake hand , Blyth , and promise you will come and dine with we , unless you be order to return on board at once . how be your good captain ? I know he when he wear Nankins . Jem Prater bring word that he be wound . I hope it be not serious . " 
 " no , sir ; not much to speak of . he have only lose three finger . that be why I write this letter or report , I ought to call it , if anybody else have write it . oh , sir ! I can not bear to think of it ! I be fifth luff when the fight begin , and now there be only one leave above I , and he be in command of our big prize , the Ville d'Anvers . but , Admiral , here you will find it all , as I write it , from the lip , when they tie up the finger , of Captain Honyman . " 
 " how could you tie they up when they be go ? " Captain Stubbard enquire , with a sneer at such a youth . he have get on very slowly in his early day , and could not bear to see a young man with such vacancy before he . " why , you be the lucky lad I ever see ! sure to go up at least three step . how well you must have keep out of it ! and how happy you must feel , Lieutenant Scudamore ! " 
 " I be not at all happy at lose dear friend , " the young man answer , gently , as he turn away and pat the breech of a gun , upon which there be a little rust next day ; " that feeling come later in life , I suppose . " 
 the Admiral be not attend to they now , but absorb in the brief account of the conflict , begin by Captain Honyman in his own handwriting , and finish by his voice , but not his pen . any one desirous to read this may do so in the proper place . for the present purpose it be enough to say that the modesty of the language be scarcely surpass by the brilliancy of the exploit . and if anything be need to commend the writer to the deep good will of the reader , it be find in the fact that this enterprise spring from warm zeal for the commerce of Springhaven . the Leda have be order on Friday last to protect the peaceful little fishing fleet from a crafty design for their capture , and this she have do with good effect , have justice on her side , and fortune . the particular of the combat be not so clear , after the captain 's three finger be go ; but if one make proper allowance for that , there be not very much to complain of . the Admiral consider it a very good report ; and then put on his spectacle , and think it still well . 
 " why ! why ! why ! " he say for without affectation many officer have catch the style of his then gracious Majesty " what be this ? what be this ? something on the other side , in a different man 's handwriting , and mighty difficult to read , in my opinion . Stubbard , do you ever see such a scrawl ? make it out for I . you have good eye , like a hawk , or the man who see through a milestone . Scudamore , what be his name ? you know . " 
 " three finger at five pound apiece per annum as long as he live ! " Captain Stubbard compute on his own : " fifteen pound a year perhaps for forty year , as you seem to say how young he be ; that come to just 600 pound , and his hand as good as ever "   " I will be hang if it be , if he write this ! " the Admiral interject   " and well , I must say , from a selfish point of view , because of only two nail leave to clean , and his other hand increase in value ; why , the scale be disgraceful , iniquitous , boobyish , and make without any knowledge of the human frame , and the comparative value of its member . Lieutenant Scudamore , look at I . here you see I without an ear , damage in the fore - hatch , and with the larboard bow stove in and how much do I get , though so much old ? " 
 " well , if you will not   help I , Stubbard , " say the Admiral , who know how long his friend would carry on upon that tack , " I must even get Scudamore to read it , though it seem to have be write on purpose to elude he . Blyth , my dear boy , can you explain it ? " 
 " it be it be only something , sir " the lieutenant blush , and hesitate , and look away unmanfully " which I ask Captain Honyman to leave out , because because it have nothing to do with it . I mean , because it be of no importance , even if he happen to have that opinion . his hand be tie up so , that I do not like to say too much , and I think that he would go to sleep , because the doctor have make he drink a poppy head boil down with pigtail . but it seem as if he have get up after that for he always will have his own way while I be go to put this coat on ; and perhaps he write that with his left hand , sir . but it be no part of the business . " 
 " then we will leave it , " say Admiral Darling , " for young eye than mine to read . Nelson write well with his left hand than ever he do with his right , to my thinking , the very first time that he try it . but we can not   expect everybody to do that . there be no sign of any change of weather , be there , Stubbard ? my order will depend very much upon that . I must go home and look at the quicksilver before I know what be good to do . you have well come with I , Scudamore . " 
 Admiral Darling be quite right in this . everything depend upon the weather ; and although the rough autumn be not come yet , the prime of the hopeful year be past . the summer have not be a grand one , such as we get about once in a decade , but of loose and uncertain character , such as an Englishman have to make the good of . it might be take up for a golden autumn , ripen corn , and fruit , and tree , or it might break up into shower and temp , sodden earth , and welter sky . 
 " your captain refer to I for order , " say Admiral Darling to Scudamore , while they be hasten to the Hall , " as Commander of the Coast Defence , because he have be bring too far inshore , and one of the Frenchmen be strand . the frigate you board and carry be the Ville d'Anvers , of forty gun . the corvette that take the ground , so luckily for you , when half of your hand be aboard the prize , be the blonde , teak - build , and only launch last year . we must try to have she , whatever happen . she will not   hurt where she be , unless it come on to blow . our sand hold fast without nipping , as you know , like a well - breed sheep - dog , and the White Pig be the tough of all of they . she may stay there till the equinox , without much mischief , if the present light air continue . but the bad job will be with the prisoner ; they be the plague of all these affair , and we can not   imitate Boney by poison they . on the whole , it have well not have happen , perhaps . though you must not tell Honyman that I say so . it be a very gallant action , very skilful , very beautiful ; and I hope he will get a fine lift for it ; and you too , my dear Blyth , for you must have fight well . " 
 " but , Admiral , surely you would have be grieve if so many of your tenant , and their boat as well , have be sweep away into a french harbour . what would Springhaven be without its Captain Zebedee ? " 
 " you be right , Blyth ; I forget that for the moment . there would have be weep and wail indeed , even in our own household . but they could not have keep they long , though the loss of their boat would have be most terrible . but I can not make out why the French should have want to catch a few harmless fishing - smack . Aquila non captat muscas , as you teach the boy at Stonnington . and two ship despatch upon a paltry job of that sort ! either Captain Honyman be strangely misinform , or there be something in the background , entirely beyond our knowledge . pay attention to this matter , and let I know what you hear of it as a friend , Blyth , as a friend , I mean . but here we be ! you must want feed . Mrs. Cloam will take care of you , and find all that be needful for a warrior 's cleanup . I must look at the barometer , and consider my despatch . let we have dinner , Mrs. Cloam , in twenty minute , if possible . for we stand in real need of it . " 
 concern that there could be no doubt . glory , as all english officer know , be no durable stay for the stomach . the urgency of mankind for victual may roughly be gauge by the length of the jaw . Captain Stubbard have jaw of tremendous length , and always carry a bag of captain 's biscuit , to which he be oblige to have recourse in the height of the hot engagement . Scudamore have short jaw , well set up , and powerful , without rapacity . but even these , after twelve hour of fasting , demand something well than gunpowder . he could not help think that his host be regard the condition of affair very calmly , until he remember that the day be Sunday , when no Briton have any call to be disturb by any but sacred insistency . at any rate , he be under order now , and those order be entirely to his liking . so he freshen up his cheerful and simple - minded face , put his sailor - knot neckcloth askew , as usual , and with some trepidation go down to dinner . 
 the young lady would not have be young woman if they have not receive he warmly . Kind Faith , who love he as a sister might for she have long discover his good quality have tear in her beautiful eye , as she give he both hand , and smile sweetly at his bashfulness . and even the critical dolly , who look so sharply at the outside of everything , allow her fair hand to stay well in his , and say something which be melody to he . then Johnny , who be of a warlike cast , and hop soon to destroy the french nation , shake hand with this public benefactor already employ in that great work . 
 " I shall scarcely have time for a bit of dinner , " say Admiral Darling , as they sit down . " I have send word to have the Protector launch , and to give little Billy a feed of corn . all you young people may take your leisure . youth be the time that command time and space . but for my part , if I can only manage this plate of soup , and a slice of that fish , and then one help of mutton , and just an apple - fritter , or some trifle of that sort , I shall be quite as lucky as I can hope to be . Duty perpetually spoil my dinner , and I must get some clever fellow to invent a plate that will keep as hot as duty be in these volcanic time . but I never complain ; I be so used to it . eat your dinner , child , and do not   think of mine . " 
 have scarcely afford himself an hour , the Admiral , in full uniform , embark upon little Billy , a gentle - minded pony from the west country , who conduct his own digestion while he consult that of his rider . at the haven they find the Protector ready , a ten - oare galley man by Captain Stubbard 's man , good sample of Sea - Fencibles . and the Captain himself be there , to take the tiller , and do any fighting if the chance should arise , for he have be disappoint all the morning . the boat which bring Scudamore have be recall by signal from the Leda , and that active young officer have seek she vainly , and thereby miss the Protector , follow steadily in Mr. Prater 's boat , with the nephew , Jem , pull the other oar , and Johnny Darling , who rag at the thought of be leave behind , steer vaguely . and just as they round the harbour - head , the long glassy sweep of the palpitating sea bore inward and homeward the peaceful squadron , so wistfully watch for and so dearly welcome . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 YOH - HEAVE - OH ! 

 " her condition be very bad , as bad as could be , without go straight to the bottom , " the Admiral say to the Rector that night , as they smoke a pipe together ; " and to the bottom she must have go , if the sea have get up , before we thrum she . Honyman want to have she bring inside the Head ; but even if we could have get there , she would ground at low water and fill with the tide . and what could we do with all those prisoner ? with our fresh hand at the pump , we very soon fetch the water out of she , and make she as tight as we could ; and I think they will manage to take she to Portsmouth . she have beautiful line . I never see a smart ship . how she come to the wind , with all that water in she ! the wind be all right for Portsmouth , and she will be a fine addition to the Navy . " 
 " but what be become of the other vessel , craft , corvette , or whatever you call she ? you say that she be scarcely hurt at all . and if she get off the White Pig 's back in the night , she may come up and bombard we . not that I be afraid ; but my wife be nervous , and the Rectory face the sea so much . if you have order away the Leda , which seem to have conquer both of they , the least you can do be to keep Captain Stubbard under arm all night in his battery . " 
 " I have a great mind to do so ; it would be a good idea , for he be very much inclined to cut up rough to - day . but he never would forgive I , he be such a hog at hammock as we use to say , until we grow too elegant . and he know that the Blonde have haul down her colour , and Scudamore be now prize - captain . I have send away most of her crew in the Leda , and I be not at all sure that we ought not to blow she up . in the end , we shall have to do so , no doubt ; for nothing large than a smack have ever get off that sand , and float . but let our young friend try ; let he have a fair trial . he have the stuff of a very fine seaman in he . and if he should succeed , it would be score with a long leg for he . Halloa ! why , I think the girl be fast asleep long ago ! " 
 " as if we could sleep , papa , with this upon our mind ! " dolly wave an open letter in the air , and then present it . " perhaps Faith might , but I be sure I never could . you defy we to make out this , which be on the other leaf ; and then , without give we fair play , you take it to the desk in your Oak - room , and there you leave it . well , I take the liberty of go there for it , for there can not   be any secret about a thing that will be print ; and how be they to print it , if they can not   contrive to read it ? how much will you pay I for interpreting , papa ? Mr. Twemlow , I think I ought to have a guinea . can you read it , now , with all your learning , and knowledge of dead language ? " 
 " my dear , it be not my duty to read it , and not at all my business . it seem to be write with the end of a stick , by a boy who be learn his letter . if you can interpret it , you must be almost a Daniel . " 
 " do you hear that , papa , you who think I be so stupid ? faith give it up ; she have no perseverance , or perhaps no curiosity . and I be very nearly beat too , till a very fine idea come into my head , and I have make out every word except three , and perhaps even those three , if Captain Honyman be not very particular in his spelling . can you tell I anything about that , papa ? " 
 " yes , dolly , just what you have hear from I before . Honyman be a good officer ; a very good one , as he have just prove . no good officer ever spell well , whether in the army or the navy . look at Nelson 's letter . I be inclined to ascribe my own slow promotion to the unnatural accuracy of my spelling , which offend my lord , because it puzzle they . " 
 " then all be straight sailing , as you say , papa . but I must tell you first how I find it out , or perhaps you will not   believe I . I know that Captain Honyman write this postscript , or whatever it be , with his left hand , so I take a pen in my own left hand , and practise all the letter , and the way they join , which be quite different from the other hand . and here be the copy of the word , as my left hand teach my right to put they down , after ink ever so many finger : 
 " ' we never could have do it without Scudamore . he jump a most wonderful jump from our jib - boom into her mizzen chain , when our grapple have slip , and we could get no nearer , and there he make fast , though the enemy come at he with cutlass , pike , and musket . by this mean we borde and carry the ship , with a loss as above report . when I grow faint from a trifling wound , Luff Scudamore lead the border with a cool courage that discomfit the fo . ' " 
 " Robert Honyman all over ! " cry the Admiral , with delight . " I could swear that he write it , if it be write with his toe . ' twas an old joke against he , when he be lieutenant , that he never could spell his own title ; and he never would put an e after an o in any word . he be far too straightforward a man to spell well ; and now the loss of three finger will cut his word short than ever , and be a fine excuse for he . he be faint again , when I board the Leda , partly no doubt through strong medical measure ; for the doctor , who be an ornament to his profession , have cauterise his stump with a marlinspike , for fear of inflammation . and I hear that he have sing the other finger off . but I hope that may prove incorrect . at any rate , I could not bear to disturb he , but leave write order with Scudamore ; for the senior be on board the prize . dolly , be off to bed , this moment . " 
 " well , now , " say the Rector , draw near , and fill another deliberative pipe , " I have no right to ask what your order be , and perhaps you have no right to tell I . but as to the ship that remain in my parish , or at any rate on its border , if you can tell I anything , I shall be very grateful , both as a question of parochial duty , and also because of the many question I be sure to have to answer from my wife and daughter . " 
 " there be no cause for secrecy ; I will tell you everything : " the admiral hat mystery . " why , the London paper will publish the whole of it , and a great deal more than that , in three day ' time . I have send off the Leda with her prize to Portsmouth . with this easterly breeze and smooth water , they will get there , cripple as they be , in some twenty - four hour . there the wound will be care for , and the prisoner draft off . the Blonde , the corvette which be aground , surrender , as you know , when she find herself helpless , and within range of our new battery . Stubbard 's man long to have a few shot at she ; but of course we stop any such outrage . nearly all her officer and most of her crew be on board the Leda , have give their parole to attempt no rise ; and frenchman be always honourable , unless they have some very wicked leader . but we leave in the corvette her captain , an exceedingly fine fellow , and about a score of hand who volunteer to stay to help to work the ship , upon condition that if we can float she , they shall have their freedom . and we put a prize crew from the Leda on board she , only eight - and - twenty hand , which be all that could be spar , and in command of they our friend Blyth Scudamore . I send he to ask Robert Honyman about it , when he manage to survive the doctor , for a captain be the master of his own luff ; and he answer that it be exactly what he wish . our gallant frigate lose three lieutenant in this very spirited action , two kill and one heavily wound . and the first be in charge of the Ville d'Anvers , so there be nobody for this enterprise except the gentle Scuddy , as they call he . he be very young for such a business , and we must do all we can to help he . " 
 " I have confidence in that young man , " say Mr. Twemlow , as if it be a question of theology ; " he have very sound view , and his principle be high ; and he would have take holy order , I believe , if his father 's asset have permit it . he perceive all the rapidly grow danger with which the Church be surround , and when I be in doubt about a line of Horace , he show the fine diffidence , and yet prove that I be right . the ' White Pig , ' as the name of a submarine bank , be most clearly of classic origin . we find it in Homer , and in Virgil too ; and probably the Romans , who undoubtedly have a naval station in Springhaven , and exterminate the oyster , as they always do " 
 " come , come , Twemlow , " say the Admiral , with a smile which smooth the breach of interruption , " you carry I out of my depth so far that I long to be strand on my pillow . when your great book come out , we shall have in perfect form all the pile of your discovery , which you break up into little bit too liberally . the Blonde on the Pig be like Beauty and the Beast . if gentle Scuddy rescue she , it will not   be by Homer , or Horace , or even holy order , but by hard tug and stout seamanship . " 
 " with the blessing of the Lord , it shall be do , " say the Rector , knock his pipe out ; " and I trust that Providence may see fit to have it do very speedily ; for I dread the effect which so many gallant stranger , all work hard and apparently in peril , may produce upon the female of this parish . " 
 but the Admiral laugh , and say , " Pooh , pooh ! " for he have faith in the maid of Springhaven . 
 for these there be a fine time now in store young man up and down everywhere , people run in and out with some new news , before they could get their hat on , the kettle to boil half a dozen time a day , and almost as much to see as they could talk of . at every high - water that come by daylight and sometimes there be two of they every maid in the parish be bind to run to the top of a sand - hill high enough to see over the neck of the Head , and there to be up among the rush all together , and repulse disdainfully the society of lad . these take the matter in a very different light , and think it quite a pity and a piece of fickle - mindedness , that they might go the round of crab - pot , or of inshore lug - line , without anybody to watch they off , or come down with a basket to meet they . 
 for be it understand that the great fishing fleet have not launch forth upon its labour . their narrow escape from the two french cruiser would last they a long time to think over , and to say the same thing to each other about it that each other have say to they every time they meet . and they know that they could not do this so well as to make a new credit of it every time , when once they be in the same craft together , and could not go asunder more than ten yard and a half . and well , far well , than all these reason for stay at home and enjoy themselves , be the great fact that they could make more money by leisure than by labour , in this nobly golden time . 
 Luck foster skill in this great affair , which deserve to be record for the good of any village gift with like opportunity . it appear that the British Admiralty have long be eager for the capture of the Blonde , because of her speed and strength and beauty , and the mischief she have do to english trade . to destroy she would be a great comfort , but to employ her aright would be glorious ; and her proper employment be to serve as a model for english frigate first , and then to fight against her native land . therefore , no soon do their lordship hear what have happen at Springhaven than they send down a rider express , to say that the ship must be save at any price . and as nothing could be spar from the blockade force , or the fleet in the down , or the cruise squadron , the Commander of the coast - defence be instruct to enrol , impress , or adapt somehow all the man and the matter available . something be say about free use of money in the service of his Majesty , but not a penny be send to begin upon . but Admiral Darling carry out his order , as if he have receive they frame in gold . " they be pretty sure to pay I in the end , " he say ; " and if they do not , it will not   break I . I would give 500 pound on my own account , to carry that corvette to Spithead . and it would be the making of Scudamore , who remind I of his father more and more , every time I come across he . " 
 the fleet under Captain Tugwell have quite lately fall off from seven to five , through the fierce patriotism of some young member , and their sanguine belief in bounty - money . Captain Zeb have present they with his experience in a long harangue nearly fifty word long and they look as if they be convince by it . however , in the morning they be go , have mostly have tiff with their sweetheart which be fervent incentive to patriotism and they charter themselves , and their boat be number for the service of their country . they have do their work well , because they have none to do , except to draw small wage , and they find themselves qualified now for more money , and come home at the early chance of it . 
 two guinea a day for each smack and four hand , be the term offer by the Admiral , whose hard - work conscience be twitch into herring - bone by the strife between native land and native spot . " I have have many tussle with uncertainty before , " he tell dolly , go down one evening , " but never such vexation of the mind as now . all our people expect to get more for a day , than a month of fine fishing would bring they ; while the Government go by the bad time they make , and expect they to throw in their boat for nothing . ' the same as our breech , ' Tugwell say to I ; ' whenever we work , we throw in they , and we ought to do the very same with our boat . ' this make it very hard for I . " 
 but by do his good , he get over the hardship , as people generally do . he settle the daily wage as above , with a bonus of double that amount for the day that see the Blonde upon her leg again . indignation prevail , or pretend to do so ; but common - sense conquer , and all set to work . hawser , and chain , and buoy , and all other needful gear and tackle be provide by the Admiralty from the store - house build not long ago for the Fencibles . and Zebedee Tugwell , by right of position , and without a word say for it because who could say a word against it ? become the commander of the Rescue fleet , and draw double pay naturally for himself and family . 
 " I do it , " he say , " if you ask I why I do it , without any intention of better myself , for the Lord hath place I above need of that ; but mainly for the sake of discipline , and the respectability of thing . suppose I be under you , sir , and know you be get no more than I be , why , my stomach would fly every time that you give I an order without a ' please , Zebedee ! ' but as soon as I feel that you pocket a shilling , in the time I take pocket twopence , the value of your brain ariseth plain before I ; and instead of think what you say , I do it . " 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 accord to CONTRACT 

 when the Blonde have be on the White Pig for a week , in spite of all the science of Scudamore , ready money of the Admiral , and effort of the native , there begin to be sign of a change in the weather . the sea be as smooth , and the sky as bright , and the land as brown as ever ; but the feel of the air be not the same , and the sound that come through it be different . " rain afore Friday , " say Captain Zeb , " and a blow from sowwest afore Sunday . ' twill break up the Blunder , I reckon , my lad . " 
 with various aspect they look at he , all hold sweet converse at the Darling Arms , after the manifold struggle of the day . the eye of the young man be fill with disappointment and anger , as at a sure seer of evil ; the elder , to whom cash be more important , gaze with anxiety and dismay ; while a pair , old enough to be sire of Zebedee , nod approval , and look at one another , expect to receive , but too discreet to give , a wink . then a lively discourse arise and throve among the young ; and the elder let they hold it , while they talk of something else . 
 on the follow morning two dialogue be hold upon different part of Springhaven shore , but each of great import to the beautiful captive still fast aground in the offing . the first be between Captain Zebedee Tugwell and Lieutenant Scudamore . the gentle Scuddy , still hop against hope , have stick fast to his charge , upon whose fortune so much of his own depended . if he could only succeed in float and carry she into Portsmouth , his mark would be make , his position secure far quick than by ten gallant action ; and that which he care for a hundredfold , the comfort of his widow mother , would be advance and establish . for , upon the valuation of the prize , a considerable sum would fall to he , and every farthing of it would be send to she . bright with youthful hope , and trustful in the rise spring of tide , which have all but release they yesterday , accord to his firm belief , he run from the Hall through the Admiral 's ground , to meet the boat which be wait for he , while he be have breakfast and council with his chief . between the Round - house and the old white gate he hear a low whistle from a clump of shrub , and turn that way , meet Tugwell . with that prince of fisherman he shake hand , accord to the manner of Springhaven , for he have learn to admire the brave habit of the man , his strong mind , and frank taciturnity . and Tugwell on his part have take a liking to the simple and cheerful young officer , who receive his suggestion , be kind to all hand , and so manfully bear the daily disappointment . 
 " nobody in there ? " ask Zeb , with one finger pointing to the Round - house ; " then sit down on this bit of bank , sir , a minute . Less chance to be shoot at by any french ship . " 
 the bit of bank really be a bit of hollow , where no one could see they from the beach , or lane , or even from the Round - house . Scudamore , who understand his man , obey ; and Tugwell come to his bearing on a clump of fern before he . 
 " how much will Government pay the chap as fetch she out of that snug little berth ? for division to self and partner , how much ? for division to self and family , how much ? " 
 " I have think about that , " the lieutenant answer , with little surprise at the question , but much at the secrecy throw around it ; " and I think it would be very unsafe to count upon get a penny beyond the Admiral 's term double pay for the day that we float she . " 
 Captain Zebedee shake his head , and the golden sheaf of his olympian beard ruffle and crisp , as to an adverse wind . 
 " can not   a'most believe it , " he reply , with his bright eye steadily settle on Scudamore 's ; " the English country , as I belong to , can not   quite ' a coom to that yet ! " 
 " I fear that it have indeed , " Blyth answer , very gravely ; " at least I be sure of this , Master Tugwell , that you must not look forward to any bounty , bonus , or premium , or whatever it be call , from the Authorities who should provide it . but for myself , and the difference it will make to I whether we succeed or fail , I shall be happy , and will give my word , to send you 50 pound , to be divide at your discretion among the smack . I mean , of course , as soon as I get pay . " 
 Scudamore be frighten by the size of his own promise ; for he have never yet own 50 pound in the solid . and then he be scared at the wholesale loss of so large a sum to his mother . 
 " never fear , lad , " honest Tugwell reply , for the young man 's face be fair to read ; " we will not take a farden of thy hard airning , not a brass farden , so help I Bob ! gentlefolk have so much call for money , as none of we know nothing of . and thou hast help to save all the lot of we from Frenchies , and be the most forward , as I hear tell . but if we could ' a get 50 pound out of Government , why so much more for we , and none the less for they . but a Englishman must do his duty , in reason , and when ' a do not   hurt his self by the same . there be a change in the weather , as forbid more sport . you shall have the Blunder off to - morrow , lad . would not   do to be too sudden like . " 
 " I fear I be very stupid , Master Tugwell . but I do not   see how you can manage it so surely , after labour nine day all in vain . " 
 Zebedee hesitate half a moment , betwixt discretion and the pride of knowledge . then the latter vanquish and relieve his mind . 
 " I trust in your honour , sir , of course , to keep I clear . I might have bring ' e off the Pig , first day , or second to the late , if it be sound business . but with winter time come , and the week 's fishing lose , our duty to our family and this place be to pull ' e on hard , sir , to pull ' e aground firm ; and with the help of the Lord we have a - do it well . we be not   a - go to kill the goose as lay the golden egg . no offence to you , sir ; it be not   you as be the goose . " 
 Master Tugwell rub his pocket with a very pleasant smile , and then put his elbow on his great square knee , and complacently study the lieutenant 's small mind . 
 " I can understand how you could do such a thing , " say Scudamore , after he have rub his eye , and then look away for fear of laugh , " but I can not understand by what power on earth you be enable to look at I and tell I this . for nine day you have be pay every night , and pay pretty well , as you yourself acknowledge , to haul a ship off a shoal ; and all the time you have be haul she hard upon it ! " 
 " young man , " reply Tugwell , with just indignation , " a hofficer should be above such word . but I forgive ' e , and hope the Lord will do the same , with allowance for youth and ill - convenience . I might ' a know no well , at your age and training . " 
 " but what be you pay for , just answer I that , unless it be to pull the Blonde off the sand - bank ? and how can you pretend that you have do an honest thing by pull she further upon the bank ? " 
 " I will not   ask ' e , sir , to beg my pardon for say what never man say to I , without read the word of the contraction ; " Zeb pull out a paper from his hat , and spread it , and lay a stone at every corner ; " this contraction be sign by yourself and Squire Darling , for and on behalf of the kingdom ; and the word be for we to give our service , to pull , haul , tow , warp , or otherwise as direct , release , relieve , set free , and rescue the aforesaid ship , or bark , or vessel , craft , or " 
 " please not to read all that , " cry Scuddy , " or a gale of wind may come before you be half - way through . it be Admiral Darling 's lawyer , Mr. Furkettle , who prepare it , to prevent any chance of misunderstanding . " 
 " provide always , " continue Tugwell , slowly , " and the meaning , condition , purport , object , sense , and intention of this agreement be , that the aforesaid Zebedee Tugwell shall submit in everything to the order , command , instruction , counsel , direction , injunction , authority , or discretion , whether in writing or otherwise , of the aforesaid " 
 " I would not interrupt you if I could help it " Scudamore have a large stock of patience   enhance by laborious practice at Stonnington , but who might abide , when time be precious , to see Zebedee feel his way with his finger along the bottom and to the end of every word , and then stop to congratulate himself at the conquest of every one over two syllable ? " but excuse I for say that I know all these condition ; and the tide will be lose , if we stop here . " 
 " very good , sir ; then you see how it standeth . who hath break they ? not we ! we be pay for to haul ; and haul we do , accord to superior order . she ground from the south , with the tide make upp'ard , somewhere about three - quarter flow ; and the squire , and you , and all the rest of ' e , without no knowledge of the Pig whatsomever , fasten all your pulley - haulie by the starn , and say , ' now pull ! ' and pull we do , to the tune of sixteen guineas a day for the good of Springhaven . " 
 " and you know all the time that it be wrong ! well , I never come across such people . but surely some one of you would have have the honesty I beg pardon , I mean the good - will to tell we . I can scarcely imagine some forty man and boy preserve such a secret for nine whole day , haul for their life in the wrong direction , and never even by a wink or smile " 
 " Springhaven be like that , " say Master Tugwell , proudly ; " we do a thing one and all together , even if we reason consarne it . and over and above that , sir , there be but two man in Springhaven as understand the White Pig , bar my own self . the young ' uns might ' a smell a rat , but they know well than to say so . where the Blunder ground and she hath airne her name , for the good of the dweller in this village be the chine of the Pig ; and he hath a double back , with the outer side high than the inner one . she come through a narrow nick in his outer back , and then plump , stem on , upon the inner one . you may haul at she forever by the starn , and there she will ' bide , or lie up again on the other back . but bring her weight forrard , and tackle she by the head , and off she come , the very next fair tide ; for she hath berth herself over the big of it , and there bain't   but a basketful under her forefoot . " 
 " then , Master Tugwell , let we lose no time , but have at she at once , and be do with it . " Scudamore jump up , to give action to his word ; but Tugwell sate aground still , as firmly as the Blonde . 
 " beg of your pardon , sir , I would invite of you not to be in no sart of hurry hasting forwardly . we must come off gradual , after hold on so long there , and well to have Squire Darling round the corner first , sir . not that he knoweth much about it , but ' a might make believe to do so . and when ' a hath see we pull wrong way , a hundred and twenty guineas ' worth , a ' might grudge we the reward for pull right way . I have   a - know ' un get into that state of mind , although it be his own tenant . " 
 the lieutenant be at length compel to laugh , though for many reason loth to do so . but the quiet contempt for the Admiral 's skill , and the brief hint about his character , touch his sense of the ludicrous more softly than the explanation of his own mishap . then the Captain of Springhaven smile almost imperceptibly ; for he be a serious man , and his smile be accustom to be interior . 
 " I do hear tell , " he say , stroke his beard , for fear of have discompose it , " that the squire be under compulsion to go a bit westward again to - morrow . and when he cometh back he would be glad to find we have manage the job without he . no fear of the weather break up afore Friday , and she can not   take no harm for a tide or two . if you think well , sir , let we heave at she to - day , as afore , by superior order . then it come into your mind to try t'other end a bit , and you shift all the gun and heavy lumber forrard to give weight to the bow and lift the starn , and off she will glide at the first tug to - morrow , so sure as my name be Zebedee . but mind one thing , sir , that you keep she , when you have   get she . she hath too many furriner native aboard of she , to be any way to my liking . " 
 " oh , there need be no doubt about they , " reply Blyth ; " we treat they like ourselves , and they be all upon their honour , which no Frenchman ever think of breaking . but my man will be tired of wait for I . I shall leave you to your plan , Tugwell . " 
 " ah , I know the natur ' of they young man , " Captain Zebedee muse , as he sate in his hollow , till Scudamore 's boat be far away ; " they be full of scruple for themselves and faith in other fellow . he will never tell Squire , nor no one else here , what I lay he under , and the laugh would go again ' he , if he do . we shall get to - day 's money , I reckon , as well as double pay to - morrow , and airn it . well , it might ' a be well , and it might be wuss . " 
 about two mile westward of the brook , some rock mark the end of the fine Springhaven sand and the beginning of a far more rugged beach , the shingle and flint shelf of Pebbleridge . here the chalk of the Sussex backbone   which have be plump over and sleek by the flesh of the valley   jut forth , like the scrag of a skeleton , and crumble in low but rugged cliff into the flat domain of sea . here the landing be bad , and the anchorage bad , for a slippery shale reject the fluke , and the water be usually keep in a fidget between the order of the west wind and scurry of the tide . 
 this very quiet morning , with the wind off shore , and scarcely enough of it to comb the sea , four smart - look Frenchmen , with red cap on their head , be barely hold way upon the light gig of the Blonde , while their captain be keep an appointment with a stranger , not far from the weed - strew line of wave . in a deep rocky channel where a land - spring rise   which be still - bear except at low water , and laver and dilsk and claw - coral show that the sea have more dominion there than the sky , two man stand face each other ; and their word , though belong to the most polite of tongue , be not so courteous as might be . each man stand with his back to a rock not touch it , however , because it be too wet one be as cold and as firm as the rock , the other like the sea , tumultuous . the passionate man be Captain Desportes , and the cold one Caryl Carne . 
 " then you wish I to conclude , monsieur , " Carne speak as one offer repentance , " that you will not do your duty to your country , in the subject set before you ? I pray you to deliberate , because your position hang upon it . " 
 " never ! never ! once more , Captain , with all thank for your consideration , I refuse . my duty to my own honour have first place . after that my duty to my country . speak of it no more , sir ; it quite be to insult I . " 
 " no , Captain Desportes , it be nothing of that kind , or I should not be here to propose it . your parole be give only as long as your ship continue upon the sand . the moment she float , you be liberate . then be the time for a noble stroke of fortune . be it not so , my dear friend ? " 
 " no , sir . this affair be impossible . my honour have be pledge , not until the ship be float , but until I be myself set free in France . I be sorry not to see thing as you see they for I ; but the question be for my own consideration . " 
 Captain Desportes have resent , as an honest man must do , especially when more advanced in year , the other 's calm settlement , without invitation , of matter which concern his own conscience . and as most mankind if at all perceptive like or dislike one another at a glance , desporte , be very quick and warm of nature , have feel at first sight a strong repulsion from the cold and arrogant man who face he . his age be at least twice that of Carne , he have see much service in the well day of France , and have rise slowly by his own skill and valour ; he know that his future in the service depend upon his decision in this matter , and he have a large family to maintain . but his honour be pledge , and he hold fast by it . 
 " there be one consideration , " Carne reply , with rancour slowly kindling in his great black eye , " which precede all other , even that of honour , in the mind of a trust officer . it be not that of patriotism which have not its usual weight with monsieur but it be that of obedience , discipline , loyalty , faith , towards those who have place faith in he . Captain Desportes , as commander of a ship , be entrust with property ; and that confidence be the first debt upon his honour . " 
 to desporte , as to most man of action , the right be plain than the reason . he know that this final plea be unsound , but he do not see how to contest it . so he come back to fact , which be easy for he . 
 " how be I to know , monsieur , what would be the wish of those who have entrust I with my position ? you be place in authority by some mean here , in your own country , but against it . that much you have prove to I , by paper . but your credential be general only . they do not apply to this especial case . if the Chief of the State know my position , he would wish I to act as I mean to act , for the honour and credit of our nation . " 
 " be you then acquaint with his signature ? if so , perhaps you will verify this , even if you be resolve to reject it . " 
 Carne draw a letter from an inner pocket , and carefully unfold it . there be many word and minute direction upon various subject , write by the hand of the most minute , and yet most comprehensive , of mankind . 
 " there be nothing in this that concern you , " he say , after show the date , only four day old , " except these few word at the end , which perhaps you may like to read , before you make final decision . the signature of the Chief be clear . " 
 Captain Desportes read aloud " it be of the utmost importance to I , that the Blonde should not be capture by the enemy , as the Ville d'Anvers have be . you tell I that it be ashore near you , and the captain and crew upon parole , to be liberate if they assist in the extrication of the vessel . this must not be . in the service of the state , I demand that they consider not at all their parole . the well - know speed and light draught of that vessel have render she almost indispensable to I . when the vessel be free , they must rise upon the enemy , and make for the near of our port without delay . upon this I insist , and place confidence in your establish courage and management , to accomplish it to my satisfaction . " 
 " your order be clear enough , " say Caryl Carne . " what reason can you give , as an officer of the Republic , for disobey they ? " 
 desporte look at his ship in the distance , and then at the sea and the sky , with a groan , as if he be bid farewell to they . Carne feel sure that he have prevail , and a smile shed light , but not a soft light , on his hard pale countenance . 
 " be in no rash haste , " say the french sea - captain , and he could not have find word more annoying to the cold proud man before he ; " I do not recognise in this mandate the voice of my country , of the honourable France , which would never say , ' let my son break their word of honour ! ' this man speak , not as Chief of a grand state , not as leader of noble gentleman , but as Emperor of a society of serfs . France be no empire ; she be a grand nation of spirit , of valour , above all , of honour . the English have treat I , as I would treat they , with kindness , with largeness , with confidence . in the name of fair France , I will not do this thing . " 
 Carne be naturally pale , but now he grow white with rage , and his black eye flash . 
 " France will be an empire within six month ; and your honour will be put upon prison diet , while your family starve for the sake of it . " 
 " if I ever meet you under other circumstance , " reply the brave Frenchman , now equally pale , " I shall demand reparation , sir . " 
 " with great pleasure , " reply Carne , contemptuously ; " meanwhile monsieur will have enough to do to repair his broken fortune . " 
 Captain Desportes turn his back , and give a whistle for his crew , then step with much dignity into his boat . " to the Blonde , lad , " he cry , " to the unsullied blonde ! " then he sate , look at she , and stroke his grizzle beard , into which there come trickle a bitter tear or two , as he think of his wife and family . he have act well ; but , accord to the measure of the present world , unwisely . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 no concern of ours 

 the very next morning it be know to the faithful of Springhaven that the glory of the place would be treble that day , and its income increase desirably . that day , the fair stranger   which have so long awaken the admiration of the woman , and the jealousy of the man   would by the consummate skill of Captain Zeb who have triumph over all the officer of the british Navy float forth magnificently from her narrow bed , hoist her white sail , and under british ensign salute the new fort , and shape a course for Portsmouth . that she have stick fast and in danger so long be simply because the cocked hat be too proud to give ear to the wisdom in an old otter - skin . now Admiral Darling be baffle and go ; and Captain Tugwell would show the world what he could do , and what stuff his man be make of , if they only have their way . from old Daddy Stakes , the bald father of the village , to Mrs. Caper junior 's baby equally bald , but with a crop as sure of come as mustard and cress beneath his flannel some in arm , some on leg , some upon brave crutch , all be abroad in the soft air from the west , which have steal up under the stiff steel skirt of the east wind , exactly as wise Captain Zeb predict . 
 " my dear , " say Mrs. Twemlow to the solid Mrs. Stubbard , for a very sweet friendship have spring up between these lady , and would last until their interest should happen to diverge , " this will be a great day for my dear husband 's parish . perhaps there be no other parish in the kingdom capable of act as Springhaven have , so obedient , so disciplined , so faithful to their contract ! I be tell that they even pull the vessel more aground , in preference to set up their own opinion . I be tell that as soon as the Admiral be go for between you and I he be a little overbearing , with the very good intention in the world , but too confident in his own sagacity then that clever but exceedingly modest young man , Lieutenant Scudamore , be allow at last to listen to our great man Tugwell , who have long be the oracle of the neighbourhood about the sea , and the weather , and all question of that kind . and between you and I , my dear , the poor old Admiral seem a little bit jealous of his reputation . and what do you think he say before he go , which show his high opinion of his own ability ? Tugwell say something in his rough and ready way , which , I suppose , put his mightiness upon the high rope , for he shout out in everybody 's hearing , ' I will tell you what it be , my man , if you can get she off , by any of your ' something I must not repeat ' device , I will give you fifty guineas , five - and - twenty for yourself , and the rest to be divide among these other fellow . ' then Zebedee pull out a testament from his pocket , for he be a man of deep religious conviction , and can read almost all the easy place , though he think most of the hard one , and he make his son Dan   who be a great scholar , as they say , and a very fine - look youth as well   put down at the end what the Admiral have say . now , what do you think of that , dear Mrs. Stubbard ? " 
 " I think , " reply that strong - minded lady , " that Tugwell be an arrant old fox ; and if he get the fifty guineas , he will put every farthing into his own pocket . " 
 " oh , no ! he be honest as the day itself . he will take his own twenty - five , and then leave the rest to settle whether he should share in their twenty - five . but we must be quick , or we shall lose the sight . quite a number of people be come from inland . how wonderfully quickly these thing spread ! they come the first day , and then make up their mind that nothing could be do , and so they stop at home . but now , here they be again , as if by magic ! if the ship get off , it will be know halfway to London before nightfall . but I see Captain Stubbard go up the hill to your charming battery . that show implicit faith in Tugwell , to return the salute of the fair captive ! it be indeed a proud day for Springhaven ! " 
 " but it be not   do yet . and perhaps it will not   be do . I would rather trust officer of the navy than people who catch crab and oyster . I would go up to the battery , to laugh at my husband , but for the trick the child play I . my authority be go , at the very first puff of smoke . how child do delight in that vile gunpowder ! " 
 " so they ought , in the present state of our country , with five hundred thousand of Frenchmen come . my dear Mrs. Stubbard , how thankful we should be to have child who love gunpowder ! " 
 " but not when they blow up their mother , ma'am . " 
 " oh , here come Eliza ! " cry Mrs. Twemlow . " I be so glad , because she know everything . I think we have miss she . my dear child , where be Faith and Dolly Darling go ? there be so many stranger about to - day that the well class should keep together . " 
 " here be three of we at any rate , " reply the young lady , who consider her mother old - fashioned : " enough to secure one another 's sanctity from the low order . faith have go on to the headland , with that heroic mannikin , Johnny . dolly be to follow , with that shank maid to protect she , as soon as her hat be trim , or some such era . but I will answer for it that she lose herself in the crowd , or some fib of that sort . " 
 " Eliza ! " say her mother , and very severely , because Mrs. Stubbard be present , " I be quite astonished at your talking so . you might do the great injury to a very lively and harmless , but not over - prudent girl , if any one hear you who would repeat it . we all know that the Admiral be so wrap up in dolly that he let she do many thing which a mother would forbid . but that be no concern of our ; and once for all , if such thing must be say , I beg that they may not be say by you . " 
 in the present age , Mrs. Twemlow would have get sharp answer . but her daughter only look aggrieved , and glance at Mrs. Stubbard , as if to say , " well , time will show whether I deserve it . " and then they hasten on , among the bad class , to the headland . 
 not only all the fishing - smack , and Captain Stubbard 's galley , but every boat half as sound as a hat , might now be see near the ground vessel , prepare to labour or look on . and though the White Pig be allow to be three - quarter of a mile from the near point , the mighty voice of Captain Zeb ride over the flicker breadth of sea , and through the soft babble of the wave ashore . the wind be light from southwest , and the warp be nearly in the same direction now , the Blonde begin to set her course , to catch a lift of air , when the tide should come busily work under she . and this would be the good tide since she take the ground , last Sunday week , when the spring be go off . as soon as the hawser be make fast , and the shout of Zebedee redouble with great strength   both of sound and of language , and the long rope lift with a flash of splash , and a creak of heavy wood , and the cry be , " with a will ! with a will , my gay lad ! " every body have a sound eye in it be gaze intently , and every heart be flutter , except the lovely eye and quick heart in all Springhaven . 
 Miss dolly have make up her mind to go , and would have have warm word ready for any one rash enough to try to prevent she . but a very short note which be put into her hand about 10 A.M. distract she . 
 " if you wish to do I a real service , accord to your kind word of Saturday , be in the upper shrubbery at half past eleven ; but tell no one except the bearer . you will see all that happen well there than on the beach , and I will bring a telescope . " 
 dolly know at once who have write this , and admire it all the more because it be follow by no signature . for year she have long for a bit of romance ; and the common - sense of all the world irk she . she know as well as possible that what she ought to do be to take this letter to her sister Faith , and be guide by her advice about it . faith be her eld by three year or more , and as steadfast as a rock , yet as tender as young moss . there be no fear that Faith would ride the high horse with she , or lie down the law severely ; she be much more likely to be too indulgent , though certain not to play with wrong . 
 all this the young sister know , and therefore resolve to eschew that knowledge . she like her own way , and she mean to have it , in a harmless sort of way ; her own high spirit should be her guide , and she be old enough now to be her own judge . Mr. Carne have save her sister 's life , when she stand up in that senseless way ; and if Faith have no gratitude , dolly must feel , and endeavour to express it for she . 
 reasoning thus , and much well than this , she be very particular about her hat , and french pelerine of fluted lawn , and frock of pale violet trim on either side with gather muslin . her little heart flutter at be draw in , when it should have be plump up to her neck , and very nearly display to the public ; but her father be stern upon some point , and never would hear of the classic discovery . she have not even grecian sandal , nor a ' surprise fan " to flutter from her wrist , nor hair oil into flat lesbian coil , but freedom of rich young tress , and of graceful figure , and taper limb . there be no one who could say her nay , of the lover of maiden nature . 
 however , maidens must be discreet , even when most adventurous ; and so she take another maid to help she , of respected but not romantic name Jenny Shanks , who have bring she that letter . Jenny be much pretty than her name , and the ground she trod on be worship by many , even when her shoe be down at heel . especially in this track remain the fine part of Charley Bowles 's heart   while the coarser be up against the Frenchmen , as well as a good deal of Mr. Prater 's nephew 's , and of several other sole - fisher . this enable Jenny to enter kindly into tender question . and she fetch her Sunday bonnet down the trap - ladder where she keep it because the other maid be so nasty as soon as her letter be deliver . 
 " your place , Jenny , be to go behind , " Miss Dolly say , with no small dignity , as this zealous attendant keep step for step with she , and swing her red arm against the lady 's fair one . " I be come upon important business , Jenny , such as you can not understand , but may stay at a proper distance . " 
 " Lor , miss , I be sure I beg your pardon . I think it be a kind of coorting - match , and you might be glad of my experience . " 
 " such thing I never do , and have no idea what you mean . I shall be much oblige to you , Jenny , if you will hold your tongue . " 
 " oh yes , miss ; no fear of my tell anybody . wild horse would never pull a syllable out of I . the young man be so aggravating that I keep my proper distance from they . but the mind must be make up , at one time or other . " 
 dolly look down at she with vast contempt , which she would not lower herself by express , even with favour of time and place . then turn a corner of the grassy walk , between ground - ash and young larch , they come upon an opening plant round with ilex , arbutus , juniper , and laurel , and back by one of the rock which form the outwork of the valley . from a niche in this rock , like the port - hole of a ship , a rill of sparkle water pour , and begin to make a noise already , cut corner 's of its own production short , in its hurry to be a brook , and then to help the sea . and across its exit from the rock   like a measure of its insignificance   a very comfortable seat be fix , so that any gentleman or even a lady with divide skirt might freely sit with one foot on either bank of this menacing but not yet very formidable stream . so that on the whole this nook of shelter under the coronet of rock be a favourite place for a sage cock - pheasant , or even a woodcock in wintry weather . 
 upon that bench   where the Admiral love to sit , in the afternoon of peace and leisure , observe with a spy - glass the manoeuvre of his tranquil fishing fleet   Caryl Carne be sit now , with his long and strong leg well spread out , his shoulder comfortably settle back , and his head cast a little on one side , as if he be try to compute his property . then , as dolly come into the opening , he arise , make a bow beyond the compass of any true Briton , and swing his hat , come to meet she . dolly make a curtsey in the style impress upon she by her last governess but one a french lady of exceedingly high ancestry and manner and Carne recognise it as a fine thing out of date . 
 " Jenny , get away ! " say dolly word not mean for he to hear , but he have grave command of countenance . 
 " this lay I under one more obligation : " Carne speak in a low voice , and with a smile of diffidence which remind she of Scudamore , though the two smile be as different as night and day . " I have take a great liberty in ask you to come , and that multiply my gratitude for your good - will . for my own sake alone I would not have dare to sue this great favour from you , though I put it so , in terror of alarm you . but it be for my own sake also , since anything evil to you would be terrible to I . " 
 " no one can wish to hurt I , " she answer , look up at he bravely , and yet frighten by his gaze , " because I have never harm any one . and I assure you , sir , that I have many to defend I , even when my father be go from home . " 
 " it be beyond doubt . who would not rush to do so ? but it be from those who be least suspect that the danger come the bad . the most modest of all gentleman , who blush like a damsel , or the gallant officer devote to his wife and child , or the simple veteran with his star , and scar , and downright speech these be the people that do the wrong , because no one believe it be in they . " 
 " then which of the three be to carry I off from home , and friend , and family Lieutenant Scudamore , Captain Stubbard , or my own godfather , Lord Nelson ? " 
 this young man nourish a large contempt for the intellect of woman , and be therefore surprised at the quickness and spirit of the girl whom he wish to terrify . a sterner tone must be use with she . 
 " I never deal in joke , " he say , with a smile of sad sympathy for those who do ; " my life be one perpetual peril , and that restrain facetiousness . but I can make allowance for those who like it . " 
 Miss dolly , the pet child of the house , and all the people round it except the gardener , Mr. Swipes , who find she too inquisitive quick as she be , could not realise at once the possibility of be look down upon . 
 " I be sorry that you have to be so grave , " she say , " because it prevent all enjoyment . but why should you be in such continual danger ? you promise to explain it , on Saturday , only you have no time then . we be all in danger from the French , of course , if they ever should succeed in landing . but you mean something more than that ; and it seem so hard , after all your loss , that you should not be safe from harm . " 
 with all her many fault many more than she dream of fair dolly have a warm and gentle heart , which fill her eye with tender loveliness , whenever it obtain command of they . Carne , who be watch they steadfastly for his own purpose , forget that purpose , and drop his dark eye , and lose the way to tell a lie . 
 " if I may ask you , " he say , almost stammer , and longing without knowledge for the blessing of her touch , " to to allow I just to lead you to this seat , I may perhaps be able I will not take the liberty of sit at your side but I may perhaps be able to explain as much of my affair as you can wish to hear of they , and a great deal more , I fear , a great deal more , Miss Darling . " 
 dolly blush at the rich tone in which he pronounce her name , almost as if it be an adjective ; but she allow he to take her hand , and lead she to the bench beneath the rock . then , regardless of his breech , although of fine padusoy , and his coat , though of purple velvet , he sate down on the bank of the rill at her foot , and wait for she to say something . the young lady love mainly to take the lead , but would liefer have follow suit just now . 
 " you have promise to tell I , " she say , very softly , and with an unusual timidity , which add to her face and manner almost the only charm they lack , ' some thing which I do not understand , and which I have no right to ask you of , except for your own offer . why should you , without injure any one , but only have suffer loss of all your family property , and of all your right and comfort , and live in that lonely place which use to be full of company why should you be in danger now , when you have nothing more to be rob of ? I beg your pardon I mean when all your enemy must have do their bad . " 
 " you be too young yet to understand the world , " he answer , with a well - draw sigh ; " and I hope most truly that you may never do so . in your gentle presence I can not speak with bitterness , even if I could feel it . I will not speak harshly of any one , however I may have be treat . but you will understand that my life alone remain betwixt the plunderer and their prey , and that my errand here prevent they from legally swallow up the spoil . " 
 Miss dolly 's idea of the law , in common with that of most young lady , suggest a horrible monster ravening to devour the fall . and the fall of the Carnes have long be a subject of romantic interest to she . 
 " oh , I see ! " she exclaim , with a look of deep wisdom . " I can quite understand a thing like that , from what I have hear about witness . I hope you will be very careful . my sister owe so much to you , and so do I. " 
 " you must never speak of that again , unless you wish to grieve I . I know that I have say too much about myself ; but you alone care to know anything about I ; and that beguile one out out of one 's wit . if I speak bad English , you will forgive I . I have pass so many year on the continent , and be pick up the language of my childhood very slowly . you will pardon I , when I be mislead by by my own signification . " 
 " well do ! " cry the innocent dolly . " now that be the very first piece of bad English you have use , to the good of my belief , and I be rather quick in that . but you have not yet explain to I my own danger , though you ask I to come here for that purpose , I believe . " 
 " but you shall not be so ; you shall not be in danger . my life shall be give for your defence . what import my peril compare with your ? I be not of cold blood . I will sacrifice all . have faith in I purely , and all shall be do . " 
 " all what ? " dolly ask , with a turn of common - sense , which be the most provoking of all thing sometimes ; and she look at he steadily , to follow up her question . 
 " you can not be persuade that you be in any danger . it be possible that I have be too anxious . do you speak the french language easily ? do you comprehend it , when speak quickly ? " 
 " not a word of it . I have have to learn , of course , and can pronounce very well , my last mistress say ; but I can not make it out at all in the way the french people pronounce it , when one come to talk with they . " 
 " it be very wrong of they , and the loss be theirs . they expect we to copy they even in their language , because we do it in everything else . pardon I one moment . may I look at the great enterprise which be to glorify Springhaven ? it be more than kind of you to be here instead of there . but this , as I venture to say , be a far well place to observe the operation . your word remind I of Captain Desportes , who have be , I think , your father 's guest . a very gallant sailor , and fame for the most unexpected exploit . without doubt , he would have capture all three ship , if he have not contrive to run his own aground . " 
 " how could he capture his own ship ? I think that you never deal in joke . but if you dislike they , you seem to be fond of a little mystery . I like the french captain very much , and he take the trouble to speak slowly for I . my father say that he bear his misfortune nobly , and like a perfect gentleman . Mr. Scudamore admire he , and they be great friend . and yet , sir , you seem inclined to hint that I be in danger from Captain Desportes ! " 
 " ha ! she be afloat ! they have succeed . I think that they have so arrange it . the brave ship spread her pinion . how clever the people of Springhaven be ! if you will condescend to look through this glass , you will see much embracing of the Saxon and the Gaul , or rather , I should say , of the Saxon by the Gaul . Old Tugwell be not fond to be embrace . " 
 " oh , let I see that ! I must see that ! " cry dolly , with all reserve and caution fly ; " to see Capp'en Zeb in the arm of a Frenchman yes , I declare , two have get he , if not three , and he put his great back against the mast to disentangle it . oh , what will he do next ? he have knock down two , in reply to excessive cordiality . what wonderful creature frenchman be ! how kind it be of you to show I this ! but excuse I , Mr. Carne ; there will be twenty people come to the house before I can get back almost . and the ship will salute the battery , and the battery will return it . look ! there go a great puff of smoke already . they can see I up here , when they get to that corner . " 
 " but this spot be not private ? I trust that I have not intrude . your father allow a sort of foot - path through this upper end of his ground ? " 
 " yes , to all the villager , and you be almost one of they ; there be no right of way at all ; and they very seldom come this way , because it lead to nowhere . faith be fond of sit here , to watch the sea , and think of thing . and so be I sometimes , I mean . " 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 long - PIPE TIMES 

 Daily now the roar and clank of war grow loud and louder , across the narrow sea , and up the river , and around the quiet home of England . if any unusual cloud of dust , any move shade , appear afar , if the tramp of horse in the lane be hear , or neigh of a colt from the four - cross road , people at dinner would start up and cry , " the French , the French have land ! " while the man in the field would get near the hedge to peep through it , and then run away down the ditch . 
 but the nation at large , and the govern power , certainly be not in any great fright . Nay , rather they err , if at all , on the side of tranquillity and self - confidence ; as one who have be fire at with blank - cartridge forget that the click of the trigger will not tell he when the bullet have be drop in . the bullet be there this time ; and it miss the heart of Britannia , only through the failure of the powder to explode all at once . 
 it be some year before all this be know ; even Nelson have no perception of it ; and although much alarm be indulge in on the sly , the few who give voice to it be condemn as faint - hearted fellow and " alarmist . " how then could Springhaven , which never have fear any enemy , or even neighbour , depart from its habit , while still an eye - witness of what have befall the Frenchman ? and in this state of mind , have plenty to talk of , it do not   as otherwise must have be do   attach any deep importance to the strange vagary of the London Trader . 
 that great Institution , and Royal Exchange , as well as central embassy of Fashion , have lately become most uncertain in its date , which for year have announce to loose - reckon housewife the day of the week and the hour to buy candle . instead of come home on a Saturday eve , in the van of all the fishing fleet , return their cheer and those of customer on the beach , the London Trader arrive anywhen , as often in the dark as daylight , never take the ground at all , and give a very wide berth to Captain Zeb Tugwell , his craft , and his crew . at time she land package big and bulky , which would have be search   in spite of London bill of lading   if there have be any Custom - house here , or any keen Officer of Customs . but these be deliver by daylight always , and cart by Mr. Cheeseman 's horse direct to his master 's cellar ; and Cheeseman have tell everybody that his wife , have come into a little legacy , be resolve in spite of his advice to try a bit of speculation in hardware , through her sister mile away at Uckfield . Most of the neighbour like Mrs. Cheeseman , because she give good weight   scarcely half an ounce short , with her conscience to her family throw in against it , as well as the sound piece of gossip to be have for the money in Springhaven . and therefore they wish she well , and box their child 's ear if they find they poke nose into her package . Mrs. Cheeseman shake her head when enquire of on the subject , and say with grave truth that the Lord alone can tell how any of poor people 's doing may turn out . 
 some other thing puzzle the village , and would in more sensible time have produce a sensation . why do Mr. Cheeseman now think nothing of as much as three spot on his white linen apron , even in the first half of the week ? why be he seldom at John Prater 's now , and silent in a corner even when he do appear ? what be become of the ruddy polish , like that of a Winter Redstrake , on his cheek , which make a man long for a slice of his ham ? why , the only joke he have make for the last three month be a terrible one at his own expense . he have rush down the street about ten o'clock one morning , at a pace quite insane for a middle - aged man , with no hat on his head and no coat on his back , but the string of his apron dash wild on the breeze , and his big ham - carver make flash in his hand . it be think that some boy must have run off with a penny , or some visitor change a bad shilling ; but no , there be no such good reason to give for it . 
 the yearning of all age , especially dotage , be for a relapse to the infantile state when all plaything be hold in common . and this wise of all place   in its own opinion   have a certain eccentric inclination towards the poetic perfection when it will be impossible to steal , because there will be nothing leave worth steal . still everybody here stick to his own right , and would knock down anybody across they , though find it very nice to talk as if other could have no such standing - point . moreover , they have sufficient common - sense to begin with the right end foremost , and to take a tender interest in one another 's good , moveable , handy , and divisible ; instead of hunger after hungry land , which feed nobody , until itself well feed and tend , and be as useless without a master as a donkey or a man be . the knowledge of these rudiment of civilization be not yet lose at Springhaven ; and while everybody feel and even prove his desire to share a neighbour 's trouble , nobody meddle with any right of his , save his right to be assist . 
 among they throve the old english feeling of respect for ancient family , which be nowadays call " toadyism " by those whom it baulk of robbery . to trade upon this good - will be almost as low a thing as any man can do , even when he do it for good us . but to trade upon it , for the harm of those who feel it , and the ruin of his country , be without exception the very low and this be what Caryl Carne be at . 
 he look at the matter in a wholly different light , and would have stab any man who put it as above ; for his sense of honour be as quick and hot as it be crook and misguide . his father have be a true Carne , of the old stamp hot - blooded , headstrong , stubborn , wayward , narrow - minded , and often arrogant ; but to balance these fault and many other truthful , generous , kind - hearted , affectionate , staunch to his friend , to his inferior genial , loyal to his country , and respectful to religion . and he might have do well , but for two sad evil he take a burdened property , and he plunge into a bad marriage . 
 his wife , on the other hand , might have do well , if she have marry almost anybody else . but her nature be too like his own , with feminine vanity and caprice , french conceit , and the pride of noble birth in the proud age of nobility harden all her fault , and hammer the rivet of her strong self - will . to these little difficulty must be add the difference of religion ; and though neither of they care two pin for that , it be a matter for crossed dagger . a pound of feather weigh as much as   and in some poise more than   a pound of lead , and the leaden - head squire and the feather - head Madame swing always at opposite end of the beam , until it break between they . tale of rough conflict , imprisonment , starvation , and even vile blow , be tell about they for several year ; and then " Madame la Comtesse "   as her husband disdainfully call she   disappear , carry off her one child , Caryl . she be still of very comely face and form ; and the Squire make known to all whom it concern , and many whom it do not concern , that his french wife have run away with a young Frenchman , accord to the habit of her race and kind . in support of this charge he have nothing whatever to show , and his friend disbelieve it , know he to be the last man in the world to leave such a wrong unresented . 
 during the last three generation the fortune of the Carnes have be decline , slowly at first , and then fast and fast ; and now they fall with the final crash . the lady of high birth and great beauty have bring nothing else into the family , but rather have impoverish it by her settlement , and wild extravagance afterwards . her husband Montagu Carne stave off the evil day just for the present , by raise a large sum upon second mortgage and the security of a trustful friend . but this sum be dissipate , like the rest ; for the squire , be deeply wound by his wife 's desertion , prove to the world his indifference about it by plunge into still more reckless way . he have none to succeed he ; for he vow that the son of the adulteress as he call she should never have Carne Castle ; and his last mad act be to buy five - and - twenty barrel of powder , wherewith to blow up his ancestral home . but ere he could accomplish that stroke of business he stumble and fall down the old chapel step , and be find the next morning by faithful Jeremiah , as cold as the ivy which have catch his foot , and as dead as the stone he would have send to heaven . 
 no marvel that his son have no love for his memory , and little for the land that give he birth . in very early day this boy have show that his french blood be predominant . he would bite , and kick , and scratch , instead of strike , as an English child do , and he never care for dog or horse , neither worship he the gamekeeper . France be the proper land for he , as his mother always say with a sweet proud smile , and his father with a sneer , or a brief word now condemn . and France be the land for he   as fact ordain   to be nourish , and teach , and grow into tall manhood , and form into the principle and habitude and character which every nation stamp upon the nature of its member . 
 however , our strong point like that of all other be absolute freedom from prejudice ; and the few english people who meet Caryl Carne be well pleased with his difference from themselves . even the enlightened fisherman , imbue with a due contempt for Crappos , feel a kindly will towards he , and be touch by his return to a ruin home and a lonely life . but the woman , romantic as they ought to be , feel a tender interest in a young man so handsome and so unlucky , who lift his hat to they , and pay his way . 
 among the rise spirit of the place , who like to take a large view , on the strength of more education , than their father have find confirm by life , Dan Tugwell be perhaps the foremost . in the present day he might have be a hot radical , even a socialist ; but thing be not come to that pass yet among people bring up to their duty . and Dan 's free sentiment have not be work by those who make a trade of such work now . so that he be pleased and respectful , instead of carp and contradictory , when person of high position than his own would discuss the condition of the time with he . Carne have discover this , although as a rule he say little to his neighbour , and for reason of his own he be strive to get a good hold upon this young fellow . he know that it could not be do in a moment , nor by any common corruption ; the mind of the youth be keen , clear - sight , and simple by reason of soundness . then Carne accidentally hear of something , which encourage and help he in his design upon Dan . 
 Business be slack upon the sea just now , but unusually active upon land , a tide of gold have flow into Springhaven , and bubble up in frying - pan and sparkle in new bonnet . the fishing fleet have capture the fine french frigate accord to feminine history that ever endeavour to capture they . after such a prisoner , let the fish go free , till hunger should spring again in the human breast , or the part that stand up under it . the hero of the whole   unlike most hero   have not succeed in ruin himself by his service to his country , but be able to go about pat his pocket , with an echo in his heart , every time it tinkle , that a quantity more to come into it be lie lock up in a drawer at home . these be the thing that breed present happiness in a noble human nature , all else be either of the future or the past ; and this be the reason why gold outweigh everything that can be say against it . 
 Captain Tugwell , in his pithy style , be will not to divide all human life into two distinctive tense the long - pipe time and the short - pipe time . the long - pipe time be of ease and leisure , comfort in the way of hot victual and cool pot , the stretching of leg without strain of muscle , and that ever - fresh well - spring of delight to the hard worker , the censorial but not censorious contemplation of equally fine fellow , equally lazy , yet peg hard , because of nothing in their pocket to tap . such be the golden period of standing , or , still well , sit with his back against a tree , and a cool yard of clay between his gently smile lip , shave with his girdle - knife a cake of rich tobacco , and then mill it complacently betwixt his horny palm , with his resolute eye relax into a gentle gaze at the labour sea , and the part   where his supper soon would be   warm into a fine condition for it , by good - will towards all the world . as for the short - pipe time , with a bitter gale dash the cold spray into his eye , leg drench with sleet , and shiver to the fork , and shoulder rack with rheumatism against the groaning mast , and the stump of a pipe keep chatter with his tooth away with all thought of such hardship now , except what would serve to fatten present comfort . 
 but fatherly feeling and sense of right compel Captain Zeb to check idle enjoyment from go too far i. e. , far than himself . every other member of his family but himself , however good the time might be , must work away as hard as ever , and earn whatever victual it should please the Lord to send they . there be always a job to be find , he know that , if a young man or maid have a mind for it ; and " no silver no supper " be the order of his house . his eld son Dan be the first to be drive for a good example to the young one and now he be set to work full time and overtime , upon a heavy job at Pebbleridge . 
 Young Daniel be not at all afraid of work , whenever there be any kind of skill to be show , or bodily strength to be prove by it . but the present task be hateful to he ; for any big - armed yokel , or common wood - hewer , might have do as much as he could do , and perhaps more , at it , and could have take the same wage over it . Mr. Coggs , of Pebbleridge , the only wheelwright within ten mile of Springhaven , have take a Government contract to supply within a certain time five hundred speak - wheel for ammunition tumbril , and as many block - wheel for small artillery ; and to hack out these latter for well man to finish be the daily task of Dan Tugwell . 
 this job swell his muscle and enlarge his calf , and fetch away all the fat he have be enable to form in lofty walk of art ; but these outward improvement be make at the expense of his inner and nobler quality . to hack and hew timber by the cubic foot , without any grow pleasure of proportion or design , to knit the brow hard for a struggle with knot , and smile the stern smile of destruction ; and then , after a long and rough walk in the dark for the equinox now be impend to be joke at by his father   who have lounge about all day , and have all his money tell into the paternal pocket , with narrow enquiry , each Saturday night . but bad of all to know that because he be not bear with a silver spoon in his mouth , he have no heart no heart that he could offer where he lay it ; but there it must lie , and be tread on in silence , while rakish - look popinjay but this reflection stop he , for it be too bitter to be think out , and fetch down his quiver hand upon his axe . enough that these thing do not tend to a healthy condition of mind , or the proper worship of the British Constitution . however , he be not quite a Radical yet . 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 FAIR in theory 

 one Saturday evening , when the dusk be just begin to smoothe the break of billow and to blunt the edge of rock , young Dan Tugwell swing his axe upon his shoulder , with the flag basket hang from it in which his food have be , and in a rather crusty state of mind set forth upon his long walk home to Springhaven . as Harry Shanks have say , and almost everybody know , an ancient foot - path , little use , but never yet obstruct , cut off a large bend of the shore , and save half a mile of plod over rock and shingle . this path be very lonesome , and infest with dark place , as well as waylay with a very piteous ghost , who never would keep to the spot where he be murder , but might appear at any shady stretch or woody corner . Dan Tugwell know three courageous man who have see this ghost , and would take good care to avoid any further interview , and his own faith in ghost be as stanch as in gold ; yet such be his mood this evening that he determine to go that way and chance it , not for the saving of distance , but simply because he have be tell in the yard that day that the foot - path be stop by the landowner . " we will see about that , " say Dan ; and now he be go to see about it . 
 for the first field or two there be no impediment , except the usual stile or gate ; but when he have cross a little woodland hollow , where the fence of the castle ground run down to the brow of the cliff , he find entrance bar . three stout oak rail have be nail across from tree to tree , and on a board above they be roughly paint : " no thoroughfare . Tresspassers will be prosecute . " for a moment the young man hesitate , his dread of the law be virtuously deep , and his mind well assure that his father would not back he up against settled authority . but the shame of turn back , and the quick sense of wrong , which have long be demand some outlet , conquer his calm judgment , and he cast the basket from his back . then swing his favourite axe , he rush at the oaken bar , and with a few stroke send they roll down the steep bank - side . 
 " that for your stoppage of a right of way ! " he cry ; " and now perhaps you will want to know who do it . " 
 to gratify this natural curiosity he draw a piece of chalk from his pocket , and write on the notice - board in large round hand , " Daniel Tugwell , son of Zebedee Tugwell , of Springhaven . " but suddenly his smile of satisfaction flee , and his face turn as white as the chalk in his hand . at the next turn of the path , a few yard before he , in the gray gloom cast by an ivy - mantled tree , stand a tall dark figure , with the right arm raise . the face be indistinct , but   as Dan 's conscience tell he   hostile and unforgiving ; there be nothing to reflect a ray of light , and there seem to be a rustle of some departure , like the spirit flee . 
 the ghost ! what could it be but the ghost ? ghost ought to be white ; but terror scorn all prejudice . probably this murder one be bury in his breech . Dan 's heart beat quick than his axe have strike ; and his foot be off to beat the ground still quick . but no Springhaven lad ever leave his baggage . Dan leap aside first to catch up his basket , and while he stoop for it , he hear a clear strong voice . 
 " who be you , that have dare to come and cut my fence down ? " 
 no ghost could speak like that , even if he could put a fence up . the inborn courage of the youth revive , and the shame of his fright make he hardier . he step forward again , catch breath as he speak , and eager to meet any man in the flesh . 
 " I be Daniel Tugwell , of Springhaven . and no live man shall deny I of my right . I have a right to pass here , and I mean to do it . " 
 Caryl Carne , look stately in his suit of black velvet , draw sword and stand behind the shattered barrier . " be you ready to run against this ? " he ask . " poor peasant , go back ; what be your right worth ? " 
 " I could smash that skewer at a blow , " say Daniel , flourish his axe as if to do it ; " but my right , as you say , be not worth the hazard . what have a poor man to do with right ? would you stop a man of your own rank , Squire Carne ? " 
 " ah , that would be a different thing indeed ! justice wear a sword , because she be of gentle birth . work - people with axis must not prate of right , or a prison will be their next one . your right be to be disdain , young man , because you be not bear a gentleman ; and your duty be to receive scorn with your hat off . you like it , probably , because your father do . but come in , Daniel ; I will not deny you of the only right an english peasant have the right of the foot to plod in his father 's footstep . the right of the hand , and the tongue , and the stomach even the right of the eye be deny he ; but by some freak of law he have some little right of foot , doubtless to enable he to go and serve his master . " 
 Dan be amazed , and his well sense arouse . why should this gentleman step out of the rank of his birth , to talk in this way ? now and then Dan himself have indulge in such idea , but always with a doubt that they be wicked , and not long enough to make they seem good in his eye . he know that some fellow at " the Club " talk thus ; but they be a lot of idle stranger , who come there chiefly to corrupt the native , and work the fish trade out of their hand . these wholesome reflection make he doubt about accept Squire Carne 's invitation ; and it would have be good for he if that doubt have prevail , though he trudge a thousand mile for it . 
 " what ! break down a fence , and then be afraid to enter ! that be the style of your race , friend Daniel . that be why you never get your right , even when you dare to talk of they . I think you be make of different stuff . go home and boast that you shatter my fence , and then fear to come through it , when I ask you . " Carne smile at his antagonist , and wave his hand . 
 Dan leap in a moment through the hang splinter , and stand before the other , with a frown upon his face . " then mind one thing , sir , " he say , with a look of defiance , while touch his hat from force of habit , " I pass here , not with your permission , but of right . " 
 " very well . let we not split word , " say Carne , who have now quite recover his native language . " I be glad to find a man that dare to claim his right , in the present state of England . I be go towards Springhaven . give I the pleasure of your company , and the benefit of your opinion upon politic . I have hear the high praise of your ability , my friend . speak to I just as you would to one of your brother fisherman . by the accident of birth I be place differently from you ; and in this country that make all the difference between a man and a dog , in our value . though you may be , and probably be , the well man more truthful , more courageous , more generous , more true - hearted , and certain to be the more humble of the two . I have be bring up where all man be equal , and the thing I see here make a new world to I . very likely these be right , and all the rest of the world quite wrong . englishman always be certain of that ; and as I belong to the privileged class , my great desire be to believe it . only I want to know how the low order the dreg , the scum , the dirt under our foot , the slave that do all the work and get starve for it how these trample wretch regard the question . if they be happy , submissive , content , delight to lick the boot of their better , my conscience will be clear to accept their homage , and their money for any stick of mine they look at . but you have amaze I by a most outrageous act . because the low order have own a path here for some century , you think it wrong that they should lose their right . explain to I , Daniel , these extraordinary sentiment . " 
 " if you please , sir , " say Dan , who be follow in the track , though invite to walk by the side , of Caryl Carne , " I can hardly tell you how the low order feel , because father and I do not   belong to they . our family have always own their own boat , and work for their own hand , this two hundred year , and , for all we know , ever since the Romans be here . we call they the low order , as come round to pick up job , and have no settlement in our village . " 
 " a sound and very excellent distinction , Dan . but as against those who make the law , and take good care to enforce they , even you   though of the upper rank here   must be count of the low order . for instance , can you look at a pheasant , or a hare , without be put into prison ? can you dine in the same room with Admiral Darling , or ask how his gout be , without be star at ? " 
 " no , sir . he would think it a great impertinence , even if I dare to do such a thing . but my father might do it , as a tenant and old neighbour . though he never get the gout , when he rid about so much . " 
 " what a matter - of - fact youth it be ! but to come to thing every man have a right to . if you save the life of one of the Admiral 's daughter , and she fall in love with you , as young people will , would you dare even lift your eye to she ? would you not be kick out of the house and the parish , if you dare to indulge the right of every honest heart ? would you dare to look upon she as a human being , of the same order of creation as yourself , who might one day be your wife , if you be true and honest , and help to break down the absurd distinction build up by vile tyranny between you ? in a word , be you a man as every man be on the continent or only an english slave , of the low class ? " 
 the hot flush of wrath , and the soft glow of shame , meet and deepen each other on the fair cheek of this ' slave " ; while his mind would not come to he to make a fit reply . that his passion for dolly , his hopeless passion , should thus be discover by a man of her own rank , but not scorn or ridicule , only pity , because of his want of manly spirit ; that he should be call a ' slave " because of honest modesty , and even encourage in his wild hope by a gentleman , who have see all the world , and look down from a lofty distance on it ; that in his true estimate of thing there should be nothing but prejudice , low and selfish prejudice , between Well , he could not think it out ; that would take he many hour ; let this large - minded man begin again . it be so dark now , that if he turn round on he , unless he be a cat , he would be no wiser . 
 " you do well to take these thing with some doubt , " continue Carne , too sagacious to set up argument , which inure even young man in their own opinion ; " if I be in your place , I should do the same . century of oppression have stamp out the plain light of truth in those who be not allow it . to I , as an individual , it be well so . Chance have ordain that I should belong to the order of those who profit by it . it be against my interest to speak as I have do . be I likely to desire that my fence should be break , my property invade , the distinction so pleasing to I set aside , simply because I consider it a false one ? no , no , friend Daniel ; it be not for I to move . the present state of thing be entirely in my favour . and I never give expression to my sense of right and wrong , unless it be surprised from I by circumstance . your bold and entirely just proceeding have force I to explain why I feel no resentment , but rather admiration , at a thing which any other land - owner in England would not rest in his bed until he have avenge . he would drag you before a bench of magistrate and fine you . your father , if I know he , would refuse to pay the fine ; and to prison you would go , with the taint of it to lie upon your good name forever . the penalty would be wrong , outrageous , ruinous ; no rich man would submit to it , but a poor man must . be this the truth , Daniel , or be it what it ought to be a scandalous misdescription of the law of England ? " 
 " no , sir ; it be true enough , and too true , I be afraid . I never think of consequence , when I use my axe . I only think of what be right , and fair , and honest , as between a man who have a right , and one who take it from he . " 
 " that be the natural way to look at thing , but never permit in this country . you be fortunate in have to deal with one who have be bring up in a juster land , where all mankind be equal . but one thing I insist upon ; and remember it be the condition of my forbearance . not a single word to any one about your dashing exploit . no gentleman in the county would ever speak to I again , if I be know to have put up with it . " 
 " I be sure , sir , " say Daniel , in a truly contrite tone , " I never should have do such an impudent thing against you , if I have only know what a nice gentleman you be . I take you for nothing but a haughty land - owner , without a word to fle at a poor fisherman . and now you go ever so far beyond what the Club doth , in speak of the right that every poor man have not . I could listen to you by the hour , sir , and learn the difference between we and abroad . " 
 " Tugwell , I could tell you thing that would make a real man of you . but why should I ? you be well as you be ; and so be we who get all the good out of you . and besides , I have no time for politic at present . all my time be occupy with stern business collect the ruin of my property . " 
 " but , sir but you come down here sometimes from the castle in the evening ; and if I might cross , without claim right of way , sometimes I might have the luck to meet you . " 
 " certainly you may pass , as often as you please , and so may anybody who set value on his right . and if I should meet you again , I shall be glad of it . you can open my eye , doubtless , quite as much as I can your . good - night , my friend , and well fortune to you ! " 
 " it be worth my while to nail up those rail , " Carne say to himself , as he go home to his ruin . " I have hook that clod , as firm as ever he hook a cod . but , thousand thunder ! what do he mean , by go away without touch his hat to I ? " 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 FOUL in practice 

 " I hope , my dear , that your ride have do you good , " say the Rector 's wife to the Rector , as he come into the hall with a wonderfully red face , one fine afternoon in October . " if colour prove health , you have gain it . " 
 " Maria , I have not be so upset for many year . Unwholesome indignation dye my cheek , and that be almost as bad as indigestion . I have have quite a turn as you woman always put it . I be never move by little thing , as you know well , and sometimes to your great disgust ; but to - day my trouble have conspire to devour I . I be not so young as I be , Maria . and what will the parish come to , if I give in ? " 
 " exactly , dear ; and therefore you must not give in . " Mrs. Twemlow reply with great spirit , but her hand be tremble as she help he to pull off his new riding - coat . " remember your own exhortation , Joshua I be sure they be beautiful last Sunday . but take something , dear , to restore your circulation . a reaction in the system be so dangerous . " 
 " not anything at present , " Mr. Twemlow answer , firmly ; " these mental care be beyond the reach of bodily refreshment . let I sit down , and be sure where I be , and then you may give I a glass of treble x. in the first place , the pony nearly kick I off , when that idiot of a Stubbard begin fire from his battery . what have I do , or my peaceful flock , that a noisy set of gun should be set up amidst we ? however , I show Juniper that he have a master , though I shall find it hard to come down - stair tomorrow . well , the next thing be that I see James Cheeseman , Church - warden Cheeseman , Buttery Cheeseman , as the bad boy call he , in the lane , in front of I not more than thirty yard , as plainly as I now have the pleasure of see you , Maria ; and while I say ' kuck ' to the pony , he be go ! I particularly wish to speak to Cheeseman , to ask he some question about thing I have observe , and especially his sad neglect of public worship a most shameful example on the part of a church - warden and I be think how to put it , affectionately yet firmly , when , to my great surprise , there be no Cheeseman to receive it ! I call at his house on my return , about three hour afterwards , have make up my mind to have it out with he , when they positively tell I or at least Polly Cheeseman do that I must be mistake about her ' dear papa , ' because he be go in the pony - shay all the way to Uckfield , and would not be back till night . " 
 " the nasty little story - teller ! " Mrs. Twemlow cry . " but I be not at all surprised at it , when I see how she have get her hair do up , last Sunday . " 
 " no ; Polly believe it . I be quite sure of that . but what I want to tell you be much strange and more important , though it can not have anything at all to do with Cheeseman . you know , I tell you I be go for a good long ride ; but I do not tell you where , because I know that you would try to stop I . but the fact be that I have make up my mind to see what Caryl Carne be at , among his owl and ivy . you remember the last time I go to the old place I knock till I be tired , but could get no answer , and the window be stop with some rusty old spiked railing , where we use to be able to get in at the side . all the other be out of reach , as you know well ; and be of a yield nature , I come sadly home . and at that time I still have some faith in your friend Mrs. Stubbard , who promise to find out all about he , by mean of Widow Shanks and the dimity - parlour . but nothing have come of that . poor Mrs. Stubbard be almost as stupid as her husband ; and as for Widow shank I be quite sure , Maria , if your nephew be plot the overthrow of King , Church , and Government , that delude woman would not listen to a word against he . " 
 " she call he a model , and a blessed martyr " Mrs. Twemlow be smile at the thought of it ; " and she say she be a woman of great penetration , and never will listen to anything . but it only show what I have always say , that our family have a peculiar power , a sort of attraction , a superior gift of knowledge of their own mind , which make they but there , you be laugh at I , Joshua ! " 
 " not I ; but smile at my own good fortune , that ever I get my own way at all . but , Maria , you be right ; your family have always be distinguish for have its own way a masterful race , and a mistressful . and so much the more do the rest of mankind grow eager to know all about they . in an ordinary mind , such as mine , that feeling become at last irresistible ; and find no other way to gratify it , I resolve to take the bull by the horn , or rather by the tail , this morning . the poor old castle have be break up most grievously , even within the last twenty year , and you , who have play as a child among the ruin of the rampart , would scarcely know they now . you can not bear to go there , which be natural enough , after all the sad thing that have happen ; but if you do , you would be surprised , Maria ; and I believe a great part have be knock down on purpose . but you remember the little way in from the copse , where you and I , five - and - thirty year ago " 
 " of course I do , darling . it seem but yesterday ; and I have a flower now which you gather for I there . it grow at a very giddy height upon the wall , full of crack and place where the evening - star come through ; but up you go , like a rocket or a race - horse ; and what a fright I be in , until you come down safe ! I think that must have make up my mind to have nobody except my Joshua . " 
 " well , my dear , you might have do much bad . but I happen to think of that way in , this morning , when you put up your elbow , as you make the tea , exactly as you use to do when I might come up there . and that set I think of a quantity of thing , and among they this plan which I resolve to carry out . I take the trouble first to be sure that Caryl be down here for the day , under the roof of Widow Shanks ; and then I set off by the road up the hill , for the stronghold of all the Carnes . without further peril than the fight with the pony , and the strange apparition of Cheeseman about half a mile from the back entrance , I come to the copse where the violet use to be , and the sorrel , and the lord and lady . there I tether our friend Juniper in a quiet little nook , and cross the soft ground , without make any noise , to the place we use to call our little postern . it look so sad , compare with what it use to be , so desolate and bramble up and ruinous , that I scarcely should have know it , except for the gray pedestal of the prostrate dial we use to moralise about . and the ground inside it , that be nice turf once , with the rill run down it that perhaps supply the moat all stony now , and overgrown , and tangle , with ugly - look elder - bush sprawl through the ivy . to a painter it might have prove very attractive ; but to I it seem so dreary , and so sombre , and oppressive , that , although I be not sentimental , as you know , I actually turn away , to put my little visit off , until I should be in well spirit for it . and that , my dear Maria , would in all probability have be never . 
 " but before I have time to begin my retreat , a very extraordinary sound , which I can not describe by any word I know , reach my ear . it be not a roar , nor a clank , nor a boom , nor a clap , nor a crash , nor a thud , but if you have ever hear a noise combine all those element , with a small percentage of screech to enliven they , that come as near it as I can contrive to tell . we know from Holy Scripture that there use to be such creature as dragon , though we have never see they ; but I seem to be hear one as I stand there . it be just the sort of groan you might have expect from a dragon , who have swallow something highly indigestible . " 
 " my dear ! and he might have swallow you , if you have stop . how could you help run away , my Joshua ? I should have insist immediately upon it . but you be so terribly intrepid ! " 
 " far from it , Maria . quite the contrary , I assure you . in fact , I do make off , for a considerable distance ; not rapidly as a youth might do , but with self - reproach at my tardiness . but the sound cease come ; and then I remember how wholly we be in the hand of the Lord . a sense of the power of right rise within I , back up by a strong curiosity ; and I say to myself that if I go home , with nothing more than that to tell you , I should not have at all an easy time of it . therefore I resolve to face the question again , and ascertain , if possible , without self - sacrifice , what be go on among the ruin . you know every stick and stone , as they use to be , but not as they be at present ; therefore I must tell you . the wall at the bottom of the little Dial - court , where there use to be a sweet - briar hedge to come through , be entirely go , either tumble down or knock down the latter I believe to be the true reason of it . also , instead of sweet - briar , there be now a very flourishing crop of sting - nettle . but the wall at the side of the little court stand almost as sound as ever ; and what surprise I most be to see , when I get far , proceed of course very quietly , that the large court beyond   which use to be the servant ' yard , and the dry - ground , and general lounging - place   have a timber floor lay down it , with a rope on either side , a long heavy rope on either side ; and these rope be still quiver , as if from a heavy strain just loosen . all this I could see , because the high door with the spike , that use to part the dial - court from this place of common business , be fall forward from its upper hinge , and splay out so that I could put my fist through . 
 " by this time I have quite recover all my self - command , and be as calm as I be now , or even calm , because I be under that reaction which ensue when a sensible man have make a fool of himself . I perceive , without think , that the sound which have so scar I proceed from this gangway , or timberway , or staging , or whatever may be the right word for it ; and I make up my mind to stay where I be , only stoop a little with my body towards the wall , to get some idea of what might be go forward . and then I hear a sort of small hubbub of voice , such as foreigner make when they be order to keep quiet , and have to carry on a struggle with their noisy nature . 
 " this be enough to settle my decision not to budge an inch , until I know what they be up to . I could not see round the corner , mind though lady seem capable of do that , Maria and so these fellow , who seem to be in two lot , some at the top and some at the bottom of the plankway , be entirely out of my sight as yet , though I have a good view of their slide - plane . but presently the rope begin to strain and creak , draw taut as our fisherman express it either from the upper or the low end , and I see three barrel come slide down slide , not roll   you must understand , and not as a brewer deliver beer into a cellar . these pass by I ; and after a little while there come again that strange sepulchral sound , which have make I feel so uneasy . 
 " Maria , you know that I can hold my own against almost anybody in the world but you ; and although this place be far outside my parish boundary , I feel that as the Uncle of the present owner so far at least as the lawyer have not snap he up and the brother - in - law of the previous proprietor , I possess an undeniable legal right quo warranto , or whatever it be call to look into all proceeding on these premise . next to Holy Scripture , Horace be my guide and guardian ; and I call to mind a well - know passage , which may roughly be render thus : ' if the crushed world tumble on he , the ruin shall strike he undismayed . ' with this in my head , I go softly down the side - wall of the Dial - court   for there be no getting through the place where I have be peep   to the bottom , where there use to be an old flint wall , and a hedge of sweet - briar in front of it . you remember the pretty conceit I make quaint and wholesome as one of Herrick 's when you say something but I verily believe we be well in those day than we ever have be since . now do not   interrupt I about that , my dear . 
 " some of these briar still be there , or perhaps some of their descendant , straggle weakly among the nettle , and mullein , and other wild stuff , but make all together a pretty good screen , through which I could get a safe side - view of the bottom of the timber gangway . so I take off my hat , for some ruffian fellow like foreign sailor be stand below , throw out their arm , and make noise in their throat , because not allow to scream as usual . it be plain enough at once to any one who know the place , that a large hole have be cut in the solid castle wall , or rather , a loophole have be enlarge very freely on either side , and bring down almost to the level of the ground outside . on either side of this great opening stand three heavy musket at full cock , and it make my blood run cold to think how likely some fatal discharge appear . if I have be bring up to war , Maria , as all the young people be bind to be now , I might have be more at home with such matter , and able to reconnoitre calmly ; but I think of myself , and of you , and Eliza , and what a shocking thing it would be for all of we but a merciful Providence be over I . 
 " too late I regret the desire for knowledge , which have lead I into this predicament , for I durst not rush off from my very sad position , for my breath would soon fail I , and my low limb be thick from the exercise of hospitality . how I long for the wing of a dove , or at any rate for the leg of Lieutenant Blyth Scudamore ! and my dark apprehension gain double force when a stone be dislodge by my foot   which may have tremble , and roll with a sharp echo down into the ballium , or whatever it should be call , where these desperado stand . in an instant three of they have their long gun point at the very thicket which shelter I , and if I have move or attempt to make off , there would have be a vacancy in this preferment . but luckily a rabbit , who have be lie as close as I have , and as much afraid of I perhaps as I be of those ruffian , set off at full speed from the hop of the stone , and they see he , and take he for the cause of it . this enable I to draw my breath again , and consider the good way of make my escape , for I care to see nothing more , except my own house - door . 
 " happily the chance be not long in come . at a shout from below which seem to I to be in English , and sound uncommonly like ' now , then ! ' all those fellow turn their back to I , and begin very carefully to low , one by one , the barrel that have be let down the incline . and other thing be stand there , besides barrel : packing - case , crate , very bulky - look box , and low massive wheel , such as you often see to artillery . you know what a vast extent there be of cellar and vault below your old castle , most of they nearly as sound as ever , and occupy mainly by empty bottle , and the refuse of past hospitality . well , they be go to fill these with something french wine , smuggle brandy , contraband good of every kind you can think of , so long as high profit can be make of they . that be how your nephew Caryl mean to redeem his patrimony . no wonder that he have be so dark and distant ! it never would have do to let we get the least suspicion of it , because of my position in the Church , and in the Diocese . by this light a thousand thing be clear to I , which exceed all the power of the Sphinx till now . " 
 " but how do you get away , my darling Joshua ? " Mrs. Twemlow enquire , as behove she . " so fearless , so devoted , so alive to every call of duty how could you stand there , and let the wretch shoot at you ? " 
 " by take good care not to do it , " the Rector answer , simply . " no soon be all their back towards I , than I say to myself that the human race happily be not spiderine . I girt up my loin , or rather fetch my tail up under my arm very closely , and glide away , with the silence of the serpent , and the craft of the enemy of our fallen race . great care be needful , and I exercise it ; and here you behold I , unshot and unshot - at , and free from all anxiety , except a press urgency for a bowl of your admirable soup , Maria , and a cut from the saddle I see hang in the cellar . " 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 MATERNAL ELOQUENCE 

 Sufficient for the day be the evil thereof ; and more than sufficient with most of we . Mr. Twemlow and his wife resolve discreetly , after a fireside council , to have nothing to say to Carne Castle , or about it , save what might be force out of they . they perceive most clearly , and very deeply feel , how exceedingly wrong it be for anybody to transgress , or even go aside of , the law of his country , as by Statute settle . still , if his ruin have be chiefly legal ; if he have be bring up under different law , and in place where they make those thing which he desire to deal in ; if it be clear that those thing be good , and their benefit might be extend to person who otherwise could have no taste of they ; above all , if it be the first and good desire of all who hear of it to have their own finger in the pie then let other stop it , who by duty and interest be so minded ; the Rector be not in the Commission of the Peace though he ought to have be there year ago and the breach of the law , if it come to that , be outside of his parish boundary . the voice of the neighbourhood would be with he , for not turn against his own nephew , even if it ever should come to be know that he have reason for suspicion . 
 it be hard to see thing in their proper light , if only one eye have a fly in it ; but if both be in that sad condition , who shall be blame for wink ? not only the pastor , but all his flock , be in need of wire spectacle now , to keep their vision clear and their forehead calm . Thicker than fly around the milk - pail , rumour come flit daily ; and even the night that fair time of thinking be busy with buzz multitude . 
 " long time have I live , and a sight have I seed , " say Zebedee Tugwell to his wife , " of thing as I could not   make no head nor tail of ; but nothing to my knowledge ever coom nigh the sort of way our folk have take to go on . Parson Twemlow tell we , when the war begin again , that the Lord could turn we all into Frenchmen , if we sin against he more than he could bear . I be fool enough to laugh about it then , not intake how it could be on this side of Kingdom Come , where no distinction be of person . but now , there it be a thing the Almighty hath in hand ; and who shall say he nay , when he layeth his hand to it ? " 
 " I reckon , ' a hath begin with you too , Zeb , " Mrs. Tugwell would answer , undesirably . " to be always go on so about trash trifle , as a woman hath a right to fly up at , but no man ! surely Dan hath a right to his politic and his parable , as much as any lame old chap that sitteth on a bench . he work hard all day , and he airn his money ; and any man hath a right to wag his tongue of night - time , when his arm and his leg have be wag all day . " 
 " depend upon how he wag ' un . " the glance of old Tugwell be stern , as he speak , and his eyebrow knit over it . " if for a yarn , to plaise child or maiden , or a bit of argyment about his business , or talk about his neighbour , or aught that consarn he why , lad must be fool , and I can smoke my pipe and think that at his age I be like he . but when it come to talk of his better , and the Government , and the right of everybody to command the ship , and the soup soup , what be it ? " 
 " superior position of the work class , dignity of labour , undefeasible right of mankind to the soil as they be bear in , and soshallistick something . " 
 " so shall I stick equality , " Mr. Tugwell amend , triumphantly ; " and so shall I stick he , by the holy poker , afore the end of the week be out . I have   a - be fool enough to leave off ropesending of he now for a matter of two year , because ' a be good , and outgrow of it like , and because you always coom between we . but mind you , mother , I will have none of that , next time . business I mean , and good measure it shall be . " 
 " Zeb Tugwell , " say his wife , long greatly to defy he , but frighten by the steadfast gaze she meet , " you can never mean to say that you would lay your hand on Dan a grown man , a'most as big as yourself , and a good half - head taller ! suppose he be to hit you back again ! " 
 " if he do , I should just kill he , " Zeb answer , calmly . " he would be but a jellyfish in my two hand . but there , I will not talk about it , mother . no need to trouble you with it . ' tis none of my seek the Lord in heaven know but a job as he hath dutifie for I to do . I will go out , and have my pipe , and dwell on it . " 
 " and I may lay a deal of it on myself , " Mrs. Tugwell begin to moan , as soon as he be go ; " for I have cocker Dan up , and there be no deny it , afore Tim , or Tryphena , or Tabby , or Debby , or even little Solomon . because he be the first , and so like his dear father , afore he get on in the world so . oh , it all come of that , all the trouble come of that , and of lay up of money , apart from your wife , and forget almost of her christian name ! and the very same thing of it money , money , and the getting on with breech that requireth no mending , and the look over church - book at gay young lady all of it leadeth to the same bad end of his better , and the Government , and the Soshallistick Quality . 
 " why , with all these mercy , " continue Mrs. Tugwell , though not in a continuous frame of mind , as Daniel come in , with a slow heavy step , and sit down by the fire in silence , " all these mercy , as be buy and pay for , from one and sixpence up to three half - crown , and give no more trouble beyond dust once a week how any one can lay his eye on other people 's property , without consideration of his own , as will be after his poor mother 's time , be to I quite a puzzle and a pin - prick . not as if they be owe for , or buy at auction , or so much as beat down by sixpence , but all at full price and own judgment , pay for by airning of labour and peril of the deep . and as Widow Shanks say , the last time she be here , by spoil of the enemy of England , who make we pay tremenjious for ' most everything we live on . and I know who would understand they crackerie , and dust they when I be go to dust , and see her own pretty face in they , whenever they have the back - varnish . " 
 Dan know that the future fair owner and duster design by his mother be Miss Cheeseman , towards whom he have cherish tender yearning in the sensible and wholesome day . and if Polly Cheeseman have hang herself on high which she might have do without a bit of arrogance perhaps she would still have be to this young man the star of fate and glory , instead of a dip , thirty - two to the pound ; the like whereof she sell for a farthing . distance make the difference . " he that will not   allow heed shall pay dear in his need ; " the good mother grow warm , as the son begin to whistle ; " and to my mind , Master Dan , it will not   be long afore you have homer thing to think of than politic . ' politic be fiddle - stick ' be what man of my age use to say ; sensible man with a house and freehold , and a pig of their own , and experience . and such a man I might have have , and sensible child by he , child as never would have whistle at their mother , if it have not   be for your poor father , Dan . misguided he may be , and too much of his own way , and not well enough in his own mind to take in a woman 's but for all that he hath a right to be honour by his child , and to lead their mind in matter touch of the king , and Church , and true religion . why only last night , no , the night afore last , I meet Mrs. Prater , and I say to she " 
 " you tell I all that , mother ; and it must have be a week ago ; for I have hear it every night this week . what be it you desire that I should do , or say , or think ? " 
 " holy mercy ! " cry Mrs. Tugwell , " what a way to put thing , Dan ! all I desire be for your good only , and so lead on to the comfort of the rest . for the whole place go wrong , and the cat sit in the corner , when you go on with politic as your dear father grunt at . no doubt it may all be very fine and just , and worth a man give his life for , if he do not   care about it , nor nobody else but even if it be to keep the French out , and yourn goeth near to let they in , what difference of a button would it make to we , Dan , compare to our stick together , and feed with a knowledge and a yielding to the fancy of each other ? " 
 " I be sure it be no fault of mine , " say Daniel , move from his high rope by this last appeal ; " to I it never matter twopence what I have for dinner , and you see I give Tim all the brown of the baked potato the very last time I have my dinner here . but what come above all those little bother be the necessity for insist upon freedom of opinion . I do not   pretend to be so old as my father , nor to know so much as he know about the world in general . but I have read a great deal more than he have , of course , because he take a long time to get a book with the right end to he ; and I have think , without know it , about what I have read , and I have hear very clever man   who could have no desire to go wrong , but quite the other way   carry on about these high subject , beyond I , but full of plain language . and I will not   be force out of a word of it by fear . " 
 " but for love of your mother you might keep it under , and think it all inside you , without bring of it out , in the presence of your elder . you know what your father be a man as never yet lay his tongue to a thing without do of it right or wrong , right or wrong ; and this time he hath right , and the law , and the Lord , and the King himself , to the side of he . and a rope's - end in his pocket , Dan , as I try to steal away , but he be too wide - awake . such a big hard one you never do see ! " 
 " a rope 's end for I , well turn twenty year of age ! " cry Daniel , with a laugh , but not a merry one ; " two can play at that game , mother . I will not be rope end by nobody . " 
 " then you will be rope - noosed ; " the poor mother fall into the settle , away from the fire - light , and put both hand over her eye , to shut out the spectacle of Dan dangle ; " or else your father will be , for you . ever since the Romans , Dan , there have be Tugwells , and respect ten time more than they be . oh do ' e , do ' e think ; and not bring we all to the grave , and then the gallow ! why I can mind the time , no more agone than last Sunday , when you use to lie here in the hollow of my arm , without a stitch of clothe on , and kind people be tempt to smack you in pleasure , because you do stick out so prettily . for a well - form baby there never be see , nor a finer - temper one , when he have his way . and the many night I walk the floor with you , Dan , when your first tooth be come through , the size of a horse - radish , and your father most wonderful to put up with my coo to you , when he have not have a night in bed for nigh three week oh , Dan , do ' e think of thing as consarneth your homer life , and thing as be above all reason ; and let they bless politic go home to they as trade in they . " 
 Mrs. Tugwell 's tender recollection have give she a pain in the part where Dan be nurse , and drive she out of true logical course ; but she come back to it , before Dan have time to finish the interesting picture of himself which she have suggest . 
 " now can you deny a word of that , Dan ? and if not , what be there more to say ? you be smack as a little babe , by many people kindly , when ever so much tender than you now can claim to be . and in those day you never could have deserve it yet , not have frame a word beyond ' Mam , ' and ' da , ' and both of those make much of , because doubtful . there be nothing about the Constitooshun then , but the colour of the tongue and the condition of the bowel ; and if any fool have ask you what politic be , you would have suck your thumb , and offer they to suck it ; for generous you always be , and just come after . and what cry have big folk , grow upright and wicked , to make about be smack , when they deserve it , for meddle with matter outside of their business , by those in authority over they ? " 
 " well , mother , I daresay you be right , though I do not   altogether see the line of it . but one thing I will promise you whatever father do to I , I will not lift a hand against he . but I must be off . I be late already . " 
 " where to , Dan ? where to ? I always use to know , even if you be go court . go a - courting , Dan , as much as ever you like , only do not   make no promise . but whatever you do , keep away from that bad , wicked , Free and Frisky Club , my dear . " 
 " Mother , that be the very place I be just bind to . after all you have say , I would have stay away to - night , except for be on the list , and pledge in honour to twenty - eight question , all bear upon the grand issue of the age . " 
 " I do not   know no more than the dead , what that mean , Dan . but I know what your father have get in his pocket for you . and he say the next time you go there , you should have it . " 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 paternal DISCIPLINE 

 " the Fair , free , and Frisky " as they call themselves , be not of a violent order at all , neither treasonable , nor even disloyal . their Club , if it deserve the name , have not be of political , social , or even convivial intention , but have lapse unaware into all three us , and most of all that last mention . the hard the time be , the more confidential   and therefore convivial   do Englishmen become ; and if free - trade survive with we for another decade , it will be the death of total abstinence . but now they have bad time , without free - trade that Goddess be still in the goose - egg and when two friend meet , without a river between they , they be bind to drink one another 's health , and do it , without the unstable and cold - blooded element . the sense of this duty be paramount among the " Free and Frisky , " and without it their final cause would have vanish long ago , and therewith their formal one . 
 none of the old - establish folk of the blue blood of Springhaven , such as the Tugwells , the Shankses , the Praters , the Bowleses , the Stickfasts , the Blocks , or the Kedgers , would have anything to do with this Association , which have form itself among they , like an anti - corn - law league , for the destruction of their right and property . its origin have be commercial , and its principle aggressive , no less an outrage be contemplate than the purchase of fish at low figure on the beach , and the speedy distribution of that slippery ware among the near village and town . but from time immemorial the trade have be in the hand of a few staunch factor , who pay a price govern by the season and the weather , and send the commodity as far as it would go , with soundness , and the hope of freshness . Springhaven believe that it supply all London , and be proud and blest in so believe . with these barrowman , huckster and pedlar of fish , it would have no manifest dealing ; but if the factor who manage the trade choose to sell their refuse or surplus to they , that be their own business . in this way perhaps , and by bargain on the sly , these petty dealer manage to procure enough to carry on their weekly enterprise , and for a certain good reason take a room and court - yard handy to the Darling Arms , to discuss other people 's business and their own . the good reason be that they be not allow to leave the village , with their barrow or truck or basket , until the night have fall , on penalty of be pelt with their own ware . such be the dignity of this place , and its noble abhorrence of anything low . 
 the vision of lofty institution , which one may not participate , inspire in the low human nature more jealousy than admiration . these higgler may have be very honest fellow , in all but pecuniary question , and possibly continue to be so in the bosom of their own family . but here in Springhaven , by the force of circumstance they be almost compel to be radical : even as the sweetest cow 's milk turn sour , when she can just reach red clover with her breath , but not her lip . but still they be not without manner , and reason , and good - will to people who have patience with they . this enable they to argue lofty question , without black eye , or kicking , or even tweak of nose ; and a very lofty question be now before they . 
 to get once into Admiral Darling 's employment be to obtain a vested interest ; so kind be his nature and so forgiving , especially when he have scold anybody . Mr. Swipes , the head gardener for so many year , hold an estate of freehold in the garden although he have no head , and would never be a gardener , till the hang garden of Babylon should be hang on the top of the tower of Babel with a vested remainder to his son , and a contingent one to all descendant . yet this man , although his hand be generally in his pocket , have not enough sense of their lining to feel that continuance , usage , institution , orderly sequence , heredity , and such like , be the button of his coat and the texture of his breech , and the warmth of his body inside they . therefore he never could hold aloof from the Free and Frisky gathering , and accept the chair upon Bumper - night , when it be a sinecure benefice . 
 this be a bumper - night , and in the chair sit Mr. Swipes , discharge gracefully the arduous duty of the office , which consist mainly in call upon member for a speech , a sentiment , or a song , and in default of mental satisfaction , bodily amendment by a pint all round . but as soon as Dan Tugwell enter the room , the Free and Friskies with one accord return to lofty business . Mr. Swipes , the gay Liber of the genial hour , retire from the chair , and his place be take by a Liberal though the name be not yet invent estranged from his own godfather . this be a hard man , who make salt herring , and long to cure everything fresh in the world . 
 Dan , be still a very tender youth , and quite unaccustomed to public speaking , be abash by these token of his own importance , and heartily wish that he have stop at home . it never occur to his simple mind that his value be not political , but commercial ; not " anthropological , " but fishy , the main ambition of the Free and Frisky Club have long be the capture of his father . if once Zeb Tugwell could be bring to treat , a golden era would dawn upon they , and a boundless vision of free - trade , when a man might be pay for refuse to sell fish , as he now be for keep to himself his screw . Dan know not these thing , and his heart misgave he , and he wish that he have never hear of the twenty - eight question set down in his name for solution . 
 however , his disturbance of mind be needless , concern those great issue . all the member , except the chairman , have forget all about they ; and the only matter they care about be to make a new member of Daniel . a little flourish go on about large thing   which nobody know , or care to know , then the table be hammer with the heel of a pipe , and Dan be make a Free and Frisky . an honorary member , with nothing to pay , and the honour on their side , they tell he ; and every man rise , with his pot in one hand and his pipe in the other , yet able to stand , and to thump with his heel , be careful . then the President make entry in a book , and bow , and Dan be request to sign it . in the fervour of good - will , and fine feeling , and the pride of popularity , the young man be not old enough to resist , but set his name down firmly . then all shake hand with he , and the meeting be declare to be festive , in honour of a new and noble member . 
 it be altogether wrong to say though many people say it that young Dan Tugwell be even a quarter of a sheet in the wind , when he steer his way home . his head be as solid as that of his father ; which , instead of grow light , increase in specific , generic , and differential gravity , under circumstance which tend otherwise , with an age like our , that insist upon sobriety , without allow practice . all Springhaven folk have long practice in the art of keep sober , and if ever a man walk with his leg outside his influence , it be always from defect of proper average quite lately . 
 be that as it may , the young man come home with an enlarged map of the future in his mind , a brisk and elastic rise in his walk , and his head much encourage to go on with liberal and indescribable feeling . in accordance with these , he expect his mother to be ready to embrace he at the door , while a saucepan simmer on the good - night of the wood - ash , with just as much gentle breath of onion from the cover as a youth may taste dreamily from the lip of love . but oh , instead of this , he meet his father , spread out and yet solid across the doorway , with very large arm bare and lumpy in the gleam of a fireplace uncrowned by any pot . Dan 's large idea vanish , like a blaze without a bottom . 
 " rather late , Daniel , " say the captain of Springhaven , with a nod of his great head , make gigantic on the ceiling . " all the rest be abe , the proper place for honest folk . I suppose you have   be airne money , overtime ? " 
 " not I , " say Dan ; " I work hard enough all day . I just look in at the Club , and have a little talk of politic . " 
 " the Club , indeed ! the stink barrow - grinder ! do I tell you , or do I forget to tell you , never to go there no more ? " 
 " you tell I fast enough , father ; no doubt about that . but I be not aboard your boat , when I happen on dry land , and I be old enough now to have opinion of my own . " 
 " oh , that be it , be it ? and to upset all the State , the King , the House of Lords , and the Parliamentary House , and all as be descend from the Romans ? well , and what do their Wusships say to you ? do they anoint you king of slooshing ? " 
 " Father , they do this and you have a right to know it ; " Dan speak with a grave debative tone , though his voice become doubtful , as he see that his father be quietly seek for something ; " almost before I know what be come , they have make I a member , and I sign the book . they have no desire to upset the kingdom ; I hear no talk of that kind ; only that every man should have his own opinion , and be free to show what can be say for they . and you know , father , that the world go on by reason , and justice , and good - will , and fair play " 
 " no , it do not , " cry the captain , who have find what he want ; " if it have to wait for they , it would never go on at all . it go on by government , and management , and discipline , and the stopping of younker from their bless foolery , and by the ten commandment , and the proverb of King Solomon . you to teach your father how the world go on ! off with your coat , and I will teach you . " 
 " Father , " say Dan , with his milder nature tremble at the stern resolution in his father 's eye , as the hearth - fire flash up show their strong flash , " you will never do such a thing , at my age and size ? " 
 " will not   I ? " answer Zebedee , crack in the air the three knot tail of the stout hempen twist . " as for your age , why , it ought to know well ; and as for your size , why , the more room for this ! " 
 it never come into Daniel 's head that he should either resist or run away . but into his heart come the deadly sense of disgrace at be flog , even by his own father , at full age to have a wife and even child of his own . 
 " Father , " he say , as he pull off his coat and red striped shirt , and show his broad white back , " if you do this thing , you will never set eye on my face again so help I God ! " 
 " do not   care if I do not , " the captain shout . " you be never son of mine , to be a runagate , and traitor . how old be you , Master Free and Frisky , to larn I how the world go on ? " 
 " as if you do not   know , father ! the fifteenth of last March I be twenty year of age . " 
 " then one for each year of your life , my lad , and another to make a man of thee . this little tickler hath three tail ; seven three be twenty - one come just right . " 
 when his father have do with he , Dan go softly up the dark staircase of old ship timber , and enter his own little room , strike a light . he see that his bed be turn down for he , by the love hand of his mother , and that his favourite brother Solomon , the young of the tugwell race , be sleep sweetly in the opposite cot . then he catch a side view of his own poor back in the little black - frame look - glass , and be quite amazed ; for he have not feel much pain , neither flinch , nor wince , nor speak . in a moment self - pity do more than pain , indignation , outrage , or shame could do ; it bring large tear into his softened eye , and a long sob into his swell throat . 
 he have bear himself like a man when flog ; but now he behave in the manner of a boy . " he shall never hear the last of this job , " he mutter , " as long as mother have a tongue in her head . " to this end he fill a wet sponge with the red proof of his scourging , lay it where it must be see , and beside it a leaf tear from his wage - book , on which he have write with a trembling hand : " he say that I be no son of his , and this look like it . sign , Daniel Tugwell , or whatever my name ought to be . " 
 then he wash and dress with neat' - foot oil all of his wound that he could reach , and tie a band of linen over they , and , in spite of increase smart and pang , dress himself carefully in his Sunday clothe . from time to time he listen for his father 's step , inasmuch as there be no bolt to his door , and to burn a light so late be against all law . but nobody come to disturb he ; his mother at the end of the passage sleep heavily , and his two child - sister in the room close by , Tabby and Debby , be in the land of dream , as far go as little solly be . have turn out his tool from their flat flag basket , or at least all but three or four favourite , he fill it with other clothe likely to be need , and buckle it over his hatchet - head . then the beating of his heart be like a flail inside a barn , as he steal along silently for one terrible good - bye . 
 this be to his darling pet of all pet , Debby , who worship this brother a great deal more than she worship her heavenly Father ; because , as she say to her mother , when rebuke " I can see Dan , mother , but I can not   see he . can I sit in his lap , mother , and look into his face , and be tell pretty story , and eat apple all the time ? " Tabby be of different grain , and her deity be Tim ; for she be of the Tomboy kind , and have no imagination . but Debby be enough to make a sound and seasoned heart to ache , as she lie in her little bed , with the flush of sleep deepen the delicate tint of her cheek , shed bright innocence fresh from heaven on the tranquil droop of eyelid and the smile curve of lip . her hair lie flutter , as if by play with the angel that protect she ; and if she could not see her heavenly Father , it be not because she be out of his sight . 
 a well tear than be ever shed by self - pity , or any other selfishness , run down the cheek she have kiss so often , and fall upon her coax , nestling neck . then Dan , with his candle behind the curtain , set a long light kiss upon the forehead of his darling , and with a heart so full , and yet so empty , take one more gaze at she , and then be go . with the basket in his hand , he drop softly from his window upon the pile of seaweed at the back of the house collect to make the wall wholesome and then , care little what his course might be , be lead perhaps by the force of habit down the foot - path towards the beach . so late at night , it be not likely that any one would disturb he there , and no one in the cottage which he have leave would miss he before the morning . the end of October now be near , the night be long , and he need not hurry . he might even lie down in his favourite boat , the good of her size in Springhaven , the one he have build among the rabbit . there he could say good - bye to all that he have know and love so long , and be off before dawn , to some place where he might earn his crust and think his thought . 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 SORE TEMPTATION 

 when a man 's spirit and heart be low , and the world seem turn against he , he have well stop both ear than hearken to the sound of the sad sea wave at night . even if he can see their movement , with the moon behind they , draw path of ripple light , and boat   with white sail plume shadow , or thin oar that dive for gem , and perhaps a merry crew with music , come home not all sea - sick well , even so , in the summer sparkle , the long low fall of the wave be sad . but how much more on a winter night , when the moon be away below the sea , and weary water roll unseen from a vast profundity of gloom , fall unreckoned , and be no more than a wistful moan , as man be ! 
 the tide be at quarter - ebb , and a dismal haze lie thick on shore and sea . it be not enough to be call a fog , or even a mist , but quite enough to deaden the gray light , always flow along the boundary of sky and sea . but over the wet sand and the white frill of the gently gurgle wave more of faint light , or rather perhaps , less of heavy night , prevail . but Dan have keen eye , and be well accustomed to the trick of darkness ; and he come to take his leave forever of the fishing squadron , with a certainty of know all the five , as if by daylight for now there be only five again . 
 as the tide withdraw , the fishing - smack   which have scarcely earn their name of late   be compel to make the good of the world until the tide come back again . to judge by creaking , straining , groaning , and even grinding of timber millstone   if there yet live in Ireland the good - will for a loan to we , all these little craft be make dreadful hardship of the abandonment which man and nature inflict on they every thirteenth hour . but all thing do make more noise at night , when they get the chance   perhaps in order to assert their own prerogative , and they seem to know that noise go far , and assume a high character , when man have leave off make it . 
 the poor young fisherman 's back be get very sore by this time , and he begin to look about for the white side - streak which he have paint along the water - line of that new boat , to distract the meddlesome gaze of rival from the peculiar curve below , which even Admiral Darling have not notice , when he pass she on the beach ; but Nelson would have spy it out in half a second , and know all about it in the other half . Dan know that he should find a very fair berth there , with a roll or two of stuff to lay his back on , and a piece of tarpaule to draw over his leg . in the faint light that hover from the breaking of the wavelet he soon find his boat , and see a tall man stand by she . 
 " Daniel , " say the tall man , without move , " my sight be very bad at night , but unless it be bad than usual , you be my admired friend Daniel . a young man in a thousand one who dare to think . " 
 " yes , Squire Carne , " the admired friend reply , with a touch of hat protest against any claim to friendship : " Dan Tugwell , at your service . and I have think too much , and be pay out for it . " 
 " you see I in a melancholy attitude , and among melancholy surrounding . " Caryl Carne offer his hand as he speak , and Dan take it with great reverence . " the truth be , that anger at a gross injustice , which have just come to my knowledge , drive I from my book and sad family paper , in the room beneath the roof of our good Widow shank . and I need must come down here , to think beside the sea , which seem to be the only free thing in England . but I little expect to see you . " 
 " and I little expect to be here , Squire Carne . but if not make too bold to ask be it anybody that be beat ? " 
 " Beaten be not the right word for it , Dan ; cruelly flog and lash , a dear young friend of mine have be , as fine a young fellow as ever live and now he have not get a sound place on his back . and why ? because he be poor , and dare to lift his eye to a rich young lady . " 
 " but he be not flog by his own father ? " ask Dan , deeply interested in this romance , and rub his back , as the pain increase with sympathy . 
 " not quite so bad as that , " reply the other ; ' such a thing would be impossible , even in England . no ; his father take his part , as any father in the world would do ; even if the great man , the young lady 's father , should happen to be his own landlord . " 
 a very black suspicion cross the mind of Dan , for Carne possess the art of suggest vile suspicion : might Admiral Darling have discover something , and request Dan 's father to correct he ? it be certain that the Admiral , so kind of heart , would never have desire such severity ; but he might have tell Captain Tugwell , with whom he have a talk almost every time they meet , that his eld son want a little discipline ; and the Club might have serve as a pretext for this , when the true crime must not be declare , by reason of its enormity . Dan close his tooth , and english air grow bitter in his mouth , as this belief run through he . 
 " good - night , my young friend ; I be begin to recover , " Carne continue , briskly , for he know that a nail snap in good oak , when the hammer fall too heavily . " what be a little bit of outrage , after all ? when I have be in England a few year more , I shall laugh at myself for have love fair play and self - respect , in this innocent young freshness . we must wag as the world do ; and you know the proverb , what make the world wag , but the weight of the bag ? " 
 " but if you be more in earnest , sir or at least I mean , if you be not bind here by property and business , and an ancient family , and thing you could not get away from , and if you want only to be allow fair play , and treat as a man by other man , and be able to keep your own money when you earn it , or at least to buy your own victual with it what would you try to do , or what part of the country would you think well to go to ? " 
 " Dan , you must belong to a very clever family . it be useless to shake your head you must ; or you never could put such question , so impossible to answer . in all this blessed island , there be no spot yet discover , where such absurd vision can be realize . Nay , nay , my romantic friend ; be content with more than the average blessing of this land . you be not starve , you be not imprison , you be not even beat ; and if you be not allow to think , what harm of that ? if you think all day , you would never dare to act upon your thought , and so you be well without they . tush ! an Englishman be never bear for freedom . good - night . " 
 " but , sir , Squire Carne , " cry Dan , pursue he , " there be one thing which you do not seem to know . I be drive away from this place to - night ; and it would have be so kind of you to advise I where to go to . " 
 " drive away ! " exclaim Carne , with amazement . " the pride of the village drive out of it ! you may be drive yourself away , Tugwell , through some scrape , or love affair ; but when that blow over you will soon come back . what would Springhaven do without you ? and your dear good father would never let you go . " 
 " I be not the pride , but the shame , of the village . " Dan forget all his home - pride at last . " and my dear good father be the man who have do it . he have leather I bad than the gentleman you speak of , and without half so much to be say against he . for nothing but go to the Club to - night , where I be sure we drink King George 's health , my father have lash I so , that I be ashamed to tell it . and I be sure that I never mean to tell it , until your kindness , in a way of speak , almost drive it out of I . " 
 " Daniel Tugwell , " Carne answer , with solemnity , " this be beyond belief , even in England . you must have fall asleep , Dan , in the middle of large thought , and dream this great impossibility . " 
 " my back know whether it have be a dream , sir . I never hear of dream as leave one - and - twenty line behind they . but whether it be one , or whether it be twenty , make no odd of value . the disgrace it be that drive I out . " 
 " be there no way of heal this sad breach ? " Carne ask , in a tone of deep compassion ; " if your father could be bring to beg your pardon , or even to say that he be sorry " 
 " he , sir ! if such a thing be put before he , his answer would be just to do it again , if I be fool enough to go near he . you be too mild of nature , sir , to understand what father be . " 
 " it be indeed horrible , too horrible to think of " the voice of this kind gentleman betray that he be shudder . " if a Frenchman do such a thing , he would be tear to piece . but no french father would ever dream of such atrocity . he would rather flog himself within an inch of his own life . " 
 " be they so much well , then , and kinder , than we Englishmen ? " in spite of all his pain and grief , Dan could not help smile at the thought of his father ropesende himself . " so superior to we , sir , in every way ? " 
 " in almost every way , I be sorry to confess . I fear , indeed , in every way , except bodily strength , and obstinate , ignorant endurance , miscall ' courage , ' and those rough quality whatever they may be which seem needful for the making of a seaman . but in good manner , justice , the sense of what be due from one man to another , in dignity , equality , temperance , benevolence , largeness of feeling , and quickness of mind , and above all in love of freedom , they be very , very sadly far beyond we . and indeed I have be lead to think from some of your fine perception , Dan , that you must have a share of french blood in your vein . " 
 " I , sir ! " cry Dan , jump back , in a style which show the distance between faith and argument ; " no , sir , thank God there be never none of that ; but all English , with some of the Romans , who be pretty near equal to we , from what I hear . I suppose , Squire Carne , you think that low of I because I make a fuss about be larrup , the same as a Frenchman I pull out of the water do about my doing of it , as if I could have help it . no Englishman would have say much about that ; but they seem to make more fuss than we do . and I dare say it be french - like of I , to go on about my hiding . " 
 " Daniel , " answer Caryl Carne , in alarm at this british sentiment ; " as a man of self - respect , you have only one course leave , if your father refuse to apologise . you must cast off his tyranny ; you must prove yourself a man ; you must begin life upon your own account . no more of this drudgery , and slavery for other , who allow you no right in return . but a nobler employment among free people , with a chance of assert your courage and manhood , and a certainty that no man will think you his bondslave because you be bear upon his land , or in his house . my father behave to I well , it do not matter . he might have repent of it , if he have live long ; and I feel ashamed to speak of it , after such a case as your . but behold , how greatly it have be for my advantage ! without that , I might now have be a true and simple Englishman ! " 
 Carne   who have take most kindly to the fortune which make he an untrue Englishman   clap his breast with both hand ; not proudly , as a Frenchman do , nor yet with that abashment and contempt of demonstration which make a true Briton very clumsy in such doing ; while Daniel Tugwell , be very solid , and by no mean " emotional " as people call it nowadays be look at he , to the utmost of his power   which would have be great by daylight , with gratitude , and wonder , and consideration , and some hesitation about his foreign sentiment . 
 " well , sir , " say Dan , with the usual impulse of the british workman , " be there any sort of work as you could find for I , to earn my own living , and be able to think afterwards ? " 
 " there be work of a noble kind , such as any man of high nature may be proud to share in , to which it be possible that I might get an entrance for you , if there should be a vacancy ; work of high character , such as admit of no higgling and haggling , and splitting of halfpence , but an independent feeling , and a sense of advance the liberty of mankind , without risk a penny , but put many guineas into one 's own pocket , and so become fit for a loftier line of life . " 
 " be it smuggling , sir ? " Daniel ask , with sore misgiving , for he have be bring up to be very shy of that . " many folk consider that quite honest ; but father call it roguery though I never shall hear any more of his opinion now . " 
 " Sigh not , friend Daniel ; sigh not so heavily at your own emancipation . " carne never could resist the chance of a little bit of sarcasm , though it often injure his own plot . " Smuggling be a very fine pursuit , no doubt , but petty in comparison with large affair like ours . no , Dan Tugwell , I be not a smuggler , but a high politician , and a polisher of mankind . how soon do you think of leave this outrageous hole ? " 
 despite the stupid outrage upon himself , Dan be too loyal and generous of nature to be pleased with this description of his native place . but Carne , too quick of temper for a really fine intriguer , cut short his expostulation . 
 " call it what you please , " he say ; " only make your mind up quickly . if you wish to remain here , do so : a man of no spirit be useless to I . but if you resolve to push your fortune among brave and lofty comrade , stir scene , and brisk adventure , meet I at six to - morrow evening , at the place where you chop down my rail . all you want will be provide , and your course of promotion begin at once . but remember , all must be honour bright . no shilly - shallying , no lukewarmness , no indifference to a noble cause . faint heart never win fair lady . " 
 the wan moon have rise , and now shine upon Carne 's face , light up all its gloomy beauty , and strange power of sadness . Dan seem to lose his clear keen sight beneath the dark influence of the other 's gaze ; and his will , though not a weak one , drop before a large and strong . " he know all about I and Miss dolly , " say the poor young fisherman to himself ; " I think so before , and I be certain of it now . and , for some reason beyond my knowledge , he wish to encourage it . oh , perhaps because the Carnes have always be against the darling ! I never think of that before . " 
 this be a bitter reflection to he , and might have incline he the right way , if time have allow he to work it out . but no such time be afford ; and in the confusion and gratitude of the moment , he answer , " Sir , I shall be always at your service , and do my very good in every way to please you . " Caryl Carne smile ; and the church clock of Springhaven solemnly strike midnight . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 the trial of faith 

 he follow day , the 27th of October , be a dark one in the calendar of a fair and good young lady . two year would then have pass since Faith Darling , at the age of twenty , have receive sad tiding , which would make the rest of her life flow on in shadow . so at least she think , forgetful   or rather perhaps unconscious , for she have not yet learn the fact of life   that time and the tide of year submerge the lofty youthful sorrow . to a warm and stedfast heart like her , and a nature strong but self - control , no casual change , or light diversion , or sudden interest in other matter , could take the place of the motive lose . therefore , be of a deep true faith , and staunch in the belief of a great God , good to all who seek his goodness , she never go away from what she mean , that faith and hope should feed each other . 
 this save she from be a trouble to any one , or damp anybody 's cheerfulness , or diminish the gaiety around she . she take a lively interest in the affair of other people , which a " blighted being " decline to do ; and their pleasure minister to her own good cheer without , or at any rate beyond , her knowledge . therefore she be like by everybody , and belove by all who have any heart for a brave and pitiful story . thus a sweet flower , half close by the storm , continue to breathe forth its sweetness . 
 however , there be time when even Faith be lose in sad remembrance , and her bright young spirit become depressed by the hope defer that maketh sick the heart . as time grow long , hope grow less ; and even the cheerful Admiral , well verse in peril of the deep , and acquaint with many a wandering story , have make up his mind that Erle Twemlow be dead , and would never more be hear of . the rector also , the young man 's father , could hold out no long against that conclusion ; and even the mother , disdain the mention , yet understand the meaning , of despair . and so among those to whom the subject be the most interesting in the world , it be now the strict rule to avoid it with the lip , though the eye be often fill with it . 
 Faith Darling at first scorn this hard law . " it do seem so unkind , " she use to say , " that even his name should be interdict , as if he have disgrace himself . if he be dead , he have die with honour . none who ever see he can doubt that . but he be not dead . he will come back to we , perhaps next week , perhaps to - morrow , perhaps even while we be afraid to speak of he . if it be for my sake that you behave thus , I be not quite so weak as to require it . " 
 the peculiar circumstance of the case have not only baffle enquiry , but from the very beginning preclude it . the man with the keen eye , sharp nose , big ear , and long head , of all the many sneak who now conduct what they call ' special enquiry , " could have do nothing with a case like this , because there be no beginning it . even now , in fair peace , and with large knowledge add , the matter would not have be easy ; but in war universal , and blank ignorance , there be nothing to be do but to sit down and think . and the story invite a good deal of thinking , because of its disappointing turn . 
 during the negotiation for peace in 1801 , and before any article be sign , order be send to the Cape of Good Hope for the return of a regiment of the line , which have not be more than three month there . but the cape be likely to be restore to Holland , and two empty transport return from India be to call under convoy , and bring home these troop . one of the officer be Captain Erle Twemlow , then about twenty - five year of age , and under probation , by the Admiral 's decree , for the hand of the maiden whose heart have be his from a time to itself immemorial . after tiresome day of impatience , the transport arrive under conduct of a frigate ; and after another week , the soldier embark with fine readiness for their native land . 
 but before they have clear the Bay , they meet a brig - of - war direct from Portsmouth , carry despatch for the officer in command of the troop , as well as for the captain of the frigate . some barbarous tribe on the coast of Guinea , the part that be call the Ivory Coast , have plunder and burn a british trading station within a few mile of Cape Palmas , and have kill and devour the trader . these native must be punish , and a stern example make , and a negro monarch of the name of Hunko Jum must have his palace burn , if he possess one ; while his rival , the king of the Crumbo tribe , whose name be Bandeliah , who have strive to protect the trader , must be reward , and have a treaty make with he , if he could be bring to understand it . both sailor and soldier be ready enough to undertake this little spree , as they call it , expect to have a pleasant run ashore , a fine bit of sport with the negro , and perhaps a few nosering of gold to take home to their wife and sweetheart . 
 but , alas ! the reality be not so fine . the negro who have do all the mischief make off , carry most of their house with they ; and the palace of Hunko Jum , if he possess one , be always a little way far on . the Colonel be a stubborn man , and so be the sea - captain good Tories both , and not desirous to skulk out of scrape , and leave well man to pick up their clumsy breakage . blue and red vie with one another to scour the country , and punish the native if only they could catch they and to vindicate , with much strong language , the dignity of Great Britain , and to make an eternal example . 
 but white bone be what the white man make , under that slimy sunshine and putrefy moon . weary , slack - joint , low - hearted as they be , the deadly coast - fever fall upon they , and they shiver , and burn , and groan , and rave , and leap into hole , or roll into camp fire . the Colonel die early , and the Naval Captain follow he ; none stand upon the order of their go ; but man follow man , as in a funeral , to the grave , until there be no grave to go to . the hand of the Lord be stretch out against they ; and never would one have come back to England , out of more than five hundred who land , except for the manhood and vigour of a seaman , Captain Southcombe , of the transport Gwalior . 
 this brave and sensible man have be leave with his ship lie off to be signal for , in case of mishap , while his consort and the frigate be despatch in advance to a creek , about twenty league westward , where the land - force triumphant be to join they . Captain Southcombe , with every hand he could muster , trace the unfortunate party inland , and find they lead many league in the wrong direction , lose among quagmire breathe death , wear out with vermin , venom , and despair , and hem in by savage lurk for the night , to rush in upon and make an end of they . what need of many word ? this man , and his comrade , do more than any other man on the face of this earth could have do without british blood in they . they bury the many who have die without hope of the decent concealment which our life have have , and therefore our death long for ; they take on their shoulder , or on cane wattle , the many who have make up their mind to die , and be in much doubt about have do it , and they rouse up and work up by the scruff of their loose place the few who could get along on their own leg . and so , with great spirit , and still great patience , they manage to save quite as many as deserve it . 
 because , when they come within signal of the Gwalior , Captain Southcombe , march slowly with his long limp burden , find ready on the sand the little barrel , about as big as a kilderkin , of true and unsullied Stockholm pitch , which he have take , as his brother take Madeira , for ripeness and for betterance , by right of change of climate . with a little of this give choicely and carefully at the back of every sick man 's tongue , and a little more spread across the hollow of his stomach , he find they so enable in the afternoon that they be glad to sit up in the bottom of a boat , and resign themselves to an all - wise Providence . 
 many survive , and bless Captain Southcombe , not at first cordially for the man yet remain to be discover who be grateful to his doctor but gradually more and more , and with that healthy action of the human bosom which be call expectoration , whenever grateful memory be rekindle by the smell of tar . but this be a trifle ; many useful life be save , and the nation should have thank Captain Southcombe , but do not . 
 after these sad incident , when sorrow for old friend be temper by the friendly warmth afford by their shoe , a muster be hold by the Major in command , and there be only one officer who could neither assert himself alive , nor be certify as dead . that one be Erle Twemlow , and the regiment would rather have lose any other two officer . urgent as it be , for the safety of the rest , to fly with every feather from this pestilential coast , sail be hand , boat despatch , and dealing try with Hunko Jum , who have reappear with promptitude , the moment he be not want . from this noble monarch , and his chief , and all his nation , it be hard to get any clear intelligence , because their own be absorb in absorbing . they have find upon the sand a cask of Admiralty rum , as well as a stout residue of unadulterated pitch . nose , and tongue , and historical romance for a cask have be wash ashore five generation since , and set up for a god , when the last drop be lick induce this brave nation to begin upon the rum ; and fashion   as powerful with they as with we   compel they to drink the tar likewise , because they have see the white man do it . this would have make it hard to understand they , even if they have be english scholar , which their ignorance of rum prove they not to be ; and our sailor very nearly go their way , after sadly ascertain nothing , except that the cask be empty . 
 but luckily , just as they be push off , a very large , black head appear from behind a vegetable - ivory tree , less than a quarter of a mile away , and they know that this belong to Bandeliah , the revere king of the Crumbos , who have evidently smell rum far inland . with he they be enable to hold discourse , partly by sign , and partly by mean of an old and highly polished negro , who have be the rat - catcher at the factory now consume ; and the conclusion , or perhaps the confusion , arrive at from sign , grunt , grin , nod , wagging of finger and twisting of toe , translate grandiloquently into break English , be not far from be to the follow effect : 
 to wit , that two great king reign inland , either of they able to eat up Hunko Jum and Bandeliah at a mouthful , but both of they too proud to set foot upon land that be flat , or in water that be salt . they rule over two great nation call the Houlas , and the Quackwas , go out of sight among great river and land with clear water stand over they . and if the white man could not understand this , it be because they drink salt - water . 
 moreover , they say that of these two king , the king of the Houlas be a woman , the most beautiful ever see in all the world , and able to jump over any man 's head . but the king of the Quackwas be a man , and although he have more than two thousand wife , and be tall by a joint of a bamboo than Bandeliah whose stature be at least six foot four yet nothing would be of any use to he , unless he could come to an agreement with Mabonga , the queen of the Houlas , to split a durra straw with he . but Mabonga be coy , and understand man , as well as jump over they , would grant they no other favour than the acceptance of their present . however , the other great king be determined to have she for his wife , if he abolish all the rest , and for this reason he have catch and keep the lost Englishman as a medicine - man ; and it be not likely that he would kill he , until he fail or succeed . 
 to further enquiry Bandeliah answer that to rescue the prisoner be impossible . if it have be his own new wife , he would not push out a toe for she . the great king Golo live up in high place that overlook the ground , as he would these white man , and his army go like wind and spread like fire . none of his warrior eat white man 's flesh ; they be afraid it would make they cowardly . 
 a brave heart be generally tender in the middle , to make up for be so firm outside , even as the durian fruit be . Captain Southcombe have walk the poop - deck of the Gwalior many a time , in the cool of the night , with Erle Twemlow for his companion , and have take a very warm liking to he . so that when the survivor of the regiment be land at Portsmouth , this brave sailor travel at his own cost to Springhaven , and tell the Rector the whole sad story , make it clear to he beyond all doubt , that nothing whatever could be do to rescue the poor young man from those savage , or even to ascertain his fate . for the Quackwas be an inland tribe , inhabit vast region wholly unknown to any European , and believe to extend to some mighty river , and lake resemble inland sea . 
 therefore Mr. Twemlow , in a deep quiet voice , ask Captain Southcombe one question only whether he might keep any hope of ever have , by the mercy of the Lord , his only son restore to he . and the sailor say yes ; the mistake would be ever to abandon such a hope , for at the moment he least expect it , his son might stand before he . he pretend to no experience of the western coast of Africa , and nigger he know be a very queer lot , act accord to their own light , which differ accord to their nature . but he be free to say , that in such a condition he never would think of despair , though it might become very hard not to do so , as time go on without bring any news . he himself have be in sad peril more than once , and once it appear quite hopeless ; but he think of his wife and his child at home , and the Lord have be pleased to deliver he . 
 the parson be rebuke by this brave man 's faith , who make no pretence whatever to piety ; and when they say Goodbye , their eye be bright with the goodwill and pity of the human race , who know trouble not inflict as yet upon monkey . Mr. Twemlow 's heart fall when the sailor be go , quite as if he have lose his own mainstay ; but he brace himself up to the heavy duty of impart sad news to his wife and daughter , and bad of all to Faith Darling . but the latter surprise he by the way in which she bear it ; for while she make no pretence to hide her tear , she be speak as if they be needless . and the strange thing of all , in Mr. Twemlow 's opinion , be her curious persistence about Queen Mabonga . could any black woman and she suppose she must be that be consider by white people to be beautiful ? have Captain Southcombe ever even see she ; and if not , how could he be in such rapture about her attraction ? she do not like to say a word , because he have be so kind and so faithful to those poor soldier , whom it be his duty to bring home safe ; but if it have not be for that , she might have think that with so many child and a wife at Limehouse , he should not have allow his mind to dwell so fondly on the personal appearance of a negress ! 
 the Rector be astonish at this injustice , and begin to revise his opinion about Faith as the fairest and sweetest girl in all the world ; but Mrs. Twemlow smile , when she have leave off cry , and say that she like the dear child all the well for conclude that Ponga or whatever her name be must of necessity and at the first glance fall desperately in love with her own Erle . then the Rector cry , " oh , to be sure , that explain it ! but he never could have think of that , without his wife 's assistance . " 
 two year now , two year of quiet patience , of busy cheerfulness now and then , and of kindness to other always , have make of Faith Darling a lady to be love for a hundred year , and for ever . the sense of her sorrow be never far from she , yet never bring near to any other by herself ; and her smile be as warm , and her eye as bright , as if there have never be a shadow on her youth . to be greet by she , and to receive her hand , and one sweet glance of her large goodwill , be enough to make an old man feel that he must have be good at some time , and a young man hope that he should be so by - and - by ; though the tendency be generally content with the hope . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 FAREWELL , DANIEL 

 thoughtful for other as she always be , this lovely and loveable young woman go alone , on the morning of the day that be so sorrowful for she , to bear a little share of an eld lady 's sorrow , and comfort she with hope , or at any rate with kindness . they have shed tear together when the bad news arrive , and again when a twelvemonth have weaken feeble hope ; and now that another year have well - nigh kill it in old heart too conversant with the cruelty of the world , a little talk , a tender look , a gentle repetition of thing that have be say at least a hundred time before , might enter by some subtle passage to the cell of comfort . who know how the welt vine leaf , when we give it shade and moisture , crisp its curve again , and breathe new bloom upon its veinage ? and who can tell how the flagging heart , beneath the cool mantle of time , revive , shape itself into keen sympathy again , and spread itself congenially to the altered light ? 
 without think about it , but only desire to do a little good , if possible , Faith take the private way through her father 's ground lead to the rectory , eastward of the village . it be scarcely two o'clock , and the sun be shin , and the air clear and happy , as it can be in October . she be walk rather fast , for fear of drop into the brood vein , when in the little fir plantation a man come forth on her path , and stand within a few yard in front of she . she be startle for an instant , because the place be lonely , and Captain Stubbard 's battery crew have establish their power to repulse the French by pound their fellow - countryman . but presently she see that it be Dan Tugwell , look as unlike himself as any man can do   without the aid of an artist , and with some surprise she go on to meet he . 
 instead of look bright , and bold , and fearless , with the freedom of the sea in his open face , and that of the sun in his cluster curl , young Daniel appear careworn and battered , not only unlike his proper self , but afraid of and ashamed of it . he stand not firmly on the ground , nor lightly poise like a gallant sailor , but loosely and clumsily like a ploughman who leave off at the end of his furrow to ease the cramp . his hat look as if he have sleep in it , and his eye as if he have not sleep with they . 
 Miss Darling have always be fond of Dan , from the day when they play on the beach together , in childhood 's contempt of social law . her old nurse use to shut her eye , after look round to make sure that there be " nobody come to tell on they , " while as pretty a pair of child as the benevolent sea ever prattle with be make mirth and music and romance along its margin . and though in ripe boyhood the unfaithful Daniel transfer the hot part of his homage to the more coquettish dolly , Faith have not make any grievance of that , but rather think all the more of he , especially when he save her sister 's life in a very rash boat adventure . 
 so now she go up to he with a friendly mind , and ask he softly and pitifully what trouble have fall upon he . at the sweet sound of her voice , and the bright encouragement of her eye , he feel as if he be get well . 
 " if you please , miss , " he say , with a meek salutation , which prove his panisic idea to be not properly work into his system as yet " if you please , miss , thing be very hard upon I . " 
 " be it money ? " she ask , with the true british instinct that all common woe have their origin there ; " if it be , I shall be so glad that I happen to have a good bit put by just now . " 
 but Dan shake his head with such dignified sadness that Faith be quite afraid of have hurt his feeling . " oh , I might have know , " she say , " that it be nothing of that kind . you be always so industrious and steady . but what can it be ? be it anything about Captain Stubbard and his man , because I know you do not like they , and none of the old Springhaven people seem to do so ? have you be oblige to fight with any of they , Daniel ? " 
 " no , miss , no . I would not soil my hand by lay it on any of such chap as those . unless they should go for to insult I , I mean , or any one belong to I . no , miss , no . it be ten time bad than money , or assault and battery . " 
 " well , Daniel , I would not on any account , " say Faith , with her desire of knowledge grow hotter by delay , as a kettle boil by wait " on no account would I desire to know anything that you do not seem to think my advice might help you to get out of . I be not in a hurry , but still my time be get rather late for what I have to do . by the time I come back from the rectory , perhaps you will have make up your mind about it . till then , good - bye to you , Daniel . " 
 he step out of the path , that she might go by , and only say , " then goodbye , miss ; I shall be far away when you come back . " 
 this be more than the well - regulate , or large which generally be the worst - regulate feminine mind could put up with . Miss Darling come back , with her mind make up to learn all , or to know the reason why . 
 " Dan , this be unworthy of you , " she say , with her sweet voice full of sorrow . " have I ever be hard or unkind to you , Dan , that you should be so afraid of I ? " 
 " no , miss , never . but too much the other way . that make it so bad for I to say good - bye . I be go away , miss . I must be off this evening . I never shall see Springhaven no more , nor you , miss nor nobody else . " 
 " it be quite impossible , Dan . you must be dream . you do not   look at all like yourself to - day . you have be do too much over - time . I have hear all about it , and how very hard you work . I have be quite sorry for you on Sundays , to see you in the gallery , without a bit of rest , still oblige to give the time with your elbow . I have often be astonish that your mother could allow it . why , Dan , if you go away , you will break her heart , and I do not   know how many more in Springhaven . " 
 " no , miss , no . they very soon mend they . it be the one as go away that get a deal the bad of it . I be sure I do not   know whatever I shall do , without the old work to attend to . but it will get on just as well without I . " 
 " no , it will not , " reply Faith , look at he very sadly , and shake her head at such cynical view ; " nothing will be the same , when you be go , Daniel ; and you ought to have more consideration . " 
 " I be go with a good man , at any rate , " he answer , " the free - minded gentleman that ever come to these part . Squire Carne , of Carne Castle , if you please , miss . " 
 " Mr. Caryl Carne ! " cry Faith , in a tone which make Daniel look at she with some surprise . " be he go away ? oh , I be so glad ! " 
 " no , miss ; not Squire Carne himself . only to provide for I work far away , and not to be behold any more to my own people . and work where a man may earn and keep his own money , and hold up his head while adoe of it . " 
 " oh , Dan , you know more of such thing than I do . and every man have a right to be independent , and ought to be so , and I should despise he otherwise . but do not   be drive by it into the opposite extreme of dislike the people in a different rank " 
 " no , miss , there be no fear of that the only fear be like some of they too much . " 
 " and then , " continue Faith , who be now upon one of her favourite subject past interruption , " you must try to remember that if you work hard , so do we , or nearly all of we . from the time my father get up in the morning , to the time when he go to bed at night , he have not get five minute as he tell we every day for attend to anything but business . even at dinner , when you get a good hour , and will not   be disturb now will you ? " 
 " no , miss ; not if all the work be tumble down . no workman as respect himself would take fifty - nine minute for sixty . " 
 " exactly so ; and you be right . you stand up for your right . your dinner you have earn , and you will have it . and the same with your breakfast , and your supper too , and a good long night to get over it . do you jump up in bed , before you have shut both eye , hear or fancy you have hear the bell , that call you out into the cold , and the dark , and a wet saddle , from a warm pillow ? and put that by , as a trouble of the war , and the chance of be shoot at by dark tall man " here Faith shudder at her own presentment , as the image of Caryl Carne pass before she " have you to consider , at every turn , that whatever you do though you mean it for the good will be twist and turn against you by some one , and make into wickedness that you never dream of , by envious people , whose grudge against you be that they fancy you look down on they ? though I be sure of one thing , and that be that my father , instead of look down upon any honest man because he be poor , look up to he ; and so do I ; and so do every gentleman or lady . and any one who go about to persuade the working - people as they be call , because they have to use their hand more that people like my father look down upon they , and treat they like dog , and all those wicked story all I can say be , any man who do it deserve to be put in the stock , or the pillory , or even to be transport as an enemy to his country . " 
 Dan look at the lady with great surprise . he have always know she to be kind and gentle , and what the old people call " mannersome , " to every live body that come near she . but to hear she put , well than he could put they , his own bud sentiment   which he think to be new , with the timeworn illusion of young Liberals , and to know from her bright cheek , and bright eye , that her heart be in every word of it , and to feel himself rebuke for the evil he have think , and the mischief he have give ear to all this be enough to make he angry with himself , and uncertain how to answer . 
 " I be certain that you never think of such thing , " Miss Darling continue , with her gentle smile return ; " you be much too industrious and sensible for that . but I hear that some person be now in our parish who make it their business , for some reason of their own , to spread ill - will and jealousy and hatred everywhere , to make we all stranger and foe to one another , and foreigner to our own country . we have enemy enough , by the will of the Lord   as Mr. Twemlow say , for a sharp trial to we , and a lesson to our pride , and a deep source of gratitude , and charity , and good - will though I scarcely understand how they come in and , above all , a warning to we to stick together , and not exactly hate , but still abhor , everybody who have a word to say against his own country at a time like this . and ten thousand time as much , if he be afraid to say it , but crawl with crafty poison into simple english bosom . " 
 " there be nothing of that , miss , to my knowledge , here , " the young fisherman answer , simply ; " Springhaven would never stand none of that ; and the club drink the health of King George every night of their meeting , and stamp on the floor for he . but I never shall help to do that any more . I must be go , miss and thank you . " 
 " then you will not tell I why you go ? you speak of it as if it be against your will , and yet refuse to say what drive you . have you be poach , Dan ? ah , that be it ! but I can beg you off immediately . my father be very good even to stranger , and as for his do anything to you have no fear , Dan ; you shall not be charge with it , even if you have be in Brown Bushes . " 
 Brown Bushes , a copse about a mile inland , be the Admiral 's most sacred spot , when peace allow he to go shoot , because it be belove by woodcock , his favourite bird both for trigger and for fork . but Daniel only shake his head ; he have not be near Brown Bushes . few thing perhaps will endure more wear than feminine curiosity . but when a trap have be set too long , it get tongue - bind , and grow content without content . 
 " Daniel Tugwell , " say Miss Darling , severely , " if you have not be fight , or conspire against society , or even poach , I can well understand that you may have reason for not desire my assistance or advice . and I only wonder that under such circumstance you take the trouble to wait for I here , as you appear to have do . good - bye . " 
 " oh , do not   be cross , miss ! please not to be cross , " cry Daniel , run after she ; " I would tell you all about it this very instant moment , if it be behove to I . you will hear all about it when you get to Parson Twemlow 's , for I see mother go there , afore she have her breakfast , though I be not concernable to let she see I . if the squire have be home , she would have go up to Hall first . no , miss , no . I do nothing to be ashamed of ; and if you turn back on I , you will be sorry afterwards . " 
 Faith be more apt to think that she have be too sharp than to be so in behaviour to any one . she begin at once , with a blush for her bad idea , to beg Dan 's pardon , and he see his way to say what he be come to say . 
 " you always be too good , Miss Faith , too good to be hard upon any one , and I be sure you have not be hard upon I ; for I know that I look disrespectable . but I could not   find word to say what I want , until you speak so soft and kind . and perhaps , when I say it , you will be angry with I , and think that I trespass upon you . " 
 " no , I will not , Dan ; I will promise you that . you may tell I , as if I be Mr. Swipes , who say that he never lose his temper in his life , because he be always right , and other people wrong . " 
 " well , miss , I be afraid that I be not like that , and that make I feel so uncomfortable with the difference between we . because it be all about Miss dolly , and I might seem so impudent . but you know that I would go through fire and water to serve Miss Dolly , and I durstn't   go away forever without one message to she . if I be in her own rank of life , God Almighty alone should part we , whether I be rich or whether I be poor , and I would like to see any one come near she ! but be only an ignorant fellow without any birth or book - learning , I be not such a fool as to forget that the breadth of the world lie between we . only I may wish she well , all the same I may wish she well and happy , miss ? " 
 " certainly you may . " Faith blush at the passion of his word , and sigh at their despair . " you have save her life . she respect and like you , the same as my father and I do . you may trust I with your message , Dan . " 
 " I suppose it would not be the proper thing for I to see she once before I go ; just for one minute , with you stand by she , that I might that she might " 
 " no , " answer Faith , though it grieve she to say it ; " we must not think of that , Dan . it could do you no good , and it might do her harm . but if you have any message , to be useful to she " 
 " the useful part of it must be through you , miss , and not send to she at all , I think , or it would be very impertinent . the kind part be to give she my good - bye , and say that I would die to help she . and the useful part be for yourself . for God 's sake , miss , do keep Miss dolly out of the way of Squire Carne ! he hath a tongue equal to any woman , with the mind of a man beneath it . he hath get I body and soul ; because I care not the skin of a dab what befall I . but oh , miss , he never must get Miss dolly . he may be a very good man in some way , and he be wonderful free - minded ; but any young lady as marrie he have well have leap into the Culver Hole . farewell , miss , now that I have tell you . " he be go before Faith could even offer he her hand , but he take off his hat and put one finger to his curl , as he look back from the clearing ; and her eye fill with tear , as she wave her hand and answer , " Farewell , Daniel ! " 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 cauliflower 

 " they cock and hen , " Mr. Swipes use to say in the early day of his empire " bless you , my lord , they cock and hen know a good bit of gardening as well as I do . they call one another , and they come to see it , and they put their head to one side and talk about it , and they say to one another , ' must be something good there , or he would not   have make it so bootiful ' ; and then up go their comb , and they tear away into it , like a passel of Scotchmen at a scratch - match . if your lordship will not   put a lock on the door , you will never taste a bit of good vegetable . " 
 Admiral Darling be at length persuade to allow Mr. Swipes the privilege of lock himself in the kitchen - garden ; and then , for the purpose of get at he , a bell be put in the gable of the tool - house , with a long handle hang outside the door in the courtyard towards the kitchen . thus he be able to rest from his labour , without incur unjust reproach ; and gradually as he decline , with increase decision , to answer the bell when it ring , accord to the high law of nature it leave off ring altogether . so Mr. Swipes in the walled kitchen - garden seek peace and ensue it . 
 one quiet November afternoon , when the disappearance of Dan Tugwell have be talk out and do with , a sad mishap befell this gardener , during the performance , or , to speak more correctly , the contemplation of his work . a yawn of such length and breadth and height and profundity take possession of he that the space it have so well occupy still retain the tender memory . in plainer word , he have rick his jaw , not from general want of usage , but from the momentary excess . 
 " sarves I right , " he mutter , " for carry on so , without nothing inside of ' un . must go to doctor , quick step , and no mistake . " 
 in this strait he set off for John Prater 's   for it be a matter of luck to get ale at the Hall , and in such emergency he must not trust to fortune , and pass hastily through the door , leave it unlocked behind he . go down the hill he remember this , and have a great mind to go back again , but the unanimous demand of his system for beer impel he downwards . he never could get up that hill again without hydraulic pressure . 
 all might have go well , and all would have go well , except for the grievous mistake of nature in furnish woman with eye whose keenness be only exceed by that of their tongue . the cook at the Hall , a superior person though lightly esteem by Mrs. Cloam have long be ambitious to have a voice in the selection of her raw material . if anything be good , who get the credit ? Mr. Swipes , immediately . but if everything be bad , as more often happen , who receive the blame ? Mary Knuckledown . her lawful name be " Knuckleup , " but early misfortune have reduce she to such mildness that her name become convert as she express it in harmony with her nature . fact have generally be adverse to she , she find some comfort in warm affection for their natural enemy and ever - victorious rival word . any word come with a brave rush be able to scatter to the wind the strong fact ; but big word as all our great orator know knock they at once on the head and cremate they . but the cook be a kind - hearted woman , and like both little and big word , without think of they . 
 she have put down her joint , a good aitch - bone , for roast than which , if well treat , be few well treat to revolve in the distant salute of the fire   until it should ripen for the close embrace , where the tint of gold and chestnut vie , when it come into her provident mind with a flash that neither horse - radish nor cauliflower have yet be deliver by Mr. Swipes . she must run out and pull the long handle in the yard , and remind he gently of her need , for she stand in some awe of his character , as a great annalist of little people 's life . 
 leave the small dog Dandolo with stern order to keep the jack steadily go , with a stick on the dresser to intimidate one eye , and a sop in the dripping - pan to encourage the other , Mrs. Knuckledown run into the court - yard , just in time to see the last swing of the skirt of that noble gardener 's coat , as he turn the wall corner on his march towards the tap . she long to call he back , but remember just in time how fearfully cross that have make he once before , and she be yield with a sigh to her usual bad luck , when an eager and triumphant cluck make she look about . the monarch and patriarch of cock , a magnificent old dorking , not idly endow with five claw for the scratch , have discover something great , and be call all his wife , and even his son , as many as yet crow not against he , to share this special luck of fortune , or kind mood of Providence . in a minute or two he have levy an army , some half - hundred strong , and all spur the land , to practise their liberal claw betime for the gorgeous joy of scatter it . then the grand old cock , whose name be " Bill , " make they all fall in behind he , and strut till he almost tumble on his head , lead the march of destruction to the garden door . 
 but , alas , he have wait for his follower too long , eager as they be for rapine . when he come to his portal of delight , there stand , stout as Britannia herself , and sweep a long knife for her trident , the valiant cook , to protect her cauliflower . " you be off , Bill , " she cry . " I do not   want to hurt you , because you have be a good bird in your time , but now you be grow outrageous . " Bill make a rush for it , but lose a slice of his top - heavy comb , retire . 
 " now be my opportunity , " say Mary to herself , " for to cut my own cabbage for once in my life , and to see what that old beast do in here . oh my ! the old villain , and robber that he be ! bamboozlement be the language for it . " embezzlement she should have say , and to one who know as she do how badly the table of the master be supply , the suspicion be almost unavoidable . for here she see in plenteous show , and appetise excellence , a many many of the very thing she have vainly crave from Mr. Swipes . and if it be so now in November , what must it have be two month ago ? why , poor Miss Faith Mary Knuckledown 's idol , because of her kindness and sad disappointment have ask a little while ago for a bit of salsify , not for herself she never think of herself but for a guest who be fond of it ; also the Admiral himself have call out for a good dish of skirret . but no ; Mr. Swipes say the weather and the black blight have destroy they . yet here they be ; Mary could swear to they both , with their neck above - ground , as if wait for the washing ! cauliflower also   as the cook call broccoli of every kind , here they be in abundance , ten long row all across the middle square , very beautiful to behold . some be just curl in their crinkle coronet , to conceal the young heart that be form , as Miss in her teen draw her tress around the first peep of her own palpitation ; other be show their broad candid bosom , with bold sprig of nature 's green lace crisp round ; while other have their ripe breast shield from the air by the breakage of their own broad fringe upon they . 
 Mary know that this be do by Mr. Swipes himself , because he have bring she some in that condition ; but the unsuspicious master have accept his assurance that " they be only fit for pig as soon as the break - stalk blight come on them " ; and then the next day he have buy the very same , perhaps at ninepence apiece , from Mr. Cheeseman 's window , trim and shorn close , like the head of a monk . " I will see every bit of ' un , now that I be here . " Mrs. Knuckledown speak aloud , to keep up her courage . " too bad for that old beast to keep we lock out from the very place we ought to have for pommylarding , because he saith all the fruit would go into our pocket . and what go into his'en , I should like to know ? suppose I lock he out , as he hath lock we out . he will not   be back yet for half an hour , anyway . Wish I could write what a list I would make , if it be only of the thing he denieth he hath get ! " 
 strong in her own honesty and loyalty to her master , the cook turn the key in the lock , and leave Swipes to ring himself into his own garden , as he always call it . that be to say , if he should return , which be not very likely , before she have time for a good look round . but she see such a sight of thing she have long for , to redeem her repute in the vegetable way , as well as such herb for dainty stuffing , of which she know more than cook generally do , that her cap nearly come off her head with amazement , and time fly by unheeded . until she be startled and terrify sadly by the loud , angry clang of the bell in the gable . not only be Mr. Swipes come back , but he be in a furious rage outside , though his fury be chill with some shiver of fear . at first , when he find the door lock against he , he think that the Admiral must have come home unexpected , and fail to find he at work , have turn the key against he , while himself inside . if so , his situation would be in sad peril , and many acre of lie would be require to redeem it . for trust in his master 's long time of absence , and full time of public duty when at home , Mr. Swipes have grow more private stock , as he call it , and deny the kitchen more , than he have ever do before , in special preparation for some public dinner about to be give at the Darling Arms , by military officer to naval , and in turn by the latter to the former ; for those be hospitable day , when all true Britons stick their country 's enemy with knife and fork , as well as sword . 
 but learn , as he soon do at the stable , that the Admiral be still away , and both the young lady be go for a ride with Miss Twemlow , the gardener come back in a rage , and ring the bell . " oh , whatever shall I do ? " the trembling Mary ask herself . " good take the upper hand if I can . he be a thief , and a rogue , and he ought to be fright . do he know I can not   write ? no , for certain he dothn't . one of his big lie about I be a letter I write to poor Jonadab . " 
 with her courage renew by the sense of that wrong , she open the door , and stand face Mr. Swipes , with a piece of paper in her hand , which a woman 's quick wit bid her fetch from her pocket . 
 " Halloa , madam ! " the gardener exclaim , with a sweep of his hat and a low salute , which he mean to be vastly satirical ; ' so your ladyship have come to take the air in my poor garden , instead of tend the spit . and what do your ladyship think of it , so please you ? sorry as I have any dung about , but have not   no warning of this royal honour . " 
 " Sir , " say Mrs. Knuckledown , pretend to be frighten a great deal more than she be " oh , sir , forgive I ! I be sure I mean no harm . but the fowl be run in , and I run up to stop they . " 
 " oh , that be how your ladyship condescend ; and to keep out the fowl , you lock out I ! allow I the royal and unapparelled honour of show your ladyship to her carriage ; and if I ever catch she in here again , I will pitch you down the court - yard pretty quick . be off , you dirty baggage , or I will not   answer for it now ! " 
 " oh , you be too kind , Mr. Swipes ; I be sure you be too gentle , to forgive I , like of that ! and the little list I make of the flower in your garden , I shall put it in a teapot till the Quality want something . " 
 Mr. Swipes give a start , and his over - water eye could not meet those of Mary , which be mildly set upon they . " list ! " he mutter " little list ! what do you please to mean , Miss ? " 
 " well , the ' dirty baggage ' mean nothing unparalleled , sir , but just the same as anybody else might do . some people call it a Inventionary , and some an Emmarandum , and some a Catalogue . it do not   interfere with you , Mr. Swipes ; only the next time as Miss dolly ask , the same as she be do the other day " 
 " oh , she be , be she ? the little - ! " Mr. Swipes use a word concern that young lady which would have insure his immediate discharge , together with one from the Admiral 's good toe . " and pray , what be her observation , ma'am ? " 
 " it be Charles tell I , for he be wait at dinner . seem that the turnip be not to she liking , though I pick out the very good of what few you send in , so she look up from her plate , and she say : ' well , I can not understand it ! to I it be the great mistress in the world , ' she say , ' that we never can get a bit of vegetable fit for eat . we have   get , ' she say , ' a kitchen - garden close upon two acre , and a man who call himself head gardener , by the name of Swipes ' my pardoning to you , Mr. Swipes , for the young lady 's way of say it ' and his two son , and his nephew , and I dare say soon his grandson . well , and what come of it ? ' say she . ' why , that we never have a bit of any kind of vegetable , much less of fruit , fit to lay a fork to ! ' Charles be a - prick up his ear at this , because of his own grumble , and the master see it , and he say , ' hush , dolly ! ' but she up and answer spiritly : ' no , I will not   hush , papa , because it be too bad . only you leave it to I , ' she say , ' and if I do not   keep the key from that old thief excoose I , Mr. Swipes , for her shocking language ' and find out what he lock up in there , my name 's not Horatia Dorothy Darling . ' oh , do not   let it dwell so on your mind , Mr. Swipes ! you know what young lady be . they say thing random , and then go away and never think no more about it . oh , do not   be upset so or I shall have to call Charles ! " 
 Mr. Swipes take his hat off to ease his poor mind , which have lose its way altogether in other people 's wickedness . " may I never set eye on that young man no more ! " he exclaim , with more pathetic force than reason power . " either he or I quit this establishment to - morrow . ah , I know well why he leave his last place , and somebody else shall know to - morrow ! " 
 " what harm have poor Charles do ? " the cook ask sharply ; " it be not   he that say it ; it be Miss dolly . Charley only tell I conferentially . " 
 " oh , I know what ' conferentially ' mean , when anything once get among the womenkind ! but I know a thing or two about Miss dolly , as will give she enough to do at home , I will warrant , without come spy after I and my affair . do not   you be surprised , cook , whatever you may hear , as soon as ever the Admiral returneth . he be a soft man enough in a number of way , but he will not   put up with everything . the nasty little vixen , if she do not   smart for this ! " 
 " oh , do not   ' e , now do not   ' e , Mr. Swipes , that be a dear ! " cry the soft - hearted Mrs. Knuckledown ; " do not   ' e tell on she , the poor young thing . if her hath be carry on a bit with some of they young hofficer , why , it be only natteral , and her such a young booty . do not   ' e be Dick - tell - tale , with a name to it , or without . and perhaps she never say half the thing that Charles hath contribute to she . " the truth be that poor dolly have say scarcely one of they . 
 " bain't   no young hofficer , " Mr. Swipes reply , contemptuously ; " ten time wuss than that , and madder for the Admiral . give I that paper , Miss , and then , perhaps , I will tell ' e. be no good to you , and might be useful to I . " 
 Mary could not give up the paper , because it be a letter from one of her adorer , which , with the aid of Jenny Shanks , she have interpret . " no , no , " she say , with a coax look ; " by - and - by , Mr. Swipes , when you have tell I who it be , and when you have promise not to tell on poor Miss dolly . but nobody sha'n't   see it , without your permission . we will have another talk about that to - morrow . but , oh my ! look at the time you have keep I , with all the good thing to make a hangel 's mouth water ! bring I two cauliflower in two second . my beef will want basting long ago ; and if Dandy hathn't   leave his job , he will be pretty well roasted hisself by now . " 
 Mr. Swipes go mutter up the walk , and be force to cut two of the fine cauliflower intend for Cheeseman 's adornment to - morrow . this turn his heart very sour again , and he shake his head , growl in self - commune : " you see if I do not   do it , my young lady . you speak again I , behind my back , and I write again you , before your face ; though , in course , I need not put my name to it . " 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 LOYAL , AYE LOYAL 

 one of the dinner at the Darling Arms , and perhaps the most brilliant and exciting of the whole , because even the waiter understand the subject , be the entertainment give in the month of December , A.D. 1803 , not only by the officer of two regiment quarter for the time near Stonnington , but also by all the lead people round about those part , in celebration of the great work do by his Majesty 's 38 - gun frigate Leda . several small dinner have be consume already , by way of practice , both for the cook and the waiter and the chairman , and Mr. John Prater , who always stand behind he , with a napkin in one hand and a corkscrew in the other , and his heart in the middle , ready either to assuage or stimulate . as for the guest , it be always find that no practice have be require . 
 " but now , but now " as Mr. Prater say , when his wife pretend to make nothing of it , for no other purpose than to aggravate he , because she think that he be make too much money , in proportion to what he be give she " now we shall see what Springhaven can do for the good of the Country and the glory of herself . two bottle and a half a head be the low that can be charge for , with the treble x outside , and the punch to follow after . his lordship be the gentleman to keep the bottle go . " 
 for the Lord - Lieutenant of the county , the popular Marquis of Southdown , have promise to preside at this grand dinner ; and everybody know what that mean . " short tongue and long throat , " be his lordship 's motto in the discharge of all public business , and " bottle to the gentleman on my left ! " be the practical form of his eulogy . in a small space like this , there would be no chance for a sober - minded guest to escape his search eye , and Blyth Scudamore   appoint to represent the officer of the Leda , and therefore the hero of the evening   feel as happy as a dog be lead to be drown , in view of this liquid ordeal . for Blyth be a temperate and moderate young man , neither such a savage as to turn his wine to poison , nor yet so anti - christian as to turn it into water . 
 many fine place have be offer for the feast , and foremost amongst they the Admiral 's house ; but the committee with sound judgment have decline they all . the great point be to have a place within easy reach of boat , and where gallant naval officer could be recall at once , if the French should do anything outrageous , which they be apt to do at the most outrageous time . but when a partition have be knock down , and the breach tack over with festoon of laurel , Mr. Prater be quite justified in rub his red hand and declare it as snug a box as could be for the business . there be even a dark elbow where the staircase jut out , below the big bressemer of the partition , and make a little gallery for lady to hear speech , and behold the festive hero while still fit to be beholden . and Admiral Darling , as vice - chairman , enter into fact masculine and feminine , have promise his daughter and Miss Twemlow , under charge of the rector 's wife and Mrs. Stubbard , a peep at this heroic scene , before it should become too convivial . the rescuer also of the Blonde , the flesh and bone , without which the master brain must still have lain strand , be to have a grand supper in the cover skittle - alley , as the joint come away from their better , this low deck be in command of Captain Tugwell , who could rouse up his crew as fast as his lordship rouse his officer . 
 Admiral Darling have be engage of late in the service of his country so continually , and keep up and down the great road so much , or in and out of any little port where sailor grow , that his own door have nearly forget his shadow , and his dining - room table the reflection of his face . for , in those day , to keep a good table imply that the table must be good , as well as what be put upon it ; and calico spread upon turpentine be not yet consider the proper footing for the hospitable and social glass . 
 " when shall twemlow and I have a hobnob again ? " the Admiral ask himself many a time . " how the dear old fellow love to see the image of his glass upon the table , and the ruby of his port reflect ! Heigho ! I be get very stiff in the back , and never a decent bit of dinner for'ard . and as for a glass of good wine oh Lord ! my timber will be break up , before it come to mend they . and when I come home for even half an hour , there be all this small rubbish to attend to . I must have Frank home , to take this stuff off my hand , or else keep what I abominate , a private secretary . " 
 among the pile of letter that have lie unopened be one which he leave to the last , because he dislike both the look and the smell of it . a dirty , ugly scrawl it be , bulge out with clumsy folding , and dab with wax in the crease . with some dislike he tear it open ; and the dislike become loathing , as he read : 
 " Hon'd Sir . these foo line come from a umble but arty frend to command . rekweste of your pardon sir , I have kep a hi same be father of good dawter on the going on of your fammeley . Miss Faith she be a hangel sir but Miss dolly I fere no well than she ort to be , and wonderful fond of be notice . I see her keep company and carryin on dreadful with a tall dark young man as meen no good and live to Widow Shankses . too nite run when the day be short she be up to the cornder of your ground to meat he there ever so long . only you hask she if you do not   believe I and wash her fase same time sir . too other peple besides I nose it . Excoose hon'd sir this trubble from your obejiant servant 
 " FAX and no misstake . " 
 the Admiral 's healthy face turn blue with rage and contempt , and he stamp with his heel , as if he have the writer under it . to write a stabbing letter , and to dare to deal the stab , and yet fear to show the hand that deal it , be at that time consider a low thing to do . even now there be people who so regard it , though a still well tool for a blackguard the anonymous post - card be now supersede it . 
 all the old man 's pleasure , and cheer , and comfort , and joy in have one day at home at last , be dash and shatter and turn into wretched anxiety by this vile scrawl . he mean to have go down , light of heart , with a smile daughter upon either arm , to the gallant little festival where everybody know he , and every one admire and love he . his two pretty daughter would sit upstairs , watch from a bow - window   though themselves unseen   all the dash arrival and the grand apparel . then when the Marquis make his speech , and the King and Queen and Royal Family ride upon the cloud , and the grandeur of Great Britain be above the star of heaven , the lady in the gallery would venture just to show themselves , not for one moment with a dream of be look at , but from romantic loyalty , and the fervour of great sentiment . People pretend not to know would ask , " who be those very lovely lady ? " and he would make believe to know nothing at all about it , but his heart would know whether he know it or not . 
 on the very eve of all this well - earn bliss , when it would have refresh his fagged body and soul which be now not so young as they use to be to hear from some scoundrel without a name , that his pet child , the life of his life , be no well than she ought to be , which be say of a woman mean that she be as bad as she can be ! this fine old gentleman have never receive such a cowardly back - hand blow till now , and for a moment he bend under it . 
 then , greatly ashamed of himself , he arise , and with one strong word , which even Mr. Twemlow might have use under such provocation , he trod the vile stuff under foot , and pitch it with the fire - tong into the fire . after this he feel well , and resolve most stoutly that he never would let it cross his mind again , make a light and cheerful answer to the profligate one his young girl who come seek he . 
 " oh , father , and you ought to be dress ! " she cry . " shall we keep his Majesty the Lord - Lieutenant waiting ? do not   let we go at all . let we stop at home , papa . we never see you now , more than once in a month ; and we do not   want to see you from a staircase hole , where we must not   even blow a kiss to you . I have get such a lot of thing to tell you , dear father ; and I could make you laugh much more than they will . " 
 " but , my darle all these grand thing ? " say the father , gently finger but half afraid to look at she , because of what have be in his own mind ; " the sweetest Navy blue , and the bright Army red , and little bit of silver lace so quiet in between they ! I be sure I do not   know what to call a quarter of it ; but the fine ship ever see under full sail , with the sun come through she from her royal to her course " 
 " now , papa , do not   be so ridiculous . you know that I be not a fine ship at all , but only a small frigate , about eighteen gun at the outside , I should say though she would be a sloop of war , would not   she ? and come here at any rate for you to command she , if you be not far too lofty an Admiral . " 
 " do you love your old father , my dear ? " say he , be carry beyond his usual state by the joy in her eye as she touch he . 
 " what a shame to ask I such a question ? oh , papa , I ought to say , ' do you love I ? ' when you go away week and month almost together ! take that , papa ; and be quite ashamed of yourself . " 
 she sweep all her breast - knot away anyhow that have take an hour to arbitrate and fling back her hair that would never be coil , and with a flash of tear leap into laugh eye , throw both arm round her father 's neck , and press her cool sweet lip to his , which be not at all in the same condition . 
 " there , see what you have   do for I now ! " she cry . " it will take three - quarter of an hour , papa , to make I look fit to be look at again . the fashion be grow so ridiculous now it be a happy thing for we that we be a hundred year behind they , as Eliza Twemlow have the impudence to say ; and really , for the daughter of a clergyman " 
 " I do not   care that for Eliza Twemlow , " the Admiral exclaim , with a snap of his thumb . " let she show herself as much as there be demand for . or rather , what I mean to say be , let Miss Twemlow be as beautiful as nature have make she , my dear ; and no doubt that be very considerable . but I like you to be different ; and you be . I like you to be simple , and shy , and retire , and not to care twopence what any one think of you , so long as your father be content . " 
 dolly look at her father , as if there be no other man in the world for the moment . then her conscience make her bright eye fall , as she whisper : " to be sure , papa . I only put these thing on to please you ; and if you do not   like they , away they go . perhaps I should look nice in my great - aunt 's shawl . and my foot would be warm , oh ever so much ! I know where it be , and if you prefer the look of it " 
 " no , no ! " cry the simple old father , as the girl trip away in hot haste to seek for it ; " I forbid you to make such a guy of yourself . you must not take my little banter , darling , in such a matter - of - fact way , or I must hold my tongue . " 
 " thank God , " he continue to himself , as Miss dolly run away , to repair her damage ; " the simple little soul think of nobody but I ! how could I be such a fool as to imagine harm of she ? why , she be quite a child , a big child than I be . I shall enjoy my evening all the more for this . " 
 and truly there seem to be no reason why all the guest at that great festival , save those who have speech to make , should not enjoy their evening thoroughly . great preparation have be make , and goodly present contribute ; plenty of serve - man would be there , and John Prater   now grow white - headed and portly   be become so skilful a caterer that if anything be suggest to he , he have always think of it long ago . the only grief be that the hour should be so late five o'clock , an unchristian time , as they say , for who could have manner after starve so long ? 
 there be some sense in this ; but the unreasonable lateness of the hour could not be help , because the Lord - Lieutenant have to wait upon the King at eight o'clock that morning . that he could do so , and yet be in Springhaven by five , seem almost impossible ; for only ten year ago the journey take two day . but the war seem to make everything go quick , and it be no use to wonder at anything . only if everything else go quick , why should dinner   the most important of they all   come slow ? and as yet there be nobody to answer this ; though perhaps there be no one to ask it now . 
 all thing begin very beautifully . the young lady slip in unobserved , and the elder blessing of mankind come after , escort themselves with dignity . then the hero who have fight , and the gallant who have not have the luck yet , but be eager for it , come pleasantly clank in , well girt to demolish ox and sheep , like Ajax , in lack of lofty carnage . the rector say grace , and the Marquis amen , and in less than two minute every elbow be up , and every mouth at business . there be very little talk for the first half hour . in those day emptiness be not allow to make the process of fill a misery . 
 while these fine fellow be still in the prime of their feeding , bent over and upon it , two man with empty stomach , and a long way between they and their victual , stand afar regard they . that be to say , just far enough to be quite out of sight from the window , in the gloom of the December evening ; but at the same time near enough , to their own unhappiness , to see and even smell the choice affair across the road . 
 " for what , then , hast thou bring I here ? " the short man sharply ask the tall one , both be in an uncomfortable place in a hedge , and with briar that scratch they . " be it to see other people eat , when to eat myself be impossible ? you have promise to show I a very fine thing , and league have I traverse to please you . Fie , then , what be it ? to see eat , eat , eat , and drink , drink , drink , and have nothing for myself ! " 
 " my friend , " say the tall man , " I have not bring you here with any desire to improve your appetite , which be always abundant , and can not be gratify for several hour , and with poor stuff then , compare to what you be behold . those man be feed well . you can see how they enjoy it . there be not a morsel in their mouth that have not a very choice flavour of its own distinguished relish . see , there be the venison just wait to be carve , and a pheasant between every two of they . if only the wind be a little more that way , and the cover take off the sauce - boat , and the gravy ah , do I perceive a fine fragrance , or be it a desirous imagination ? " 
 " Bah ! you be of the cold - blood , the wicked self - command . for I it be either to rush in , or rush away . no long can I hold my nose and mouth . and behold they have wine grand wine the wine of Sillery , of Medoc , of Barsac , and of Burgundy ! by the bottle I can tell they , and by all the Saints " 
 " be not so excited , for you can not smack the lip . it be too late now to envy they their solid , because they have make such speed with they . but listen , my dear friend " and here the tall man whisper into the ear of his brisk companion , who dance with delight in the ungenial hedge , till his face be scar with bramble . 
 " it be magnificent , it be droll , it be what you call in England one grand spree , though of that you understand not the signification . but , my faith , it be at the same time barbarous , and almost too malignant . " 
 " too benevolent Charron , " say the tall stern man , " that shall rest upon my conscience , not on your . the object be not to spoil their noisy revel , but to gain instruction of importance . to obtain a clear idea of the measure they adopt ah , you see , you be as quick as lightning . this urgent message be upon official paper , which I have take from the desk of that very stupid Stubbard . take the horse Jerry hold at the corner , and the officer 's hat and cape provide be ample disguise for so dark a night . take the lane behind the hill , and gallop two mile eastward , till you come to the shore again , then turn back towards the village by way of the beach , and you will meet the Coast - guard on duty , a stupid fellow call Vickers . your horse by that time will be pip and roar : he can go like the wind , but his own be break . the moment you see Vickers , begin to swear at your horse . I have practise you in d ns , for an emergency . " 
 " ten thousand thunder , I can say d n now to equal and surpass the purest bear of all Britons . " 
 " not so loud , my friend , until by - and - by . the Coast - guard will come to you , and you pull up with your horse hang down his head , as if dead - beat . use your accomplishment again , you say : ' here , take this on to Admiral Darling . my nag be quite do , and I must get to Stonnington to call Colonel James . for your life , run , run . you will get a guinea , if you look sharp . ' before he can think of it , turn your horse , and make back to the lane , as if for Stonnington . but instead of that , gallop back to our ruin ; and we will go up the hill , and see what come of it . " 
 " it be very good , it be magnificent . but will not the sentinel perceive my voice and accent ? " 
 " not he ; he be a very honest and therefore stupid fellow . give he no time , answer no question . be all in a rush , as you so generally be . I would do it myself , but I be too well know . say , will you undertake it ? it will be a fine joke for you . " 
 about half an hour after this , the Lord - Lieutenant have hammer on the table with an empty bottle , stand up to propose the chief toast of the evening the gallant crew of the Leda , and the bold sailor of Springhaven . his lordship have scarcely have a bottle and a half , and be now in the prime of his intellect . a very large man , with a long brocade coat of ruby - colour cloth , and white satin breech , a waistcoat of primrose plush emblazon with the Union - jack   then the popular device   in gorgeous silk with a margin of bright gold , and a neckcloth point and plait in with the rare lace , worth all the rest put together what a pity it seem that such a man should get drunk , or at any rate try so hard to do it . there be not a pimple on his face , his cheek be rosy and glistening , but not flush ; and his eye be as bright and clear and deep as a couple of large sapphire . 
 this nobleman say a few word , without any excitement , or desire to create it , every word to the point , and the good that could be choose not to go beyond the point . there be no attempt at eloquence , and yet the speech be eloquent , because it suggest so much more than be say . more excitable nature , overcome by half a bottle , resolve to have the other half , in honour of that toast . 
 then the Marquis do a very kind and thoughtful thing , for which he deserve a bottle of the Royal Tokay , such as even Napoleon could not obtain . when the cheering be do , and every eye be fix upon the blushing Scudamore who feel himself , under that fixture , like an insect under a lens which the sun be turn into a burning - glass the Chairman perceive his sad plight , and to give he more time and more spirit , rise again . 
 " gentleman , " he say , " or I would rather call you brother englishman at this moment , I have forget one thing . before our young hero reply to his health , let we give he that spirited song ' Billy Blue , ' which be well known to every man here , I will be bind . tell the drummer down there to be ready for chorus . " Billy Blue , though almost forget now   because the enemy would not fight he , the blockader of Brest , the hardy , skilful , and ever watchful Admiral Cornwallis , would be know to we nearly as well as Nelson , if fame be not a lottery . 
 as the Lord - Lieutenant wave his hand , the company rise with one accord , and follow the lead of his strong clear voice in the popular song , call 
  " BILLY BLUE " 

  1 

  " ' tis a terrible time for Englishmen ; 
  all tyrant do abhor they ; 
  every one of they hath to fight with ten , 
  and the Lord alone be for they . 
  but the Lord hath give the strong right hand , 
  and the courage to face the thunder ; 
  if a Frenchman tread this english land , 
  he shall find his grave thereunder . 

  CHORUS 

  Britannia be the Ocean - Queen , and she standeth staunch and 
  true , 
  with Nelson for her faulchion keen , and her buckler Billy Blue . 

  2 

  " they be muster on yon gallic coast , 
  you can see they from this high land , 
  the big of all the outlandish host 
  that ever devour an island . 
  there be steed that have scour the continent , 
  Ere ever one might say , ' whoa , there ! ' 
  and ship that would fill the Thames and Trent , 
  if we would let they go there . 

  CHORUS 

  but England be the Ocean - Queen , and it shall be hard to do ; 
  not a Frenchman shall skulk in between herself and her Billy 
  Blue . 

  3 

  " from the smile bay of Devonshire 
  to the frown cliff of Filey , 
  leap forth every son of an English sire , 
  to fight for his native isley . 
  he hath draw the sword of his father now 
  from the rusty sheath it rattle in ; 
  and Dobbin , who drag the peaceful plough , 
  be neigh for the battle - din . 

  CHORUS 

  for Albion still be Ocean - Queen , and though her son be few , 
  they challenge the world with a dauntless mien , and the flag 
  of Billy Blue . 

  4 

  " then pledge I your english palm , my lad ; 
  keep the knuckle for Sir Frenchman ; 
  no slave can you be till you change your dad , 
  and no son of yours a henchman . 
  the fight be to come ; and we will not brag , 
  nor expect whatever we sigh for , 
  but stand as the rock that bear the flag 
  our duty be to die for . 

  CHORUS 

  for englishman confront serene whatever they betideth ; 
  and England shall be Ocean 's queen as long as the world 
  abideth . " 
 what with the drum and the fife of one of the regiment now at Stonnington , and the mighty bass of some sea - captain vehement in chorus , these rough and rolling line be enough to frighten a thousand frenchman , while prove the vigour of british nerve , and fortitude both of heart and ear . when people have do a thing well , they know it , and applaud one another to include themselves ; and even the lady , who be mean to be unseen , forget that and wave their handkerchief . then up and speak Blyth Scudamore , in the spirit of the moment ; and all that he say be good and true , well - balance and well - condense , like himself . his quiet melodious voice go far than the Lord - Lieutenant 's , because it be new to the air of noise , and that fickle element love novelty . all be silence while he speak , and when he cease great uproar . 
 " that lad will do , " say the Marquis to his supporter on the right hand ; " I be just like he at that age myself . let I draw this cork it be the bottle of the evening . none but my own fellow understand a cork , and they seem to have get away somewhere . what the doose be they about why , halloa , Darling ! what be the meaning of all this , at such a time ? " 
 " well , my lord , you must judge for yourself , " say the Admiral , who have make his way quietly from the bottom of the table . " we know that false alarm be plentiful . but this look like business , from the paper it be write on ; and I know that old Dudgeon be as solid as myself . Vickers the Coast - guard bring it in , from an officer whose horse be blow , who have order to get somehow to Stonnington . " 
 " be Vickers a knave , or a fool who be likely to be make the victim of a very low joke ? there be hundred of jealous scoundrel eager to spoil every patriotic gathering . ah , this look rather serious , though , if you can vouch for the paper . " 
 " I can vouch for the paper , my lord , and for Vickers ; but not for Dudgeon 's signature . of that I have no knowledge though it look right enough , so far as I know . shall I read it aloud , and let officer who be not under my command judge for themselves , as I shall judge for those I have the honour to command ? " 
 the Lord - Lieutenant , with his cork just squeak in the neck of the bottle , nod ; and the Admiral , with officer crowd round , read aloud as follow , part be in type , and part in manuscript : 
 " Commander of Coast - defence at Hythe , to Vice - Admiral Darling , Springhaven . 
 " french fleet stand in , must have slip Cornwallis . do all you can . not a moment to lose . 
  sign   " BELLAMY DUDGEON . " 
 " well , it may be true , or it may be a lie , " say the Marquis , pour carefully ; " my opinion be the latter ; but I have nothing to do with it officially , accord to the new arrangement . every gentleman must judge for himself . and I mean to abide by my own judgment , which strongly recommend I to finish this bottle . " 
 " probably you be right enough ; and in your place perhaps I should do the same , " the Admiral answer , quietly ; " but be the alarm either true or false , I be bind to act otherwise . all Naval Officers present will be good enough to follow I , and prepare to rejoin if order . we shall very soon know from the signal - point , unless fog have set in suddenly , whether we be bind to beat a general alarm . " 
 all the son of the sea arise quietly , and be despatch with brief order to the right and leave , to communicate with their signal station , while Stubbard hurry back to his battery . 
 " what cold blood they do display ! " whisper the Frenchman , who have return with the author of the plot to watch the issue from a point of vantage . " my faith , they march slowly for their native land ! not less than six bottle of great french wine do I anticipate to steal through the window , while they fall out precipitous . but there sit a man big enough to leave I nothing not even a remainder of my own body . soul of St. Denis , can it be that they question the word of a gentleman ? " 
 " not they ! " reply Carne , who be vex , however ; " they be take thing easily , accord to the custom of the nation . but two good thing we have do , friend Charron ; we have learn their proceeding , and we have spoil their feasting . " 
 " but not at all ; they be all come back to enjoy it all the more ! " cry the Frenchman . " oh that I be an Englishman , to get such a dinner , and to be so loyal to it ! " 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 fair criticism 

 few thing can be bad for a very young woman than to want to be lead by somebody , and yet find nobody fit to do it . or at any rate , through superior quickness and the knowledge of it , to regard old friend and relative of experience as very slow coach , and prig or prude , who can not enter into quick young feeling , but deal in old saw which grate upon they . 
 not to moralise about it for if young lady hate anything , it be such moralise Miss Dolly Darling be now in that uncomfortable frame of mind when advice be most need , yet most certain to be spurn . she look upon her love and sensible sister as one who be fat to be an old maid , and be mean perhaps by nature for that condition , which appear to herself the most abject in the world . and even without that conclusion about Faith she would have be loth to seek counsel from she , have always resent most unduly what she call she ' superior air of wisdom . " dolly know that she be quick of wit than her sister as shallow water run more rapidly and she fancy that she possess a world of lively feeling into which the slow intellect could not enter . for instance , their eld brother Frank have just publish a volume of poem , very noble in their way , and glow with ardour for freedom , democracy , and the like , as well as exhibit fine perception of sound , and great boldness in matter beyond sound , yet largely ungifted with knowledge of nature , whether human or superior . 
 " well stick to his law - book , " the Admiral have say , after sing out some of the rhyme of it to the tune of " Billy Benbow " ; " never sit on the wool - sack by spew oakum this way . " 
 Faith have try , as a matter of duty , to peruse this book to its cover ; but she find it beyond even her good - will , and mild sympathy with everything , to do so . there be not the touch of nature in it which make humble people feel , and tickle even the very high with desire to enter into it . so Faith declare that it must be very clever , and no doubt very beautiful , but she herself be so stupid that she could not make out very clearly what it be all about . 
 " well , I understand every word of it , " Miss dolly cry , with a literary look . " I do not   see how you can help do that , when you know all about Frank , who write it . whenever it be not quite clear , it be because he want we to think that he know too much , or else because he be not quite certain what he want to mean himself . and as for his talk about freedom , and all that , I do not   see why you should object to it . it be quite the fashion with all clever people now , and it stop they from do any mischief . and nobody pay much attention to they , after the cruel thing do in France when I be seven or eight year old . if I see Frank , I shall tell he that I like it . " 
 " and I shall tell he that I do not , " say Faith . " it can not do anybody any good . and what they call ' freedom ' seem to mean make free with other people 's property . " 
 these poem be issue in one volume , and under one title the harmodiad although there must have be some half - hundred of they , and not more than nine ode to freedom in the lot . some be almost tolerable , and other lofty rubbish , and the critic   not know the author   speak their bright opinion freely . the poet , though shy as a mouse in his preface , expect a mountain of inquiry as to the identity of this new bard , and modestly sign himself " Asteroid , " which make his own father stare and swear . grow sore prematurely from much keelhauling for the reviewer of the period be patriotic , and the english public anti - gallic Frank quit his chamber at Lincoln 's Inn , and come home to be comfort for Christmas . this be the wise thing that he could do , though he feel that it be not harmodian . in spite of all crotchet , he be not a bad fellow , and not likely to make a good lawyer . 
 as the fate would have it   be naturally hostile to poet who defy they , by the same coach to Stonnington come Master Johnny , in high feather for his Christmas holiday . now these two brother be as different of nature as their sister be , or more so ; and unlike the gentler pair , each of these cherish lofty disdain for the other . Frank look down upon the school - boy as an unlicked cub without two idea ; the bodily defect he endeavour to cure by frequent outward application , but the mental shortcoming be beneath his effort . Johnny meanwhile , who be as hard as nail , no soon recover from a thumping than he renew and redouble his loud contempt for a great lout over six foot high , who have never draw a sword or pull a trigger . and now for the winter this book would be a perpetual snowball for he to pelt his big brother with , and yet   like a critic   be scarcely fair object for a hiding . in season out of season , upstairs down - stair , even in the breakfast and the dinner chamber , this young imp poke clumsy splinter bad than thorn , because so dull into the tender poetic side ; and people , who laugh at the less wit the well , laugh very kindly , to please the boy , without ask whether they vex the man . and the bad of it be that the author too must laugh . 
 all this might be look down at by a soul well hoist upon the guy - rope of contempt ; and now and then a very solid drubbing give handsomely   upon other ground   to the chief tormentor solace the mind of unacknowledged merit . but as the most vindictive measure to the man who have write an abusive letter be to vouchsafe he no reply , so to the poet who rebuke the age the bitter answer it can give be none . Frank Darling could retaliate upon his brother Johnny , and do so whenever he could lay hold of he alone ; but the stedfast silence of his sister Faith   to whom one of his lofty ode be address , and of his lively father , irk he far more than a thousand low parody . dolly alone be some comfort to he , some little vindication of true insight ; and he be surprised to find how quickly her intelligence   which until now he have despise   have strengthen , deepen , and enlarge itself . still he want some one old , big , more capable of shut up the mouth , and nodding   instead of show such a lot of red tongue and white tooth , before he could be half as snug as a true poet should be , upon the hob of his own fire . and happily he find his Anti - Zoilus ere long . 
 one day he be walk in a melancholy mood along the beach towards Pebbleridge , doubt deeply in his honest mind whether he ever should do any good , in versification , or anything else . he say to himself that he have be too sanguine , eager , self - confident , ardent , impetuous , and , if the nasty word must be face , even too self - conceite . only yesterday he have try , by delicate setting of little word - trap , to lead Mr. Twemlow towards the subject , and obtain that kind - hearted man 's comfort opinion . but no ; the gentle Rector would not be bring to book , or at any rate not to that book ; and the author have sense enough to know without a wink that his volume have win volume of dislike . 
 Parnassus could never have live till now without two head one to carry on with , while the other be be thump to piece . while the critic demolish one peak , the poet withdraw to the other , and assure himself that the general public , the large voice of the nation , will salute he there . but alas , Frank Darling have just discover that even that eminence be not his , except as a desert out of human sight . for he have in his pocket a letter from his publisher , receive that dreary morning , announce a great many copy go gratis , six sell to the trade at a frightful discount , and six to the enterprising public . all these fact combine to make he feel uncommonly sad and sore to - day . 
 a man of experience could have tell he that this disappointment be for his good ; but he fail to see it in that light , and do not bless the blessing . slowly and heavily he go on , without much heed of anything , swing his clouded cane now and then , as some slash review occur to he , yet become more peaceful and impartial of mind under the long monotonous cadence and quiet repetition of the soothe sea . for now he be beyond the Haven head the bulwark that make the bay a pond in all common westerly weather and wave that be worthy of the name flow towards he , with a gentle breeze step over they . 
 the brisk air be like a fresh beverage to he , and the fall of the wave sweet music . he take off his hat , and stop , and listen , and his eye grow bright . although the wave have nothing very distinct to say in dying , yet no two   if you hearkened well , or at any rate no two in succession , die with exactly the same expression , or vanish with precisely the same farewell . continual shift go on among they , and momentary change ; each in proper sequence marching , and allow its proper time , yet at any angle traverse , even in its crowning curl , not only by the wind its father , but by the penitent return and white contrition of its shattered eld brother . and if this be not enough to make a samely man take interest in perpetually flow change , the sun and cloud , at every look and breath , varied variety . 
 Frank Darling think how small his grief be , and how vain his vanity . of all the bubbly clot of froth , or fray and shattered dab of drift , fly beside he or fall at his foot , every one be as good as his idea , and as valuable as his labour . and of all the unreckoned wave advance , lift their fugitive crest , and roar , there certainly be not one that fall with weight so futile as his own . who care even to hear his sound ? what ear be soothe by his long rhythm , or what mind solace by the magnitude of his rolling ? 
 suddenly he find that some mind be so . for when he have be stand a long while thus , chew the salt cud of marine reflection , he seem to hear something more intelligible than the sea . with more surprise than interest he walk towards the sound , and stand behind the corner of a jut rock to listen . in another second his interest overpower his surprise , for he know every word of the line bring to his ear , for the very simple reason that they be his own . round the corner of that rock , so absorb in admiration that he could hear no footstep , a very fine young man of the high order be read aloud in a powerful voice , and with extremely ardent gesticulation , a fine passage from that greatly undervalue poem , the Harmodiad , of and concern the beauty of Freedom 
  " no crown upon her comely head she bear , 
  no wreath her affluent tress to restrain ; 
  a smile the only ornament she wear , 
  her only gem a tear for other ' pain . 
  herself do not her own mishap deplore , 
  because she live immortal as the dew , 
  which fall from the star soon mount again ; 
  and in this wise all space she travel through , 
  beneficent as heaven , and to the earth more true . 

  " her blessing all may win who seek the prize , 
  if only they be faithful , meek , and strong , 
  and crave not that which other ' right denie , 
  but march against the citadel of wrong . 
  a glorious army this , that find ally 
  wherever God hath build the heart of man 
  with attribute that to himself belong ; 
  by he ordain to crown what he begin , 
  and shatter despotism , which be the foul fiend 's ban . " 
 Frank think that he have never hear nobler reading , sonorous , clear , well time , well poise , and of harmonious cadence . the curved rock give a melodious ring , and the husky wave a fine contrast to it , while the reader be so engross with grandeur the grandeur of Frank 's own mind ! that his hat could evidently not contain his head , but be fling at the mercy of his foot . what a fine , expressive , and command face ! 
 if Frank Darling have be a frenchman which he sometimes long to be , for the sake of that fair Liberty the scene , instead of be awkward , would have be elegant , rapturous , ennoble . but be of the clumsy english race , he be quite at a loss what to do with himself . on paper he could be effusive , ardent , eloquent , sentimental ; but not a bit of that to meet the world in his own waistcoat . he give a swing to his stick , and walk across the opening as if he be look at sea - gull . and on he would have walk without further notice , except a big gulp in his throat , if it have not be for a trifling accident . 
 somehow or other the recitative gentleman 's hat turn over to the wind , and that active body   which never neglect any sportive opportunity   get into the crown , with the speed of an upstart , and make off with it along the stone . a costly hat it be , and comely with rich braid and satin loop , become also to a well - shape head , unlike the chimney - pot of the present day , which any man must thank God for lose . however , the owner be so wrap up in poetry that his breech might have go without his be any wiser . 
 " Sir , " say Frank Darling , after chase the hat   which could not trundle as our pot do , combine every possible absurdity , " excuse I for interrupt you , but this appear to be your hat , and it be on its way to a pool of salt - water . " 
 " Hat ! my hat ? " reply the other gentleman . " oh , to be sure ! I have quite forget . Sir , I be very much oblige to you . my hat might have go to the devil , I believe , I be so delightfully occupy . such a thing never happen to I before , for I be very hard indeed to please ; but I be read , sir ; I be read . accept my thank , sir ; and I suppose I must leave off . " 
 " I think that I hear a voice , " say Frank , grow bold with fear that he should know no more , for the other be close his book with great care , and commit it to a pouch buckle over his shoulder ; " and I fear that I break in upon a pleasant moment . perhaps I should have please you well if I have leave this hat to drown . " 
 " I seem ungrateful , " the stranger answer , with a sweet but melancholy smile , as he don his hat and then lift it gracefully to salute its rescuer ; " but it be only because I have be carry far away from all thought of self , by the power of a much large mind . such a thing may have occur to you , sir , though it happen very seldom in one life . if so , you will know how to forgive I . " 
 " I scarcely dare ask or rather I would say " stammer the anxious poet " that I can not expect you to tell I the name of the fortunate writer who have move you so . " 
 " would to Heaven that I could ! " exclaim the other . " but this great poet have withhold his name all great poet be always modest but it can not long remain unknown . such grandeur of conception and force of language , combine with such gift of melody , must produce universal demand to know the name of this benefactor . I can not express myself as I would desire , because I have be bring up in France , where literature be so different , and people judge a work more liberally , without recourse to politic . this be a new work , only out last week ; and a friend of mine , a very fine judge of literature , be so enchant with it that he buy a score of copy at once , and as my good star prevail , he send I one . you be welcome to see it , sir . it be unknown in these part ; but will soon be know all over Europe , unless these cruel war retard it . " 
 with a face of deep gravity , Caryl Carne put into Frank Darling 's hand a copy of his own book , quite young , but already score with many love mark of admiration and keen sympathy . Frank take it , and redden with warm delight . 
 " you may not understand it at first , " say the other ; " though I beg your pardon for say that . what I mean be , that I can well suppose that an Englishman , though a good judge in general , would probably have his judgment darken by insular prejudice , and the petty feeling which call itself patriotism , and condemn whatever be nobler and large than itself . my friend tell I that the critic have begin to vent their little spite already . the author would treat they with calm disdain ! " 
 " horribly nasty fellow ! " cry Frank . " they ought to be kick ; but they be below contempt . but if I could only catch they here " 
 " I be delighted to find , " reply Carne , look at he with kind surprise , " that you agree with I about that , sir . read a few line , and your indignation against that low lot will grow hotter . " 
 " it can not grow hotter , " cry the author ; " I know every word that the villain have say . why , in that first line that I hear you read , the wretch actually ask I whether I expect my beautiful goddess to wear her crown upon her comely tail ! " 
 " I be quite at a loss to understand you , sir . why , you speak as if this great work be your own ! " 
 " so it be , every word of it , " cry Frank , hurry out of all reserve by excitement . " at least , I do not   mean that it be a great work though other , besides your good self , have say be you sure that your friend buy twenty copy ? my publisher will have to clear up that . why , they say , under date of yesterday , that they have only sell six copy altogether . and it be out on Guy Fawkes ' day , two month ago ! " 
 Caryl Carne 's face be full of wonder . and the great wonder of all be its gravity . he draw back a little , in this vast surprise , and shade his forehead with one hand , that he might think . 
 " I can hardly help laugh at myself , " he say , " for be so stupid and so slow of mind . but a coincidence like this be enough to excuse anything . if I could be sure that you be not jest with I , see how my whole mind be take up with this book " 
 " Sir , I can feel for your surprise , " answer Frank , hand back the book , for which the other have make a sign , " because my own be even great ; for I never have be read aloud before by anybody else I mean , of course ; and the sound be very strange , and highly gratifying at least , when do as you do it . but to prove my claim to the authorship of the little work which you so kindly esteem , I will show you the letter I speak of . " 
 the single - minded poet produce from near his heart a very large letter with much sealing - wax endorse , and the fervent admirer of his genius read : 
 " DEAR SIR , in answer to your favour to hand , we beg to state that your poetical work the Harmodiad , publish by our firm , begin to move . follow the instruction in your last , we have already dispose of more than fifty copy . forty - two of these have be distribute to those who will forward the interest of the book , by commend it to the Public ; six have be sell to the trade at a discount of 75 per cent . ; and six have be take by private purchaser , at the full price of ten shilling . we have reason to anticipate a more rapid sale hereafter . but the political view express in the poem as we frankly state to you at first be not likely to be popular just now , when the Country be in peril , and the Book trade incommode , by the immediate prospect of a french invasion . we be , dear sir , your obedient servant , TICKLEBOIS , LATHERUP , BLINKERS ,    Co. to Mr. FRANK DARLING , Springhaven Hall . " 
 " you can not call that much encouragement , " say Frank ; " and it be a most trusty and honourable house . I can not do what a friend of mine have do , who go to inferior publisher denounce they as rogue , and call myself a martyr . if the book have be good , it would have sell ; especially as all the poet now be write vague national song , full of slaughter and brag , like that ' Billy Blue ' thing all our fisherman be hum . " 
 " you have nothing to do but to bide your time . in the long - run , fine work be sure to make its way . meanwhile I must apologise for praise you to your face , in utter ignorance , of course . but it must have make you feel uncomfortable . " 
 " not at all ; far otherwise , " say the truthful Frank . " it have be the very great comfort to I . and strange to say , it come just when I want it most sadly . I shall never forget your most kind approval . " 
 " in that case I may take the liberty of introduce myself , I trust . you have tell I who you be , in the most delightful way . I have no such claim upon your attention , or upon that of the world at large . I be only the last of an ill - fat race , famous for nothing except ruin themselves . I be Caryl Carne , of yonder ruin , which you , must have know from childhood . " 
 Frank Darling lift his hat in reply to the other 's more graceful salutation , and then shake hand with he heartily . " I ought to have know who you be , " he say ; " for I have hear of you often at Springhaven . but you have not be there since I come down , and we think that you have leave the neighbourhood . our little village be like the ear of the tyrant , except that it carry more false than true sound . I hope you be come to remain among we , and I hope that we shall see you at my father 's house . year ago I have hear that there use to be no especial good - will between your family and mine petty dispute about boundary , no doubt . how narrow and ridiculous such thing be ! we live in a well age than that , at any rate , although we be small enough still in many way . " 
 " you be not ; and you will enlarge many other , " Carne answer , as if the matter be beyond debate . " as for boundary now , I have none , because the estate be go , and I be all the rich . that be the sure way to liberate the mind . " 
 " will you oblige I , " say Frank , to change the subject , for his mind do not seek to be liberate so , and yet wish its new admirer to remain in admiration , " by look along the shore towards Springhaven as far as you can see , and tell I whether any one be come ? my sister be to follow I , if the weather keep fine , as soon as they have pay a little visit at the rectory . and my sight be not good for long distance . " 
 " I think I can see two lady come , or at any rate two figure move , about a mile or more away , where the sand be shin in a gleam of sunlight . yes , they be lady . I know by their walk . good - bye . I have a way up the cliff from here . you must not be surprised if you do not see I again . I may have to be off for France . I have business there , of which I should like to talk to you . you be so far above mean prejudice . if I go , I shall carry this precious volume with I . Farewell , my friend , if I may call you so . " 
 " do wait a minute , " cry the much admiring Frank ; " or walk a few yard with I towards Springhaven . it would give I such pleasure to introduce you to my sister . and I be sure they will be so glad to know you , when I tell they what I think . I very seldom get such a chance as this . " 
 " there be no resisting that ! " reply the graceful Carne ; " I have not the honour of know a lady in England , except my aunt Mrs. Twemlow , and my cousin Eliza both very good , but to the last degree insular . " 
 " it be very hard to help be that , when people have never be out of an island . but I fear that I be take you out of your way . " 
 in a few minute these two young man draw near to the two young woman , whose manner be hard put to hide surprise . when their brother introduce Mr. Carne to they , Faith bow rather stiffly , for she have form without reason a dark and obstinate dislike to he . but the impetuous dolly run up and offer he both her hand , and say , " why , Mr. Carne save both our life only a few day ago . " 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 neither AT home 

 though Admiral Darling have not deign to speak to his young daughter about that vile anonymous charge , he be not always quite comfortable in his inner mind concern it . More than once he think of ask Faith 's opinion , for he know her good sense and discretion ; but even this be repugnant to he , and might give she the idea that he cherish low suspicion . and then he be call from home again , be occupy among other thing with a vain enquiry about the recent false alarm . for Carne and Charron have manage too well , and judge too correctly the character of Vickers , to afford any chance of discovery . so that , when the Admiral come home again , his calm and in its fair state gentle nature be ruffle by the prosperity of the wicked . 
 " oh , he be a fine judge of poetry , be he ? " he say , more sarcastically than his will not ; " that mean , I suppose , that he admire your , Frank . remember what Nelson say about you . the long I live , the more I find his view confirm . " 
 " Papa , you be too bad ! you be come home cross ! " cry dolly , who always take Frank 's part now . " what do my godfather know of poetry , indeed ? if he ever have any ear for it , the gun would have ruin it long ago . " 
 " no mostacchio in my house ! " say the master , without heed she . " I believe that be the correct way to pronounce the filthy thing a foreign abomination altogether . who could keep his lip clean , with that dirt over they ? a more tolerant man than myself never live a great deal too tolerant , as everybody know . but I will never tolerate a son of mine in disgusting french hairiness of that sort . " 
 " Papa , you be come home as cross as a bear ! " cry dolly , presume on her favour . " Lord Dashville be here the other day with a very nice one , and I hear that all Cavalry officer mean to have one , when they can . and Mr. Carne , Frank 's friend , encourage it . " 
 " the less you have to say about that young man , the well . and the less he have to say to any child of mine , the well , both for he and she , I say . I know that the age be turn upside down . but I will not have that sort of thing at my table . " 
 when a kind and indulgent father break forth thus , the result be consternation , follow by anxiety about his health . faith glance at Dolly , who be look quite bewilder , and the two girl withdraw without a word . Johnny be already go to visit Captain Stubbard , with whose eld daughter Maggie and the cannon of the battery he be by this time desperately in love ; and poor Frank be leave to have it out with the angry father . 
 " I very seldom speak harshly , my boy , " say the Admiral , draw near his son gradually , for his wrath   like good vegetable   be very short of staple ; " and when I do so you may feel quite certain that there be sound reason at the bottom of it " here he look as if his depth be unfathomable . " it be not only that I be not myself , because of the many hour spend upon hard leather , and vile chalk of flint that go by I half asleep , when I ought to be snore in the feather ; neither have it anything to do with my consume the hide of some quadrupe for dinner , instead of meat . and the bread be make of rye , if of any grain at all ; I rather think of spend tan , knead up with tallow end , such as I have see cast by in bushel , when the time be good . and every loaf of that cost two shilling one for I , and one for Government . they all seem to acknowledge that I can put up with that ; and I make a strict point of mild language , which enable they to do it again with I . and all up and down the road , everybody like I . but if I be shoot to - morrow , would they care twopence ? " 
 " I be sure they would , sir ; and a good deal more than that , " answer Frank , who perceive that his father be out of his usual line of thinking , perhaps because he have just have a good dinner so ill do we digest our mercy . " I be sure that there be nobody in Sussex , Kent , or Hampshire who do not admire and respect and trust you . " 
 " I dare say , and rejoice to see I do the work they ought to do . they have long night in bed , every one of they , and they get their meal when they want they . I be not at all astonish at what Nelson say . he be young than I be by a good many year , but he seem to have pick up more than I have , in the way of common sentiment , and such like . ' you may do everybody 's work , if you be fool enough , ' he say to I the last time I see he ; ' and ease they of their soul as well , if you be rogue enough , as they do in the popish country . I be nearly sick of do it , ' he say , and he look it . ' if you once begin with it , you must go on . ' I find it more true every day of my life . do not   interrupt I ; do not   go on with comfortable stuff about do good , and one 's duty towards one 's Country though I fear that you think very little of that . if I think I have do good enough to make up for my back - ache , and three fine stump lose through chew patriotic sentiment , why , of course I should be thankful , and make the good of my reward . but charity begin at home , my boy , and one 's shirt should be consider before one 's cloak . a man 's family be the near piece of his country , and the dear one . " 
 " I be sure , sir , I hope , " reply Frank , who have never hear his father talk like this before , " that nothing be go on amiss with we here . when you be away , I keep a sharp lookout . and if I see anything go wrong , I should let you know of it immediately . " 
 " no doubt you would ; but you be much too soft . you be quite as easygoing as I use to be at your age " here the Admiral look as if he feel himself to be uncommonly hard - go now " and that sort of thing will not do in these day . for my own discomfort I care nothing . I could live on lobscouse , or soap and bully , for a year , and thank God for get more than I deserve . but my child , Frank , be very different . from I you would never hear a grumble , or a syllable of anything but perfect satisfaction , so long as I feel that I be do good work , and have it appreciate . and all my old comrade have just the same feeling . but you , who come after we , be not like that . you must have everything make to fit you , instead of make yourself fit they . the result will be , I have very little doubt , the downfall of England in the scale of nation . I be talk to my old friend St. Vincent last week , and he most heartily agree with I . however , I do not   mean to blame you , Frank . you can not help your unfortunate nature for string end of word together that happen to sound alike . Johnny will make a fine officer , not in the Navy , but of Artillery Stubbard say that he have the rare eye he ever come across in one so young , and he wish he could put they into his Bob 's head . he shall not go back to Harrow ; he can spell his own name , which seem to be all they teach they there , instead of fine scholarship , such as I obtain at Winton . but to spell his own name be quite enough for a soldier . in the Navy we always be well educate . Johnny shall go to Chatham , when his tog be ready . I settle all about it in London , last week . nothing hurt he . he be water - proof and thunder - proof . toss he up anyhow , he fall upon his foot . but that sort of nature very seldom go up high . but you , Frank , you might have do some good , without that nasty twist of yours for writing and for rhyming , which be a sure indication of spinal complaint . do not   interrupt I ; I speak from long experience . thing might be bad , and I ought to be thankful . none of my child will ever disgrace I . at the same time , thing would go on well if I be able to be more at home . that Caryl Carne , for instance , what do he come here for ? " 
 " well , sir , he have only be here twice . and it take a long time to persuade he at all . he say that as you have not call upon he , he feel that he might be intrude here . and Faith , who be sometimes very spiteful , bow , as much as to say that he have well wait . but dolly , who be very kind - hearted , assure he that she have hear you say at least a dozen time : ' be sure that I call upon Mr. Carne to - day . what will he think of my neglect ? but I hope that he will set it down to the right cause the perpetual demand upon my time . ' and when she tell he that , he say that he would call the next day , and so he do . " 
 " ah ! " cry the old man , not well please ; " it be dolly who take that little business off my shoulder ! she might have be content with her eld sister 's judgment , in a family question of that sort . but I dare say she think it right to make my excuse . very well , I will do that for myself . to - morrow I shall call upon that young man , unless I get another despatch to - night . but I hear he want nobody at his ruin . I suppose he have not ask even you to go there ? " 
 " no , sir ; I think he take his little place here , because it would be so painful for he to receive any friend at that tumble - down castle . he have not yet be able to do any repair . " 
 " I respect he for that , " say the Admiral , with his generous sympathy arouse ; " they have be a grand old family , though I can not   say much for those I know except , of course , Mrs. Twemlow . but he may be a very fine young fellow , though a great deal too frenchify , from all I hear . and why my friend Twemlow cold - shoulder he so , be something of a mystery to I . Twemlow be generally a judicious man in thing that have nothing to do with the Church . when it come to that , he be very stiff - back , as I have often have to tell he . perhaps this young man be a Papist . his mother be , and she bring he up . " 
 " I be sure I do not   know , sir , " answer Frank . " I should think none the bad of he if he be , unless he allow it to interfere with his proper respect for liberty . " 
 " Liberty be hang ! " cry the Admiral ; " and that be the proper end for most of those who prate about it , when they ought to be fight for their Country . I shall sound he about that stuff to - morrow . if he be one of that lot , he will not   come here with my good - will , I can assure he . what time be he generally to be find down there ? he be right over Stubbard 's head , I believe , and yet friend Adam know nothing about he . nor even Mrs. Adam ! I should have think that worthy pair would have draw any badger in the kingdom . I suppose the youth will see I , if I call . I do not   want to go round that way for nothing . I do want to have a quiet day at home , and saunter in the garden , as the weather be so mild , and consult poor swipe about Spring crop , and then have a pipe or two , and take my gun to Brown Bushes for a woodcock , or a hare , and come home with a fine appetite to a good dinner . but I never must hope for a bit of pleasure now . " 
 " you may depend upon it , sir , " say Frank , " that Caryl Carne will be greatly pleased to see you . and I think you will agree with I that a more straightforward and simple - minded man be not to be find in this country . he combine what we be pleased to call our national dignity and self - respect with the elegant manner , and fraternal warmth , and bonhomie as they themselves express it of our friend across the water . " 
 " you be off ! I do not   want to be cross any more . two hundred thousand friend there at this moment eager to burn down our home and cut our throat ! tired as I be , I ought to take a stick to you , as friend Tugwell do to his son for much less . I have the great mind not to go near that young man . I wish I have Twemlow here to talk it over . pay your fine for a french word , and be off ! " 
 Frank Darling gravely lay down five shilling on his dessert plate , and walk off . the fine for a french word in that house , and in hundred of other english house at this patriotic period , be a crown for a gentleman , and a shilling for a lady , the latter not be liable except when gentleman be present . the poet know well that another word on his part would irritate his father to such a degree that no visit would be pay to - morrow to the admirer of the Harmodiad , whose admiration he be long to reward with a series of good dinner . and so he do his utmost to ensure his father 's visit . 
 but when the Admiral , go warily because he be so stiff from saddle - work make his way down to the house of Widow Shanks , and wink at the Royal Arms in the low front window , where Stubbard keep Office and convenience , knock with the knocker at the private door , there seem to be a great deal of thought require before anybody come to answer . 
 " susie , " say the visitor , who have an especial knack of remember Christian name , which endear he to the bearer , " I be come to see Mr. Carne , and I hope he be at home . " 
 " no , that ' a bain't , sir , " the little girl make answer , after look at the Admiral as if he be an elephant , and wipe her nose with unwonted diligence ; " he be go away , sir ; and please , sir , mother say so . " 
 " well , here be a penny for you , my dear , because you be the good little needle - woman in the school , they tell I . run and tell your mother to come and see I . oh , Mrs. Shanks , I be very glad to see you , and so bloom in spite of all your hard work . ah , it be no easy thing in these hard time to maintain a large family and keep the pot boiling . and everything clean as a quarter - deck ! my certy , you be a woman in a thousand ! " 
 " no , sir , no . it be all the Lord 's doing . and you to the back of he , as I alway say . not a penny can they make out as I owe justly , bad as I be at the figure , squire . do ' e come in , and sit down , there be a dear . ah , I mind the time when you be like a dart , Squire ! " 
 " well , and now I be like a cannon - ball , " say the Admiral , who understand and like this unflattering talk ; " only I do not   travel quite so fast as that . I scarcely get time to see any old friend . but I come to look out for a young friend now , the gentleman you make so comfortable upstairs . do not   I wish I be a young man without incumbrance , to come and lodge with such a wonderful landlady ! " 
 " ah , if there be more of your sort , sir , there would be a deal less trouble in the world , there would . not that my young gentleman be troublesome , mind you , only so full of they outlandish furrin way abideth all day long without ate ort , so different from a honest englishman . first I use to think as he could not   afford it , and long to send he up a bit of my own dinner , but dursn't   for the life of I too grand for that , by ever so till one day little Susie there come a - run down the stair , and she sing out , with her face as red as ever a boil lobster : ' Looky see , mother ! oh , do ' e come and looky see ! Pollyon hath get a heap of guineas on his table ; would not   go into the big yellow pudding - basin ! ' and sure enough he have , your Honour , in pile , as if he be tell of they . he have slip out suddenly , and think the passage door be bolt . what a comfort it be to I , I can not   configurate . because I could eat my dinner comfortable now , for such a big heap of money never I do see . " 
 " I be very glad heartily glad , " exclaim the smile Admiral . " I hope he may get cash enough to buy back all the great Carne property , and kick out those rascally Jews and lawyer . but what make Susie call he that ? " 
 " well , sir , the young one must have a nickname for anything beyond they ; and because he never take any notice of they so different from your handsome Master Frank and some simility of his black horse , or his proud walk , to the pictur ' , ' Pollyon ' be the name they give he , out of Pilgrim 's Progress . though not a bit like he , for such a gentleman to pay his rent and keep his place untroublesome I never have before . and a fortnight he pay I last night , afore go , and take away the key of all three door . " 
 " he be go , then , be he ? to London , I dare say . it would be useless to look for he at the castle . my son will be disappoint more than I be . to tell you the truth , Mrs. Shanks , in these day the great thing be to stick to the people that we know . the world be so full , not of rogue , but of people who be always want something out of one , that to talk with a thoroughly kind , honest person , like yourself , be a real luxury . when the gentleman come back , let he know that I have call . " 
 " and my Jenny , sir ? " cry the anxious mother , run after he into the passage ; " not a word have you say about my Jenny . I hope she show no sign of flightiness ? " 
 " Jenny be as steady as the church , " reply the Admiral . " we be go to put she on a pound a year from next quarter - day , by Mrs. Cloam 's advice . she will have a good stocking by the time she get marry . " 
 " there never be such a pleasant gentleman , nor such a kind - hearted one , I do believe , " say Widow Shanks , as she come in with bright eye . " what be they Carnes to the Darlings , after all ? as different as night and day . " 
 but the Admiral 's next visit be not quite so pleasant ; for when he get back into the village road , expect a nice walk to his luncheon and his pipe , a man run furiously almost knock he down , and have no time to beg his pardon . the runner 's hat be off his head , and his hair blow out , but luckily for itself his tongue be not between his tooth . 
 " have the devil get hold of you at last , Jem Prater ? " the Admiral ask , not profanely ; for he have see a good deal of mankind , and believe in diabolical possession . 
 " for Parson ! for Parson ! " cry Jem , start off again as hard as he could go . " Butter Cheeseman hath hang his self in his own scale . and nobody be any good but Parson . " 
 Admiral Darling be much disturbed . " what will the world come to ? I never know such time , " he exclaim to himself , with some solemnity ; and then set off , as fast as his overridden state permit , for the house of Mr. Cheeseman . pass through the shop , which have nobody in it , he be lead by the sound of voice into a little room beyond it the room in which Mr. Cheeseman have first receive Caryl Carne . here he behold an extraordinary scene , of which he often have to dream thereafter . 
 from a beam in the roof   which have nothing to do with his scale , as Jem Prater have imagine , by a long but not well - plait cord , be dangle the respected Church - warden Cheeseman . happily for he , he have rely on his own good ; and the rope be therefore of very bad hemp , have fail in this sad and too practical proof . the weight of its vendor have add to its length some fifteen inch as he love to pull out thing and his toe touch the floor , which relieve he now and then . 
 " why do not   you cut he down , you old fool ? " cry the Admiral to three gaffer , who stand moralise , while Mrs. Cheeseman sit upon a barrel , sob heavily , with both hand spread to conceal the sad sight . 
 " we be afraid of hurt of he , " say the quick - witted of the gaffer ; " we want to know why ' a do it , " say the deep ; and , " the will of the Lord must be do , " say the wise . 
 after fumble in vain for his knife , and look round , the Admiral run back into the shop , and catch up the sharp steel blade with which the victim of a troubled mind have often unsold a sell ounce in the day of happy commerce . in a moment the Admiral have the poor Church - warden in his sturdy arm , and with a sailor 's skill have unknotte the choke noose , and be shout for brandy , as he keep the blue head from fall back . 
 when a little of the fine eau de vie that ever be smuggle have be administer , the patient rally , and become comparatively cheerful , be enable to explain that " it be all a mistake altogether . " this remove all misunderstanding ; but Rector Twemlow , arrive too late for anything but exhortation , ask a little too sternly as everybody feel under what influence of the Evil One Cheeseman have commit that mistake . the reply be worthy of an enterprising tradesman , and bring he such order from a score of mile around that the resource of the establishment could only book they . 
 " Sir , " he say , look at the parson sadly , with his right hand lay upon his heart , which be feeble , and his left hand intimate that his neck be sore , " if anything have happen that have well not have be , it must have be by reason of the weight I give , and the value such a deal above the price . " 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 EVERYBODY 's MASTER 

 the peril of England be now grow fast ; all the fast from be in the dark . the real design of the enemy escape the penetration even of Nelson , and our Government show more anxiety about their great adversary land on the coast of Egypt than on that of England . naval man laugh at his flat - bottom boat , and declare that one frigate could sink a hundred of they ; whereas it be probable that two of they , with their powerful gun and level fire , would have sink any frigate we then possess . but the crafty and far - see foe do not mean to allow any frigate , or line - of - battle ship , the chance of enquire how that might be . 
 his true scheme , as everybody now know well , be to send the english fleet upon a wild - goose chase , whether to Egypt , the west coast of Ireland , or the West Indies , as the case might be ; and then , by a rapid concentration of his ship , to obtain command of the English Channel , if only for twenty - four hour at a time . twenty - four hour of clearance from our cruiser would have see a hundred thousand man land on our coast , throw up entrenchment , and cover the landing of another hundred thousand , come close upon their heel . who would have face they ? a few good regiment , badly find , and perhaps bad lead , and a mob of militia and raw volunteer , the reward of whose courage would be carnage . 
 but as a chip smell like the tree , and a hair like the dog it belong to , so Springhaven be a very fair sample of the England whereof   in its own opinion   it form a most important part . contempt for the body of a man lead rashly to an under - estimate of his mind ; and one of the great man that ever grow on earth if greatness can be without goodness be hold in low account because not of high inch , and laugh at as " little Boney . " 
 however , there be , as there always be , thousand of sensible englishman then ; and rogue have not yet make a wreck of grand Institutions to scramble for what should wash up . abuse exist , as they always must ; but the great abuse of all   the destruction of every good usage   be undreame of yet . and the right man be even now approach to the rescue , the great Prime - Minister of any age or country . 
 Unwitting perhaps of the fine time afford by the feeble delay of Mr. Addington , and absorb in the tissue of plot and counterplot now thicken fast in Paris the arch - plotter in all of they be himself the First Consul have slacken awhile his hot haste to set foot upon the shore of England . his bottomless ambition for the moment have a top , and that top be the crown of France ; and as soon as he have get that on his head , the head would have no rest until the crown be that of Europe . 
 but before any crown could be put on at all , the tender heart of frenchman must be touch by the appearance of great danger the danger which be of all the great , that to their near and dearest self . a bloody farce be in preparation , noble life be to be perjure away , and above all , the only great rival in the heart of soldier must be turn out of France . this foul job work as foul radical job do now for the good of England . if the french invasion have come to pass , as it be fully mean to do , in the month of February , 1804 , perhaps its history must have be write in French , for we to understand it . 
 so , at any rate , think Caryl Carne , who know the resource of either side , and the difference between a fine army and a mob . he feel quite sure that his mother 's country would conquer his father 's without much trouble , and he know that his horn would be exalt in the land , when he have guide the conqueror into it . sure enough then he would recover his ancestral property with interest and be able to punish his enemy well , and reward his friend if they deserve it . think of these thing , and believe that his own preparation would soon be finish , he leave Widow Shanks to proclaim his merit , while under the bold and able conduct of Captain Renaud Charron he run the gauntlet of the english fleet , and be put ashore southward of Cape Grisnez . here be a long reach of dreary exposure , face the west unprofitably , with a shallow slope of brown sand , and a scour of tide , and no pleasant mooring . jot as the coast be all along   whereon dry battery grin defiance , or sand just awash smile treachery   with shallow transport , gun - boat , prame , scow , bilander , brig , and schooner , row - galley , lugger , and every sort of craft that have a mast , or get on without one , and even a few good ship of war ponder malice in the safe roadstead , yet here the sweep of the west wind , and the long roll from the ocean following , keep a league or two , northward of the mighty defence of Boulogne , inviolate by the petty enmity of man . along the slight curve of the coast might be see , beyond Ambleteuse and Wimereux , the vast extent of the french flotilla , range in three division , before the great lunette of the central camp , and hill jot with tent thick as limpet on a rock . 
 Carne   whose dealing be quite unknown to all of the french authority save one , and that the supreme one   be come by appointment to meet his commander in a quiet and secluded spot . it be early February now , and although the day be wan , and the wind , which be draw to the north of west , deliver a cold blow from the sea , yet the breath of Spring be in the air already , and the beat of her pulse come through the ground . almost any man , except those two concerting to shed blood and spread fire , would have look about a little at the pleasure of the earth , and feel a touch of happiness in the goodness of the sky . 
 Caryl Carne wait in the shelter of a tree , scarcely deserve to be call a tree , except for its stiff tenacity . all the branch be drive by the western gale , and scourge flat in one direction that in which they well could hold together , and try to believe that their life be their own . like the wing of a sea bird strive with a temp , all the spray be fray alike , and all the twig hackle with the self - same pile . whoever observe a tree like this should stop to wonder how ever it manage to make itself any sort of trunk at all , and how it be persuade to go up just high enough to lose the chance of ever come down again . but Carne care for nothing of this sort , and heed very little that do not concern himself . all he think of be how he might persuade his master to try the great issue at once . 
 while he lean heavily against the tree , with his long sea - cloak flap round his leg , two horseman strike out of the Ambleteuse road , and come at hand - gallop towards he . the foremost , who ride with short stirrup , and sit his horse as if he despise he , be the foremost man of the world just now , and for ten year yet to come . 
 Carne run forward to show himself , and the master of France dismount . he always look well upon horseback , as short man generally do , if they ride well ; and his face   which help to make his fortune   appear even more commanding at a little distance . an astonishing face , in its sculptured beauty , set aspect , and stern haughtiness , calm with the power of transcendant mind , and a will that never meet its equal . even Carne , void of much imagination , and contemptuous of all the human character he share , be the slave of that face when in its presence , and could never meet steadily those pierce eye . and yet , to the study of a neutral dog , or a man of abstract science , the face be as bad as it be beautiful . 
 Napoleon as he be soon to be call by a cringe world smile affably , and offer his firm white hand , which Carne barely touch , and bent over with deference . then the foaming horse be send away in charge of the attendant trooper , and the master begin to take short quick step , to and fro , in front of the weather - beat tree ; for to stand still be not in his nature . Carne , be beckon to keep at his side , lose a good deal of what he have mean to say , from the trouble he find in time his wonte stride to the brisk pace of the other . 
 " you have do well on the whole very well , " say Napoleon , whose voice be deep , yet clear and distinct as the sound of a bell . " you have keep I well informed ; you be not suspect ; you be enlarge your knowledge of the enemy and of his resource ; every day you become more capable of conduct we to the safe landing . for what , then , this hurry , this demand to see I , this expose of yourself to the risk of capture ? " 
 Carne be about to answer ; but the speaker , who undershoot the thought of other before they be shape as the shuttle of the lightning underweave a cloud raise his hand to stop he , and go on : 
 " because you suppose that all be ripe . because you believe that the slow beast of islander will strengthen their defence more by delay than we shall strengthen our attack . because you be afraid of incur suspicion , if you continue to prepare . and most of all , my friend , because you be impatient to secure the end of a long enterprise . but , Captain , it must be long yet . it be not for you , but for I , to fix the time . behold I ! I be come from a grand review . we have again rehearse the embarkation . we have again put two thousand horse on board . the horse do it well ; but not the man . they be as brave as eagle , but as clumsy as the ostrich , and as fond of the sand without water . they will all be sea - sick . it be in their countenance , though many have be practise in the mouth of river . those infamous English will not permit we to proceed far enough from our native land to acquire what they call the leg of the sea . if our brave be sea - sick , how can they work the cannon , or even navigate well for the accursed island ? they must have time . they must undergo more wave , and a system of diet before embarkation . Return , my trust Captain , and continue your most esteemed service for three month . I have write these new instruction for you . you may trust I to remember this addition to your good work . " 
 Carne 's heart fall , and his face be gloomy , though he do his good to hide it . so well he know the arrogance and fierce self - will of his command officer that he durst not put his own opposite view of the case directly before he . this arrogance grow with the growth of his power ; so that in many important matter Napoleon lose the true state of the case through the terror feel by his subordinate . so great be the mastery of his presence that Carne feel himself guilty of impertinence in carry his head above the level of the General 's plume , and stoop unconsciously as hundred of tall man be say to have do to lessen this anomaly of Nature . 
 " all shall be do to your order , my General , " he reply , submissively . " for my own position I have no fear . I might remain there from year to year without any suspicion arise , so stupid be the people all around , and so well be my name know among they . the only peril be in the landing of store , and I think we should desist from that . a few people have be wonder about that , though hitherto we have be most fortunate . they have set it down so far to smuggle operation , with which in that tyrannical land all the low order sympathise . but it would be wise to desist awhile , unless you , my General , have anything of moment which you still desire to send in . " 
 " what sort of fellow be that Sheeseman ? " ask Napoleon , with his wonderful memory of detail . " be he more to be confide in as a rogue or as a fool ? " 
 " as both , sir ; but more especially as a rogue , though he have the compunction of a fool sometimes . but he be as entirely under my thumb , as I be under that of my Commander . " 
 " that be very good , " answer the First Consul , smile with the sense of his own power ; " and at an hour 's notice , with fifty choose man land from the London Trader ah , I love that name ; it be appropriate you could spike all the gun of that pretentious little battery , and lock the Commander of the Coast - Defence in one of his own cellar . be it not so , my good Captain ? answer I not . that be enough . one question more , and you may return . be you certain of the pilotage of the proud young fisherman who know every grain of sand along his native shore ? surely you can bribe he , if he hesitate at all , or hold a pistol at his ear as he steer the lead prame into the bay ! Charron would be the man for that . between you and Charron , there should be no mistake . " 
 " he require to be handle with much delicacy . he have no idea yet what he be mean to do . and if I understand his nature , neither bribe nor fear would move he . he be stubborn as a Breton , and of that simple character . " 
 " one can always befool a Breton ; but I hate that race , " say Napoleon . " if he can not be make useful , tie a round shot to he , throw he overheard , and get a gentle native . " 
 " alas , I fear that we can not indulge in that pleasure , " say Carne , with a smile of regret . " it cost I a large outlay of skill to catch he , and the native of that place be all equally stubborn . but I have a plan for make he do our work without be at all aware of it . be it your wish , my General , that I should now describe that plan ? " 
 " not now , " reply Napoleon , pull out a watch of English make , " but in your next letter . I start for Paris in an hour 's time . you will hear of thing soon which will add very greatly to the weight and success of this grand enterprise . we shall have perfidious Albion catch in her own noose , as you shall see . you have not hear of one Captain Wright , and the landing - place at Biville . we will have our little Biville at Springhaven . there will be too many of we to swing up by a rope . Courage , my friend ! the future be with you . our regiment be cast dice for the fair english county . but your native county be reserve for you . you shall possess the whole of it I swear it by the god of war and command the southern army . be brave , be wise , be vigilant , and above all thing be patient . " 
 the great man hold up his hand , as a sign that he want his horse , and then offer it to Caryl Carne , who touch it lightly with his lip , and bend one knee . " my emperor ! " he say , " my Emperor ! " 
 " wait until the proper time , " say Napoleon , gravely , and yet well please . " you be not the first , and you will not be the last . observe discretion . Farewell , my friend ! " 
 in another minute he be go , and the place look empty without he . Carne stand gloomily watch the horseman as their figure grow small in the distance , the large man behind pound heavily away , like an english dragoon , on the scanty sod , of no importance to anybody unless he have a wife or child the little man in front   with the white plume wave , and the well - breed horse go easily , the one whose body would affect more body , and certainly send more soul out of they , than any other bear upon this earth as yet , and we hope as long as ever it endureth . 
 Caryl Carne care not a jot about that . he be anything but a philanthropist ; his weakness , if he have any , be not dispersive , but thoroughly concentric . he gather his long cloak round his body , and go to the high spot within his reach , about a mile from the watch - tower at Cape Grisnez , and thence he have a fine view of the vast invasive fleet and the vaster host behind it . 
 an Englishman who love his Country would have turn sick at heart and faint of spirit at the sight before he . the foe be gather together there to eat we up on every side , to get we into his net and rend we , to tear we asunder as a lamb be tear when its mother have drop it in flight from the wolf . for forty square mile there be not an acre without a score of tent upon it , or else of hut throw up with slab of wood to keep the powder dry , and the steel and iron bright and sharp to go into the vital of England . mighty dock have be scoop out by warlike hand , and shine with ship crowd with gun and alive with man . and all along the shore for league , wherever any shelter lay , and great battery protect they , hundred of other ship tear at their mooring , to dash across the smooth narrow line , and blacken with fire and redden with blood the white cliff of the land they loathe . 
 and what be there to stop they ? the steam of the multitude rise in the air , and the clang of armour fill it . number irresistible , and relentless power urge they . at the beck of the hand that have call the horse , the grey sea would have be black with ship , and the pale wave would have be red with fire . Carne look at the water way touch with silver by the soft descent of the winter sun , and upon it , so far as his gaze could reach , there be but a dozen little object move , puny creature in the distance mice in front of a lion 's den . and much as he hat with his tainted heart the land of his father , the land of his birth , some reluctant pride arise that he be by right an Englishman . 
 " it be the dread of the english seaman , it be the fame of Nelson , it be the habit of be beat when England meet they upon the sea nothing else keep this mighty host like a set of tremble captive here , when they might launch forth irresistibly . and what be a great deal bad , it will keep I still in my ruin dungeon , a spy , an intriguer , an understrapper , when I be fit to be one of the foremost . what a fool I be so to be cow and enslave , by a man no well endow than myself with anything , except self - confidence ! I should have look over his head , and tell he that I have have enough of it , and if he would not take advantage of my toil , I would toil for he no long . why , he never even thank I , that I can remember , and my pay be no more than Charron 's ! and a pretty strict account I have to render of every republican coin he send . he will have his own head on they within six month , unless he be assassinate . his manner be not those of a gentleman . while I be speak to he , he actually turn his back upon I , and clear his throat ! every one hat he as much as fear he , of all who be in the rank of gentleman . how would it pay I to throw he over , denounce my own doing , excuse they as those of a Frenchman and a french officer , and bow the knee to Farmer George ? truly if it be not for my mother , who have sacrifice her life for I , I would take that course , and have do with it . such all - important news would compel they to replace I in the property of my forefather ; and if neighbour look coldly on I at first , I could very soon conquer that nonsense . I should marry little dolly , of course , and that would go half - way towards do it . I hate that country , but I might come to like it , if enough of it belong to I . aha ! what would my mother say , if she dream that I could have such idea ? and the whole of my life belong to she . well , let I get back to my ruin first . it would never do to be capture by a british frigate . we have a narrow shave of it last time . and there will be a vile great moon to - night . " 
 with these reflection which be upon the whole more to his credit than the wonte web of thought Carne with his long stride strike into a path towards the beach where his boat be wait . although he know where to find several officer who have once be his comrade , he keep himself gladly to his loneliness ; less perhaps by reason of Napoleon 's order than from the grow charm which Solitude have for all who begin to understand she . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 run the GAUNTLET 

 though Carne have make light , in his impatient mood , of the power of the blockade fleet , he feel in his heart a sincere respect for its vigilance and activity . La Liberte   as the unhappy Cheeseman 's schooner be call within gunshot of France   be glad enough to drop that pretentious name , and become again the peaceful London Trader , when she find herself beyond the reach of french battery . the practice of her captain , the lively Charron , be to give a wide berth to any british cruiser appear singly ; but whenever more than one hove in sight , to run into the midst of they and dip his flag . from the speed of his schooner he could always , in a light wind , show a clean pair of heel to any single heavy ship , and he have not yet come across any cutter , brig of war , or light corvette that could collar the Liberte in any sort of weather . Renaud Charron be a brave young Frenchman , as fair a speciman as could be find , of a truly engaging but not overpower type , kindly , warm - hearted , full of enterprise , lax of moral   unless honour their veneer be touch , love excitement , and capable of anything , except skulk , or sulking , or run away slowly . 
 " none of your risky trick to - night ! " say Carne , as he stand on the schooner 's deck , in the dusk of the February evening , himself in a dark mood grow dark for his english blood supply the element of gloom , and he feel a dull pleasure in goad a Frenchman , after be trample on by one of french position . " you will just make straight , as the tide and shoal allow , for our usual landing - place , set I ashore , and follow I to the old quarter . I have order to give you , which can be give only there . " 
 " my command officer shall be obey , " the Frenchman answer , with a light salute and smile , for he be not endow with the power of hating , or he might have indulge that bad power towards Carne ; " but I fear that he have not find thing to his liking . " 
 " what concern be that of your ? your duty be to carry out my order , to the utmost of your ability , and offer opinion when ask for . " 
 the light - hearted Frenchman shrug his shoulder . " my command officer be right , " he say ; " but the sea be get up , and there will be wind , unless I mistake the arising of the moon . my command officer have well retire , until his command be need . he have be know to feel the effect of high tossing , in spite of his unequalled constitution . be it not so , my commander ? I ask with deference , and anxiety . " 
 Carne , who like to have the joke on his side only , swear at the moon and the wind , in clear English , which be short and more efficacious than French . he long to say , " try to keep I out of rough water , " but his pride , and the fear of suggest the opposite to this sailor who love a joke , keep he silent , and he withdraw to his little cuddy , chew a biscuit , to feed , if it must be so , the approach malady . 
 " we shall have some game , and a fine game too , " say Renaud Charron to himself , as he order more sail to be make . " Milord give himself such mighty air ! we will take he to the cross - run off the Middle Bank , and offer he a basin through the key - hole . to make sea - sick an Englishman for , after all , what other be he ? will be a fine piece of revenge for fair France . " 
 Widow shank have remark with tender sorrow more perhaps because she admire the young man , and be herself a hearty soul , than from any loss of profit in victual he that " he be one of they folk as seem to go about their business , and do their job , and keep their skin as full as other people , without put nort inside of they . " she know one of that kind before , and he be shoot by the Coast - guard , and when they postmartyre he , an eel twenty foot long be find inside he , double up for all the world like a love - knot . Squire Carne be of too high a family for that ; but she would give a week 's rent to know what be inside he . 
 there be no little justice in these remark , as be pretty sure to be the case with all good - natured criticism . the good cook that ever be roasted can not get out of a pot more than be put in it ; and the weight of a cask , as a general rule , diminish if the tap be turn , without any redress at the bung - hole . Carne run off his content too fast , before he have arrange for fresh receipt ; and all who have feel what come of that will be able to feel for he in the result . 
 but a further decrease be in store for he now . as the moon arise , the wind get high , and chop round to one point north of west , raise a perkish head - sea , and grin with white tooth against any flapping of sail . the schooner be put upon the starboard tack as near to the wind as she would lie , bear so for the french coast more than the English , and make for the Vergoyers , instead of the Varne , as intend . this carry they into wide water , and a long roll from the southwest crossing the point squabble of the strong new wind . 
 " General , " cry Charron , now as merry as a grig , and skip to the door of Carne 's close little cabin , about an hour before midnight , " it would afford we pleasure if you would kindly come on deck and give we the benefit of your advice . I fear that you be a little confine down here , and in need of more solid sustenance . my General , arise ; there be much briskness upon deck , and the wave be dance beautifully in the full moon . two sail be in sight , one upon the weather bow , and the other on the weather quarter . ah , how superior your sea - word be to ours ! if I be bear an Englishman , you need not seek far for a successor to Nelson , when he get shoot , as he be sure to be before very long . " 
 " get out ! " mutter Carne , whose trouble be faintly illuminate by a sputtering wick . " get out , you scoundrel , as you love plain english . go direct to the devil only let I die in peace . " 
 " all language be excusable in those affect with the malady of the sea , " reply the Frenchman , dance a little to encourage his friend . " Behold , if you would get up and do this , you would be as happy inside as I be . but stay I know what will ease you in an instant , and enable you to order we right and leave . the indefatigable Sherray put a fine piece of fat pork in store before we sail ; I have just have it cook , for I be almost starve . it float in brown liquor of the rich order , such as no Englishman can refuse . take a sip of pure rum , and you will enjoy it surely . Say , my brave General , will you come and join I ? it will cure any little disquietude down here . " 
 with a pleasant smile Charron lay his hand on the part of his commander which he suppose to be blameable . Carne make an effort to get up and kick he , but fall back with everything whirl around , and all human standard invert . then the kindly Frenchman tuck he up , for his face be blue and the chill of exhaustion strike into he . " I wish you could eat a little bit , " say Charron , gently ; but Carne give a push with his elbow . " well , you will be bad before you be well , as the old woman say in your country . but what be I to do about the two british ship for they be sure to be british now in sight ? " but Carne turn his back , and his black boot dangle from the rim of his bunk as if there be nothing in they . 
 " this be go a little too far , " cry Charron ; " I must have some order , my commander . you understand that two english ship be manifestly bear down upon we " 
 " let they come and send we to the bottom the soon the well , " his commander groan , and then raise his limp knuckle with a final effort to stop his poor ear forever . 
 " but I be not ready to go to the bottom , nor all the other people of our fourteen hand " the Frenchman speak now to himself alone " neither will I even go to prison . I will do as they do at Springhaven , and doubtless at every other place in England . I will have my dish of pork , which be now just crackle I be capable of smell it even here and I will give some to Sam Polwhele , and we will put head together over it . to outsail friend Englishman be a great delight , and to out - gun he would be still great ; but if we can not accomplish those , there will be some pleasure of outwit he . " 
 Renaud Charron be never dispose to make the bad of anything . when he go upon deck again , to look out while his supper be wait , he find no change , except that the wind be freshen and the sea increase , and the stranger whose company he do not covet seem wait for no invitation . with a light wind he would have have little fear of give they the go - by , or on a dark night he might have contrive to slip between or away from they . but everything be against he now . the wind be so strong , blow nearly half a gale , and threaten to blow a whole one , that he durst not carry much canvas , and the full moon , approach the meridian now , spread the white sea with a broad flood of light . he could see that both enemy have descry he , and be act in concert to cut he off . the ship on his weather bow be a frigate , rid the wave in gallant style , with the wind upon her beam , and travel two foot for every one the close - haul schooner could accomplish . if the latter continue her present course , in another half - league she would be under the port - hole of the frigate . 
 the other enemy , though far off , be far more difficult to escape . this be a gun - brig , not so very much big than La Liberte herself for gun - brig in those day be very small craft and for that very reason more dangerous . she bear about two point east of north from the greatly persecute Charron , and be hold on steadily under easy sail , neither gain much upon the chase nor lose . 
 " carry on as we be for about ten minute , " say Charron to his mate , Sam Polwhele ; " that will give we period to eat our pork . come , then , my good friend , let we do it . " 
 Polwhele as he be call to make believe that he and other hand be Cornishmen , whereas they be Yankees of the sharp order , owe no allegiance and unhappily no good - will to their grandmother this man , whose true name be Perkins , give the needful order , and follow down . Charron could talk , like many frenchman , quite as fast with his mouth full as empty , and he have a man to talk to who do not require anything to be say twice to he . 
 " no fear of I ! " be all he say . " you keep out of sight , because of your twang . I will teach they a little good English well than ever come out of Cornwall . the good of all English be not to say too much . " 
 the captain and his mate enjoy their supper , while Carne in the distance bear the pang of a malady call bulimus , that be to say , a giant 's ravening for victual , without a babe 's power of receive they . for he be turn the corner of his sickness now , but prostrate and cold as a fall stalactite . 
 " aha ! we have do well . we have warm our wit up . one glass of what you call the grog ; and then we will play a pleasant game with those englishman ! " Carne hear he say it , and in his heart hop that the English would pitch he overboard . 
 it be high time for those two to finish their supper . the schooner have no wheel , but steer as light craft do then , and long afterwards with a bulky ash tiller , have iron eye for lash it in heavy weather . three strong man stand by it now , obedient , yet mutter to one another , for another cable 's length would bring they into danger of be run down by the frigate . 
 " all clear for stay ! " cry Polwhele , under order from Charron . " down helm ! Helm 's alee ! Steady so . let draw ! Easy ! easy ! there she fill ! " and after a few more rapid order the handy little craft be dash away , with the wind abaft the beam , and her head about two point north of east . " Uncommon quick in stay ! " cry Polwhele , who have take to the helm , and now stand there . " wonder what britisher will think of that ? " 
 the british ship soon let he know her opinion , by a roar and a long streak of smoke blow toward he , as she put up her helm to consider the case . it be below the dignity of a fine frigate to run after little smuggling craft , such as she vote this to be , and a large ship have be sight from her top down channel , which might afford her nobler sport . she content herself with a harmless shot , and leave the gun - brig to pursue the chase , bear away for more important business . 
 " nonplus the big ' un ; shall have trouble with the little ' un , " say Master Polwhele to his captain . " she do not   draw half a fathom more than we do . no good run inside the shoal . and with this wind , she have the foot of we . " 
 " bear straight for she , and let she board we , " Charron answer , pleasantly . " down with all french hand into the forepart of the hold , and stow the spare foresail over they . show our last bill of lading , and ask they to trade . you know all about Cheeseman ; double his price . if we make any cash , we will divide it . say we be out of our course , through supply a cruiser that want our good for nothing . I shall keep out of sight on account of my twang , as you politely call it . the rest I may safely leave to your invention . but if you can get any ready rhino , Sam Polwhele be not the man to neglect it . " 
 " bully for you ! " cry the Yankee , look at he with more admiration than he expect ever to entertain for a Frenchman . " there be five ton of cheese that have be seven voyage , and a hundred firkin of irish butter , and five - and - thirty case of russian tongue , as old as old Nick , and ne'er a sign of weevil ! Lor ' no , never a tail of weevil ! Skipper , you deserve to go to heaven out of West Street . but how about he , down yonder ? " 
 " Captain Carne ? leave he to I to arrange . I shall be ready , if they intrude . announce that you have a sick gentleman on board , a passenger afflict with a foreign illness , and have a foreign physician . Mon Dieu ! it be good . every Englishman believe that anything foreign will kill he with a vault . arrange you the trading , and I will be the doctor a German ; I can do the German . " 
 " and I can do the trading , " the American reply , without any rash self - confidence ; " any fool can sell good stuff ; but it requireth a good man to sell bad good . " 
 the gun - brig bear down on they at a great pace , feel happy certitude that she have get a prize not a very big one , but still worth catch . she see that the frigate have fire a shot , and believe that it be do to call her own attention to a matter below that of the frigate . on she come , heel to the lively wind , very beautiful in the moonlight , toss the dark sea in white shower , and with all her taut canvas arch and gleaming , hover with the shade of one another . 
 " heave to , or we sink you ! " cry a mighty voice through a speak trumpet , as she luff a little , bring her port broadside to bear ; and the schooner , which have hoist british colour , obey the command immediately . in a very few second a boat be man , and dance on the hillock of the sea ; and soon , with some danger and much care , the visitor stand upon the London Trader 's deck , and Sam Polwhele come to meet they . 
 " we have no wish to put you to any trouble , " say the officer in command , very quietly , " if you can show that you be what you profess to be . you sail under british colour ; and the name on your stern be London Trader . we will soon dismiss you , if you prove that . but appearance be strongly against you . what have bring you here ? and why do you run the risk of be fire at , instead of submit to his Majesty 's ship Minerva ? " 
 " because she have not   get any ready money , skipper , and we do not   like three month ' bill , " say the tall Bostonian , look loftily at the british officer . " such thing be nothing but piracy , and we have well be shoot at than lose such good as we carry fresh ship , and in prime condition . come and see they , all with Cheeseman 's brand , the celebrate Cheeseman of Springhaven name guarantee the quality . but one thing , mind you no use to hanker after they unless you come provide with the ready . " 
 " we do not   want your good ; we want you , " answer Scudamore , now first luff of the brig of war Delia , and star a little with his mild blue eye at this man 's effrontery . " that be to say , our duty be to know all about you . produce your paper . prove where you clear from last , and what you be do here , some thirty mile south of your course , if you be a genuine british trader . " 
 " paper all in order , sir . first - chop wafer , as they put on now , to save sealing - wax . charter - party , and all the rest . last bill of lading from Gravesend , but you must not   judge our good by that . bulk of they from St. Mary Axe , where Cheeseman hath freight from these thirty year . if ever you have be at Springhaven , Captain , you would jump at anything with Cheeseman 's brand . but have you bring that little bag of guineas with you ? " 
 " once more , we want none of your good . you might praise they as much as you like , if time permit . show I to the cabin , and produce your paper . after that we shall see what be in the hold . " 
 " Supercargo very ill in good cabin . Plague , or black fever , the german doctor say . none of our hand will go near he but myself . but you will not   be like that , will you ? " 
 Less for his own sake than his mother 's who have none but he to help she Scudamore dread especially that class of disease which be now call " zymotic . " his father , an eminent physician , have observe and have write a short work to establish that certain family and type of constitution lie almost at the mercy of such contagion , and find no mercy from it . and among those family be his own . " Fly , my boy , fly , " he have often say to Blyth , " if you ever come near such subject . " 
 " captain , I will fetch they , " continue Mr. Polwhele , look grave at his hesitation . " by good right they ought to be smoke , I dare say , though I do not   hold much with such stuff myself . and the doctor keep do a heap of herb hot . you can see he , if you just come down these few step . perhaps you would not   mind look into the hold , to find something to suit your judgment quality combine with low figure there while I go into the infected den , as the cleverest of my chap call it . why , it make I laugh ! I have   be in and out , with this stand - up coat on , fifty time , and you can not   smell a flue of it , though wonderful strong down there . " 
 Scudamore shudder , and draw back a little , and then steal a glance round the corner . he see a thick smoke , and a figure prostrate , and another tie up in a long white robe , wave a pan of burn stuff in one hand and a bottle in the other , and plainly conjure Polwhele to keep off . then the latter return , quite complacently . 
 " can not   find all of they , " he say , present a pile of paper big enough to taint Sahara . " that doctor go on as bad as open a coffin . say he understand it , and I do not . the old figure - head ! what do he know about it ? " 
 " much more than you do , perhaps , " reply Blyth , stand up for the profession , as he be bind to do . " perhaps we have well look at these on deck , if you will bring up your lantern . " 
 " but , Captain , you will have a look at our hold , and make we a bid we need not take it , any more than you need to double it for as prime a lot of cheese , and side of bacon " 
 " if your paper be correct , it will not be my duty to meddle with your cargo . but what be you do the wrong side of our fleet ? " 
 " why , that be a bad job . there be no fair trade now , no sort of deal on the square nohow . we run all this risk of be catch by Crappos on purpose to supply british ship gorgeous , soweastern station ; and blow I tight if I could not   swear she have be supply chock - full by a Crappo ! only take ten cheese and fifteen side of bacon , though she never know nought of our black fever case ! but , Captain , sit down here , and overhaul our flimsy . not like rag , you know ; do not   hold plague much . " 
 the young lieutenant compel himself to discharge his duty of inspection behind a combing , where the wind be break ; but even so he take good care to keep on the weather side of the document ; and the date perhaps fly away to leeward . " they seem all right , " he say , " but one thing will save any further trouble to both of we . you belong to Springhaven . I know most people there . have you any Springhaven hand on board ? " 
 " I should think so . send Tugwell aft ; pass the word for Dan Tugwell . Captain , there be a family of that name there settle as long as we have be at Mevagissey . ah , that sort of thing be a credit to the place , and the people too , in my opinion . " 
 Dan Tugwell come slowly , and with a heavy step , look quite unlike the spruce young fisherman whom Scudamore have notice as first and smart in the rescue of the strand Blonde . but he could not doubt that this be Dan , the Dan of happy time and thought ; in whom , without use his mind about it , he have feel some likeness to himself . it be not in his power to glance sharply , because his eye be kindly open to all the little incident of mankind , but he manage to let Dan know that duty compel he to be particular . Dan Tugwell touch the slouched hat upon his head , and stand wait to know what he be want for . 
 " Daniel , " say Scudamore , who could not speak condescendingly to any one , even from the official point of view , because he feel that every honest man be his equal , " be you here of your own accord , as one of the crew of this schooner ? " 
 Dan Tugwell have a hazy sense of be put upon an untrue balance . not by this kind gentleman 's word , but through his own proceeding . in his honest mind he long to say : " I fear I have be bamboozle . I have cast my lot in with these fellow through passion , and in hasty ignorance . how I should like to go with you , and fight the French , instead of get mix up with a lot of thing I can not   make out ! " 
 but his equally honest heart say to he : " you have be well treat . you be well pay . you ship of your own accord . you have no right to peach , even if you have anything to peach of ; and all you have see be some queer trading . none but a sneak would turn against his shipmate and his ship , when overhaul by the Royal Navy . " 
 Betwixt the two voice , Dan say nothing , but look at the lieutenant with that gaze which the receiver take to mean doubt of his meaning , while the doubt more often be what to do with it . 
 " be you here of your own accord ? do you belong to this schooner of your own accord ? be you one of this crew , of your own free - will ? " 
 Scudamore ring the change on his simple question , as he have often be oblige to do in the Grammar - school at Stonnington , with the slow - witted boy , who could not , or would not , know the top from the bottom of a sign - post . " do you eat with your eye ? " he have ask they sometimes ; and they have put their thumb into their mouth to enquire . 
 " S'pose I be , " say Dan at last , assume stupidity , to cover hesitation ; " yes , sir , I come aboard of my own free - will . " 
 " very well . then I be glad to find you comfortable . I shall see your father next week , perhaps . shall I give he any message for you ? " 
 " no , sir ! for God 's sake , do not   let he know a word about where you have see I . I come away all of a heap , and I do not   want one of they to bother about I . " 
 " as you wish , Dan . I shall not say a word about you , until you return with your earning . but if you find the fishing business dull , surely you might have come to we , Dan . any volunteer here for his Majesty 's service ? " Scudamore raise his voice , with the usual question . " good pay , good victual , fine promotion , and prize - money , with the glory of fight for their native country , and provision for life if disable ! " 
 not a man come forward , though one man long to do so ; but his sense of honour , whether true or false , forbid he . Dan Tugwell go heavily back to his work , try to be certain that it be his duty . but sad doubt arise as he watch the brave boat , lift over the wave in the moonlight , with loyal arm tug towards a loyal british ship ; and he feel that he have throw away his last chance . 




 CHAPTER XL 

 shelfe the question 

 there be a time of day   as everybody must have notice who be kind enough to attend to thing   not to be tell by the clock , nor measure to a nicety by the position of the sun , even when he have the manner to say where he be a time of day dependent on a multiplicity of thing unknown to we   who have make our own brain , by perceive that we have none , and work away till we get they , yet palpable to all those less self - exalt being , who , or which , be of infinitely nobler origin than we , and have show it , by humility . at this time of day every decent and good animal feel an unthought - of and untraced desire to shift its position , to come out and see its fellow , to learn what be happen in the humble grateful world out of which man have hoist himself long ago , and be therefore a spectre to they to breathe a little sample of the turn the world be take , and sue their share of pleasure in the quiet earth and air . 
 this time be more observable because it follow a period of the opposite tendency , a period of heaviness , and rest , and silence , when no bird sing and no quadrupe play , for about half an hour of the afternoon . then suddenly , without any alteration of the light , or weather , or even temperature , or anything else that we know of , a change of mood flash into every live creature , a spirit of life , and activity , and stir , and desire to use their own voice and hear their neighbour 's . the usual beginning be to come out first into a place that can not knock their head , and there to run a little way , and after that to hop , and take a peep for any people around , and espy none or only one of the very few admit to be friend speedily to dismiss all misgiving , take a very little bit of food , if handy   more as a duty to one 's family than oneself , for the all - important supper - time be not come yet , and then , if gift by the Lord with wing for what bird can stoop at such a moment to believe that his own grandfather make they ? up to the topmost spray that feather in the breeze , and pour upon the grateful air the voice of free thanksgiving . but an if the blade behind the heart be still unplumed for fly , and only gentle flax or fur blow out on the wind , instead of beat it , do the owner of four leg sit and sulk , like a man defraud of his merit ? he answer the question with a skip and jump ; ere a man can look twice at he he have cut a caper , frolic an intricate dance upon the grass , and brighten his eye for another round of joy . 
 at any time of year almost , the time of day command these deed , unless the weather be outrageous ; but never more undeniably than in the month of April . the growth of the year be well establish , and its manner begin to be school by then ; childish petulance may still survive , and the tear of penitence be frequent ; yet upon the whole there be or use to be a sense of responsibility form , and an elemental inkling of true duty towards the earth . even man   the least observant of the power that walk the ground , go for the sign of weather to the cow , or crow , or pig , swallow , spider , gnat , and leech , or the final assertion of his own corn   sometimes be move a little , and enlarge by influence of life beyond his own , and tickle by a pen above his thought , and touch for one second by the hand that make he . then he see a brother man who owe he a shilling , and his soul be swallow up in the resolve to get it . 
 but well in the sky - like period of youth , when the wind sit lightly , and the cloud go by in puff , these little jump of inspiration take the most respectable young man sometimes off his leg , and the young maid likewise if she continue in these fine day to possess such continuation . Blyth Scudamore have be appoint now , partly through his own good desert , and wholly through good influence for Lord St. Vincent be an ancient friend of the excellent Admiral Darling to the command of the Blonde , refit , thoroughly overhaul at Portsmouth , and pronounce by the dock - yard people to be the fast and sound corvette afloat , and in every way a credit to the british navy . " the man that float she shall float in she , " say the Earl , when somebody , who want the appointment , suggest that the young man be too young . " he have see sharp service , and do sharp work . it be waste of time to talk of it ; the job be do . " " Job be the word for it , " think the other , but wisely reserve that great truth for his wife . however , it be not at all a bad job for England . and Scudamore have now see four year of active service , count the former year of volunteering , and be more than twenty - five year old . 
 none of these thing exalt he at all in his own opinion , or , at any rate , not very much . because he have always regard himself with a proper amount of self - respect , as modest man be almost sure to do , desire less to know what the world think of they than to try to think rightly of it for themselves . his opinion of it seem to be that it be very good just now , very kind , and fair , and gentle , and a thing for the heart of man to enter into . 
 for dolly Darling be close beside he , sit on a very pretty bench , make of twisted oak , and turn up at the back and both end , so that a gentleman could not get very far away from a lady without frighten she . not only in this way be the spot well adapt for tender feeling , but itself truly ready to suggest they , with nature and the time of year to help . there be no stream issue here , to puzzle and perpetually divert the human mind   whose origin clearly be spring - water pour into the frame of the jelly - fish , neither be there any big rock , like an obstinate barrier rise ; but gentle slope of daisie pasture lead the eye complacently , sleek cow sniff the herbage here and there , and brush it with the underlip to fetch up the blade for supper - time , and placable tree , forget all the rudeness of the winter wind , begin to disclose to the fond deceive breeze , with many a glimpse to attract a glance , all the cream of their summer intention . and in full enjoyment of all these doing , the poet of the whole stand sing the simple - minded thrush , proclaim that the world be good and kind , but himself perhaps the kind , and his nest , beyond doubt , the good of it . 
 " how lovely everything be to - day ! " Blyth Scudamore speak slowly , and gaze shyly at the lovely thing of all , in his opinion the face of Dolly Darling . " no wonder that your brother be a poet ! " 
 " but he never write about this sort of thing , " say dolly , smile pleasantly . " his poem be all about liberty , and the right of man , and the wrong of war . and if he ever mention cow or sheep , it be generally to say what a shame it be to kill they . " 
 " but surely it be much bad to kill man . and who be to be blame for that , Miss Darling ? the Power that want to overrun all the rest , or the Country that only defend itself ? I hope he have not convert you to the worship of the new Emperor ; for the army and all the great city of France have beg he to condescend to be that ; and the King of Prussia will add his entreaty , accord to what we have hear . " 
 " I think anything of he ! " cry dolly , as if her opinion would settle the point . " after all his horrible murder bad of all of that very handsome and brave young man shoot with a lantern , and bury in a ditch ! I be tell that he have to hold the lantern above his poor head , and his hand never shake ! it make I cry every time I think of it . only let Frank come back , and he will not   find I admire his book so very much ! they do the same sort of thing when I be a little girl , and could scarcely sleep at night on account of it . and then they seem to get a little well , for a time , and fight with their enemy , instead of one another , and make everybody wild about liberty , and citizen , and the noble march of intellect , and the dignity of mankind , and the right of labour when they would not   work a stroke themselves and the black superstition of believe anything , except what they choose to make a fuss about themselves . and thousand of people , even in this country , who have be bring up so much well , be foolish enough to think it very grand indeed , especially the poet , and the one that be too young . but they ought to begin to get wise now ; even Frank will find it hard to make another poem on they . " 
 " how glad I be to hear you speak like that ! I have no idea at least I do not understand " 
 " that I have so much common - sense ? " enquire dolly , with a glance of subtle yet humble reproach . " oh yes , I have a great deal sometimes , I can assure you . but I suppose one never do get credit for anything , without claim it . " 
 " I be sure that you deserve credit for everything that can possibly be imagine , " Scudamore answer , scarcely know , with all his own common - sense to help he , that he be talk nonsense . " every time I see you I find something I have never find before to to wonder at if you can understand and to admire , and to think about , and to to be astonish at . " 
 dolly know as well as he do the word he long to use , but fear . she like this state of mind in he , and she like he too for all his kindness , and his humble worship ; and she could not help admire he for his bravery and simplicity . but she do not know the value yet of a steadfast and unselfish heart , and her own be not quite of that order . so many gallant officer be now to be see at her father 's house , half a cubit tall than poor Blyth , and a hundred cubit high in rank , and wealth , and knowledge of the world , and the power of make their wife great lady . moreover , she like a dark man , and Scudamore be fair and fresh as a rose call Hebe 's Cup in June . another thing against he be that she know how much her father like he ; and though she love her father well , she be not bind to follow his leading . and yet she do not wish to lose this useful and pleasant admirer . 
 " I be not at all ambitious , " she reply , without a moment 's hesitation , for the above reflection have long be deal with , " but how I wish I could do something to deserve even half that you say of I ! but I fear that you find the air get rather cold . the weather be so changeable . " 
 " be you sure that you be not ambitious ? " Scudamore be too deeply plunge to get out of it now upon her last hint ; and to - morrow he must be far away . " you have every right to be ambitious , if such a word can be use of you , who be yourself the height of so many ambition . it be the only fault I could imagine you to have , and it seem too bad that you should have none at all . " 
 " you do not   know anything about it , " say dolly , with a lovely expression in her face of candour , penitence , and pleasantry combine ; " I be not only full of fault , but entirely make up of they . I be tell of they too often not to know . " 
 " by miserably jealous and false people . " it be impossible to look at she and not think that . " by people who can not have a single atom of perception , or judgment , or even proper feeling . I should like to hear one of they , if you would even condescend to mention it . tell I one only one if you can think of it . I be not at all a judge of character , but but I have often have to study it a good deal among the boy . " 
 this make Miss dolly laugh , and drop her eye , and smoothe her dress , as if to be sure that his penetration have not be bring to bear on she . and the gentle Scuddy blush at his clumsiness , and hop that she would understand the difference . 
 " you do say such thing ! " she also be blush beautifully as she speak , and take a long time before she look at he again . " thing that nobody else ever say . and that be one reason why I like you so . " 
 " oh , do you like I do you like I in earnest ? I can hardly dare to dream even for one moment " 
 " I be not go to talk about that any more . I like Mr. Twemlow , I like Captain Stubbard , I like old Tugwell though I should have like he well if he have not be so abominably cruel to his son . now I be sure it be time to go and get ready for dinner . " 
 " ah , when shall I dine with you again ? perhaps never , " say the young man , endeavour to look very miserable and to inspire sadness . " but I ought to be very happy , on the whole , to think of all the pleasure I have enjoy , and how much well I have get on than I have any right in the world to hope for . " 
 " yes , to be the Commander of a beautiful ship , little more than a year from the date of your commission . Captain Stubbard be in such a rage about it ! " 
 " I do not   mean about that though that of course be rare luck I mean a much more important thing ; I mean about get on well with you . the first time I see you in that fine old school , you do not even want to shake hand with I , and you think what a queer kind of animal I be ; and then the first time or two I din at the Hall , nothing but fine hospitality stop you from laugh at my want of practice . but gradually , through your own kind nature , and my humble endeavour to be of use , I begin to get on with you well and well ; and now you be begin almost to like I . " 
 " not almost , but altogether , " she answer , with quite an affectionate glance . " I can tell you there be very few , outside of my own family , that I like half so well as I like you . but how can it matter to you so much ? " 
 she look at he so that he be afraid to speak , for fear of spoil everything ; and be a very good - natured girl , and please with his deep admiration , she sigh just enough to make he think that he might hope . 
 " we be all so sorry to lose you . " she say ; " and no one will miss you so much as I shall , because we have have such pleasant time together . but if we can carry out our little plot , we shall hear of you very often , and I dare say not very unfavourably . faith and I have be put our head together , and for our own benefit , and that of all the house , if we can get you to second it . my father jump at the idea , and say how stupid we be not to think of it before . you know how very little he can be at home this summer , and he say he have to sacrifice his child to his country . so we suggest that he should invite Lady Scudamore to spend the summer with we , if she can be persuade to leave home so long . we will do our very utmost to make her comfortable , and she will be a tower of strength to we ; for you know sometimes it be very awkward to have only two young lady . but we dare not do anything until we ask you . do you think she would take compassion upon we ? a word from you perhaps would decide she ; and Faith would write a letter for you to send . " 
 Scudamore redden with delight , and take her hand . " how can I thank you ? I have well not try , " he answer , with some very tender play of thumb and fore - finger , and a strong impulse to bring lip too into action . " you be almost as clever as you be good ; you will know what I mean without my tell you . my mother will be only too glad to come . she know what you be , she have hear so much from I . and the reality will put to shame all my description . " 
 " tell I what you tell she I be like . the truth , now , and not a word of afterthought or flattery . I be always so irritated by any sort of flattery . " 
 " then you must let I hold your hand , to subdue your irritation ; for you be sure to think that it be flattery you be so entirely ignorant of yourself , because you never think of it . I tell my dear mother that you be the good , and sweetest , and wise , and loveliest , and most perfect , and exquisite , and innocent , and unselfish of all the human being she have ever see , or hear , or read of . and I say it be quite impossible for any one after one look at you to think of himself any more in this world . " 
 " well do ! " exclaim dolly , show no irritation , unless a gleam of pearl inside an arch of coral show it . " it be as well to do thing thoroughly , while one be about it . I can understand now how you get on so fast . but , alas , your dear mother will only laugh at all that . lady be so different from gentleman . perhaps that be why gentleman never understand they . and I would always a great deal rather be judge by a gentleman than a lady . lady pick such a lot of hole in one another , whereas gentleman be too large - minded . and I be very glad upon the whole that you be not a lady , though you be much more gentle than they make believe to be . oh dear ! we must run ; or the lady will never forgive we for keep they starve all this time . " 




 CHAPTER XLI 

 listener hear no good 

 " not that there be anything to make one so very uneasy , " say Mr. Twemlow , " only that one have a right to know the meaning of what we be expect to put up with . nothing be clear , except that we have not one man in the Government who know his own mind , or at any rate dare to pronounce it . Addington be an old woman , and the rest oh , when shall we have Pitt back again ? People talk of it , and long for it ; but the Country be so slow . we put up with everything , instead of demand that the right thing shall be do at once . here be Boney , a fellow raise up by Satan as the scourge of this island for its manifold sin ; and now he be to be the Emperor forsooth not of France , but of Europe , continental Europe . we have only one man fit to cope with he at all , and the voice of the nation have be shout for he ; but who pay any attention to it ? this state of thing be childish simply childish ; or perhaps I ought to say babyish . why , even the child on the sea - shore know , when they make their little sand wall against the tide , how soon they must be sweep away . but the difference be this , that they do not   live inside they , and they have not   get all that belong to they inside they . nobody must suppose for a moment that a clergyman 's family would fail to know where to look for help and strength and support against all visitation ; but , in common with the laity , we ask for Billy Pitt . " 
 " and in another fortnight you will have he , " reply Captain Stubbard , who be din there that day . " allow I to tell you a little thing that happen to my very own self only yesterday . you know that I be one of the last people in the world to be accuse of any what be the proper word for it ? Mrs. Stubbard , you know what I mean Jemima , why the deuce do not   you tell they ? " 
 " Captain Stubbard always have more meaning than he can well put into word , " say his wife ; " his mind be too strong for any dictionary . hallucination be the word he mean . " 
 " exactly ! " cry the Captain . " that express the whole of what I want to say , but go aside of it . I be one of the last man in the world to become the victim of any there , I have   lose it again ! but never mind . you understand now ; or if you do not , Mrs. Stubbard will repeat it . what I mean be that I see all thing square , and straight , and with their own corner to they . well , I know London pretty well ; not , of course , as I know Portsmouth . still , nobody need come along with I to go from Charing Cross to St. Paul 's Church - yard ; and pretty tight I keep all my hatch batten down , and a sharp pair of eye in the crow' - nest for to have they in the foretop will not   do there . it be strictly on duty that I go up the duty of get a fresh stock of powder , for gun be not much good without it ; and I have write three time , without answer or powder . but it seem that my letter be go the round , and would turn up somewhere , when our gun be storm , without a bit of stuff to make answer . " 
 " ah , that be the way they do everything now ! " interrupt Mr. Twemlow . " I think you have be very quiet lately ; but I do not know what a good reason you have . we might all have be shoot , and you could not have fire a salute , to inform the neighbourhood ! " 
 " well , never mind , " reply the Captain , calmly ; " I be not complain , for I never do so . young man might ; but not old hand , whose duty it be to keep their situation in life . well , you must understand that the air of London always make I hungry . there be so many thousand of people there that you can not   name a time when there be nobody eat , and this make a man from the country long to help they . anyhow , I smell roast mutton at a place where a little side street come up into the Strand ; and although it be scarcely half past twelve , it remind I of Mrs. Stubbard . so I call a halt , and stand to think upon a grating , and the scent become flavour with baked potato . this be always more than I can resist , after all the heavy trial of a chequer life . so I push the door open , and see a lot of little cabin , right and leave of a fore and aft gangway , all rig up alike for victual . Jemima , I tell you all about it . you describe it to the Rector and Mrs. Twemlow . " 
 " do not   let we trouble Mrs. Stubbard , " say the host ; " I know the sort of thing exactly , though I do not   go to that sort of place myself . " 
 " no , of course you do not . and I be a little scared at first , for there be sawdust enough to soak up every drop of my blood , if they have pistol I . Mrs. Twemlow , I beg you not to be alarm . my wife have such nerve that I often forget that all lady be not like she . now do not   contradict I , Mrs. Stubbard . well , sir , I go to the end of this cockpit if you like to call it so and get into the starboard berth , and shout for a ration of what I have smell outside . and although it be far from be equal to its smell as the character be of everything you might have think it uncommon good , if you have never taste Mrs. Stubbard 's cooking , after she have be to the butcher herself . very well . I do not   care for kickshaw , even if I could afford they , which have never yet be my destiny . so I call for another ration of hot sheep beg your pardon , lady , what I mean be mutton and half a dozen more of baked potato ; and they remind I of be at home so much that I call for a pint of good pine - apple rum and a brace of lemon , to know where I be to remind I that I be not   where I could not   get they . " 
 " oh , Adam ! " cry Mrs. Stubbard , " what will you say next ? not on weekday , of course , but nearly every Sunday and the sample of his powder in his pocket , Mr. Twemlow ! " 
 " Jemima , you be spoil my story altogether . well , you must understand that this room be low , scarcely high than the cabin of a fore - and - after , with no skylight to it , or wind - sail , or port - hole that would open . and so , with the summer come on , as it be now though a precious long time about it and the smell of the meat , and the thought of the grog , and the feeling of be at home again , what do I do but fall as fast asleep as the captain of the watch in a heavy gale of wind ! my back be to the light , so far as there be any , and to make sure of the top of my head , I fetch down my hat the soft - edged one , the same as you see I wear on fine sunday . 
 " well , I may have go on in that way for an hour , not snore , as Mrs. Stubbard call it , but breathe to myself a little in my sleep , when I seem to hear somebody call I , not properly , but as people do in a dream ' Stoobar Stoobar Stoobar , ' be the sound in my ear , like my conscience haul I over the coal in bad English . this make I wake up , for I always have it out with that part of I when it mutiny ; but I do not move more than to feel for my glass . and then I perceive that it be nothing more or less than a pair of Frenchmen talk about I in the berth next to mine , within the length of a marlin - spike from my blessed surviving ear . 
 " some wiseacre say that listener never hear good of themselves , and upon my word he be right enough this time , so far as I make out . the french language be beyond I , so far as speak go , for I never can lay hold of the word I want ; but I can make out most of what those queer people say , from be a prisoner among they once , and twice in command of a prize crew over they . and the sound of my own name prick I up to listen sharply with my one good ear . you must bear in mind , Rector , that I could not see they , and durst not get up to peep over the quarter - rail , for fear of scar they . but I be wear a short hanger , like a middy 's dirk the one I always carry in the battery . " 
 " I make Adam promise , before he go to London , " Mrs. Stubbard explain to Mrs. Twemlow , " that he would never walk the street without steel or firearm . Portsmouth be a very wicked place indeed , but a garden of Eden compare with London . " 
 " well , sir , " continue Captain Stubbard , " the first thing I hear those frenchman say be : ' stoobar be a stupid beast , like the ox that take the prize up here , except that he have no claim to good look , but the contrary wholly the contrary . ' Mrs. Stubbard , I beg you to preserve your temper ; you have hear other say it , and you should now despise such falsehood . ' but the ox have his horn , and Stoobar have none . for all his great gun there be not one little cup of powder . ' the villain laugh at this , as a very fine joke , and you may well suppose that I almost boil over . ' you have then the command of this beast stoobar ? ' the other fellow ask he , as if I be a jackass . ' how then have you so very well obtain it ? ' ' in a manner the most simple . our chief have he by the head and heel : by the head , by be over he ; and by the heel , because nothing can come in the rear without his knowledge . Behold ! you have all . ' ' it be very good , ' the other villain answer ; ' but when be it to be , my most admirable Charron ? how much long ? how many month ? ' ' behold my finger , ' say the one who have abuse I ; ' I put these into those , and then you know . it would have be already , except for the business that you have be employ upon in this black hole . Hippolyte , you have do well , though crookedly ; but all be straight for the native land . you have make this Government appear more treacherous in the eye of France and Europe than our own be , and you have give a good jump to his instep for the saddle . but all this throw we back . I be tired of trick ; I want fight ; though I find they quite a jolly people . ' ' I do not , ' say the other , who be clearly a low scoundrel , for his voice be enough to settle that ; ' I hate they ; they be of thick head and thick hand , and would come in sabot to catch their enemy asleep . and now there be no chance to entangle any more . their government will be of the old brutal kind , hard knock , and no stratagem . in less than a fortnight Pitt will be master again . I know it from the very good authority . you know what access I have . ' ' then that be past , ' the other fellow answer , who seem to speak more like a gentleman , although he be the one that run down I ; ' that be the Devil . they will have their wit again , and that very fat Stoobar will be supply with powder . Hippolyte , it be a very grand joke . within three mile of his head   which be empty , like his gun   we have nearly two hundred barrel of powder , which we fear to bring over in those flat - bottom for fear of a volley among they . ha ! ha ! stoobar be one fine fat ox ! ' 
 " this be all I hear , for they begin to move , have have enough sugar and water , I suppose ; and they saunter away to pay their bill at the hatch put up at the doorway . it be hopeless to attempt to follow they ; but although I be not so quick in stay as I be , I slew myself round to have a squint at they . one be a slight little active chap , with dapper leg , and jerk like a Frenchman all over . I could pardon he for call I a great fat ox , for want of a bit of flesh upon his own bone . but he know more about I than I do of he , for I never clap eye on he before , to my knowledge . the other be well build , and of some substance , but a nasty , slouchy - look sort of cur , with high fur collar and a long grey cloak . and that be the one call Hippolyte , who know all about our government . and just the sort of fellow who would do so in these day , when no honest man know what they be up to . " 
 " that be true , " say the Rector " too true by half . but honest man soon will have their turn , if that vile spy be well informed . the astonishing thing be that England ever put up with such shameful anarchy . what have be do to defend we ? nothing , except your battery , without a pinch of powder ! with Pitt at the helm , would that have happen ? how could we have sleep in our bed , if we have know it ? fourteen gun , and not a pinch of powder ! " 
 " but you use to sleep well enough before a gun be put there . " Mrs. Stubbard 's right to spare nobody be well establish by this time . " well have the gun , though they could not be fire , than no gun at all , if they would frighten the enemy . " 
 " that be true , ma'am , " reply Mr. Twemlow ; " but until the gun come , we have no sense of our danger . have teach we that , they be bind to act up to their teaching . it be not for ourselves that I have any fear . we have long since learn to rest with perfect faith in the Hand that overruleth all . and more than that if there should be a disturbance , my nephew and my godson Joshua have a house of fourteen room in a Wiltshire valley , quite out of the track of invader . he would have to fight , for he be Captain in the Yeomanry ; and we would keep house for he till all be over . so that it be for my parish I fear , for my people , my school , and my church , ma'am . " 
 " need not   be afraid , sir ; no call to run away , " cry the Captain of the battery , have now well man his own porthole with the Rector 's sound wine ; " we shall have our powder in to - morrow , and the French can not   come to - night ; there be too much moon . they never dare show their nose nor'ard of their sand , with the man in the moon the John Bull in the moon look at they . and more than that , why , that curse Boney " 
 " Adam , in Mr. Twemlow 's house ! you must please to excuse he , all good people . he have sate such a long time , without say what he like . " 
 " Jemima , I have use the right word . the parson will back I up in every letter of it , have say the same thing of he , last Sunday week . but I beg Mrs. Twemlow 's pardon , if I say it loud enough to disturb she . well , then , this bless Boney , if you prefer it , be a deal too full of his own dirty trick for mount the throne of the King they murder , to get into a flat - bottomed boat at Boulogne , and a long sight too jealous a villain he be , to let any one command instead of he . why , the man who set foot upon our shore , and beat we if such a thing can be suppose would be ten time big than Boney in a month , and would sit upon his crown , if he get one . " 
 " well , I do not   believe they will ever come at all , " the solid Mrs. Stubbard pronounce , with decision . " I believe it be all a sham , and what they want be to keep we from attack they in France . however , it be a good thing on the whole , and enable poor officer , who have fight well for their country , to keep out of the Workhouse with their family . " 
 " Hearken , hearken to Mrs. Stubbard ! " the veteran cry , as he pat his waistcoat a well one than he could have wear , and a large one than he could have want , except for the promise invasion . " I will back my wife against any lady in the land for common - sense , and for put it plainly . I be not ashamed to say thank God for the existence of that bless Boney . all I hope be that he will only try to land at Springhaven I mean , of course , when I have   get my powder . " 
 " keep it dry , Captain , " say the Rector , in good spirit . " your confidence make we feel comfortable ; and of course you would draw all their fire from the village , and the house stand near it , as this do . however , I pray earnestly every night that they may attempt it in some other parish . but what be it you hear that Frenchman say about two or three hundred barrel of powder almost within three mile of we ? suppose it be to blow up , where should we be ? " 
 " oh , I do not   believe a word of that . it must be brag and nonsense . to begin with , there be no place where they could store it . I know all the neighbourhood , and every house in it . and there be no cave on this coast in the cliff , or hole of that kind such as smuggler use . however , I shall think it my duty to get a search - order from Admiral Darling , and inspect large farm - building , such as Farmer Graves have get , and another man the other side of Pebbleridge . those be the only place that could accommodate large store of ammunition . why , we can take only forty barrel in the fire - proof magazine we have build . we all know what liar those Frenchmen be . I have no more faith in the 200 barrel of powder than I have in the 2000 ship prepare on the opposite coast to demolish we . " 
 " well , I hope you be right , " Mr. Twemlow answer . " it do seem a very unlikely tale . but the lady be go . let we have a quiet pipe . a man who work as hard as you and I do be entitle to a little repose now and then . " 




 CHAPTER XLII 

 answer the question 

 if Scudamore have not see Dan Tugwell on board of the London Trader , and hear from his own lip that he be one of her crew , it be certain that he would have make a strict search of her hold , accord to his order in suspicious case . and if he have do this , it be probable that he never would have set his nimble foot on deck again , for Perkins   the American who pass as Sam Polwhele   have a heavy ship - pistol in his great rough pocket , ready for the back of the young officer 's head if he have probe below the cheese and firkin of butter . only two man have follow the lieutenant from their boat , the rest be need for her safety in the strong sea running , and those two at the signal would have be fling overboard , and the schooner   put about for the mouth of the Canche , where heavy battery be mount   would have have a fair chance of escape , with a good start , while the gun - brig be pick up her boat . unless , indeed , a shot from the Delia should carry away an important spar , which be not very likely at night , and with a quick surf to baffle gunnery . however , none of these thing come to pass , and so the chance require no measurement . 
 Carne land his freight with his usual luck , and resolve very wisely to leave off that dangerous work until further urgency . he have now a very fine stock of military store for the ruin of his native land , and especially of gunpowder , which the gallant Frenchmen be afraid of stow largely in their flat - bottom craft . and know that he owe his success to moderation , and the good - will of his neighbour towards evasion of the revenue , he think it much well to arrange his magazine than to add to it for a month or two . 
 moreover , he be vex at the neglect of his advice , on the part of his arrogant Commander , a man who be never know to take advice from any mind external to his own body , and not even from that clear power sometimes , when his passionate heart get the uppermost . Carne , though of infinitely small mind , have one great advantage he seldom allow it to be curdle or cross in its clear operation by turbulent bodily element . and now , when he hear from the light - hearted Charron , who have lately be at work in London , that the only man they fear be about to take the lead once more against the enemy of Great Britain , Caryl Carne grow bitter against his chief , and begin for the first time to doubt his success . 
 " I have a great mind to go to Mr. Pitt myself , tell he everything , and throw myself upon his generosity , " he think , as he sate among his ruin sadly . " I could not be bring to trial as a common traitor . although by accident of birth I be an Englishman , I be a french officer , and within my duty in act as a pioneer for the french army . but then , again , they would call I at the good a spy , and in that capacity outside the rule of war . it be a toss - up how they might take it , and the result would depend perhaps on popular clamour . the mighty Emperor have snub I . he be not a gentleman . he have not even invite I to Paris , to share in the festivity and honour he proclaim . I would risk it , for I believe it be the safe game , except for two obstacle , and both of those be woman . matter be grow very ticklish now . that old bat of a Stubbard have get scent of a rat , and be hunt about the farm - house . it would be bad for he if he come prowl here ; that step for inspector be well contrive . twenty foot fall on his head for my friend ; even his bull - neck would get the bad of that . and then , again , there be that wretch of a Cheeseman , who could not even hang himself effectually . if it be not for Polly , we would pretty soon enable he , as the Emperor enable poor Pichegru . and after his own bona fide effort , who would be surprised to find he sus . per coll . ? but Polly be a nice girl , though become too affectionate . and jealous good lack ! a grocer 's daughter jealous , and a Carne compel to humour she ! what idiot woman be in the hand of a strong man ! only my mother my mother be not ; or else my father be a weak one ; which I can well believe from my own remembrance of he . well , one point at least shall be settle to - morrow . " 
 it be early in May , 1804 , and Napoleon have make away to the good of his ability which in that way be pre - eminent with all possible rival and probable foe , be receive address , and appoint dummy , and establish foolscap guarantee against his poor fallible and flexible self as he have the effrontery to call it with all the gravity , grand benevolence , confidence in mankind   as fool , immensity of yearn for universal good , and intensity of planning for his own , which have hoodwink the zany in every age , and never more than in the present age and country . and if France lick the dust , she could plead more than we can it have not be cast off from her enemy 's shoe . 
 Carne 's love of liberty , like that of most people who talk very largely about it , be about as deep as beauty be declare to be ; or even less than that , for he would not have imperille the gloss of his epiderm for the fair goddess . so that it irk he very little that his Chief have smash up the Republic , but very greatly that his own hand should be out in the cold , and have nothing put inside it to restore its circulation . " if I have stick to my proper line of work , in the Artillery , which have make his fortune " he could not help say to himself sometimes " instead of lose more than a year over here , and perhaps another year to follow , and all for the sake of these dirty old ruin , and my mother 's revenge upon this country , I might have be a General by this time almost for nothing depend upon age in France and worthy to claim something lofty and grand , or else to be buy off at a truly high figure . the little gunner have make a great mistake if he think that his flat thumb of low breed can press I down shudder , and starving , and crouch , just until it suit he to hold up a finger for I . my true course be now to consider myself , to watch event , and act accordingly . my honour be free to go either way , because he have not keep his word with I ; he promise to act upon my advice , and to land within a twelvemonth . " 
 there be some truth in this , for Napoleon have promise that his agent 's perilous commission in England should be discharge within a twelvemonth , and that time have elapse without any renewal . but Carne be clear - minded enough to know that he be bind in honour to give fair notice , before throw up the engagement ; and that even then it would be darkest dishonour to betray his confidence . he have his own sense of honour still , though warp by the underhand work he have stoop to ; and even while he reason with himself so basely , he feel that he could not do the thing he threaten . 
 to a resolute man it be a misery to waver , as even the most resolute must do sometimes ; for instance , the mighty Napoleon himself . that great man feel the misery so keenly , and grow so angry with himself for let in the mental pain , that he walk about vehemently , as a horse be walk when cold water upon a hot stomach have make colic only there be nobody to hit he in the rib , as the groom serve the nobler animal . Carne do not stride about in that style , to cast his wrath out of his toe , because his body never tingle with the sting - nettling of his mind as it be bind to do with all correct Frenchmen and his leg be long , he might have fall down a hole into ancestral vault before he know what he be up to . be as he be , he sate still , and think it out , and resolve to play his own game for a while , as his master be play for himself in Paris . 
 the next day he reappear at his seaside lodging , look as comely and stately as of old ; and the kind Widow Shanks be so glad to see he that he feel a rare emotion good - will towards she ; as the hard man must do sometimes , especially if other have be hard upon he . he even chuck little Susy under the chin , which amaze she so much that she stroke her face , to make sure of its be her own , and run away to tell her mother that the gentleman be come home so nice . then he order a special repast from John Prater 's for John , on the strength of all his winter dinner , have now paint on his sign - board " Universal Victualler , " care not a fig for the offence to Cheeseman , who never come now to have a glass with he , and have spoil all the appetite inspire by his window through the dismal suggestion of his rash act on the premise . instead of flatten their nose and open their mouth , and exclaim , " oh , should not   I like a bit of that ? " the child , if they venture to peep in at all , now do it with an anxious hope of horror , and a stealthy glance between the ham and bacon for something that might be hang up among the candle . and the bad of it be that the wise man in the village have fail to ascertain as yet " the reason why ' a do it . " until that be know , the most charitable neighbour could have no hope of forgive he . 
 Miss Dolly Darling have not see her hero of romance for a long time ; but something tell she or perhaps somebody that he be now at hand ; and to make sure about it , she resolve to have a walk . faith be very busy , as the lady of the house , in prepare for a visitor , the mother of Blyth Scudamore , whom she , with her usual kindness , intend to meet and bring back from the coach - road that evening ; for no less than three coach a day pass now within eight mile of Springhaven , and several of the native have see they . dolly be not to go in the carriage , because nobody know how many box the visitor might bring , inasmuch as she be to stop ever so long . " I be tired of all this fuss , " cry dolly ; " one would think Queen Charlotte be come , at the least ; and I dare say nearly all her luggage would go into the door - pocket . they be dreadfully poor ; and it serve they right , for be so dreadfully honest . " 
 " if you ever fall into poverty , " say Faith , " it will not be from that cause . when you get your money , you do not   pay your debt . you think that people should be proud to work for you for nothing . there be one house I be quite ashamed to pass by with you . how long have you owe poor Shoemaker Stickfast fifteen shilling and sixpence ? and you take advantage of he , because he dare not send it in to father . " 
 " fashionable lady never pay their debt , " dolly answer , as she spin round on one light heel , to float out a new petticoat that she be very proud of ; " this be not   pay for , nor this , nor this ; and you with your slow head have no idea how it add to the interest they possess . if I be not allow to have a bit of fashion in my dress , I can be in the fashion by not pay for it . " 
 " it be a most happy thing for you , dear child , that you be keep under some little control . what you would do , I have not the least idea , if you be not afraid of dear father , as you be . the bad of it be that he be never here now for as much as two day together . and then he be so glad to see we that he can not attend to our discipline or take notice of our dress . " 
 " ha ! you have inspire I ! " exclaim dolly , who rejoice in tease Faith . " the suggestion be your , and I will act upon it . from the village of Brighthelmstone , which be grow very fine , I will procure upon the strict credit a new Classic dress , with all tackle complete as dear father so well express it and then I will promenade I on the beach , with Charles in good livery and a big stick behind I . how then will springhaven rejoice , and every one that hath eye clap a spy - glass to they ! and what will old Twemlow say , and that frump of an Eliza , who condescend to give I little hint sometimes about tighten up so , perhaps , and let out so , and permit a little air to come in HERE " 
 " do be off , you wicke little animal ! " cry Faith , who in spite of herself could not help laugh , so well be dolly mimic Eliza Twemlow 's voice , and manner , and attitude , and even her figure , less fit by nature for the Classic attire ; " you be waste all my time , and do bad with your own . be off , or I will take a stick to ' e , as old Daddy Stakes say to the boy . " 
 take advantage of this state of thing , the young Miss Darling set forth by herself to dwell upon the beauty of the calm May sea , and her own pretty figure glass in tidal pool . she know that she would show to the utmost of her gift , with her bright complexion softly gleam in the sun , and dark gray eye through their deep fringe receive and return tenfold the limpid glimmer of the shore . and she feel that the spring of the year be with she , the bound of old time that renew his youth and power of go at any pace ; when the desire of the young be to ride he at full gallop , and the pleasure of the old be to stroke his nose and think . 
 dolly , with everything in her favour , youth and beauty , the time of year , the time of day , and the power of the place , as well as her own wish to look lovely , and to be love beyond reason , nevertheless come along very strictly , and keep herself most careful not to look about at all . at any rate , not towards the house , where people live , and therefore must look out . at the breadth of sea , with distant ship jot against the sky like chip , or dot with boat like bit of stick ; also at the playing of the little wave that run at the bottom of the sand , just now , after one another with a lively turn , and then jostle into white confusion , like a flock of sheep huddle up and hurry from a dog at these and at the warm cloud loiter in the sun she might use her bright eye without prejudice . but soon she have to turn they upon a near object . 
 " how absorbed we be in distant contemplation ! a happy sign , I hope , in these turbulent time . Miss Darling , will you condescend to include I in your view ? " 
 " I only understand simple English , " answer dolly . " Most of the other come from France , perhaps . we believe that you be go abroad again . " 
 " I wish that the subject have more interest for you , " Carne answer , with his keen eye fix on her , in the manner that half angered and half conquer she . " my time be not like that of happy young lady , with the world at their foot , and their chief business in it , to discover some new amusement . " 
 " you be not at all polite . but you never be that , in spite of your french education . " 
 " ah , there it be again ! you be so accustomed to the flattery of great people that a simple - minded person like myself have not the small chance of please you . ah , well ! it be my fate , and I must yield to it . " 
 " not at all , " reply dolly , who could never see the beauty of that kind of resignation , even in the case of Dan Tugwell . " there be no such thing as fate for a strong - willed man , though there may be for poor woman . " 
 " may I tell you my idea about that matter ? if so , come and rest for a moment in a quiet little shelter where the wind be not so cold . for there be no such thing as Spring in England . " 
 dolly hesitate , and with the proverbial result . to prove himself more polite than she suppose , Caryl Carne , hat in hand and with low bow preserve a respectful distance , conduct she to a little place of shelter , so pretty and humble and seclude by its own want of art , and simplicity of skill , that she be equally pleased and surprised with it . 
 " why , it be quite a little bower ! " she exclaim ; " as pretty a little nest as any bird could wish for . and what a lovely view towards the west and beyond Pebbleridge ! one could sit here forever and see the sun set . but I must have pass it fifty time without the least suspicion of it . how on earth have you manage to conceal it so ? that be to say , if it be your doing . surely the child must have find it out , because they go everywhere . " 
 " one brat do . but I give he such a scare that he never stop roar till next Sunday , and it frighten all the rest from look round that corner . if any other come , I shall pitch - plaster he , for I could not endure that noise again . but you see , at a glance , why you have fail to see it , as we always do with our little oversight , when humbly point out to we . it be the colour of the ground and the background too , and the grayness of the scanty growth that hide it . nobody find it out by walk across it , because of this swampy place on your side , and the shoot of flint down from the cliff on the other , all sharp as a knife , and as rough as a saw . and nobody come down to this end of the warren , neither be it see from the battery on the hill . only from the back be it likely to be invade , and there be nothing to make people look , or come , up here . so you have I altogether at your mercy , Miss Darling . " 
 dolly think within herself that it be much the other way , but could not well express her thought to that effect . and be of a brisk and versatile not to say volatile order , she go astray into a course of wonder concern the pretty little structure she behold . structure be not the proper word for it at all ; for it seem to have grow from the nature around , with a little aid of human hand to guide it . branch of sea - willow radiant with spring , and supple spray of tamarisk recover from the winter , be lightly inweave and arch together , with the soft compliance of reed and rush from the marsh close by , and the stout assistance of hazel rod from the westward cliff . the back be afford by a grassy hillock , with a tuft or two of brake - fern throwing up their bronzy crocket among the spray russet of last year 's pride . and beneath they a ledge of firm turf afford as fair a seat as even two sweet lover need desire . 
 " how clever he be , and how full of fine taste ! " think the simple - minded dolly ; " and all this time I have be take he for a gloomy , hard - hearted , unnatural man . Blyth Scudamore never could have make this lovely bower . " 
 in this conclusion she be altogether wrong . Scudamore could have make it , and would have make it gladly , with bright love to help he . but Carne never could , and would have scorn the pleasant task . it be Charron , the lively Frenchman , who , with the aid of old Jerry , have achieve this pretty feat , work to relieve his dull detention , with a Frenchman 's playful industry and tasteful joy in nature . but Carne be not likely to forego this credit . 
 " I think I have do it pretty well , " he say , in reply to her smile of admiration ; " with such scanty material , I mean , of course . and I shall think I have do it very well indeed , if you say that you like it , and crown it with new glory by sit for a moment in its unpretentious shade . if your brother come down , as I hope he will , next week , I shall beg he to come and write a poem here . the place be fitter for a poet than a prosy vagabond like I . " 
 " it be very hard that you should be a a wanderer , I mean , " dolly answer , look at he with a sweet thrill of pity ; " you have do nothing to deserve it . how unfairly fortune have always treat you ! " 
 " Fortune could make I a thousand time more than the just compensation even now , if she would . such a glorious return for all my bitter loss and outcast condition , that I should but it be useless to think of such thing , in my low state . the fate have be hard with I , but never shall they boast that they drive I from my pure sense of honour . oh yes , it be damp . but let I cure it thus . " 
 for dolly , grow anxious about his meaning , yet ready to think about another proposal , be desirous to sit down on the sweet ledge of grass , yet uneasy about her pale blue sarsenet , and uncertain that she have not see something of a little sea - snail   live in a yellow house , dado with red , whom to crush would be a cruel act to her dainty fabric . but if he be there , he be sit upon unavenged ; for Carne , pull off his light buff cloak , fling it on the seat ; after which the young lady could scarcely be rude enough not to sit . 
 " oh , I be so sorry now ! perhaps it will be spoil , " she say ; " for you say that the fate be against you always . and I be sure that they always combine against I , when I wear anything of that colour . " 
 " I be go the wrong way to work , " think Carne . " what a little vixen it be ; but what a beauty ! " for his love for she be chiefly a man 's admiration . and bodily she look worthy now of all that could be do in that way , with the light flow in through the bud arch and flash upon the sweet flush of her cheek . carne gaze at she without a word or thought , simply admire , as he never have admire anything , except himself , till now . then she feel all the meaning of his gaze , and turn away . 
 " but you must look at I and tell I something , " he say , in a low voice , and take both her hand ; " you shall tell I what my fate must be . whether you can ever come to love I , as I have love you , long and long . " 
 " you have no right to speak to I like that , " she answer , still avoid his eye , and strive to show proper anger ; " no gentleman would think of take advantage of a lady so . " 
 " I care not what be right or wrong . look up , and tell I that you hate I . dolly , I suppose you do . " 
 " then you be quite wrong " she give he one bright glance of contradiction ; " no . I have always be so sorry for you , and for all your trouble . you must not ask I to say more . " 
 " but I must ; I must . that be the very thing that I must do . only say that you love I , dolly . dolly darling , tell I that . or let your lovely eye say it for you . " 
 " my lovely eye must not tell story " they be gaze softly at he now " and I do not   think I can say it yet . " 
 " but you will you shall ! " he exclaim , with passion grow as he draw she near ; " you shall not slip from I , you shall not stir , until you have answer I one question be there anybody else , my dolly ? " 
 " you frighten I . you forget who I be . of course there be a great many else , as you call it ; and I be not to be call , for a moment , your DOLLY . " 
 " no , not for a moment , but forever . " Carne be accustom to the way of girl , and read all their word by the light of their eye . " your little heart begin to know who love it well than all the world put together . and for that reason I will leave you now . Farewell , my darling ; I conquer myself , for the sake of what be worth a thousand of it . " 
 dolly be in very sad confusion , and scarcely know what she might do next that be to say , if he still go on . pleasant conceit and bright coquetry ill supply the place of honest pride and gentle self - respect , such as Faith be bl with . carne might have kiss dolly a hundred time , without much resistance , for his strong will have master her ; but she would have hat he afterwards . he do not kiss she once ; and she almost wish that he have offer one one little tribute of affection   as the Valentines express it   as soon as he be go , and the crisis of not know what to do be past . " I should have let he I believe I should , " she reflect , sagely recover herself ; " but how glad I ought to be that he do not ! and I do hope he will not   come back again . the next time I meet he , I shall sink into the earth . " 
 for her hat have fall off , and her hair be out of order , and she see two crinkle near the buckle of her waist ; and she have not so much as a look - glass to be sure that she look nice again . with a heavy sigh for all these woe , she gather a flossy bud of willow , and fix it on her breast - knot , to defy the world ; and then , without heed of the sea , sun , or sand , go home with short breath , and quick blush , and some wonder ; for no man 's arm , except her father 's , have ever be round her waist till now . 




 CHAPTER XLIII 

 little and great PEOPLE 

 if ever a wise man depart from wisdom , or a sober place from sobriety , the man be John Prater , and the place Springhaven , towards the middle of June , 1804 . there have be some sharp rumour of great thing before ; but the good people , have be mislead so often , shake their head without produce of their content ; until Captain Stubbard come out in his shirt sleeve one bright summer morning at half past nine , with a large print paper in one hand and a slop basin full of hot paste in the other . his second boy , George , in the absence of Bob   who be now draw ration at Woolwich , follow , with a green baize apron on , and carry a hearth - brush tie round with a string to keep the hair stiff . 
 " lay it on thick on the shutter , my son . never mind about any other notice , except the one about young man want . no hurry ; keep your elbow up ; only do not   dab my breech , nor the shirt you have on Sunday . " 
 by this time there be half a dozen people wait ; for this shutter of Widow Shanks be now accept as the central board and official panel of all public business and authorise intelligence . not only because all Royal Proclamations , offer of reward , and issue of menace be post on that shutter and the one beyond the window   which serve as a postscript and glossary to it , but also inasmuch as the kind - hearted Captain , begin now to understand the native which be not to be do pugnaciously , as he have first attempt it , neither by any show of interest in they   than which they detest nothing more , but by take they coolly , as they take themselves , and gradually slide , without any thought about it , into the wholesome contagion of their mind , and the divine gift of take thing easily our Captain Stubbard may be fairly now declare to have make himself almost as good as a native , by the way in which he minister to their content . 
 for nothing delight they more than to hear of great wonder go on in other place of battle , plague , pestilence , famine , and fire ; of people whose wife run away with other people , or highwayman stop the coach of a bishop . be full of good - nature , they enjoy these thing , because of the fine sympathy call out to their own credit , and the sense of pious gratitude arouse towards Heaven , that they never permit such thing among they . perceive this genial desire of theirs , the stout Captain of the Foxhill battery be kind enough to meet it with worthy subject . receive officially a London newspaper almost every other day , as soon as it have tread the round of his friend , his regular practice be to cut out all the piece of lofty public interest the first - rate murder , the exploit of highwayman , the episode of high life , the gallant execution , the embezzlement of demagogue , in a word , whatever quiet people find a fond delight in ruminate and these he paste   sometimes upside down   upon his shutter . Springhaven have a good deal of education , and enjoy most of all what be hard to read . 
 but this great piece of news , that should smother all the rest , seem now to take a terrible time in come . all the gaffer be wait who have wait to see the result of Mr. Cheeseman 's suicide , and their patience be less on this occasion . at length the great Captain unfold his broad sheet , but even then hold it upside down for a minute . it be below their dignity to do anything but grunt , put their spec on their nose , and lean chin upon staff . they deserve to be reward , and so they be . 
 for this grand poster , which overlap the shutter , be a Royal Proclamation , all print in red ink , announce that his Majesty King George the 3rd would on the 25th of June then ensue hold a grand review upon shotbury down of all the Volunteer force and Reserve , mount , footman , or artillery , of the four county form the Southeast Division , to wit , Surrey , Kent , Sussex , and hant . certain regiment of the line would be appoint to act with they ; and officer in command be order to report at once ,   c. ,   c. God save the king . 
 if shotbury Down have be ten mile off , Springhaven would have think very little of the matter ; for no one would walk ten mile inland to see all the sojer that ever be shoot , or even the " King and Queen , and their fifteen little one . " Most of the little one be very large now ; but the village have see they in a travel show , and expect they to continue like it . but Shotbury Down be only three mile inland ; and the people   who think nothing of twenty mile along the coast   resolve to face a league of peril of the solid earth , because if they only turn round upon their trudge , they could see where they live from every corner of the road . they always do all thing with one accord ; the fishing fleet all should stand still on the sand , and the house should have to keep house for themselves . that be to say , perhaps , all except one . 
 " do as you like , " say Mrs. Tugwell to her husband ; " nothing as you do make much differ to I now . if you feel you can be happy with they thousand of young man , and I without one leave fit to lift a big crock , go your way , Zeb ; but you do not   catch I go , with the tear come into my eye every time I see a young man to remind I of Dan though there will not   be one there fit to stand at his side . and he perhaps fight against his own King now ! " 
 " whatever hath coom to Dannel be all along of your own fault , I tell ' e. " Captain Tugwell have scarcely enjoy a long pipe since the night when he discharge his paternal duty , with so much vigour , and such sad result . not that he feel any qualm of conscience , though his heart be sometimes heavy , but because his good wife be a good wife no long , in the important sphere of the pan , pot , and kettle , or even in listen to his adventure with the proper exclamation in the proper place . and not only she , but all his child , from Timothy down to Solomon , instead of a pleasant chatter around he , and little attention , and a smile to catch a smile , seem now to shrink from he , and hold whisper in a corner , and watch he with timid eye , and wonder how soon their own time would come to be lash and turn away . and as for the woman , whether up or down the road but as he would not admit , even to himself , that he care twopence what they think , it be useless to give voice to their opinion , which they do quite sufficiently . Zebedee Tugwell feel sure that he have do the right thing , and therefore admire himself , but would have enjoy himself more if he have do the wrong one . 
 " what fault of mine , or of his , poor lamb ? " Mrs. Tugwell ask , with some irony . she know that her husband could never dare to go to see the King without she for no married man in the place would venture to look at he twice if he do such a thing and she have make up her own mind to go from the first ; but still , he should humble himself before she do it . " be it I as colte he ? or be it he as gash himself , like the prophet of Baal , when ' a be go hunt ? " 
 " no ; but you cocker he up , the same as be do to they , by the wicked king , and his wife the bad woman as ever live . if they have not   gash theirselve , I reckon , the true man of God would ' a do it for they , the same as he cut their throat into the brook Kishon . Solomon be the wise man as ever live , and Job the most patient the same as I be and Elijah , the Tishbite , the most justest . " 
 " you well finish up with all the Psalms of David , and the Holy Children , and the Burial Service . no more call for Parson Twemlow , or the new Churchwarden come in place of Cheeseman , because ' a try to hang his self . Zebedee Tugwell in the pulpit ! Zebedee , come round with the plate ! Parson Tugwell , if you please , a - read out the ten commandment ! but ' un ought to leave out the sixth , for fear of spoil 's own dinner afterwards ; and the seventh , if ' a hope to go to see King George the third , with another man 's woman to his elbow ! " 
 " when you begin to go on like that , " Captain Tugwell reply , with some dignity , " the only thing as a quiet man can do be to go out of houze , and have a half - pint of small ale . " he put his hat on his head and go to do it . 
 notwithstanding all this and much more , when the great day come for the Grand Review , very few people see more of the king , or enter more kindly into all his thought or rather the thought that they make he think than Zebedee Tugwell and his wife Kezia . the place be so near home , and the smoke of their own chimney and mast of their smack as good as in sight if you know where to look it be natural for they to regard the King as a stranger require to be teach about their place . this sense of proprietary right be strong in dog and bird and cow and rabbit , and everything that act by nature 's law . when a dog sit in front of his kennel , fast chain , every strange dog that come in at the gate confess that the premise be his , and all the treasure they contain ; and if he hunt about which he be like enough to do , unless full of self - respect and fresh victual for any bone invest in the earth to ripen , by the vested owner , he do it with a low tail and many prick of conscience , perhaps hop in his heart that he may discover nothing to tempt he into breach of self - respect . but now man be order , in this matter , to be of low principle than their dog . 
 King George the third , who hat pomp and show , and have in his blood the old german sense of patriarchal kingship , would have enjoy a good talk with Zebedee and his wife Kezia , if he have meet they on the down alone ; but , alas , he be surround with great people , and oblige to restrict himself to the upper order , with whom he have less sympathy . Zebedee , perceive this , make all allowance for he , and buy a new Sunday hat the very next day , for fear of wear out the one he have take off to his Majesty , when his Majesty look at he , and her Majesty as well , and they manifestly say to one another , what a very fine subject they have find . such be loyalty aye , and royalty in those time that we despise . 
 but large event demand our heed . there be forty thousand gallant fellow , from the age of fifteen upwards , do their good to look like soldier , and some almost succeed . true it be that their leg and arm be not all of one pattern , nor their hat put on their head alike any more than the head on their shoulder be neither do they swing together , as they would have do to a good swathe of grass ; but for all that , and make due allowance for the necessity they be under of star incessantly at the King , any man who understand they would have praise they wonderfully . and they go about in such wide formation , and occupy so much of their native land , that the well - drill regiment Napoleon possess would have look quite small among they . 
 " they understand furze , " say a fine young officer of the staff , who have ride up to Admiral Darling 's carriage and salute three lady who keep watch there . " I doubt whether many of the regular force would have get through that brake half so well ; certainly not without double gaiter . if the French ever land , we must endeavour to draw they into furzy ground , and then set the Volunteers at they . no Frenchman can do much with prickle in his leg . " 
 Lady Scudamore smile , for she be think of her son , who would have jump over any furze - bush there and the fir - tree too , accord to her conviction ; dolly also show her very beautiful tooth ; but Faith look at he gratefully . 
 " it be very kind of you , Lord Dashville , to say the good of we that you can find to say . but I fear that you be laugh to yourself . you know how well they mean ; but you think they can not do much . " 
 " no , that be not what I think at all . so far as I can judge , which be not much , I believe that they would be of the great service , if the Country should unfortunately need they . man for man , they be as brave as train troop , and many of they can shoot well . I do not   mean to say that they be fit to meet a french army in the open ; but for act on their flank , or rear , or in a woode country however , I have no right to venture an opinion , have never see active service . " 
 Miss Darling look at he with some surprise , and much approval of his modesty . so strongly do most of the young officer who come to her father 's house lie down the law , and criticise even Napoleon 's tactic . 
 " how beautiful Springhaven must be look now ! " he say , after dolly have offer her opinion , which she seldom long withhold . " the cottage must be quite cover with rose , whenever they be not too near the sea ; and the tree at their good , full of leaf and blossom , by the side of the brook that feed they . all the rest of the coast be so hard and barren , and cover with chalk instead of grass , and the shore so straight and star . but I have never be there at this time of year . how much you must enjoy it ! surely we ought to be able to see it , from this high ground somewhere . " 
 " yes , if you will ride to that shattered tree , " say Faith , " you will have a very fine view of all the valley . you can see round the corner of Foxhill there , which shut out most of it just here . I think you have meet our Captain Stubbard . " 
 " ah , I must not go now ; I may be want at any moment " Lord Dashville have very fine taste , but it be not the inanimate beauty of Springhaven that he care a dash for " and I fear that I could never see the rose there . I think there be nothing in all nature to compare with a rose except one thing . " 
 Faith have a lovely moss - rise in her hat a rose just peep through its lattice at mankind , before it should open and blush at they and she know what it be that he admire more than the sweetest rise that ever gem itself with dew . Lord Dashville have love she , as she be frightened to remember , for more than a year , because he could not help it , be a young man of great common - sense , as well as fine taste , and some knowledge of the world . " he know to which side his bread will be butter , " Mr. Swipes have remark , as a keen observer . " if ' a can only get Miss Faith , his bread will be butter to both side for life his self to one side , and she to do the tother . the same as I tell Mother Cloam a man that knoweth his duty to head gardener , as his noble lordship doth , the same know the differ atwixt Miss Faith as fine a young ' ooman as ever look into a pink and that blow - away froth of a thing , Miss dolly . " 
 this fine young woman , to use the word of Mr. Swipes , colour softly , at his noble lordship 's gaze , to the tint of the rose - bud in her hat ; and then speak coldly to countervail her blush . 
 " there be evidently something to be do directly . all the people be move towards the middle of the down . we must not be so selfish as to keep you here , Lord Dashville . " 
 " why , do not   you see what it be ? " exclaim Miss Dolly , hotly resent the part of second fiddle ; " they be go to have the grand march - past . these affair always conclude with that . and we be in the bad part of the whole down for see it . Lord Dashville will tell we where we ought to go . " 
 " you have well not attempt to move now , " he answer , smile as he always smile at dolly , as if she be a charming but impatient child ; " you might cause some confusion , and perhaps see nothing . and now I must discharge my commission , which I be quite ashamed of have leave so long . his Majesty hop , when the march - past be over , to receive a march - up of fair lady . he have a most wonderful memory , as you know , and his nature be the kind of the kind . as soon as he hear that Lady Scudamore be here , and Admiral Darling 's daughter with she , he say : ' bring they all to I , every one of they ; young Scudamore have do good work , good work . and I want to congratulate his mother about he . and Darling 's daughter , I must see they . why , we owe the security of the coast to he . ' and so , if you please , lady , be quite ready , and allow I the honour of conduct you . " 
 with a low bow , he set off about his business , leave the lady in a state of sweet disturbance . Blyth Scudamore 's mother weep a little , for ancient trouble and present pleasure . Lord Dashville could not repeat before she all that the blunt old King have say : " monstrous ill - treat woman , shameful , leave without a penny , after all her poor husband do for I and the child ! not my fault a bit fault of the whig always stingy say he make away with himself bad example do not   believe a word of it ; very cheerful man . blow by now , at any rate must see what can be do for she oblige to go for governess disgrace to the Crown ! " 
 Faith , with her quiet self - respect , and the largeness learn from sorrow , be almost capable of not weep that she have leave at home her apple - green Poland mantlet and jockey bonnet of lilac satin check with maroon . but dolly have no such weight of by - go sorrow to balance her present woe , and the thing she have leave at home be infinitely bright than that dowdy Faith 's . 
 " be there time to drive back ? be there time to drive home ? the King know father , and he will be astonish to see a pair of frump , and he will not   understand one bit about the dust , or the sun that take the colour out . he will think we have get all our good thing on . oh , Lady Scudamore , how could you do it ? you tell we to put on quite plain thing , because of the dust , and the sun , and all that ; and it might come to rain , you say as if it be likely , when the King be on the hill ! and with all your experience of the King and Queen , that you tell we about last evening , you must have know that they would send for we . Gregory , how long would it take you to go home , at full gallop , allow we half an hour in the house , and be back here again , when all these people be go by ? " 
 " well , miss , there be a steepish bit of road , and a many ockard cornder ; I should say ' a might do it in two hour and a half , with a fresh pair of nag put in while you lady be a - cleaning of yourself , miss . leastway , if Hadmiral not object . " 
 " Hadmiral , as you call he , would have nothing to do with it " dolly be always free - speak with the servant , which make she very popular with some of they " he have heavy duty than he can discharge . but two hour and a half be hopeless ; we must even go as we be . " 
 Coachman Gregory smile in his sleeve . he know that the Admiral have that day a duty far beyond his power to bring up his Sea - Fencibles to see the King upon which they have insist and then to fetch they all back again , and send they on board of their several craft in a state of strict sobriety . and Gregory mean to bear a hand , and lift it pretty frequently towards the most loyal part of man , in the large festivity of that night . he smack his lip at the thought of this , and give a little flick to his horse . 
 after a long time , long enough for two fair drive to Springhaven and back , and when even the young be grow weary of glare , and dust , and clank , and din , and blare , and roar , and screech music , Lord Dashville ride up through a cloud of rove chalk , and after a little talk with the lady , order the coachman to follow he . then stop the carriage at a proper distance , he lead the three lady towards the King , who be thoroughly tired , and have forget all about they . his Majesty 's sole desire be to get into his carriage and go to sleep ; for he be threescore year and six of age , and his health not such as it use to be . ever since twelve o'clock he have be sit in a box make of feather - edge board , which the newspaper call a pavilion , have two little curtain   both of which stick fast   for his only defence against sun , noise , and dust . moreover , his seat be a board full of knot , with a strip of thin velvet throw over it ; and her Majesty sit towards the other end   that the public might see between they , and weigh more than he do , every time she jump up , he go down , and every time she plump down , he go up . but he never complain , and only slowly get tired . " thank God ! " he say , gently , " it be all over now . my dear , you must be monstrous tired ; and scarcely a bit to eat all day . but I lock some in the seat - box this morning no trust anybody but oneself . let we get into the coach and have at they . " " Ja , ja , meinherr , " say the Queen . 
 " if it please your Majesties " a clear voice enter between the bonnet - hood of the curtain " here be the lady whose attendance I be order to require . " 
 " lady ! what lady ? " ask King George , rub his eye , and yawn . " oh yes , to be sure ! I must not   get up so early to - morrow . will not   take a minute , my dear . let they come . not much time to spare . " 
 but as soon as he see Lady Scudamore , the King 's good - nature overcome the weariness of the moment . he take she kindly by the hand , and look at her face , which bear the mark of many heavy trial ; and she , who have often see he when the world be bright before she , could not smother one low sob , as she think of all that have be since . 
 " do not   cry , do not   cry , my dear , " say the King , with his kind heart show in his eye ; " we must bow to the will of the Lord , who give sad trial to every one of we . we must think of the good , and not the evil . bless I , keep your spirit up . your son be do very well indeed , very well indeed , from all I hear . good chip of the old block , very good chip . will cure my grandchild , as soon as they want it ; and nobody be ever in good health now . " 
 " no , your Majesty , if you please , my son be in the Royal Navy , fight for his Country and his king . and he have already capture " 
 " three french frigate . to be sure , I know . well than cure three hundred people . fine young officer very fine young officer . must come to see I when he get old . there , you be laugh ! that be as it should be . goodbye , young lady . forty mile to go tonight , and very rough road very rough indeed . monstrous pretty girl ! Uncommon glad that George be not   here to see they . well stay in the country too good for London . must be off ; sha'n't   have a bit o ' sleep to - night , because of sleep the whole way there , and then sure to be late in the morning , not a bit of breakfast till eight o'clock , and all the day throw upside down ! darling , darling the right name for they ! but they must not   come to London . no , no , no . too much wickedness there already . very glad George be not   here to - day ! " 
 his Majesty be talk , as he always do , with the firm conviction that his word intend for the public ear would reach it , while those address , without change of tone , to himself , would be strictly private . but instead of offend any one , this on the whole give great satisfaction , and impress nine people out of ten with a strong and special regard for he , because almost every one suppose himself to be admit at first sight to the inner confidence of the king . and to what could he attribute this ? he would do his own merit great demerit unless he attribute it to they , and to the King an unusual share of sagacity in perceive they . 




 CHAPTER XLIV 

 down among the dead MEN 

 that grand review at Shotbury be declare by all who take part in it , or at all understand the subject , to have be a most remarkable and quite unparalleled success . not only do it show what noble stuff there be in Englishmen , and how naturally they take to arm , but also it inspire with martial feeling and happy faith the wife and mother of all the gallant warrior there . it would make the blood - stain despot cower upon his throne of murder , and teach he the madness of invade any land so fortified . 
 however , Napoleon fail to see the matter in that wholesome light , and smile a grim and unkind smile as he read Caryl Carne 's report of those " left - handed and uncouth manoeuvre . " " one of your Majesty 's feeble regiment would send the whole of those lout to the devil ; and I be bind to impress once more , with all deference to your infallible judgment , the vast importance of carry out your grand design at the first moment . all be prepared on my part . one day 's notice be all I need . " 
 so write Carne ; and perhaps the truth , as usual , lie about half - way between the two opinion . even Carne be not admit to a perfect knowledge of his master 's scheme . but to keep thing move and man alert , the Emperor come to the coast at once , busy as he be in Paris , and occupy for several week , with short interval of absence , the house prepare for he near Boulogne , whence he watch and quicken the ripening of his mighty plan against we . 
 now carne himself , while work with new vigour and fresh enterprise , have a narrow escape from invasion . Captain Stubbard , stir up now and again by Mr. Twemlow , have thoroughly search all cover place , likely to harbour gunpowder , within at least six mile of his fort , that be to say , all likely place , save and except the right one . by do this he have do for himself as regard sweet hospitality among all the lead farmer , maltster , tanner , and miller for mile around . even those whose premise be not enter , as if they have be Frenchmen , have a brother - in - law , or at least a cousin , whose wooden bar have be knock up . and the most atrocious thing of all , if there could be anything bad than bad , be that the Captain din one day , at a market - ordinary , with Farmer , or you might say Squire Hanger for the good part of his land follow to he from his father and have rum and water with he , and speak his health , and tuck Mrs. Hanger up into the shay , and ride alongside to guarantee they ; and then the next day , on the very same horse , up he come at Hanger - dene , and overhaul every tub on the premise , with a parchment as big as a malt - shovel ! such a man be not fit to lay a knife and fork by . 
 some sense of the harm he have do to himself , without a bit of good to any one , dwelt heavily in the Captain 's mind , as he ride up slowly upon the most amiable of the battery - horse for all sailor can ride , from long practice on the wave and strike a stern stroke , with a stick like a linstock , upon the old shutter that serve for a door and the front entrance to Carne Castle . there use to be a fine old piece of workmanship in solid and bold oak here , a door divide in the middle else no man might swing it back and even so pierce with a wicket , for small people to get through . that mighty door be not wear out , for it be not three hundred year old yet , and therefore scarcely in middle life ; but the mortgagee who have sack the place of all that be worth a sack to hold it , these have a very fine offer for that door , from a rich man come out of a dust - bin . and this be one of the many little thing that make Caryl Carne unpleasant . 
 " I do not require production of your warrant . the whole place be open to your inspection , " say Carne , who have long be prepare for this visit ; " open to all the wind and rain , and the low part sometimes fill with water . the upper room , or rather the few that remain of they , be scarcely safe for a person of any weight to walk in , but you be most welcome to try they , if you like ; and this gentleman , I think , might not fall through . here be my quarter ; not quite so snug as my little room at the widow 's ; but I can offer you some bread and cheese , and a glass of country cider . the vault or cellar have hold good wine in their time , but only empty cask and break bottle now . " 
 Captain Stubbard have know for many year the silent woe of poverty , and now he observe with some good - will the young man 's sad but haughty smile . then he order his young subaltern , his battery - mate , as he call he , to ascend the broad crumbling staircase , and glance into the dismantled chamber , while himself with the third of the party a trusty old gunner should inspect the cellarage . 
 " we will not keep you long , sir , " he say to Carne ; " and if you be kind enough to show we the way , which be easily lose in a place of this kind , we shall be all the quick . wilkin , when you have do up there , wait here for we . shall we want a light , sir ? " 
 " in the winter , you could hardly do without one , but at this time of year , I think you may . at any rate I will bring a lantern , and we can light it if want . but the truth be that I know next to nothing of those sepulchral place . they would not be very tempting , even without a ghost , which they be say to have . " 
 " a ghost ! " cry the Captain ; " I do not   like that . not that I have much faith in they ; although one never can be sure . but at this time of day what be it like ? " 
 " I have never see she , and be quite content without it . it be say to be an ancestress of mine , a Lady Cordelia Carne , who be murder , when her husband be away , and bury down there , after be throw into the moat . the old people say that whenever her ghost be walk , the water of the moat burst in and cover the floor of the vault , that she may flit along it , as she use to do . but of course one must not listen to that sort of fable . " 
 " perhaps you will go in front , sir , because you know the way . it be my duty to inspect these place ; and I be devilish sorry for it ; but my duty must be do . " 
 " you shall see every hole and corner , include the stone that be put up to commemorate her murder and keep she quiet . but I should explain that these vault extend for the entire length of the building , except just in the middle , where we now stand . for a few yard the centre of the building seem to have never be excavate , as to which you will convince yourself . you may call the cellar east and west , or right and left , or north and south , or uphill and downhill , or anything else , for really they be so much alike , and partition into cell so much alike , that I scarcely know which be which myself , come suddenly from the daylight . but you understand those thing much well . a sailor always know his bearing . this lead to the entrance of one set . " 
 Carne lead the Captain and old Gunner Bob as he be call in the battery along a dark and narrow passage , whose mouth be browe with ivy . half - way through , they find an archway on the right - hand side , open at right angle into long and badly light vault . in this arch there be no door ; but a black step - ladder   make of oak , no doubt , very steep and rather rickety , be plant to tempt any venturesome foot . 
 " be you sure this ladder be safe ? " the Captain be by no mean in love with the look of it . " my weight have increase remarkably in the fine air of Springhaven . if the bottom be rotten , the top will not   help we . " 
 " let I go first . it be my duty , as the owner ; and I have no family dependent on I . my neck be of no value , compare to your , Captain . " 
 " how I have mistake this young man ! " think the brave yet prudent Stubbard . " I call he a frenchified fool , whereas he be a downright Englishman ! I shall ask he to dinner next week , if Jemima can get a new leg for the dripping - pan . " 
 follow warily , with Gunner Bob behind he , and not disdain the strong arm of the owner , the Captain of Foxhill be land in the vault , and be there , make a strict examination . he even poke his short sword into the bung - hole of three or four empty barrel , that Bob might be satisfied also in his conscience . " Matter of form , " he say , " matter of form , sir , when we know who people be ; but you might have to do it yourself , sir , if you be in the service of your king . you ought to be that , Mr. Carne ; and it be not too late , in such day as these be , to begin . take my advice such a fine young man ! " 
 " alas , my dear sir , I can not afford it . what officer can live upon his pay for a generation ? " 
 " Gospel truth ! " cry the Captain , warmly ; " Gospel truth ! and more than that he must be the last of his generation , or else send his young ' uns to the workhouse . what thing I could tell you , Mr. Carne ! but here we be at the end of the vault ; all empty , as I can certify ; and I hope , my dear sir , that you may live to see they fill with good wine , as they use to be . " 
 " thank you , but there be no hope of that . shall we take the vault of the other end next , or examine the chapel , and the outer building outer ruin , I should say ? " 
 " oh , a little open air first , for goodness sake ! " say the Captain , go heavily up the old step ; " I be pretty nearly choke with all this mildew . a little fresh air , before we undertake the other lot . " 
 as soon as the echo of their step be dead , Charron , old Jerry , and another man jump down from a loop - hole into the vault they have leave , pile up a hoarding at the entrance , and with a crowbar swing back a heavy oak hatch in the footing of the outer wall . a volume of water pour in from the moat , or rather from the stream which have once supply it . see this , they disappear with a soft and pleasant chuckle . 
 the owner keep Stubbard such a time among the ruin , tell he some fine old legend , and otherwise lead he in and out , that when a bit of food and a glass of old Cognac be propose by way of interlude , the Captain heartily embrace the offer . then Carne conduct his three visitor , for Wilkins have now rejoin they , into a low room poorly furnish , and regale they beyond his promise . " rare stuff ! " exclaim Stubbard , with a wink at Carne . " ah , I see that free - trade still exist . no concern of mine , except to enjoy its benefit . here be to your very good health , sir , and I be proud to have make your acquaintance . " 
 " have another drop ; it can hurt no one , " Carne declare , and the Captain acquiesce . 
 " well , I suppose we must finish our job , " the official visitor at length pronounce ; " a matter of form , sir , and no offence ; but we be bind to carry out our duty . there be nothing leave , except the other lot of vault ; but the light begin to fail we , for underground work . I hope they be not so dark as those we have be through . " 
 " just about the same . you would hardly know one set from the other , as I tell you , except for the stone that record the murder . perhaps we have well light the lantern now ? " 
 " by all mean . I do not   half like that story of the lady that walk on the water . it do seem so gashly and unchristian altogether . not that I have any fear of ghost not likely , for I have never even see one . " 
 " I have , " say Gunner Bob , in a deep voice , which make they all glance through the ivy . " I have , and a fearful one it be . " 
 " do not   be a fool , Bob , " the Captain whisper ; " we do not   want to hear about that now . allow I to carry the lantern , Mr. Carne ; it throw such shadow from the way you hold it . why , surely , this be where we be before ! " 
 " you might easily fancy so , " Carne answer , smile , " especially with a mind at all excited " 
 " my mind be not excited , sir ; not at all excite ; but as calm as it ever be in all its life . " 
 " then two thing will show you that these be the other vault . the arch be on your left hand , instead of on your right " he have bring they in now from the other end of the passage " and this entrance , as you see , have a door in it , which the other have not . perhaps the door be to keep the ghost in " his laugh sound hollow , and like a mocking challenge along the dark roof " for this be the part she be suppose to walk in . but so much for the door ! the money - lender have not leave we a door that will stand a good kick . you may find our old door in Wardour Street . " 
 as he speak , he set foot against the makeshift door , and away it go , as he have predict . crash on the step as it fall , it turn over , and a great splash arise at the bottom . 
 " why , bless my heart , there be a flood of water there ! " cry Stubbard , peep timidly down the step , on which   if the light have be clear , and that of his mind in the same condition   he might have see the mark of his own boot . " a flood of water , perhaps six foot deep ! I could scarcely have believe , but for that and the door , that these be not the very vault that we have examine . but what business have the water there ? " 
 " no business at all , any more than we have , " Carne answer , with some rudeness , for it do not suit he to encourage too warmly the friendship of Captain Stubbard ; " but I tell you that the place become cover with water whenever the ghost intend to walk . probably there be not more than a foot of water " there be in fact about three inch " and as you be bind to carry out your duty " 
 " my dear sir , I be satisfied , perfectly satisfied . who could keep gunpowder under water , or even in a flooded cellar ? I shall have the great pleasure in report that I search Carne Castle not of course suspiciously , but narrowly , as we be bind to do , in execution of our warrant " 
 " if you would not mind look in this direction , " whisper Carne , who could never be content , " I think I could show you , just beyond the murder - stone yes , and it seem to be come towards we , as white as a winding - sheet ; do come and look . " 
 " no , sir , no ; it be not my duty " the Captain turn away , with his hair upon the rise . " I be send here to look for saltpetre , not spectre . no officer in his Majesty 's service can be expect Bob , and Wilkins , be you there ? " 
 " yes , sir , yes we have have quite enough of this ; and unless you give the order " 
 " here she come , I do declare ! " whisper Carne , with extraordinary calmness . 
 " Bob , and Wilkins , give I one arm each . make for daylight in close order . you may be glad to see your grandmother , young man ; but I decline to have anything to say to she . Bob , and Wilkins , bear a hand ; I feel a little shaky in my low timber . run for your life , but do not   leave I behind . run , lad , like the very devil ! " for a groan of sepulchral depth , and big enough to lift a granite tombstone , issue from the vault , and wail along the sombre archway . all the Artillerymen flee , as if the muzzle of their big gun be slew upon they , and very soon the sound of horse ' heel , urge at a perilous pace down the hill , ring back as the echo of that grand groan . 
 " I think I do that pretty well , my Captain , " cry Charron , ascend from the vault with dripping boot ; " I deserve a glass of Cognac , if they have leave I any . happy be stoobar that he be content , without break his neck at the inspector 's step . " 
 " he have satisfy his conscience , " Carne answer , grimly ; " yet it can not be blameless , to make he run so fast . I be glad we have be save from kill they . it would have be hard to know what to do next . but he will never trouble we here again . " 




 CHAPTER XLV 

 FATHER , and child 

 " tell Miss Faith , when she come in , that I shall be glad to see she , " say Admiral Darling to his trusty butler , one hot afternoon in August . he have just come home from a long rough ride , to spend at least one day in his own house , and after overhaul his correspondence , go into the dining - room , as the cool in the house , to refresh himself a little with a glass of light wine before go up to dress for dinner . there he sit in an arm - chair , and look at his hand , which be brown by the sun , and tremble from a long period of heavy work and light sleep . he be get too old to endure it with impunity , yet angry with himself for show it . but he be not think of himself alone . 
 " I hope she will be sensible " he be talk to himself , as elderly people be apt to do , especially after be leave to themselves ; " I hope she will see the folly of it of live all her life as the bride of a ghost ; and herself such a beautiful , cheerful darling ! loving , warm - hearted , sweet - temper , adore child , and adore by they ; obedient , gentle I can not   think of anything good that she have not   get , except common - sense . and even for that , I like she all the more ; because it be so different from all the other girl . they have get too much one lover out of sight , even for a month or two , go fight for his Country , what do they do but take up with another , as I very greatly fear our dolly would ? but Faith why , my darling , how well you look ! " 
 " how I wish that I could say the same of you , dear father ! " say the lovely young woman , while kiss he , and smooth with her soft hand his wrinkle forehead ; " you never use to have these little tuck and gather here . I would rather almost that the French should come and devour we all , than see my father , whenever we do see he , once in a month , say , gauffre like this as their laundress do it and get reduce to the classical shape , so that I can put one arm round he . " 
 " my darling , " say the Admiral , though proud at heart of the considerable reduction of his stomach , " you should not say such thing to I , to remind I how very old I be ! " 
 father be crafty , and daughter childish , as behove the both of they . the Admiral know , as well as if he have order it , what Faith would do . and she must have perceive his depth , if only she have take a moment to think of it . because when she plump , like a child , into his arm , how come his arm to be so wide open ? and when two great tear roll down her cheek , how spring his handkerchief so impromptu out from beneath his braid lappet ? 
 " tell I what harm I have do , " she ask , with a bright smile dawn through the dew of her dark eye ; " what have I do to vex you , father , that you say thing fit to make I cry ? and yet I ought to laugh , because I know so well that you be only fish for compliment . you be get so active that I shall be frightened to go for a walk or a ride with you . only I do love to see you look fat , and your darling forehead smooth and white . " 
 " my dear child , I must get up my substance . this very day I begin in earnest . because I be to be a great man , Faith . how would you like to have to call I ' Sir Charles ' ? " 
 " not at all , darling ; except when you deserve it , by be cross to I ; and that never , never happen . I wish there be more chance of it . " 
 " well , dear , if you will not , the other people must ; for his Majesty have be graciously pleased to turn I into a Baronet . he say that I have earn it ; and perhaps I have ; at any rate , he put it so nicely that without be churlish I could not refuse . and it will be a good thing for Frank , I hope , by bring he back from his democratic stuff . to myself it be useless ; but my child ought to like it . " 
 " and so they will , father , for your own dear sake . let I be the first to salute you , father . oh , dolly will be in such a rage because you tell I , without tell she ! " 
 " I never think of that , " say the Admiral , simply ; " I be afraid that I shall get in for it . however , I have a right to please myself , and you need not tell she until I do . but that be not all my news , and not by any mean the good of it . the King be remind , the other day , of all that he and his family owe to the late Sir Edmond Scudamore , and well late than never , he have order your governess , as he call she , to be put on the list for a pension of 300 pound a year . nothing that once get into his head can ever be get out of it , and he be shock at see his old physician 's widow ' go out as a governess go out as a governess great disgrace to the royal family ! ' I be very glad that it happen so . " 
 " and so be I. she ought to have have it long and long ago , especially after the sad misfortune of her husband . you will let I tell she ? it will be such a pleasure . " 
 " certainly , my dear ; you be the very one to do it . tell she that her eld pupil be come with a little piece of news for she ; it will make her smile she have a very pretty smile , which remind I of the gallant Blyth . and now , my child , the third piece of news concern yourself your good , and dutiful , and exceedingly sensible self . ahem ! " cry the Admiral , as he always do , when he fear that he might have overstep the truth . 
 " I know what it be ; you need not tell I , " Faith answer , confirm her fear at once . " it be no use , father ; it be no good at all unless you intend to forget your own promise . " 
 " that I shall never do , " he reply , while look at she sadly ; " no , my dear child , I shall never attempt to drive instead of lead you . but you have not hear I out as yet . you do not   even know who it be I mean . " 
 " oh yes , I do ; I know well enough , father . I be not like dolly , universally admire . because I do not want to be . you mean Lord Dashville can you tell I that you do not ? " 
 " no , my dear " Sir Charles be a little surprised that Faith should be so quick , for   like most people of gentle nature   she be take to be slow , because she never snap " I can not deny that it be Lord Dashville , because that be the man , and no other . but how you could tell surpass I , and it show that he must be very often in your mind : " the Admiral think he have catch she there . " now can you say anything against he ? be he not honest , manly , single - minded , faithful as yourself , I do believe , good - look , well - breed , a Tory , and a gentleman , certain to make any woman happy whom he love ? can you say a syllable against all that ? " 
 " no , " reply Faith a very long , slow " no , " as if she only wish she could say something hard about he . 
 " very well , " her father go on , with triumph , " and can you deny that he be just the person you might have take a great liking to fall in love with , as they call it if only he have come before your mind be full of somebody else a very fine young fellow , no doubt ; but my darling , I will not   say a word against he , only you know what I mean too well . and be you forever to be like a nun because it have please the Lord to take he from you ? " 
 " Lord Dashville have not advance himself in my good opinion , if he care for that , " say Faith , start sideways , as a woman always do , from the direct issue , " by go to you , when I decline to have anything more to say to he . " 
 " my dear , you be unjust , " reply Sir Charles ; " not purposely , I know , for you be the most upright darling that can be , in general . but you accuse young Dashville of what he never do . it be his good mother , the Countess of Blankton , a most kind - hearted and lady - like person , without any nonsense about she , who give I the good cup of tea I ever taste , and speak with the very good feeling possible . she put it so sweetly that I only wish you could have be there to hear she . " 
 " Father , what be the good of it all ? you hate turncoat even bad than traitor . would you like your daughter to be one ? and when she would seem to have turn her coat for the lady wear coat now , the horrid ugly thing ! for the sake of position , and title , and all that . if Lord Dashville have be a poor man , with his own way to make in the world , a plain Mister , there might have be more to be say for it . but to think that I should throw over my poor darling because he will come home without a penny , and perhaps tattoed , but at any rate turn black , for the sake of a coronet , and a heap of gold oh , father , I shall break down , if you go on so ! " 
 " my dear girl , I will not say a word to vex you . but you be famous for common - sense , as well as every other good quality , and I would ask you to employ just a little of it . can you bear I to speak of your trouble , darling ? " 
 " oh yes , I be so well accustomed to it now ; and I know that it be nothing compare to what thousand of people have to bear . sometimes I be quite ashamed of give way to it . " 
 " you do not give way to it , Faith . no person can possibly say that of you . you be my brave , unselfish , cheerful , sweet - natured , upright , and love child . nobody know , but you and I and perhaps I know it even more than you do the greatness of the self - command you use , to be pleasant and gay and agreeable , simply for the sake of those around you . " 
 " then , father , " cry Faith , who be surprised at this , for the Admiral have never say a word about such matter , " you think , after all , that I be that I be almost as good as dolly ! " 
 " you jealous little vixen , I shall recall every word I have say in your favour ! my child , and my pride , you be not only as good as dolly , but my good hope be that when dolly grow old she may be like you . do not   cry , darling ; I can not   stand cry , when it come from eye that so seldom do it . and now that you know what I think of you , allow I to think a little for you . I have some right to interfere in your life ; you will allow that will not   you ? " 
 " Father , you have all right , and a thousand time as much , because you be so gentle about use it . " 
 " I call that bad English , as Zeb Tugwell say when he do not   want to understand a thing . but , my pretty dear , you must remember that you will not have a father always . who will look after you , when I be go , except the Almighty ? and he do not do it , except for the few who look after themselves . it be my duty to consider these point , and they override sentimentality . to I it be nothing that Dashville will be an Earl , and a man of great influence , if he keep up his present high character ; but it be something to I that I find he modest , truthful , not lead away by phantom , a gentleman which be more than a nobleman and with his whole heart give to my dear child faith . " 
 Faith sigh heavily , partly for herself , but mainly , perhaps , for the sake of a fine heart sadly throw away on she . " I believe he be all that , " she say . 
 " in that case , what more can you have ? " pursue the triumphant Admiral . " it be one of the clear thing I ever know , and one of the most consistent " consistent be a great word in those day " as well as in every way desirable . consider , not yourself which you never do but the state of the Country , and of Dolly . they have make I a baronet , for be away from home nearly every night of my life ; and if I have Dashville to see to thing here , I might stay away long enough to be a lord myself , like my late middy the present Duke of Bronte . " 
 Faith laugh heartily . " you call I jealous ! my dear father , I know that you could have do a great deal more than Lord Nelson have , because he learn all that he know from you . and now who be it that really defend the whole south coast of England against the French ? be it Lord Nelson ? he have as much as he can do to look after their fleet in the Mediterranean . Admiral Cornwallis and Sir Charles Darling be the real defender of England . " 
 " no , my dear , you must never say that , except of course in private . there may be some truth in it , but it would be laugh at in the present condition of the public mind . history may do I justice ; but after all it be immaterial . a man who do his duty should be indifferent to the opinion of the public , which begin more and more to be form less by fact than by the newspaper of the day . but let we return to more important matter . you be now in a very sensible frame of mind . you see what my wish be about you , and how reasonable they be . I should be so happy , my darling child , if you would consider they sensibly , and yield some little of your romantic view . I would not ask you unless I be sure that this man love you as you deserve , and in his own character deserve your love . " 
 " then , father , will this content you , dear ? unless I hear something of Erle Twemlow , to show that he be live , and still hold to I , in the course of another twelvemonth , Lord Dashville , or anybody else , may try may try to take his place with I . only I must not be worry I mean , I must not hear another word about it , until the time have quite expire . " 
 " it be a very poor concession , faith . surely you might say half a year . consider , it be nearly three year now " 
 " no , papa , I should despise myself if I be so unjust to one so unlucky . and I only go so much from my own wish because you be such a dear and good father . not a bit of it for Lord Dashville 's sake . " 
 " well , my poor darling , " the Admiral reply , for he see that she be upon the brink of tear , and might hate Lord Dashville if far urge , " half a loaf be well than no bread . if Dashville be worthy of your constant heart , he will stand this long trial of his constancy . this be the tenth day of August , 1804 . I hope that the Lord may be pleased to spare I till the 10th of August , 1805 . high time for they to come and lay the cloth . I be as hungry as a hunter . " 




 CHAPTER XLVI 

 CATAMARANS 

 Napoleon have show no proper dread of the valiant british volunteer , but keep his festival in August , and carry on his sea - side plan , as if there be no such fellow . not content with that , he even flout our blockade fleet by come out to look at they . and if one of our frigate have shoot straight , she might have save million of life and billion of money , at the cost of one greatly bad life . but the poor ship know not her opportunity , or she would rather have go to the bottom than waste it . 
 now the French make much of this affair , accord to their nature ; and history of it , full of life and growth , run swiftly along the shallow shore , and even to Paris , the navel of the earth . frenchman of letter or rather of paper declare that all England be smite with dismay ; and so she might have be , if she have hear of it . but as our neighbour go home again , as soon as the water be six fathom deep , few englishman know that they have try to smell a little of the sea - breeze , outside the smell of their inshore powder . they be pleased to get ashore again , and talk it over , with vivid description of the thing that do not happen . 
 " such scene as these tend much to agitate England , " write a great french historian . " the British Press , arrogant and calumnious , as the Press always be in a free country , rail much at Napoleon and his preparation ; but rail as one who tremble at that which he would fain exhibit as the object of his laughter . " it may have be so , but it be not to be see in any serious journal of that time . he seem to have confound coarse caricaturist with refined and thoughtful journalist , even as , in the account of that inshore skirmish , he turn a gun - brig into a british frigate . however , such matter be too large for we . 
 it be resolve at any rate to try some sort of a hit at all these very gallant Frenchmen , moor under their own battery , and make horse - marine of themselves , whenever Neptune , the father of the horse , permit . the jolly english tar , rid well upon the wave , send many a broad grin through a spy - glass at Muncher Crappo tug hard to get his nag into his gun - boat and then to get he out again , because his present set of shoe would not be wear out in England . every sailor love a horse , regard he as a boat on leg , and therefore know more about he than any landlubber may feign to know . 
 but although they would have be loth to train a gun on the noble animal , who be duly keep beyond their range , all the british sailor long to have a bout with the double tier of hostile craft moor off the shore within shelter of french battery . every day they could reckon at least two hundred sail of every kind of rig invent since the time of Noah , but all prepare to destroy instead of succour the godly . it be truly grievous to see they there and not be able to get at they , for no ship of the line or even frigate could get near enough to tackle they . then the British Admiral , Lord Keith , resolve after much consultation to try what could be do with fire - ship . 
 Blyth Scudamore , now in command of the Blonde , have do much excellent service , in cut off straggler from the french flotilla , and drive ashore near Vimereux some prame and lugger come from Ostend . he begin to know the french coast and the run of the shoal like a native pilot ; for the post of the Blonde , and some other light ship , be between the blockade fleet and the blockaded , where perpetual vigilance be need . this sharp service be the very thing require to improve his character , to stamp it with decision and self - reliance , and to burnish his quiet , contemplative vein with the very frequent friction of the trick of mankind . these he now be strictly bind not to study , but anticipate , take it as first postulate that every one would cheat he , if permit . to a scrimpy and screwy man , of the type most abundant , such a position would have do a deal of harm , shut he up into his own shell hard , and flinte its muricate horn against the world . but with the gentle Scuddy , as the boy at school have call he , the process of harden be beneficial , as it be with pure gold , which can not stand the wear and tear of the human race until it have be reduce by they at least to the mark of their twenty carat . 
 and now it be a fine thing for Scudamore even as a man too philanthropic be strengthen in his moral tone   as his wife find out   by be compel to discharge the least pleasant of the duty of a county sheriff or if not a fine thing , at least it be a wholesome and durable corrective to all excess of lenience , that duty to his country and mankind compel the gentle Scuddy to conduct the western division of this night - attack . 
 at this time there be in the public mind , which be quite of full feminine agility , a strong prejudice against the use of fire - ship . red - hot cannon - ball , and shrapnel , langrage , chain - shot , and greek - fire these and the like be all fair warfare , and France might use they freely . but England   which never be allow to do , without hoot and execration , what every other country do with loud applause   England must rather burn off her right hand than send a fire - ship against the ship full of fire for her house , her cottage , and church . Lord Keith have the sense to laugh at all that stuff , but he have not the grand mechanical power which have now enable the human race , not to go , but to send one another to the star . a clumsy affair call a catamaran , the acephalous ancestor of the torpedo , be expect to relieve the sea of some thousand of people who have no business there . this catamaran be a water - proof box about twenty foot long , and four foot wide , narrow at the end , like a coffin for a giant . it be fill with gunpowder , and ballast so that its lid , or deck , be almost awash ; and near its stern be a box contain clock movement that would go for about ten minute , upon the withdrawal of a peg outside , and then would draw a trigger and explode the charge . this wondrous creature have neither oar nor sail , but demand to be tow to the tideward of the enemy , then have the death - watch set going , and be cast adrift within hail of the enemy 's line . then as soon as it come across their mooring cable , its duty be to slide for a little way along they in a friendly manner , lie hold of they kindly with its long tail , which consist of a series of grappling - hook buoy with cork , and then bring up smartly alongside of the gun - boat , blow itself up , and carry they up with it . how many there be of these catamaran be not quite certain , but perhaps about a score , the intention be to have ten time as many , on the next occasion , if these do well . and no doubt they would have do well , if permit ; but they fail of their purpose , like the great Guy Fawkes , because they be prevent . 
 for the French , by mean of treacherous agent of whom perhaps Caryl Carne be one , though his name do not appear in the despatch know all about this neat little scheme beforehand , and set their wit at work to defeat it . moreover , they know that there be four fire - ship , one of which be the Peggy of Springhaven , intend to add to the consternation and destruction work by the catamaran . but they do not know that , by some irony of fate , the least destructive and most gentle of mankind be order to take a leading part in shatter man , and horse , and even good dog , into vapour . 
 many quiet horse , and sweet - natured dog , whose want of breeding have improve their manner , live in this part of the great flotilla , and be satisfied to have their home where it please the Lord to feed they . the horse be lead to feed out of the gun , that they might not be afraid of they ; and they struggle against early prejudice , to like wood as well as grass , and to get sea - leg . Man put they here to suit his own idea ; of that they be quite aware , and take it kindly , accept superior power , and inferior use of they , without a shade of question in their eye . to their innocent mind it be never bring home that they be tethered here , and cropping clot instead of clover , for the purpose of inspire in their timid friend ashore the confidence a horse repose in a brother horse , but very wisely doubt about invest in mankind . for instance , whenever a wild young animal , a new recruit for the cavalry , be hale against his judgment by a man on either side to the hollow - sound gangway over dance depth of peril , these veteran salt of horse would assure he , with a neigh from the billowy distance , that they be not drown yet , but be walk on a sort of gate , and get their victual regular . on the other hand , as to the presence of the dog , that require no explanation . be there ever a time or place in which a dog grudge his sprightly and disinterested service , or fail to do his good when call upon ? these french dog , whom the mild english mastiff would have look upon , or rather would have shut his eye at , as a lot of cur below contempt , be as full of fine ardour for their cause and country as any noble hound that ever sate like a statue on a marble terrace . 
 on the first of October all be ready for this audacious squibbing of the hornet 's nest , and the fleet of investment   which keep its distance accord to the weather and the tide   stand in , not bodily so as to arouse excitement , but a ship at a time sidle in towards the coast , and traverse one another 's track , as if they be simply exchange station . the french pretend to take no heed , and do not call in a single scouting craft , but show every sign of have all eye shut . nothing , however , be do that night , by reason perhaps of the weather ; but the follow night be favourable , and the british fleet bring as nigh as it durst come , the four fire - ship be despatch after dark , when the enemy be likely to be engage with supper . the sky be conveniently overcast , with a faint light wander here and there , from the lift of the horizon , just enough to show the rig of a vessel and her length , at a distance of about a hundred yard . nothing could be well think the Englishmen ; and the French be of that opinion too , especially as Nelson be not there . 
 Scudamore have nothing to do with the loose adventure of the fire - ship , the object of which be to huddle together this advanced part of the flotilla , so that the catamaran might sweep unseen into a goodly thicket of vessel , and shatter at least half a dozen at once . 
 but somehow the scheme be not well carry out , though it look very nice upon paper . one very great drawback , to begin with , be that the enemy be quite aware of all our kind intention ; and another scarcely less fatal be the want of punctuality on our part . all the float coffin should have come together , like a funeral of fifty from a colliery ; but instead of that they dribble in one by one , and be cast off by their tow - boat promiscuously . Scudamore do his part well enough , though the whole thing go against his grain , and the four catamaran under his direction be the only one that do their duty . the boat of the Blonde have these in tow , and cast they off handsomely at the proper distance , and draw the plug which set their clock - spring go . but even of these four only two explode , although the clock be not american , and those two make a tremendous noise , but only sing a few french beard off . except , indeed , that a fine old horse , with a white roman nose and a bright chestnut mane , who be live in a flat - bottom boat , break his halter , and rush up to the bow , and give vent to his amazement , as if he have be gift with a trumpet . 
 Hereupon a dog , loth to be behind the time , scamper up to his side , and with his forefeet on the gunwale , contribute a howl of incalculable length and unfathomable sadness . 
 in the hurly of the combat and confusion of the night , with the dimness streak with tumult , and the water gash with fire , that horse and this dog might have go on for ever , bewail the nature of the son of man , unless a special fortune have put power into their mouth . one of the fire - ship , as scandal do declare , be that very ancient tub indeed that could not float on its bottom the Peggy of Springhaven , buy at thrice her value , through the influence of Admiral Darling . if one have to meet every calumny that arise , and deal with it before go far , the battle that last for a fortnight and then turn into an earthquake would be a quick affair compare with the one now in progress . enough that the Peggy prove by the light she give , and her grand style of burn to the water 's edge before she blow up , that she be worth at least the hundred pound Widow Shanks receive for she . she startle the French more than any of the other , and the strong light she afford in her last moment shine redly on the anguish of that poor horse and dog . there be no sign of any one to help they , and the flame in the background redouble their woe . 
 now this apparently deserted prame , near the centre of the line , be the Ville de Mayence ; and the flag of Rear - Admiral Lacrosse be even now fly at her peak . " we must have she , my lad , " cry Scudamore , who be wonder what to do next , until he descry the horse and dog and that fine flag ; " let we board she , and make off with all of they . " 
 the crew of his launch be delighted with that . to destroy be very good ; but to capture be still well ; and a dash into the midst of the enemy be the very thing they long for . " ay , ay , sir , " they cry , set their back to their oar , and through the broad light that still shine upon the wave , and among the thick crowd of weltering shadow , the launch shoot like a dart to the side of the foe . 
 " easy all ! throw a grapple on board , " cry the young commander ; and as the stern swung round he leap from it , and over the shallow bulwark , and stand all alone on the enemy 's fore - deck . and alone he remain , for at that moment a loud crash be hear , and the launch fill and sink , with her crew of sixteen plunge wildly in the wave . 
 this come to pass through no fault of their own , but a clever device of the enemy . Admiral Lacrosse , be call away , have leave his first officer to see to the safety of the flag - ship and her immediate neighbour , and this brave man have obtain permission to try a little plan of his own , if assail by any adventurous british boat in charge of the vessel explosive . in the bow of some stout but handy boat he have rig up a mast with a long spar attach , and by mean of a guy at the end of that spar , a brace of heavy chain - shot could be swing up and pitch headlong into any boat alongside . while the crew of Scudamore 's launch be intent upon board the prame , one of these boat come swiftly from under her stern , and with one fling swamp the enemy . then the Frenchmen laugh heartily , and offer oar and buoy for the poor british seaman to come up as prisoner . 
 Scudamore see that he be trap beyond escape , for no other british boat be anywhere in hail . his first impulse be to jump overboard and help his own drown man , but before he could do so an officer stand before he , and say , " Monsieur be my prisoner . his man will be safe , and I can not permit he to risk his own life . Mon Dieu , it be my dear friend Captain Scudamore ! " 
 " and you , my old friend , Captain Desportes ! I see it be hopeless to resist " for by this time a score of Frenchmen be round he " I can only congratulate myself that if I must fall , it be into such good hand . " 
 " my dear friend , how glad I be to see you ! " reply the french captain , embrace he warmly ; " to you I owe more than to any man of your nation . I will not take your sword . no , no , my friend . you shall not be a prisoner , except in word . and how much you have advance in the knowledge of our language , chiefly , I fear , at the expense of France . and now you will grow perfect , at the expense of England . " 




 CHAPTER XLVII 

 ENTER and exit 

 the summer have be fine upon the whole , and a very fair quantity of fish bring in , Miss Twemlow have pick up a sweetheart , as the unromantic mother of the place express it . and the circumstance be of such a nature that very large interest be arouse at once , and not only so , but be feed well and grow fast . 
 the most complete of chronicle be no well than a sponge of inferior texture and with many mouth shut . part that be full of suctive power get no chance of sucking ; other part have a flood of juice bubble at they , but be waterproof . this be the only excuse except one for the shameful neglect of the family of Blocks , in any little treatise pretend to give the dull of glimpse at Springhaven . 
 the other excuse if self - accusation do not poke a finger through it be that the Blockses be mainly of the dry land , and never go to sea when they could help it . if they have live beyond the two tree and the stile that mark the parish boundary upon the hill towards London , they might have be spotless , and grand , and even honest , yet must have be the depth of the hill below contempt . but they dwelt in the village for more generation than would go upon any woman 's finger , and they do a little business with the fish catch by the other , which enable it to look after three day ' journey as if it swam into town upon its own fin . the invention for wrong mankind pay a great deal well than those for right they . 
 now the news come from John Prater 's first , that a gentleman of great renown be come down from London city to live on fish fresh out of the sea . his doctor have order he to leave off butcher 's meat , and baker 's bread , and tea - grocer 's tea , and almost every kind of inland victual , because of the state of his something big , which even Springhaven could not pronounce . he must keep himself up , for at least three month , upon nothing but breeze of the sea , and malt - liquor , and farm - house bread and milk and new - lay egg , and anything he fancy that come out of the sea , shelly , or scaly , or jellified , or weedy . news from a public - house grow fast as seed come up quick for soak and a strong competition for this gentleman arise ; but he know what he be do , and bring down his cook and house - maid , and dislike the noise at the Darling Arms , take no less than five room at the house of Matthew Blocks , on the rise of the hill , where he could see the fish come in . 
 he be call at once Sir Parsley Sugarloaf , for his name be Percival shargeloe ; and his cook rebuke his housemaid sternly , for meddle with matter beyond her sphere , when she tell Mrs. Blocks that he be not Sir Percival , but only Percival Shargeloes , Esquire , very high up in the Corporation , but too young to be Lord Mayor of London for some year . he appear to be well on the right side of forty ; and every young lady on the wrong side of thirty possess a pony , or even a donkey , with leg enough to come down the hill , immediately begin to take a rose - colour view of the many beauty of Springhaven . 
 if Mr. Shargeloes have any ambition for title , it lie rather in a military direction . he have join a regiment of City Volunteers , and must have be a Captain , if he could have stand the drill . but this , though not arduous , have outgo his ambition , nature have gift he with a remarkable power of extract nourishment from food , which be now call assimilation . he be not a great feeder people so blessed seldom be but nothing short of painful starvation would keep he lean . he have consult all the foremost physician about this , and one say , " take acid , " another say , " walk twenty mile every day with two Witney blanket on , " a third say , " thank God for it , and drink before you eat , " and a fourth   a man of wide experience   bid he marry the worst - temper woman he know . then they all give he pill to upset his stomach ; but such be its power that it assimilate they . despair of these , he consult a Quack , and receive the direction which bring he to Springhaven . and a lucky day for he it be , as he confess for the rest of his life , whenever any lady ask he . 
 because Miss Twemlow be intend for he by the nice adjustment of nature . how can two round thing fit together , except superficially ? and in that case one must be upper and the other under ; which be not the proper thing in matrimony , though generally the prevail one . but take a full - moon and a half - moon , or even a square and a tidy triangle with manner enough to have one right angle and when you have put they into one another 's arm , there they stick , all the firmer for friction . Jack Spratt and his wife be a case in point ; and how much more point the case become when the question be not about what be on the plate , but the gentleman be in his own body fat , and the lady in her elegant person lean ! 
 Mr. Sugarloaf which he could not bear to be call be an ardent admirer of the Church , and aware that her minister know what be good , return with great speed the Rector 's call , have earnest hope of some heart - feel word upon the difference between a right and left hand sole . one of these be ever so much well than the other accord to our evolutionist , because when he be a cod , a few milliard of year back , he choose the right side to begin lie down on , that his descendant in the thirty - millionth generation might get flat . his wife , from sheer perversity , lie down upon the other side , and this explain how some of their descendant pull their eye through their head to one side , and some   though comparatively few   to the other . and the bad of it be that the fit for the frying - pan do not survive this well - intend involution , except at a very long figure in the market . 
 as it fall out upon that day , Miss Twemlow be sit in the drawing - room alone , wait till her mother 's hair be quite do up , her own abundant lock be not do up at all , for she have lately take to set her face against all foreign fashion . " I have not be introduce to the king , " she say , " nor even to the Queen , like those forward darling , and I shall do my hair to please myself . " when her father object , she quench he with St. Paul ; and even her mother , though shock , begin to think that Eliza know what she be about . the release of her fine hair , which fall in natural wave about her stately neck , make she look nearly ten year young than she be , for by this time she must have be eight - and - twenty . the lady of the Carne race , as their picture show   until they be sell to be the grandmother of dry - salter , have always be endow with shapely neck , fit column for their small round head . and this young lady 's hair , with no constraint but that of a narrow band across the forehead , cluster and gleam like a bower of acanthu round that parian column . 
 Mr. Shargeloes , have obey his order always to dine early , be thrill with a vision of poetry and romance , as he cross the first square of the carpet . the lady sit just where the light fall well from a filter sunbeam to illumine she , without enter into the shady part ; and the poetry of her attitude be inspire by some very fine poetry upon her lap . " I do not   care what the doctor say , I shall marry that girl , " say Mr. Shargeloes to himself . 
 he be a man who know his own mind , and a man with that gift make other know it . Miss Twemlow clench in the coat upon his back the nail she have drive through his heart , by call he , at every other breath , " Colonel Shargeloes . " he say he be not that ; but she feel that he be , as indeed every patriotic man must be . her contempt for every man who forsook his country in this bitter , bitter strait be at once so ruthless and so bewitch that he be quite surprised into confessing that he have give 10,000 pound , all in solid gold , for the comfort of the Royal Volunteers , as soon as the autumnal damp come on . he could not tell such an elegant creature that what he have pay for be flannel drawer , though she have so much strength of mind that he be enable to tell she before very long . 
 a great deal of nonsense be talk about lady who be get the well of their first youth , as if they then hang themselves out as old slate for any man to write his name on . the truth be that they have well judgment then , less trouble in their heart about a gentleman 's appearance , and more enquiry in their mind as to his temper , taste , and principle , not to mention his prospect of support they . and even as concern appearance , Mr. Shargeloes be very good . nature have give he a fine stout frame , and a very pleasant countenance ; and his life in the busy world have add that quickness of decision and immediate sense of right which a clever woman know to be the very thing she want . moreover , his dress , which go a very long way into the heart of a lady , be most correct and particular . for his coat be of the late Bond Street fashion , the " Jean de Brie , " improve and beautify by suggestion from the Prince of Wales himself . bright claret be the colour , and the button be of gold , bright enough to show the road before he as he walk . the shoulder be pad , as if a jam pot stand there , and the waist button tight , too tight for any happiness , to show the bright laticlave of brocade waistcoat . then follow breech of rich purple padusoy , have white satin bow at the knee , among which the little silver bell of the hessian boot jingle . 
 Miss Twemlow be superior to all small feeling , but have great breadth of sympathy with the sterling truth in fashion . the volume of love , like a pattern - book , fall open , and this well - dress gentleman be engrave upon her heart . the most captious young chit , such as dolly herself , could scarcely have call he either corpulent or old . every day he could be see to be grow young , with the aid of fresh fish as a totally novel ingredient in his system ; his muscle increase with the growth of brain - power , and the shoemaker be punch a fresh hole in his belt , an inch far back , every week he stop there . after buckle up three hole , he propose . Miss Twemlow refer he to her dear papa ; and the Rector take a week to enquire and meditate . " take a month , if you like , " say Mr. Shargeloes . 
 this reply increase the speed . Mr. Twemlow have the deep respect for the Corporation , and to live to be the father of a Lord Mayor of London become a new ambition to lead on his wan year . " come and dine with we on Saturday , and we will tell you all about it , " he say , with a pleasant smile , and warm shake of the hand ; and Shargeloes know that the neck and the curl would bend over the broad gold chain some day . 
 how grievous it be to throw a big stone into a pool which have plenty of depth and length and width for the ring to travel pleasantly , yet not to make one ring , because of wind upon the water ! in the day that be not more than two year old , Springhaven could have take all this news , with a swiftly expand and smoothly fluent circle , with a lift of self - importance at the centre of the movement , and a heave of gentle interest in the far reflective corner . even now , with a tumult of thing to consider , and a tempest of judgment to do it in , people contrive to be positive about a quantity of thing still pende . Sir Parsley Sugarloaf have buy Miss Twemlow for 50,000 pound , they say , and he make she let her curl down so outrageous , because she be to be marry at Guildhall , with a guinea at the end of every hair . Miss Faith would be dirt - cheap at all that money ; but as for Miss Eliza , they wish he well knowledge , which be sure to come , when it be no good to he . 
 " what a corner of the world this be for gossip ! " Mr. Shargeloes say , pleasantly , to his Eliza , have hear from his cook , who desire no new mistress , some few of the thing say about he . " I be not such a fool as to care what they say . but I be greatly surprised at one thing . you know that I be a thorough englishman ; may I tell you what I think , without offend you ? it be a delicate matter , because it concern a relative of your own , my dear . " 
 " I know what you mean . you will not offend I . Percival , I know how straightforward you be , and how keen of perception . I have expect this . " 
 " and yet it seem presumptuous of I to say that you be all blind here , from the high to the low . except indeed yourself , as I now perceive . I will tell you my suspicion , or more than suspicion my firm belief about your cousin , Mr. Carne . I can trust you to keep this even from your father . Caryl Carne be a spy , in the pay of the French . " 
 " I have long think something , though not quite so bad as that , " Miss Twemlow answer , calmly ; " because he have behave to we so very strangely . my mother be his own father 's sister , as you know , and yet he have never din with we more than once , and then he scarcely say a word to any one . and he never yet have ask we to visit he at the castle ; though for that we can make all allowance , of course , because of its sad condition . then everybody think he have take to smuggling , and after all his loss , no one blame he , especially as all the Carnes have do it , even when they be the owner of the land . but ever since poor Mr. Cheeseman , our church - warden , try to destroy himself with his own rope , all the parish begin to doubt about the smuggling , because it pay so well and make the people very cheerful . but from something he have see , my father feel quite certain that the true explanation be smuggle . " 
 " indeed ! do you know at all what it be he see , and when , and under what circumstance ? " Mr. Shargeloes put these question with more urgency than Miss Twemlow like . 
 " really I can not tell you all those thing ; they be scarcely of general interest . my dear father say little about it : all knowledge be deny in this good world to woman . but no doubt he would tell you , if you ask he , when there be no lady present . " 
 " I will , " say Mr. Shargeloes . " he be most judicious ; he know when to speak , and when to hold his tongue . and I think that you combine with beauty one of those two gift which be the utmost to be expect . " 
 " Percival , you put thing very nicely , which be all that could be expect of a man . but do take my advice in this matter , and say no more about it . " 
 Mr. Shargeloes feign to comply , and perhaps at the moment mean to do so . but unluckily he be in an enterprise temper , proud of recovered activity , and determine to act up to the phosphate supply by fish diet . therefore when the Rector , rejoice in an outlet for his long pen - up discovery , and regard this sage man as one of his family , repeat the whole of his adventure at Carne Castle , Mr. Shargeloes say , briefly , " it must be see to . " 
 " Stubbard have be there , " reply Mr. Twemlow , repent perhaps of his confidence ; " Stubbard have make an official inspection , which relieve we of all concern with it . " 
 " Captain Stubbard be an ass . it be a burn shame that important affair should be entrust to such fellow . the country be in peril , deadly peril ; and every Englishman be bind to act as if he be an officer . " 
 that very same evening Carne ride back to his ruin in a very grim state of mind . he have receive from the Emperor a curt and haughty answer to his last appeal for immediate action , and the prospect of another gloomy winter here , with danger thicken round he , and no motion to enliven they , be almost more than he could endure . the night be draw in , and a damp fog from the sea have drizzle the tree , and the ivy , and even his own moustache with cold misery . 
 " bring I a lantern , " he say to old Jerry , as he swing his stiff leg from the back of the jade horse , " and the little flask of oil with the feather in it . it be high time to put the Inspector 's step in order . " 
 Jerry Bowles , whose back and knee be bent with rheumatism and dull service , trot   like a horse who have become too stiff to walk   for the thing command , and come back with they . then his master , without a word , strode towards the passage give entry to the vault which Stubbard have not see the vault contain all the powder , and the weapon for arm the peasantry of England , whom Napoleon fondly expect to rise in his favour at the sight of his eagle . 
 " how do it work ? quite stiff with rust . I think so . nothing be ever in order , unless I see to it myself . give I the lantern . now oil the bearing thoroughly . put the feather into the socket , and work the pin in and out , that the oil may go all round . now pour in some oil from the lip of the flask ; but not upon the treadle , you old blockhead . now do the other end the same . ah , now it would go with the weight of a mouse ! I have a great mind to make you try it . " 
 " what would you do , sir , if my neck be break ? who would do your work , as I do ? " 
 they be under an arch of mouldy stone , open into the deep dark vault , where the faint light of the lantern glance on burnish leather , brass , and steel , or fall without flash upon dull round bulk . the old man , kneel on the round chalk - flint set in lime for the flooring of the passage , be handle the first step of narrow step - ladder lead to the cellar - depth . this top step have be take out of the old oak mortice , and cut short , and then replace in the frame , with an iron pin work in an iron collar , just as the gudgeon of a wheelbarrow revolve . any one step upon it unawares would go down without the aid of any other step . 
 " go like spittle now , sir , " say old Jerry ; " but I do not   want no more harm in this crick of life . the Lord be pleased to keep all they examiner at home . might have none to find their corpusse until next leap - year . I hope with all my heart they will not   come poke their long nose here . " 
 " well , I rather hope they will . they want a lesson in this neighbourhood , " mutter Carne , who be shiver , and hungry , and unsweetene . 




 CHAPTER XLVIII 

 MOTHER SCUDAMORE 

 if we want to know how a tree or flower have bear the gale that flog last night , or the frost that sting the morning , the only sure plan be to go and see . and the only way to understand how a friend have take affliction be to go if it may be do without intrusion and let he tell you , if he like . 
 Admiral Darling be so much vex when he hear of Blyth Scudamore 's capture by the french , and duty compel he to inform the mother , that he would rather have ride a thousand mile upon barley - bread than face she . he know how the whole of her life be now bind up with the fortune of her son , and he long to send Faith with the bad news , as he have send she with the good before ; but he fear that it might seem unkind . so he go himself , with the hope of put the good complexion upon it , yet fully expect sad distress , and perhaps a burst of weeping . but the lady receive his tiding in a manner that surprise he . at first she indulge in a tear or two , but they only introduce a smile . 
 " in some way it be a sad thing , " she say , " and will be a terrible blow to he , just when he be rise so fast in the service . but we must not rebel more than we can help , against the will of the Lord , Sir Charles . " 
 " how philosophical , and how commonplace ! " think the Admiral ; but he only bow , and pay she some compliment upon her common - sense . 
 " perhaps you scarcely understand my view , and perhaps I be wrong in have they , " Lady Scudamore continue , quietly . " my son 's advancement be very dear to I , and this will of course retard it . but I care most of all for his life , and now that will be safe for a long while . they never kill their prisoner , do they ? " 
 " no , ma'am , no . they behave very well to they ; well , I be afraid , than we do to ours . they treat they quite as guest , when they fall into good hand . though Napoleon himself be not too mild in that way . " 
 " my son have fall into very good hand , as you yourself assure I that Captain Desportes , a gallant officer and kind gentleman , as I know from your daughter 's description . Blyth be quite equal to Lord Nelson in personal daring , and possibly not behind he in ability . consider how shockingly poor Nelson have be injure , and he feel convince himself that they will have his life at last . no officer can be a hero without get very sad wound , and perhaps lose his life . every one who do his duty must at least be wound . " 
 the Admiral , who have never receive a scratch , be not at all charm with this view of naval duty ; but he be too polite to enter protest , and only make one of his old - fashioned scrape . 
 " I be sure every time I have hear a gun come from the sea , and especially after dark , " the lady resume , without thinking of he , " it have make I miserable to know that probably Blyth be rush into some deadly conflict . but now I shall feel that he can not do that ; and I hope they will keep he until the fighting grow milder . he use to send I all his money , poor dear boy ! and now I shall try to send he some of mine , if it can be arrange about bank - note . and now I can do it very easily , thank to your kindness , Sir Charles , his father 's good friend , and his own , and mine . " 
 Lady Scudamore shed another tear or two , not of sorrow , but of pride , while she put her hand into her pocket , as if to begin the remittance at once . " you owe I no thank , ma'am , " say the Admiral , smile ; " if any thank be due , they be due to the king , for remember at last what he should have do before . " 
 " would he ever have think of I , but for you ? it be useless to talk in that way , Sir Charles ; it only increase the obligation , which I must entreat you not to do . how I wish I could help you in anything ! " 
 " every day you be help I , " he reply , with truth ; " although I be away too often to know all about it , or even to thank you . I hope my dear Faith have persuade you not to leave we for the winter , as you threaten . " 
 " faith can persuade I to anything she please . she possess the power of her name , " reply the lady ; " but the power be not call for , when the persuasion be so pleasant . for a month , I must be away to visit my dear mother , as I always have do at this time of year ; and then , but for one thing , I would return most gladly . for I be very selfish , you must know , Sir Charles I have a well chance of hearing of my dear son at these head - quarter of the defence of England , than I should have even in London . " 
 " certainly , " cry the Admiral , who magnify his office ; ' such a number of despatch pass through my hand ; and if I can not   make they out , why , my daughter dolly can . I do not   suppose , Lady Scudamore , that even when you live in the midst of the world you ever see any girl half so clever as my Dolly . I do not   let she know it that would never do , of course but she always get the good of I , upon almost any question . " 
 Sir Charles , for the moment , forget his good manner , and spread his coat so that one might see between his leg . " I stand like this , " he say , " and she stand there ; and I take she to task for not pay her bill for some of those fellow have have to come to I , which be not as it should be in a country place , where people do not   understand the fashionable system . she stand there , ma'am , and I feel as sure as if I be an English twenty - four bearing down upon a Frenchman of fifty gun , that she can only haul her colour down and rig out gangway ladder when , bless I and keep I ! I be carry by surprise , and drive under hatchway , and if there be a guinea in my hold , it fly into the enemy 's locker ! if it happen only once , I should think nothing of it . but when I know exactly what be come , and have double - shot every gun , and set up hammock - netting , and take uncommon care to have the weather - gage , ' tis the Devil , Lady Scudamore excuse I , madam ' tis the Devil to a ditty - bag that I have she at my mercy . and yet it always come to money out of pocket , madam ! " 
 " she certainly have a great power over gentleman " Blyth 's mother smile demurely , as if she be sorry to confess it ; " but she be exceedingly young , Sir Charles , and every allowance must be make for she . " 
 " and by the Lord Harry , she get it , madam . she take uncommonly good care of that . but what be the one thing you mention that would prevent you from come back to we with pleasure ? " 
 " I scarcely like to speak of it . but it be about that self - same dolly . she be not fond of advice , and she know how quick she be , and that make she resent a word from slow people . she have take it into her head , I fear , that I be here as a restraint upon she ; a sort of lady spy , a duenna , a dictatress , all combine in one , and all unpleasant . this often make I fancy that I have no right to be here . and then your sweet faith come , and all be smooth again . " 
 " dolly have the least little possible touch of the vixen about she . I have find it out lately , " say the Admiral , as if he be half doubtful still ; " Nelson tell I so , and I be angry with he . but I believe he be right , as he generally be . his one eye see more than a score of mine would . but , my dear madam , if that be your only objection to come back to we , or rather to my daughter , I beg you not to let it weigh a feather 's weight with you . or , at any rate , enhance the obligation to we , by put it entirely on one side . dolly have the very fine heart in all the world ; not so steady perhaps as Faith 's , nor quite so fair to other people , but wonderfully warm , ma'am , and as sound as as a roach . " 
 Lady Scudamore could not help laugh a little , and she hop for her son 's sake that this account be true . her gratitude and good - will to the Admiral , as well as her duty to her son , make she give the promise seek for ; and she begin to prepare for her journey at once , that she might be back in good time for the winter . but she feel very doubtful , at leave the Hall , whether she have do quite right in keep her suspicion of dolly from Dolly 's father . for with eye which be sharpen by jealousy for the interest , or at least the affection , of her son , she have long perceive that his lady - love be play a dangerous game with Caryl Carne . sometimes she believe that she ought to speak of this , for the good of the family ; because she feel the deep mistrust and dislike of Carne , who strictly avoid she whenever he could ; but on the other hand she find the subject most delicate and difficult to handle . for she have take good care at the outset not to be here upon any false pretence . at the very first interview with her host she have speak of Blyth 's attachment to his young daughter , of which the Admiral have hear already from that youthful sailor . and the Admiral have simply say , as in Captain Twemlow 's case : " let we leave they to themselves . I admire the young man . if she like he , I shall make no objection , when they be old enough , and thing be favourable . " and now if she tell he of the other love - affair , it would look like jealousy of a rival . perhaps a hundred time a day , as her love for gentle Faith grow fast than her like for the sprightly dolly , she would sigh that her son do not see thing like herself ; but bitter affliction have teach she that the course of this life follow our own wish about as much as another man 's dog heed our whistle . but , for all that , this good lady hop some day to see thing come round as she would like to bring they . 
 " no wonder that we like her son so much , " say faith when they have do wave handkerchief at the great yellow coach go slowly up the hill , with its vast wicker basket behind , and the guard perch over it with his blunderbus ; " he take after his mother in so many way . they be both so simple and unsuspicious , and they make the good of every one . " 
 " include themselves , I suppose , " answer dolly . " well I like people who have something on their mind , and make the bad of everybody . they have so much more to talk about . " 
 " you should never try to be sarcastic , dear . and you know that you do not   mean it . I be sure you do not   like to have the bad make of yourself . " 
 " oh , I have long be use to that . and I never care about it , when I know it be not true . I be sure that Mother Scudamore run I down , when I be out of hearing . I never do like those perfect people . " 
 " Mother Scudamore , indeed ! you be get into a low way of talking , which be not at all pretty in a girl . and I never hear she say an unkind word about you . though she may not have find you quite so perfect as she hop . " 
 " I tell you , Miss Darling , " cry dolly , with her bright colour deepen , and her grey eye flash , " that I do not   care a something that papa often say what she think about I , or you either . I know that she have come here to spy out all my way . " 
 " you should not have any to be spy out , dolly , " Faith answer , with some sternness , and a keen look at her sister , whose eye fall beneath her gaze . " you will be sorry , when you think of what you say to I , who have do nothing whatever to offend you . but that be a trifle compare with act unfairly to our father . Father be the kind man that ever live ; but he can be stern in great matter , I warn you . if he ever believe that you have deceive he , you will never be again to he what you have always be . " 
 they have send the carriage home that they might walk across the field , and this little scene between the sister take place upon a foot - path which lead back to their ground . dolly know that she be in the wrong , and that increase her anger . 
 " so you be another spy upon I , I suppose . ' tis a pretty thing to have one 's sister for an old duenna . pray who give you authority to lord it over I ? " 
 " you know as well as I do " Faith speak with a smile of superior calmness , as dolly toss her head " that I be about the last person in the world to be a spy . neither do I ever lord it over you . if anything , that matter be very much the other way . but be so much old , and your principal companion , it would be very odd of I , and as I think most unkind , if I do not take an interest in all your going on . " 
 " my going on ! what a lady - like expression ! who have get into a low way of talk now ? well , if you please , madam , what have you find out ? " 
 " I have find out nothing , and make no attempt to do so . but I see that you be alter very much from what you use to be ; and I be sure that there be something on your mind . why not tell I all about it ? I would promise to let it go no far , and I would not pretend to advise , unless you wish . I be your only sister , and we have always be together . it would make you so much more comfortable , I be certain of that , in your own mind , darling . and you know when we be little girl , dear mother on her death - bed put her hand upon our head and say , ' be love sister always , and never let anything come between you . ' and for father 's sake , too , you should try to do it . put aside all nonsense about spy and domineering , and trust I as your sister , that be my own darling dolly . " 
 " how can I resist you ? I will make a clean breast of it ; " dolly sigh deeply , but a wicked smile lie ambush in her bright eye and upon her rosy lip . " the sad truth be that my heart have be quite sore since I hear the shocking tiding about poor old daddy Stokes . he go to bed the other night with his good hat on , both his arm in an old muff he find in the ditch , and his leathern breech turn inside out . " 
 " then the poor old man have a clean breast than your , " cry Faith , who have prepare her heart and eye for tear of sympathy ; " he go upon his knee every night , stiff as they be , and his granddaughter have to help he up . but as for you , you be the most unfeeling , mocking , godless , unnatural creature that ever never care what become of anybody . here we be at the corner where the path divide . you go home that way , and I will go home by this . " 
 " well , I be so glad ! I really do believe that it be quite impossible to put you in a rage . now do not   be in a hurry , dear , to beg my pardon . " 
 " of that you may be quite sure , " cry Faith across the corner of the meadow where the path diverge ; " I never be less in a passion in my life ; and it will be your place to apologise . " 
 dolly send a merry laugh across the widening interval ; and Faith , who be just begin to fear that she have be in a passion , be convince by that laugh that she have not . but the weight lift from her conscience fall more heavily upon her heart . 




 CHAPTER XLIX 

 EVIL communication 

 although she pretend to be so merry , and really be so self - confident   whenever anybody want to help she , Miss Dolly Darling , when leave to herself , be not like herself , as it use to be . her nature be lively , and her spirit very high ; every one have pet she , before she could have earn it by aught except childish beauty ; and no one have leave off do it , when she be bind to show well claim to it . all this make doubt , and darkness , and the sense of not be her own mistress , very snappish thing to she , and she gain relief sweet - tempered as she be when pleased by a snap at other . for although she be not give , any more than other young people be , to plaguesome self - inspection , she could not help feel that she be no long the playful young dolly that she love so well . a strong , and clear , yet more mysterious will than her own have conquer her ; but she would not confess it , and yield entire obedience ; neither could she cast it off . her pride still exist , as strong as ever , whenever temper rouse it ; but there be too much of vanity in its composition , and too little of firm self - respect . contempt from a woman she could not endure ; neither from a man , if make manifest ; but Carne so calmly take the upper hand , without any show of have it , that she fall more and more beneath his influence . 
 he , know thoroughly what he be about , do nothing to arouse resistance . so far as he be capable of love any one , he be now in love with dolly . he admire her quickness , and pretty girlish way , and gaiety of nature   so unlike his own , and most of all her beauty . he have make up his mind that she should be his wife when fit for that dignity ; but he mean to make her useful first , and he see his way to do so . he know that she act more and more as her father 's secretary , for she write much fast than her sister Faith , and be quick in catch up a meaning . only it be needful to sap her little prejudice candour , to wit , and the sense of trust , and above all , patriotic feeling . he rejoice when he hear that Lady Scudamore be go , and the Rector have take his wife and daughter for change of air to Tunbridge Wells , Miss Twemlow be seriously out of health through anxiety about Mr. Shargeloes . for that gentleman have disappear , without a line or message , just when Mr. Furkettle , the chief lawyer in the neighbourhood , be begin to prepare the marriage - settlement ; and although his cook and house - maid be furious at the story , Mrs. Blocks have say , and all the parish now believe , that Sir Parsley Sugarloaf have fly away to Scotland rather than be bring to book that fatal part of the Prayer - book by the Rector and three or four brother clergyman . 
 this be so , and Frank Darling absorb in London with the publication of another batch of poem , dedicate to Napoleon , while Faith stand aloof with her feeling hurt , and the Admiral stand off and on in the wearisome cruise of duty , Carne have the coast unusually clear for the entry and arrangement of his contraband idea . he meet the fair dolly almost every day , and their interview do not grow short , although the day be do so . 
 " you should have be bear in France , " he say , one bright November morning , when they sit more comfortable than they have any right to be , upon the very same seat where the honest but hapless Captain Scuddy have try to venture to lisp his love ; " that be the land you belong to , darling , by beauty and manner and mind and taste , and most of all by your freedom from prejudice , and great liberality of sentiment . " 
 " but I think we be quite as good - look in England ; " dolly lift her long black lash , with a flash which might challenge the brilliance of any french eye ; " but of course you know well . I know nothing of french lady . " 
 " do not   be a fool , dolly ; " Carne speak rudely , but make up for it in another way . " there never be a french girl to equal you in loveliness ; but you must not suppose that you beat they all round . one point particularly you be far behind in . a french woman leave all political question , and national matter , and public affair , entirely to her husband , or her lover , as the case may be . whatever he wish be the law for she . Thy god shall be my god . " 
 " but you say they have great liberality of sentiment , and now you say they have no opinion of their own ! how can the two thing go together ? " 
 " very easily , " say Carne , who be accustomed to be baffle by such little sally ; " they take their opinion from their husband , who be always liberal . this produce happiness on both side a state of thing unknown in England . let I tell you of something important , mainly as it concern yourself , sweet dolly . the French be certain to unite with England , and then we shall be the grand nation in the world . no power in Europe can stand before we . all will be freedom , and civilization , and great idea , and fine taste in dress . I shall recover the large estate , that would now be mine , but for usury and fraud . and you will be one of the first lady in the world , as nature have always intend you to be . " 
 " that sound very well ; but how be it to be do ? how can France unite with England , when they be bitter enemy ? be France to conquer England first ? or be we to conquer France , as we always use to do ? " 
 " that would be a hard job now , when France be the mistress of the continent . no , there need be no conquering , sweet dolly , but only a little removal . the true interest of this country be as that mighty party , the Whigs , perceive to get rid of all the paltry form and dry bone of a dynasty which be no more english than Napoleon be , and to join that great man in his warfare against all oppression . your brother Frank be a lead spirit ; he have long cast off that wretched insular prejudice which defeat all good . in the grand new scheme of universal right , which must prevail very shortly , Frank Darling will obtain that foremost place to which his noble view entitle he . you , as his sister , and my wife , will be adore almost as much as you could wish . " 
 " it sound very grand , " answer dolly , with a smile , though a little alarmed at this turn of it ; " but what be to become of the king , and Queen , and all the royal family ? and what be my father to do , and faith ? although she have not behave well to I . " 
 " those detail will be arrange to everybody 's satisfaction . little prejudice will subside , when it be see that they be useless . every possible care will be take not to injure any one . " 
 " but how be it all to be do ? " ask dolly , whose mind be practical , though romantic . " be the French to land , and overrun the country ? I be sure I never should agree to that . be all our defender to be throw into prison ? " 
 " certainly not . there will be no prison . the French might have to land , as a matter of form ; but not to overrun the country , only to secure british liberty and justice . all sensible people would hasten to join they , and any opposition would be quench at once . then such a glorious condition of mankind would ensue as have never be know in this world peace , wealth , universal happiness , gaiety , dance everywhere , no more shabby clothe , no more dreary sunday . how do you like the thought of it ? " 
 " well , some of it sound very nice ; but I do not   see the use of universal justice . justice mean have one 's own right ; and it be impossible for everybody to do that , because of other people . and as for the French come to put thing right , they have well attend to their own affair first . and as if any Englishman would permit it ! why , even Frank would mount his wig and gown   for he be a full - fledged barrister now , you know , and come and help to push they back into the sea . and I hope that you would do so too . I be not go to marry a Frenchman . you belong to an old english family , and you be bear in England , and your name be English , and the property that ought to belong to you . I hope you do not   consider yourself a frenchman because your mother be a great french lady , after so many generation of Carnes , all English , every bit of they . I be an english girl , and I care very little for thing that I do not   see such as justice , liberty , right of people , and all that . but I do care about my relation , and our friend , and the people that live here , and the boat , and all the tree , and the land that belong to my father . very likely you would want to take that away , and give it to some miserable Frenchman . " 
 " dolly , my dear , you must not be excite , " Carne answer , in the manner of a father ; " powerful as your comprehension be , for the moment these thing be beyond it . your meaning be excellent , very good , very great ; but to bring it to bear require further information . we will sit by the side of the sea to - morrow , darling , if you grant I a view of your loveliness again ; and there you will see thing in a large light than upon this narrow bench , with your father 's tree around we , and your father 's cow enquire whether I be good to eat . get away , cow ! do you take I for a calf ? " 
 one of the cow well love by dolly , who be very fond of good animal , have come up to ask who this man be that have be sit here so long with she . she be gift with a white face and large soft eye even beyond the common measure of a cow short little horn , that she would scarcely think of push even at a dog   unless he make mouth at her infant , a flat broad nose ever genial to be rub , and a delicate fringe of finely point yellow hair around her pleasant nostril and above her clovery lip . with single - hearted charity and enviable faith she be able to combine the hope that dolly have obtain a lover as good as could be find upon a single pair of leg . Carne be attire with some bravery , of the french manner rather than the English , and he want no butter on his velvet and fine lace . so he swing round his cane of heavy snakewood at the cow , and strike her poor horn so sharply that her head go round . 
 " be that universal peace , and gentleness , and justice ? " cry dolly , spring up and hasten to console her cow . " be this the way the lofty french redress the wrong of England ? what have poor Dewlips do , I should like to know ? kiss I , my pretty , and tell I how you would like the french army to land , as a matter of form ? the form you would take would be beef , I be afraid ; not even good roast beef , but bouillon , potage , fricandeau , friture anything one can not taste any meat in ; and that be how your wrong would be redress , after have have both your horn knock off . and about the same fate for John Bull , your master , unless he keep his horn well sharpen . do I not speak the truth , monsieur ? " 
 when Carne do anything to vex Miss dolly which happen pretty often , for he could not stop to study much her little prejudice she address he as if he be a Frenchman , never doubt that this must reduce he sadly in his self - esteem . 
 " never mind matter political , " he say , perceive that his power must not be press until he have deepen its foundation ; " what be all the politic in the world compare with your good opinion , beauty ? " dolly like to be call " Beauty , " and the name always make her try to deserve it by look sweet . " you must be quite certain that I would do nothing to injure a country which contain my Dolly . and as for Madam Cow , I will beg her pardon , though my cane be hurt a great deal more than her precious horn be . behold I snap it in twain , although it be the only handsome one I possess , because it have offend you ! " 
 " oh , what a pity ! what a lovely piece of wood ! " cry dolly ; and they part on the good of term , after a warm vow upon either side that no nasty politic should ever come between they . 
 but Carne be annoy and discontent . he come to the edge of the cliff that evening below his ruin castle ; for there be no cliff at Springhaven , unless the headland deserve that name ; and there he sit gloomily for some hour , revolve the chance of his enterprise . the weather have change since the morning , and a chill November wind begin to urge the wave ashore . the sky be not very dark , but shred with loose grey vapour from the west , where a heavy bank of cloud lie under the pale crescent of a watery moon . in the distance two british cruiser shone , light ship of outlook , under easy sail , prepare to send the signal for a hundred league , from ship to ship and cliff to cliff , if any of England 's foe appear . they shine upon the dark sea , with canvas touch by moonlight , and seem ready to spring against the lower sky , if it hold any menace to the land they watch , or the long reach of water they have make their own . 
 " a pest upon those watch - dog ! " mutter Carne . " they be always wide - awake , and forever at their station . instead of grow tired , they get sharp every day . even Charron can scarcely run through they now . but I know who could do it , if he could only be trust . with a pilot - boat it be a fine idea a pilot - boat enter as of Pebbleridge . the Pebbleridge people hate Springhaven , through a feud of century , and Springhaven despise Pebbleridge . it would answer well , although the landing be so bad , and no anchorage possible in rough weather . I must try if Dan Tugwell will undertake it . none of the rest know the coast as he do , and few of they have the bravery . but Dan be a very sulky fellow , very difficult to manage . he will never betray we ; he be wonderfully grateful ; and after that battle with the press - gang , when he knock down the officer and break his arm , he will keep pretty clear of the Union - jack . but he go about moping , and wonder , and mooning , as if he be wretched about what he have to do . bless my soul , where be my invention ? I see the way to have he under my thumb . reason be an old coat hang on a peg ; passion be the fool who put it on and run away with it . Halloa ! who be you ? and what do you want at such a time as this ? surely you can see that I be not at leisure now . why , Tugwell , I think that you be far away at sea ! " 
 " so I be , sir ; but she travel fast . I never would believe the old London Trader could be drive through the water so . Sam Polwhele know how to pile it on a craft , as well as he do upon a man , sir . I will not   serve under he no more , nor Captain Charcoal either . I have do my duty by you . Squire Carne , the same as you do by I , sir ; and thank you for find I work so long , my meaning be to go upon the search to - morrow . " 
 " what fool they must have be to let this fellow come ashore ! " think Carne , while he fail to see the wise way to take it . " tugwell , you can not do this with any honour , after we have show you all the secret of our enterprise . you know that what we do be of the very high honour , kind and humane and charitable , though strictly forbid by a most inhuman government . how would you like , if you be a prisoner in France , to be debar from all chance of get any message from your family , your wife , your sweetheart , or your child , from year 's end to year 's end , and perhaps be dead for month without their know anything about it ? " 
 " well , sir , I should think it very hard indeed ; though , if I be dead , I should not   know much more about it . but , without reproach to you , I can not make out altogether that our only business be to carry letter for the prisoner , as now may be in England , from their love friend to command in their native country . I will not   say against you , sir , if you say it be that is , to the outside of all your knowledge . and twenty thousand of they may need letter by the sack . but what use they could make , sir , of cannon as big as I be , and musket that would kill a man a hundred yard of distance , and bayonet more large and more sharp than ever I see before , even with the Royal Volunteers this go out of all my calculation . " 
 " Daniel , you have express your view , which be remarkable as indeed they always be with your usual precision . but you have not observe thing with equal accuracy . do you know when a gun be past service ? " 
 " no , sir ; I never be a poacher , no - how . Squire Darling , that be to say , Sir Charles Darling now , accord to a chap on board , he be always so good upon his land that nobody durst go a - poaching . " 
 " I mean a cannon , Dan . they do not   poach with cannon yet , though they may come to do it , as the game - law increase . do you know when a cannon be unsafe to fire , though it may look as bright as ever , like a wear - out poker ? all those thing that have frighten you be only mean for ornament . you know that every ancient building ought to have its armoury , as this castle always have , until they be take away and sell . my intention be to restore it , when I can afford to do so . and have a lot of wear - out weapon offer I for next to nothing , I seize the chance of bring they . when time be well , and the war be over , I may find time to arrange they . but that be not of much importance . the great point be to secure the delivery of letter from their native land to the brave man here as prisoner . I can not afford to do that for nothing , though I make no profit out of it . I have so many thing to think about that I scarcely know which to consider first . and after all , what matter to we whether those poor man be allow to die , and be bury like dog , without knowledge of their friend ? why should we run the risk of be punish for they ? " 
 " well , sir , that seem hard doctrine , if I may be allow to say so , and not like your kind - heartedness . our Government have no right to stop they of their letter . " 
 " it be a cruel thing . but how be we to help it ? the London Trader be too large for the purpose , and she be under suspicion now . I tell you everything , Daniel , because I know that you be a true - hearted fellow , and far above all blabbing . I have think once or twice of obtain leave to purchase a stout and handy pilot - boat , with her licence and all that transfer to we , and so run to and fro when needful . the only risk then would be from peril of the sea ; and even the pressman dare not meddle with a pilot - boat . by - the - by , I have hear that you knock some of they about . tugwell , you might have get we all into sad trouble . " 
 " be I to think of what I be do , Squire Carne , when they want to make a slave of I ? I would serve King George with a good heart , in spite of all that father have say against it . but it must be with a free will , Squire Carne , and not to be tie hand and foot to it . how would you like that yourself , sir ? " 
 " well , I think I should have do as you do , Dan , if I have be a british sailor . but as to this pilot - boat , I must have a bold and good seaman to command it . a man who know the coast , and be not afraid of weather . of course we should expect to pay good wage ; 3 pound a week , perhaps , and a guinea for every bag of letter land safe . there be plenty of man who would jump at such a chance , Dan . " 
 " I will be bind there be , sir . and it be more than I be worth , if you mean offer the place to I . it would suit I wonderful , if I be certain that the job be honest . " 
 " Daniel Tugwell " Carne speak with great severity " I will not lose my temper , for I be sure you mean no insult . but you must be of a very low , suspicious nature , and quite unfit for any work of a lofty and unselfish order , if you can imagine that a man in my position , a man of my large sentiment " 
 " oh , no , sir , no ; it be not at all that " Dan scarcely know how to tell what it be " it be nothing at all of that manner of thinking . I heartily ask your pardon , sir , if it seem to go in that way . " 
 " do not   do that , " reply Carne , " because I can make allowance . I know what a fine nature be , and how it take alarm at shadow . I be always tender with honest scruple , because I find so many of they in myself . I should not have be pleased with you , if you have accept my offer although so advantageous , and full of romantic interest until you be convince of its honourable nature . I have no time for argument , and I be sorry that you must not come up to the castle for supper , because we have an old Springhaven man there , who would tell your father all about you , which you especially wish to avoid . but if you feel inclined for this berth as you sailor seem to call it and hesitate through some patriotic doubt , though I can not understand what they be , I will bring you a document   if you meet I here to - morrow night   from Admiral Sir Charles Darling , which I think will satisfy you . " 
 " and shall I be allow to keep it , sir , to show , in case of trouble ? " 
 " very likely . but I can not say for certain . some of those official form must be return , other not ; all depend upon their rule . now go and make yourself comfortable . how be you off for money ? " 
 " Plenty , sir , plenty . I must not go where anybody know I , or to - morrow half the talk at old Springhaven would be about I . good - night , sir , and God bless you . " 




 CHAPTER L 

 his savage SPIRIT 

 at this time letter come very badly , not only to french prisoner in England , but even to the high authority , who have the very good mean of get they . Admiral Darling have often write to his old friend Nelson , but have long be without any tiding from he , through no default on the hero 's part . Lord Nelson be almost as prompt with the pen as he be with the sword , but despatch be most irregular and uncertain . 
 " here at last we have he ! " cry Sir Charles one morning early in December ; " and not more than five week old , I declare ! dolly , be ready , and call Faith down . now read it , my dear , for our benefit . your godfather write a most excellent hand , consider that it be his left hand ; but my eye be sore from so much night - work . put on my spec , dolly ; I should like to see you in they . " 
 " be I to read every word , papa , just as it come ? you know that he generally put in word that be rather strong for I . " 
 " Nelson never think or write a single word unfit for the nice young lady . but you may hold up your hand if you come to any strong expression , and we shall understand they . " 
 " then I shall want both hand as soon as ever we come to the very first Frenchman . but this be what my godfather say : 
 " ' victory , OFF TOULON , October 31st , 1804 . 
 " ' MY DEAR lingo , it be only yesterday that I receive your letter of July 21st ; it go in a spanish smuggling boat to the coast of Italy and return again to Spain , not have meet any of our ship . and now I hope that you will see I before you see this letter . we be certain to be at war with Spain before another month be out , and I be heartily sorry for it , for I like those fellow well than the French , because they be not such liar . my successor have be appoint , I have reason to hope , and must be far on his way by this time ; probably Keith , but I can not say . minister can not suppose that I want to fly the service ; my whole life have prove the contrary ; if they refuse , I shall most certainly leave in March or April , for a few month ' rest I must have , or else die . my cough be very bad , and my side where I be strike off Cape St. Vincent be very much swell , at time a lump as large as my fist be bring on by violent coughing , but I hope and believe my lung be sound . I hope to do good service yet , or else I should not care so much . but if I be in my grave , how can I serve the Country ? 
 " ' you will say , this be not at all like Nelson , to write about nothing but his own poor self ; and thank God , Lingo , I can say that you be right ; for if ever a man live for the good of England and the destruction of those ' " here dolly hold a hand up " ' frenchman , it be the man in front of this ink - bottle . the Lord have appoint I to that duty , and I shall carry out my order . mon . La Touche , who be preach about in France as the man that be to extinguish I , and even in the scurvy english newspaper , but never dare to show his snivelly countenance outside of the inner buoy , be dead of his debosherie , for which I be deeply grieve , as I fully intend to send he to the devil . 
 " ' I have be most unlucky for some time now , and to tell the truth I may say always . but I be the last man in the world to grumble as you , my dear Lingo , can testify . I always do the utmost , with a single mind , and leave the thought of miserable pelf to other , man perhaps who never see a shot cannon fire . you know who make eighty thousand pound , without have to wipe his pigtail dirty thing , I be glad they be go out but my business be to pay other people 's debt , and receive all my credit in the shape of cannon - ball . this be always so , and I should let it pass as usual , except for a blacker trick than I have ever know before . for fear of give I a single chance of earn twopence , they know that there be a million and a half of money come into Cadiz from South America in four spanish frigate , and instead of leave I to catch they , they send out Graham Moore you know he very well with order to pocket everything . this will create a war with Spain , a war begin with robbery on our part , though it must have come soon in any case . for everywhere now , except where I be , that fiend of a Corsican be supreme . 
 " ' there be not a sick man in this fleet , unless it be the one inside my coat . that liar La Touche say he chase I and I RAN . I keep a copy of his letter , which it would have be my duty to make he eat , if he have venture out again . but he be go to the lake of brimstone now , and I have the good feeling to forgive he . if my character be not fix by this time , it be not worth my trouble to put the world right . yesterday I take a look into the port within easy reach of their battery . they lay like a lot of mouse hole in a trap , but the weather be too thick to count they . they be certainly nearly twice our number ; and if any one be here except poor little Nelson , I believe they would venture out . but my reputation deprive I always of any fair chance to increase it . 
 " ' and now , my dear Lingo , allow I to enquire how you be get on with your Coast - defence . I never do attach much importance to their senseless invasion scheme . the only thing to make it formidable would be some infernal traitor on the coast , some devilish spy who would keep they well inform , and enable they to land where least expect . if there be such a scoundrel , may the Lord Almighty ' " here both dolly 's hand go up , with the letter in they , and her face turn as white as the paper . 
 " ' I have often tell you , as you may remember , that Springhaven be the very place I should choose , if I be commander of the french flotilla . it would turn the flank of all the inland defence , and no british ship could attack their intrenchment , if once they be snug below the window of the Hall . but they be not likely to know this , thank God ; and if they do , they would have a job to get there . however , it be wise to keep a sharp lookout , for they know very well that I be far away . 
 " ' and now that I have get to your own door , which I heartily hope to do , perhaps before you see this , let I ask for yourself and all your dear family . Lingo , the long I live the more I feel that all the true happiness of life be find at home . my glory be very great , and satisfy I , except when it scar the enemy ; but I very often feel that I would give it all away for a quiet life among those who love I . your daughter Faith be a sweet young woman , just what I should wish for a child of mine to be . and Horatia , my godchild , will turn out very well , if a sharp hand be keep over she . but she take after I , she be daring and ambitious , and require a firm hand at the helm . read this to she , with my love , and I dare say she will only laugh at it . if she marry to my liking , she will be down for a good thing in my will , some day . God bless we all . amen . amen . 
 " ' your affectionately , 
 " ' nelson and BRONTE . ' " 
 " take it to heart , my dear ; and so must I , " say the Admiral , laugh at the face his daughter make ; " your godfather be a most excellent judge of everybody 's character except his own . but , bless I , my dear , why , you be cry ! you silly little thing ! I be only in fun . you shall marry to his liking , and be down for the good thing . look up , and laugh at everybody , my darling . no one laugh so merrily as my pretty dolly . why , Faith , what do she mean by this ? " 
 to the coax voice of her father , and the playful glance that she use to play with , dolly have not rush up at all , either with mind , or , if that fail , with body , as she always use to do . she hurry towards the door , as if she long to be away from they ; and then , as if she would rather not make any stir about it , sit down and pretend to have catch her dress in something . 
 " the only thing be to let she go on as she like , " Faith say aloud , so that dolly might hear all of it ; " I have do all I can , but she believe herself superior . she can not bear any sort of contradiction , and she expect one to know what she say , without she say it . there be nothing to be do but to treat she the same way . if she be leave to herself , she may come back to it . " 
 " well , my dear child , " say the Admiral , much alarmed at the prospect of a broil between they , such as he remember about three year back , " I make no pretence to understand your way . if you be boy , it would be different altogether . but the Almighty have be pleased to make you girl , and very good one too ; in fact , there be none to be find well . you have always be bind up with one another and with I ; and every one admire all the three of we . so that we must be content if a little thing arise , not to make too much of it , but bear with one another , and defy anybody to come in between we . kiss one another , my dear , and be off ; for I have much correspondence to attend to , besides the great Nelson 's , though I take he first , hop for something sensible . but I have not much to learn about Springhaven , even from his lordship . however , he be a man in ten thousand , and we must not be vex about any of his crotchet , because he have never have child to talk about ; and he get out of sounding when he talk about mine . I wish Lady Scudamore be come back . she always agree with I , and she take a great load off my shoulder . " 
 the girl laugh at this , as they be mean to do . and they hurry off together , to compare opinion . after all these year of independence , no one should be set up over they . upon that point faith be quite as resolute as dolly ; and her ladyship would have refuse to come back , if she have overhear their council . for even in the lofty feminine nature lurk a small tincture of jealousy . 
 but dolly be now in an evil frame of mind about many thing which she could not explain even to herself , with any satisfaction . even that harmless and pleasant letter from her great godfather go amiss with she ; and instead of laugh at the word about herself , as with a sound conscience she must have do , she brood over they , and turn they bitter . no man could have mix up thing as she do , but her mind be nimble . for the moment , she hat patriotism , because Nelson represent it ; and feel how wrong he have be about herself , she feel that he be wrong in everything . the French be fine fellow , and have quite as much right to come here as we have to go and harass they , and a little abatement of english conceit might be a good thing in the long - run . not that she would let they stay here long ; that be not to be think of , and they would not wish it . but a little excitement would be delightful , and a great many thing might be change for the well , such as the treatment of woman in this country , which be barbarous , compare to what it be in France . Caryl have tell she a great deal about that ; and the long she know he the more she be convince of his wisdom and the largeness of his view , so different from the savage spirit of Lord Nelson . 




 CHAPTER LI 

 strange craft 

 while his love be lapse from he thus , and from her own true self yet more , the gallant young sailor , whose last prize have be that useful one misfortune , be dwell continually upon her image , because he have very little else to do . english prisoner in France be treat sometimes very badly , which they take good care to proclaim to Europe ; but more often with pity , and good - will , and a pleasant study of their mode of thought . for an Englishman then be a strange and ever fresh curiosity to a Frenchman , a speciman of another race of biped , with doubt whether marriage could make parentage between they . and a century of intercourse , good - will , and admiration have leave we still inquisitive about each other . 
 Napoleon feel such confidence in his plan for the conquest of England that if any british officer belong to the fleet in the narrow sea be take   which do not happen largely , he send for he , upon his arrival at Boulogne , and hold a little talk with any one who could understand and answer . he be especially pleased at hearing of the capture of Blyth Scudamore   who have rob he of his beloved Blonde , and at once restore desporte to favour , which he have begin to do before , know as well as any man on earth the value of good officer . " bring your prisoner here to - morrow at twelve o'clock , " be his order ; " you have turn the table upon he well . " 
 Scudamore feel a little nervous tingling as he pass through the sentry , with his friend before he , into the pavilion of the great man in Europe . but the Emperor , be in high good - humour , and please with the young man 's modest face and gentle demeanour , soon set he at his ease , and speak to he as affably as if he have be his equal . for this man of almost universal mind could win every heart , when he set himself to do it . Scudamore rub his eye , which be a trick of his , as if he could scarcely believe they . Napoleon look not insignificant   that be impossible for a man with such a countenance , but mild , and pleasing , and benevolent , as he walk to and fro , for he never could stay still , in the place which be neither a tent nor a room , but a mixture of the two , and not a happy one . his hat , loop up with a diamond and quiver with an ostrich feather , be fling anyhow upon the table . but his wonderful eye be the bright thing there . 
 " ha ! ha ! " say the Emperor , a very keen judge of face ; " you expect to find I a monster , as I be portray by your caricaturist . your countryman be not kind to I , except the foremost of they the great poet . but they will understand I well by - and - by , when justice prevail , and the blessing of peace , for which I be strive perpetually . but the english nation , if it be allow a voice , would proclaim I its only true friend and ally . you know that , if you be one of the people , and not of the hateful House of Lords , which engross all the army and the navy . be you in connection with the House of Lords ? " 
 Scudamore shake his head and smile . he be anxious to say that he have a cousin , not more than twice remove , now an entire viscount ; but Napoleon never encourage conversation , unless it be his own , or in answer to his question . 
 " very well . then you can speak the truth . what do they think of all this grand army ? be they aware that , for their own good , it will very soon occupy London ? be they form themselves to act as my ally , when I have reduce they to reason ? be it now make entirely familiar to their mind that resistance to I be as hopeless as it have be from the first unwise ? if they would submit , without my crossing , it would save they some disturbance , and I a great expense . I have often hop to hear of it . " 
 " you will never do that , sire , " Scudamore answer , look calmly and firmly at the deep gray eye , whose gaze could be meet by none of the million who dread passion ; " England will not submit , even if you conquer she . " 
 " it be well say , and doubtless you believe it , " Napoleon continue , with a smile so slight that to smile in reply to it would have be impertinent ; " but England be the same as other nation , although the most obstinate among they . when her capital be occupy , her credit ruin , her great lord unable to obtain a dinner , the government   which be not the country   will yield , and the country must follow it . I have hear that the king , and the Court , and the Parliament , talk of fly to the north , and there remain , while the navy cut off our communication , and the inferior class starve we . have you hear of any such romance as that ? " 
 " no , sire : " Scudamore scarcely know what to call he , but adopt this vocative for want of any well . " I have never hear of any such plan , and no one would think of pack up , until our fleet have be demolish . " 
 " your fleet ? yes , yes . how many ship be now parade to and fro , and get very tired of it ? " 
 " your Majesty 's officer know that good , " Scudamore answer , with his pleasant open smile . " I have be a prisoner for a month and more , and keep ten mile inland , out of sight of the sea . " 
 " but you have be well treat , I hope . you have no complaint to make , Monsieur Scutamour ? your name be french , and you speak the language well . we set the fair example in the treatment of brave man . " 
 " sire , I have be treat , " the young officer reply , with a low bow , and eye full of gratitude , " as a gentleman amongst gentleman . I might say as a friend among kind friend . " 
 " that be as it should be . it be my wish always . few of your english fabrication annoy I more than the falsehood about that . it be most ungenerous , when I do my good , to charge I with strangle brave english captain . but desporte fight well , before you take his vessel . be it not so ? speak exactly as you think . I like to hear the enemy 's account of every action . " 
 " Captain Desportes , sire , fight like a hero , and so do all his crew . it be only his mishap in stick fast upon a sand - bank that enable we to overpower he . " 
 " and now he have do the like to you . you speak with a brave man 's candour . you shall be at liberty to see the sea , monsieur ; for a sailor always pine for that . I will give full instruction to your friend desporte about you . but one more question before you go be there much anxiety in England ? " 
 " yes , sire , a great deal . but we hope not to allow your Majesty 's armament to enter and increase it . " 
 " ah , we shall see , we shall see how that will be . now farewell , Captain . tell desporte to come to I . " 
 " well , my dear friend , you have make a good impression , " say the french sailor , when he rejoin Scudamore , after a few word with the Master of the state ; " all you have to do be to give your word of honour to avoid our line , and keep away from the beach , and of course to have no communication with your friend upon military subject . I be allow to place you for the present at Beutin , a pleasant little hamlet on the Canche , where live an old relative of mine , a Monsieur Jalais , an ancient widower , with a large house and one servant . I shall be afloat , and shall see but little of you , which be the only sad part of the business . you will have to report yourself to your landlord at eight every morning and at eight o'clock at night , and only to leave the house between those hour , and not to wander more than six mile from home . how do these condition approve themselves to you ? " 
 " I call they very liberal , and very handsome , " Scudamore answer , as he well might do . " two mile ' range be all that we allow in England to french officer upon parole . these generous term be due to your kind friendship . " 
 before very long the gentle Scuddy be as happy as a prisoner can expect to be , in his comfortable quarter at Beutin . through friendly exchange he have receive a love letter from his mother , with an amiable enclosure , and M. Jalais be far from wealthy , a pleasant arrangement be make between they . Scudamore take all his meal with his host , who could manage sound victual like an Englishman , and the house - keeper , house - cleaner , and house - feeder   misdescribe by desporte as a servant , accord to our distinction , be a widow of mark , sit down to consider her cookery upon choice occasion . then for a long time would prevail a conscientious gravity , and reserve of judgment inwardly , everybody wait for some other body 's sentiment ; until the author of the work , as a female , might no more abide the malignant silence of male reviewer . 
 Scudamore , be very easily amuse , as any good - natured young man be , enter with zest into all these doing , and become an authority upon appeal ; and be gift with depth of simplicity as well as high courtesy of taste , be never know to pronounce a wrong decision . that be to say , he decide always in favour of the lady , which have be the majestic course of Justice for century , till the appearance of Mrs. - , the lady who should have marry the great Home - Ruler . 
 thus the wily Scudamore obtain a sitting - room , with the prettiest outlook in the house , or indeed in any house in that part of the world for many league of seek . for the mansion of M. Jalais stand in an elbow of the little river , and one window of this room show the curve of tidal water widen towards the sea , while the other pleasantly give eye to the upper reach of the stream , where an angler of rose - coloured mind might almost hope to hook a trout . the sun glance down the stream in the morning , and up it to see what he have do before he set ; and although M. Jalais ' tree be leafless now , they have sleeve their bent arm with green velvetry of moss . 
 Scudamore bring his comfortable chair to the nook between these window , and there , with a book or two belong to his host , and the pipe whose silver cloud enthrone the god of contemplation , many a pleasant hour be pass , seldom invade by the sound of war . for the course of the road , and sand of the river , keep this happy spot aloof from bad communication . like many other stream in northern France , the Canche have be deepen and its mouth improve , not for us of commerce , but of warfare . veteran soldier and raw recruit , bugler , baker , and farrier , man who come to fight and man who come to write about it , all have be turn into navvy , digger , driver of pile , or of horse , or wheelbarrow , by the man who turn everybody into his own teetotum . the Providence that guide the world show mercy in send that engine of destruction before there be a Railway for he to run upon . 
 now Scudamore be of a different sort , and therefore have please Napoleon   who detest any one at all of his own pattern , might have be very well content here , and certainly must have be so , if he have be without those two window . many a bird have lose his nest , and his egg , and his mate , and even his own tail , by cock his eye to the right and leave , when he should have draw their shutter up . and why ? because the brilliance of his too project eye have twinkle through the leaf upon the narrow oblong of the pupil of a spotty - eyed cat go stealthily under the comb of the hedge , with her stomach wire in , and her spinal column flute , to look like a wrinkle blackthorn snag . but still bad be it for that poor thrush , or lintie , or robin , or warbler - wren , if he flutter in his bosom when he spy that cat , and set up his feather , and begin to hop about , make a sad little chirp to his mate , and appeal to the sky to protect he and his family . 
 Blyth Scudamore 's case be a mixture of those two . it would have be well for his comfort if he have shut his eye ; but have open they , he should have stay where he be , without any fluttering . however , he act for the good ; and when a man do that , can those who never do so find a word to say against he ? 
 accord to the good of his recollection , which be generally near the mark , it be upon Christmas Eve , a.d. 1804 , that his curiosity be first arouse . he have make up his room to look a little bit like home , with a few sprig of holly , and a sheaf of laurel , not place daintily as a lady dress they , but as sprightly as a man can make they look , and as bright as a captive Christmas could expect . the decorator shed a little sigh if that expression may be pardon by analogy , for he certainly neither fetch nor heave it and then he light his pipe to reflect upon home blessing , and consider the free world outside , in which he have very little share at present . 
 mild blue eye , such as this young man possess , be often short - sighted at a moderate range , and would be fit up with glass in these artificial time , and yet at long distance they be most efficient , and can make out object that would puzzle keener organ . and so it be that Scudamore , with the sink sun to help he , descry at a long distance down the tidal reach a peaceful - looking boat , which make his heart beat fast . for a sailor 's glance assure he that she be English English in her rig and the stiff cut of her canvas , and in all those point of character to a seaman so distinctive , which apprise he of his kindre through the length of air and water , as clearly as we landsman know a man from a woman at the measure of a furlong , or a quarter of a mile . he perceive that it be an English pilot - boat , and that she be stand towards he . at first his heart flutter with a warm idea , that there must be good news for he on board that boat . perhaps , without his knowledge , an exchange of prisoner might have be agree upon ; and what a grand Christmas - box for he , if the order for his release be there ! but another thought show he the absurdity of this hope , for order of release do not come so . nevertheless , he watch that boat with interest and wonder . 
 presently , just as the sun be set , and shadow cross the water , the sail   which have be gleam like a candle - flame against the haze and upon the glaze   flicker and fall , and the bow swing round , and her figure be draw upon the tideway . she be now within half a mile of M. Jalais ' house , and Scudamore , though long for a spy - glass , be able to make out a good deal without one . he see that she be an English pilot - boat , undecked , but fit with a cuddy forward , rig luggerwise , and build for speed , yet fit to encounter almost any Channel surge . she be light in the water , and bear little except ballast . he could not be sure at that distance , but he think that the sailor must be Englishmen , especially the man at the helm , who be beyond reasonable doubt the captain . 
 then two long sweep be man amidship , with two sturdy fellow to tug at each ; and the quiet evening air lead through the soft rehearsal of the water to its bank the creak of tough ash thole - pin , and the groan of gunwale , and the splash of oar , and even a sound of human staple , such as be accept by the civilized world as our national diapason . 
 the captive Scuddy , who observe all this , be thoroughly puzzle at that last turn . though the craft be visibly English , the crew might still have be doubtful , if they have hold their tongue , or keep they in submission . but that word stamp they , or at any rate the one who have be strike in the breast by the heavy timber , as of genuine british birth . yet there be no sign that these man be prisoner , or act by compulsion . no french boat be near they , no battery there command their course , and the pilot - boat carry no prize - crew to direct reluctant labour . at the mouth of the river be a float bridge , for the use of the force on either side , and no boat could have pass it without permission . therefore these could be no venturesome Britons , spy out the quarter of the enemy ; either they must have be allow to pass for some special purpose , under flag of truce , or else they be traitor , in league with the French , and despatch upon some dark errand . 
 in a few minute , as the evening dusk begin to deepen round she , the mysterious little craft disappear in a hollow of the upland on the other side of the water , where a narrow creek or inlet such as be call a " pill " in some part of England form a shelter landing - place , overhang with clustering tree . then Scudamore rise , and fill another pipe , to meditate upon this strange affair . " I be justly forbid , " he think , as it grow dark , " to visit the camp , or endeavour to learn anything do by the army of invasion . and I have pledge myself to that effect . but this be a different case altogether . when englishman come here as traitor to their country , and in a place well within my range , my duty be to learn the meaning of it ; and if I find treachery of importance work , then I must consider about my parole , and probably withdraw it . that would be a terrible blow to I , because I should certainly be send far inland , and keep in a french prison perhaps for year , with little chance of hear from my friend again . and then she would give I up as lose , that faithful darling , who have put aside all her bright prospect for my sake . how I wish I have never see that boat ! and I think it be come to bring I such good news ! I be bind to give they one day 's grace , for they might not know where to find I at once , and to - night I could not get near they , without overstay my time to be in - door . but if I hear nothing to - morrow , and see nothing , I must go round , so as not to be see , and learn something about she the very next morning . " 
 hear nothing and see no more , he spend an uncomfortable Christmas Day , disappoint his host and kind Madame Fropot , who have do all they know to enliven he with a genuine english plum - pudding . and the next day , with a light foot but rather heavy heart , he make the long round by the bridge up - stream , and examine the creek which the english boat have enter . he approach the place very cautiously , know that if his suspicion be correct , they might be confirm too decisively , and his countryman , if they have fire - arm , would give he a warm reception . however , there be no living creature to be see , except a poor terrify ox , who have escape from the slaughter - house of the distant camp , and hop for a little rest in this dark thicket . he be wear out with his long flight and sadly wound , for many man have shoot at he , when he desire to save his life ; and although his mouth be little more than the length of his tail from water , there he lie gasp with his lip stretch out , and his dry tongue quiver between his yellow tooth , and the only moisture he could get be run out instead of into his mouth . 
 Scudamore , see that the coast be clear , and no enemy in chase of this poor creature , immediately fill his hat with fresh water for the tide be out now , and the residue be sweet and speak very gently in the english language , for he see that he must have be hard - shout at in French , be allow without any more disturbance of the system to supply a little glad refreshment . the sorely afflict animal lick his lip , and look up for another hatful . 
 Captain Scuddy deserve a new hat for this though very few englishman would not have do the like and in the end he get it , though he must have catch a bad cold if he have go without a hat till then . 
 pursue his search , with grateful eye pursue he , he soon discover where the boat have ground , by the impress of her keel and forefoot on the stiff retentive mud . he could even see where a hawser have be make fast to a staunch old trunk , and where the soil have be prod with a pole in push she off at the turn of tide . also deep track of some very large hound , or wolf , or unknown quadruped , in various place , scar the bank . and these mark be so fresh and bright that they must have be make within the last few hour , probably when the last ebb begin . if so , the mysterious craft have spend the whole of Christmas Day in that snug berth ; and he blame himself for permit his host 's festivity to detain he . then he take a few bearing to mark the spot , and feed the poor crippled ox with all the herbage he could gather , resolve to come with a rope to - morrow , and lead he home , if possible , as a Christmas present to M. Jalais . 




 CHAPTER LII 

 KIND enquiry 

 that notable year , and signal mark in all the great annal of England , the year 1805 , begin with gloom and great depression . food be scarce , and so be money ; war , and rumour of bad than war ; discontent of man who owe it to their birth and country to stand fast , and trust in God , and vigorously defy the devil ; sinking even of strong heart , and quailing of spirit that have never quail before ; passionate outcry for peace without honour , and even without safety ; savage murmuring at wise measure and at the burden that must be bear none but those who live through all these trouble could count half of they . if such come now , would the body of the nation strive to stand against they , or fall in the dust , and be kick and trample , sputter namby - pamby ? Britannia now be always wrong , in the opinion of her wise son , if she dare to defend herself even against weak enemy ; what then would her crime be if she buckle her corselet against the world ! to prostitute their mother be the philanthropy of Communists . 
 but while the anxious people who have no belief in foreigner be watch by the dark wave , or at the twilight window trembling   if ever a shooting - star draw train , like a distant rocket - signal , or in their sleepy bed scar , and jump up if a bladder burst upon a jam - pot , no one attempt to ridicule they , and no public journal pronounce that the true british flag be the white feather . it have be leave for time when the power of England be tenfold what it be then , and her duty a hundredfold , to tell we that soon than use the one for the proper discharge of the other , we must break it up and let they go to pot upon it , for fear of hurt somebody that stick we in the back . 
 but who of a right mind know not this , and who with a wrong one will heed it ? the only point be that the commonest truism come upon utterance sometimes , and take didactic form too late ; even as we shout to our comrade prone , and begin to rub his poor nose , " look out ! " and this be what everybody do with one accord , when he be down upon his luck which be far more momentous than his nose to any man in the case of Rector Twemlow . 
 that gentleman now have good reason for be in less than his usual cheer and comfort . everything around he be uneasy , and everybody seem to look at he , instead of look up to he , as the manner use to be . this be enough to make he feel unlike himself ; for although he be resolute in his way , and could manage to have it with most people , he be not of that iron style which take the world as wax to write upon . Mr. Twemlow like to heave his text at the people of his parish on Sunday , and to have his joke with they on Monday ; as the fire that have burn a man make the kettle sing to comfort he . and all who meet he throughout the week be pleased with he doubly , when they remember his faithfulness in the pulpit . 
 but now he do his duty softly , as if some of it have be do to he ; and if anybody thank he for a fine discourse , he never endeavour to let he have it all again . so far be he go from his natural state that he would rather hear nothing about himself than be praise enough to demand reply ; and this show a world - wide depression to have arrive in the latitude of a british waistcoat . however , he go through his work , as a Briton always do , until he hang himself ; and he try to try some of the high consolation , which he know so well how to administer to other . 
 those who do not understand the difference of this might have be incline to blame he ; but all who have see a clever dentist with the toothache be aware that his knowledge add acuteness to the pain . Mr. Twemlow have bear great trouble well , and be cheerful even under long suspense ; but now a disappointment close at home , and the grief of behold his last hope fade , be embitter by mystery and dark suspicion . in despair at last of recover his son , he have fasten upon his only daughter the interest of his decline life ; and now he be vex with misgiving about she , which vary as frequently as she do . it be very unpleasant to lose the chance of have a grandchild capable of rock in a silver cradle ; but that be a trifle compare with the prospect of have no grandchild at all , and perhaps not even a child to close his eye . and even his wife , of long habit and fair harmony , from whom he have never keep any secret frightful as might be the cost to his honour even Mrs. Twemlow shake her head sometimes , when the arrangement of her hair permit it , and doubt whether any of the Carne Castle Carnes would have bear with such indignity . 
 " prosecute he , prosecute he , " this good lady always say . " you ought to have be a magistrate , Joshua the first magistrate in the Bible be that and then you would have know how to do thing . but because you would have to go to Sir Charles Darling whose Sir can never put he on the level of the Carnes you have some right feeling against take out a summon . in that I agree with you ; it would be very dreadful here . but in London he might be punish , I be sure ; and I know a great deal about the law , for I never have any one connect with I who be not a magistrate ; the Lord Mayor have a Court of his own for try the corporation under the chair ; and if this be put properly before he by a man like Mr. Furkettle , upon the understanding that he should not be pay unless he win his case , I be sure the result would be three year ' imprisonment . by that time he would have wear out his coat with jailer 's key upon it , which first attract our poor Eliza ; or if he be not allow to wear it , it would go out of fashion , and be harmless . no one need know a word about it here , for Captain Stubbard would oblige we gladly by cut it out of the London paper . my dear , you have nobody ill in the parish ; I will put up your thing , and see you off to - morrow . we will dine late on Friday , to suit the coach ; and you will be quite fit for Sunday work again , if you keep up your leg on a chair all Saturday . " 
 " if ever I see a straightforward man , " Mr. Twemlow use to answer , " it be poor Percival shargeloe . he be go to a well world , my dear . and if he continue to be amenable to law , this be not a criminal , but a civil case . " 
 " a nice case of civility , Joshua ! but you always stand up for your sex . do the coach take people to a well world ? a stout gentleman , like he , be see inside the coach , muffle up in a cravat of three colour , and eat at frequent interval . " 
 " the very thing poor Percival never do . that dispose to my mind of that foolish story . my dear , when all truth come to light , you will do justice to his memory . " 
 " yes , I dare say . but I should like to do it now . if you entertain any dark idea , it be your duty to investigate they . also to let I share they , Joshua , as I have every right to do . " 
 this be just what the Rector could not do ; otherwise he might have be far more happy . remember that last conversation with his prospective son - in - law , and the poor man 's declaration that the suspicious matter at the castle ought to be thoroughly search out at once , he nourish a dark suspicion , which he fear to impart to his well half , the aunt of the person suspect . but the long he conceal it , the more unbearable grow this misery to a candid nature , until he be compel , in self - defence , to allow it some sort of outlet . " I will speak to the fellow myself , " he say , heartily dislike the young man now , " and judge from his manner what next I ought to do . " 
 this resolution give he comfort , much as he hat any interview with Carne , who treat he generally with cold contempt . and , like most people who have form a decision for the easing of the conscience , he accept very patiently the obstacle encounter . in the first place , Carne be away upon business ; then he be lay up with a heavy cold ; then he be much too hard at work   after lose so much time   to be able to visit Springhaven ; and to seek he in his ruin be most unsafe , even if one like to do it . for now it be say that two gigantic dog , as big as a bull and as fierce as a tiger , rove among the ruin all day , and be always famish , would devour in two minute any tempting stranger with a bit of flesh or fat on he . the Rector , pat his gaiter , feel that instead of a pastor he might become a very sweet repast to they , and his delicacy be renew and deepen . he be bind to wait until his nephew appear at least inside his parish . 
 therefore the time of year be come almost to the middle of February when Mr. Twemlow at last obtain the chance he require and dread . he hear that his nephew have be see that day to put up his horse in the village , and would probably take the homeward road as soon as it grow too dark to read . so he get through his own work   consist chiefly of newspaper , dinner , and a cool clay pipe , to equalise mind with matter , and have thus escape the lady , off he set by the lobby door , carry a good thick stick . as the tide would be up , and only deep sand leave for the heavy track of the traveller , he choose the inland way across the low part of the Admiral 's ground , lead to the village by a narrow plank bridge across the little stream among some tree . here be bank of earth and thicket , shadowy dell where the primrose grow , and the cuckoo - pint , and wood - sorrel , and perhaps in summer the glowworm breathe her mossy gleam under the blackberry . 
 and here Parson Twemlow be astonish , though he have promise himself to be surprised no more , after all he have be through lately . as he turn a sharp corner by an ivied tree , a breathless young woman run into his arm . 
 " oh ! " cry the Rector , for he be walk briskly , with a well - nourish part of his system forward " oh , I hope you have not hurt yourself . no doubt it be my fault . why , dolly ! what a hurry you be in ! and all alone all alone , almost after dark ! " 
 " to be sure ; and that make I in such a hurry ; " Miss dolly be in sad confusion . " but I suppose I be safe in my father 's own ground . " 
 " from everybody , except yourself , my dear , " Mr. Twemlow reply , severely . " be your father aware , do your sister know , that you be at this distance from the house after dark , and wholly without a companion ? " 
 " it be not after dark , Mr. Twemlow ; although it be get dark than I mean it to be . I beg your pardon for terrify you . I hope you will meet with no other peril ! good - night ! or at least I mean , good - afternoon ! " 
 " the brazen creature ! " think Mr. Twemlow , as the girl without another word disappear . " not even to offer I any excuse ! but I suppose she have no fib handy . she will come to no good , I be very much afraid . Maria tell I that she be get very wilful ; but I have no idea that it be quite so bad as this . I be sorry for poor Scudamore , who think she such an angel . I wonder if Carne be at the bottom of this ? there be nothing too bad for that dark young man . I shall ascertain at any rate whether he be in the village . but unless I look sharp I shall be too late to meet he . oh , I can not   walk so fast as I do ten year ago . " 
 impel by duty to put good leg foremost , and take a short - cut above the village , he come out upon the lane lead towards the castle , some half - mile or so beyond the last house of Springhaven . here he wait to recover breath , and prepare for what he mean to say , and he be sorry to perceive that light would fail he for strict observation of his nephew 's face . but he choose the most open spot he could find , where the hedge be low , and nothing overhang the road . 
 presently he hear the sound of hoof approach leisurely up the hill , and could see from his resting - place that Carne be come , sit loosely and wearily on his high black horse . then the Rector , to cut short an unpleasant business , stand boldly forth and hail he . 
 " no time for anything now , " shout Carne ; " too late already . do you want my money ? you be come to the wrong man for that ; but the right one , I can tell you , for a bullet . " 
 " Caryl , it be I , your uncle Twemlow , or at any rate the husband of your aunt . put up your pistol , and speak to I a minute . I have something important to say to you . and I never can find you at the castle . " 
 " then be quick , sir , if you please ; " Carne have never condescend to call this gentleman his uncle . " I have little time to spare . out with it . " 
 " you be rid very slowly for a man in a hurry , " say the Rector , annoy at his roughness . " but I will not keep you long , young man . for some good reason of your own you have make a point of avoid we , your near relative in this country , and to whom you address yourself before you land in a manner far more become . have I ever press my attention upon you ? " 
 " no , I confess that you have not do that . you perceive as a gentleman how little there be in common between the son of a devoted Catholic and a heretic clergyman . " 
 " that be one way to put it , " Mr. Twemlow answer , smile in spite of his anger at be call a heretic ; " but I be not aware that you have strong religious view . however that may be , we should have many thing in common , as Englishmen , at a time like this . but what I come to speak of be not that . we can still continue to get on without you , although we would rather have meet with friendly feeling and candour , as become relative . but little as you know of we , you must be well aware that your cousin Eliza be engage to be married to a gentleman from London , Mr. Percival Shargeloes , and that he " 
 " I be sure I wish she all happiness , and congratulate you , my dear sir , as well as my aunt Maria . I shall call , as soon as possible , to offer my good wish . it be very kind of you to tell I . Goodnight , sir , good - night ! there be a shower come . " 
 " but , " exclaim the Rector , nonplus for the moment by this view of the subject , yet stand square before the horse , " shargeloe have disappear . what have you do with he ? " 
 Carne look at his excellent uncle as if he have much doubt about his sanity . " try to explain yourself , my dear sir . try to connect your idea , " he say , " and offer I the benefit another time . my horse be impatient ; he may strike you with his foot . " 
 " if he do , I shall strike he upon the head , " Mr. Twemlow reply , with his heavy stick ready . " it will be well for you to hear I out . otherwise I shall procure a search - warrant , and myself examine your ruin , of which I know every crick and cranny . and your aunt Maria shall come with I , who know every stone even well than you do . that would be a very different thing from an overhauling by Captain Stubbard . I think we should find a good many barrel and bale that have pay no duty . " 
 " my dear uncle , " cry Carne , with more affection than he ever yet have show , " that be no concern of your ; you have no connection with the revenue ; and I be sure that Aunt Maria would be loth to help in pull down the family once more . but do as you please . I be accustom to ill fortune . only I should like to know what this be about poor Cousin Eliza . if any man have wrong she , leave the case to I . you have no son now , and the honour of the family shall not suffer in my hand . I will throw up everything , busy as I be , to make such a rascal bite the dust . and Eliza so proud , and so upright herself ! " 
 " Caryl , " say his uncle , move more than he like to show by this fine feeling , " you know more , I see , than you like to show at first , doubtless through goodwill to we . your dear aunt wish to keep the matter quiet , for the sake of poor Eliza , and her future chance . but I say no . let we have it all out . if there be wrong , we have suffer , not do it . Concealment be odious to every honest mind . " 
 " deeply , deeply odious . upon that point there can be no two opinion " he forget his barrel , think the Rector " but surely this man , whatever his name be charleygoe must have be hide from you something in his own history . probably he have a wife already . city man often do that when young , and then put their wife somewhere when they get rich , and pay visit , and even give dinner , as if they be bachelor to be seek after . be charleygoe that sort of a man ? " 
 " his name be ' shargeloe , ' a name well know , as I be assure , in the high quarter . and he certainly be not seek after by we , but come to I with an important question bear on ichthyology . he may be a wanderer , as you suggest , and as all the lady seem to think . but my firm belief be to the contrary . and my reason for ask you about he be a very clear one . he have meet you twice , and feel interest in you as a future member of our family . you have never invite he to the castle ; and the last intention he express in my hearing be to call upon you without one . have he meet with an accident in your cellar ? or have your dog devour he ? he carry a good deal of flesh , in spite of all he could do to the contrary ; and any man naturally might endeavour to hush up such an incident . tell I the truth , Caryl . and we will try to meet it . " 
 " my two dog   who would never eat any one , though they might pull down a stranger , and perhaps pretend to bite he   arrive here the first week in January . when do charleygoe disappear ? I be not up in date , but it must have be week and week before that time . and I must have hear of it , if it have happen . I may give you my honour that Orso and Leo have not eat charleygoe . " 
 " you speak too lightly of a man in high position , who would have be Lord Mayor of London , if he have never come to Springhaven . but living or dead , he shall never be that now . can you answer I , in the same straightforward manner , as to an accident in your cellar ; which , as a gentleman upon a private tour , he have clearly no right to intrude upon ? " 
 " I can answer you quite as clearly . nothing accidental have happen in my cellar . you may come and see they , if you have any doubt about it . and you need not apply for a search - warrant . " 
 " God forbid , my dear fellow , " cry the uncle , " that I should intrude upon any little matter of delicacy , such as be apt to arise between artificial law and gentleman who happen to live near the sea , and to have large place that require restore ! I shall go home with a light heart . there be nothing in this world that bring the comfort of straightforwardness . " 




 CHAPTER LIII 

 TIME and PLACE 

 in a matter like that french invasion , which have be threaten for such a time , and keep so long impending , " the cry of wolf " grow stale at last , and then the real danger come . Napoleon have reckon upon this , as he always do upon everything , and for that good reason he have not grudge the time devote to his home affair . these be settle accord to his will , and mob turn into pomp as gaily as grub turn into butterfly , a strong desire for a little more glory arise in his mighty but ill - regulated mind . if he could only conquer England , or even without that fetch she down on her knee and make her lick her own dust off the foot of Frenchmen , from that day forth all the nation of the earth must bow down before he . Russia , Prussia , Austria , Spain , though they might have have the power , never would have pluck the spirit up , to resist he hand in hand , any more than skittle - pin can back one another up against the well - aim ball . 
 the balance of to - be or not - to - be , as concern our country   which many now despise , as the mother of such disloyal child , after all that long suspension , hang in the cloud of that great year ; and a very cloudy year it be , and thick with storm on land and sea . storm be what the Frenchmen long for , to disperse the british ship ; though storm make many an Englishman , pull up the counterpane as the window rattle , thank the Father of the weather for keep the enemy ashore and in a fright . but the great peril of all would be in the case of fog succeed storm , when the mighty flotilla might sweep across before our ship could resume blockade , or even a frigate intercept . 
 one of the strange point in all this period of wonder , to we who after the event be wise , be that even far - sight Nelson and his watchful colleague seem to have have no inkling of the enemy 's main project . Nelson believe Napoleon to be especially intent on Egypt ; Collingwood expect a sudden dash on Ireland ; other be sure that his object be Jamaica ; and many maintain that he would step ashore in India . and these last come near to the mark upon the whole , for a great historian   who declare , like Caryl Carne , that a french invasion be a blessing to any country   show that , for at least a month in the spring of 1805 , his hero be revolve a mighty scheme for rob poor England of blissful ravage , and transfer it to India . 
 however , the master of the world as he be call already , and mean soon to be suddenly return to his early design , and fix the vast power of his mind upon it . he push with new vigour his preparation , which have be slacken awhile , he add 30,000 well - train soldier to his force already so enormous , and he breathe the quick spirit of enterprise into the mighty mass he move . then , to clear off all obstacle , and ensure clear speed of passage , he send sharp order to his Admirals to elude and delude the british fleet , and resolve to enhance that delusion by his own brief absence from the scene . 
 meanwhile a man of no importance to the world , and of very moderate ambition , be pass a pleasant time in a quiet spot , content to be scarcely a spectator even of the drama in rehearsal around he . Scudamore still abode with M. Jalais , and have win his hearty friendship , as well as the warm good - will of that important personage Madame Fropot . neither of these could believe at first that any Englishman be kind and gentle , playful in manner , and light - hearted , easily pleased , and therefore truly pleasing . but as soon as they see the poor wound ox bring home by a ford , and settle happily in the orchard , and receive he as a free gift from their guest , national prejudice dwindle very fast , and domestic good feeling grow fast . M. Jalais , although a sound Frenchman , hat the Empire and all that lead up to it ; and as for Madame Fropot , her choice piece of cookery might turn into cinder , if anybody mention conscription in her presence . for she have lose her only son , the entire hope of her old day , as well as her only daughter 's lover , in that lottery of murder . 
 nine out of ten of the people in the village be of the same way of thinking . a great army can not be quarter anywhere , even for a week , without scatter brand of ill - will all around it . the swagger of the troop , their warlike air , and loud contempt of the undrilled swain , the dash of a coin on the counter when they deign to pay for anything , the insolent wink at every modest girl , and the coarse joke run along apish mouth even before dark crime begin , native antipathy be sow and thrive . and now for nearly four year this coast have never be free from the arrogant strut , the clanking spur , and the loud guffaw , which in every age and every clime have be consider the stamp of valour by plough - boy at the pap of Bellona . so weary be the neighbourhood of this race , new conscript always keep up the pest , that even the good M. Jalais long to hear that the armament lie at the bottom of the Channel . and Scudamore would have be follow by the good wish of every house in the village , if he have lift his hat and say , " good - bye , my dear friend ; I be break my parole . " 
 for this , though encourage by the popular voice , he be not sufficiently liberal , but stay within bound of space and time more carefully than if he have be watch . Captain Desportes , who have be in every way a true friend to he , come to see he now and then , be now in command of a division of the prame , and naturally anxious for the signal to unmoor . much discourse be hold , without brag on either side , but with equal certainty on both side of success . and in one of these talk the Englishman in the simple manner tell the Frenchman all that he have see on Christmas Eve , and his own suspicion about it . 
 " understand this well , " continue Scudamore ; " if I discover any treachery on the part of my own countryman , I shall not be able to stop here on the term that have be allow I . whatever the plan may be , I shall feel as if I be a party to it , if I accept my free range and swallow my suspicion . with your proceeding I do not meddle , accord to fair compact , and the liberal condition offer . but to see my own countryman play my country false be more than I could stand . you know more of such thing than I do . but if you be an Englishman , could you endure to stand by and hide treachery , for the sake of your own comfort ? " 
 " beyond a doubt , no , " Captain Desportes answer , spread his hand with decision : " in such a case I should throw up my parole . but a mere suspicion do not justify an act so ungracious to the commander , and personally so unkind to I . I hop that bright eye might persuade you to forego hard knock , and wear none but gentle chain among we . nature intend you for a Frenchman . you have the gay heart , and the easy manner , and the grand philosophy of our great nation . your name be Blyth , and I know what that intend . " 
 Scudamore blush , for he know that Madame Fropot be do she good to commit he with a lovely young lady not far off , who have feel a tender interest in the cheerful english captive . but after try to express once more the deep gratitude he feel towards those who have be so wonderfully kind and friendly , he ask with a smile , and a little sigh behind it , what he must do , if compel by duty to resign his present privilege . 
 " my faith ! I scarcely know , " reply desporte ; " I have never have such a case before . but I think you must give I a write notice , sign by yourself and by M. Jalais , and allow a week to pass , and then , unless you have hear from I , present yourself to the commandant of the near post , which must be , I suppose , at Etaples . rather a rough man he be ; and I fear you will have reason for regret . the duty will then remain with he . but I beg you , my dear friend , to continue as you be . tush , it be nothing but some smuggler 's work . " 
 Scudamore hop that he might be right , and for some little time be not disturb by any appearance to the contrary . but early in the afternoon one day , when the month of March be near its close , he leave his book for a little fresh air , and stroll into the orchard , where his friend the ox be dwell . this worthy animal , endow with a virtue deny to none except the human race , approach he lovingly , and beg to draw attention to the gratifying difference betwixt wound and scar . he offer his broad brow to the hand , and his charitable ear to be tickle , and breathe a quick issue of good feeling and fine feeding , from the sensitive tuck of his nostril , as a large - hearted smoker make the air go up with gratitude . 
 but as a burn child dread the fire , the seriously perforate animal keep one eye vigilant of the northern aspect , and the other studious of the south . and the gentle Scuddy   who be find all thing happy , which be the only way to make they so   be startle by a sharp jerk of his dear friend 's head . follow the clue of gaze , there he see , come up the river with a rollick self - trust , a craft uncommonly like that craft which have mount every sort of rig and flag , and carry every kind of crew , in his many dream about she . this make he run back to his room at once , not only in fear of be see upon the bank , but also that he might command a well view , with the help of his landlord 's old spy - glass . 
 use this , which he have clean from the dust of age , he could clearly see the face of the man on board . of these there be six , of whom five at least be Englishmen , or of english breed . as the pilot - boat draw nearer , and the sunlight fall upon she , to his great surprise he become convinced that the young man at the tiller be Dan Tugwell , the son of the captain of Springhaven . four of the other be unknown to he , though he fancy that he have see two of they before , but could not remember when or where . but he watch with special interest the tall man lounge against the little door of the cuddy in the bow , whose profile only be present to he . then the boat cant round towards the entrance of the creek , and have his glass upon the full face of the man , he recognise he as Caryl Carne , whom he have meet more than once at Springhaven . 
 his darkest suspicion be at once redouble , and a gush of latent jealousy be add to they . in happy day , when he be near his lady - love , some whisper have reach he about this fellow , whose countenance have always be repulsive to he , arrogant , moody , and mysterious . his good mother also , though most careful not to harass he , have mention that Carne in her late letter , and by no mean in a manner to remove his old misgiving . as a matter now of duty to his country and himself , the young sailor resolve to discover , at any risk , what traitorous scheme have bring this dark man over here . 
 to escape the long circuit by the upper bridge , he have obtain leave , through M. Jalais , to use an old boat which be keep in a bend of the river about a mile above the house . and now , after see that english boat make for the creek where she have be berth on Christmas Eve , he beg Madame Fropot to tell his host not to be uneasy about he , and take no weapon but a ground - ash stick , set forth to play spy upon traitor . as surely as one foot come after the other , he know that every step be towards his grave , if he make a mistake , or even meet bad luck ; but he twirl his light stick in his broad brown hand , and gently invade the french tree around with an old English song of the day when still an Englishman could compose a song . but this make he think of that old - fashioned place Springhaven ; and sadness fall upon he , that the son of its captain should be a traitor . 
 instead of pull across the river , to avoid the splash of oar he scull with a single oar astern , not stand up and wallow in the boat , but sit and cut the figure of 8 with less noise than a skater make . the tide be just at slack - water , this give he quite as much way as he want , and he steer into a little bight of the southern bank , and make fast to a stump , and look about ; for he durst not approach the creek until the light should fade and the man have stow tackle and begin to feed . the vale of the stream afford shelter to a very decent company of tree , which could not have put up with the tyranny of the west wind upon the bare brow of the coast . Most of these tree stand back a little from the margin of high tide , reluctant to see themselves in the water , for fear of the fate of Narcissus . but where that clandestine boat have glide into gloom and greyness , a fosse of Nature 's digging , deeply line with wood and thicket , offer snug harbourage to craft and fraud . 
 Scudamore have take care to learn the up and down of the riverside ere this , and know they now as well as a native , for he have pay many visit to the wound ox , whom he could not lead home quite as soon as he have hop , and he have find a firm place of the little river , easy to cross when the tide be out . with the help of this knowledge he make his way to the creek , without much risk of be observe , and then , as he come to the crest of the thicket , he lie down and watch the interloper . 
 there be the boat , now imbed in the mud , for the little creek be nearly dry by this time . her crew have all land , and kindle a fire , over which hang a kettle full of something good , which they seem to regard with tender interest ; while upon a grassy slope some few yard to the right a trooper 's horse be tether . Carne be not with they , but have cross the creek , as the mark of his boot in the mud declare ; and creep some little way along the thicket , Scudamore descry he walk to and fro impatiently in a little hollow place , where the sailor could not see he . this be on Scudamore 's side of the creek , and scarcely fifty yard below he . " he be wait for an interview with somebody , " think Scuddy : " if I could only get down to that little shanty , perhaps I should hear some fine treason . the wind be the right way to bring I every word he say . " 
 keep in shelter when the traitor walk towards he , and steal on silently when his back be turn , the young sailor manage to ensconce himself unseen in the rough little wattle shed make by his own hand for the shelter of his patient , when a snow - storm have visit the valley of the Canche last winter . nothing could be well fit for his present purpose , inasmuch as his lurking - place could scarcely be descry from below , be shelter by two large tree and a screen of droop ivy , betwixt and below which it look no more than a casual meeting of bush ; while on the other hand the open space beneath it be curve like a human ear , to catch the voice and forward it . 
 while Scudamore be wait here and keenly watch everything , the light begin to falter , and the late gleam of sunset tremble with the breath of spring among the bud and catkin . but the tall man continue his long , firm stride , as if the watch in his pocket be the only thing worth heed . until , as the shadow lose their line and flow into the general depth , Carne spring forward , and a horse and rider burst into the silence of the grass and moss and tree . 
 Carne make a low obeisance , retire a little , and stand hat in hand , until it should please the other man to speak . and Scudamore see , with a start of surprise , that the other man be Napoleon . 
 this great man appear , to the mild english eye that be watch he so intently , of a very different mood and visage from those of their last view of he . then the face , which combine the beauty of Athens with the strength of Rome , be calm , and gentle , and even sweet , with the rare indulgence of a kindly turn . but now , though not disturb with wrath , nor trouble by disappointment , that face   which have help to make his fortune , more than any woman 's have ever do for she   be cast , even if the mould could be the same , in a very different metal . stern force and triumphant vigour shone in every lineament , and the hard bright eye be intent with purpose that would have no denial . 
 Refusing Carne 's aid , he remain on his horse , and stroke his mane for a moment , for he love any creature that serve he well , and be tender of heart when he could afford it ; which add to his power with mankind . 
 " be all your man well out of earshot ? " he ask ; and receive assurance from Carne , go on . " now you will be satisfied at length . you have long be impatient . it be useless to deny it . all be arrange , and all come to a head within three month , and perhaps within two . only four man will know it besides yourself , and three of those four be commander of my fleet . a short time will be occupy in mislead those british ship that beleaguer we ; then we concentrate ours , and command the Channel ; if only for three day , that will be enough . I depart for Italy in three day or in four , to increase the security of the enemy . but I shall return , without a word to any one , and as fast as horse can lay belly to the ground , when I hear that our ship have break out . I shall command the invasion , and it will be for England to find a man to set against I . " 
 " England will have difficulty , sire , in do that , " Carne answer , with a grim smile , for he share the contempt of English Generals then prevalent . " if the continent can not do it , how can the poor England ? once let your Majesty land , and all be over . but what be your Majesty 's order for I ? and where do you propose to make the landing ? " 
 " never ask more than one question at a time , " Napoleon answer , with his usual curtness ; " my order to you be to return at once . prepare your supply for a moment 's notice . through private influence of some fair lady , you have command of the despatch of that officer at Springport , who have the control of the naval force there . ha ! what be that ? I hear a sound up yonder . hasten up , and see if there be any listener . it seem to be there , where the wood grow thick . " 
 Blyth Scudamore , forgetful of himself , have move , and a dry stick crack beneath his foot . Carne , at the Emperor 's glance and signal , spring up the bank , with the help of some bush , draw his sword and pass it between the wattle , then part they and rush through , but see no sign of any one . for Scuddy have slip away , as lightly as a shadow , and keep in a mossy trough , have gain another shelter . here he be oblige to slink in the small possible compass , kneeling upon both knee , and shrug in both shoulder . peer very sharply through an intertwist of sucker   for his shelter be a stool of hazel , throw up to repair the loss of stem , he perceive that the Emperor have move his horse a little when Carne rejoin and reassure he . and this prevent Scudamore from be half so certain as he would have like to be , about further particular of this fine arrangement . 
 " no , " be the next thing he hear Napoleon say whose power of say " no " have make his " yes " invincible ; " no , it be not to be do like that . you will await your instruction , and not move until you receive they from my own hand . make no attempt to surprise anybody or anything , until I have ten thousand man ashore . ten thousand will in six hour attain to fifty thousand , if the shore prove to be as you describe ; so great be the merit of flat - bottom boat . your duty will be to leave the right surprise to we , and create a false one among the enemy . this you must do in the distance of the West , as if my Brest fleet be ravage there , and perhaps destroy Plymouth . you be sure that you can command the signal for this ? " 
 " Sire , I know everything as if I sit among it . I can do as I please with the fair secretary ; and her father be an ancient fool . " 
 " then success be more easy than I wish to have it , because it will not make good esteem . if Nelson come at all , he will be too late , as he generally be too early . London will be in our hand by the middle of July at the late , probably much early , and then Captain Carne shall name his own reward . meanwhile forget not any word of what I say . make the passage no more . you will not be want here . your service be far more important where you be . you may risk the brave Charron , but not yourself . send over by the 20th of May a letter to I , under care of Decres , to be open by no hand but mine , upon my return from Italy , and let the messenger wait for my reply . among they must be the young man who know the coast , and we will detain he for pilot . my reply will fix the exact date of our landing , and then you will despatch , through the mean at your command , any english force that might oppose our landing , to the West , where we shall create a false alarm . be all this clear to you ? you be not stupid . the great point be to do all at the right time , have consideration of the weather . " 
 " all be clear , and shall be carry out clearly , to the good of your Majesty 's humble servant 's power . " 
 Napoleon offer his beautiful white hand , which Carne raise to his lip , and then the Emperor be go . Carne return slowly to the boat , with triumph write prematurely on his dark stern face ; while Scudamore 's brisk and ruddy feature be draw out to a wholly unwonted length , as he quietly make his way out of the covert . 




 CHAPTER LIV 

 in a SAD PLIGHT 

 " how shall I get out of this parole ? or shall I break it , instead of get out ? which shall I think of first , my honour , or my country ? the safety of million , or the pride of one ? an old Roman would have settle it very simply . but a Christian can not do thing so . thank God there be no hurry , for a few day yet ! but I must send a letter to desporte this very night . then I must consider about wait for a week . " 
 Scudamore , unable to think out his case as yet especially after run as if his wind could turn a vane be sit on the bank , to let the river - bed get dark , before he put his leg into the mud to get across . for the tide be out , and the old boat high and dry , and a very weak water remain to be cross   though , like nearly all thing that be weak , it be muddy , but the channel have a moist gleam in the dry spring air , and anybody move would be magnify afar . he feel that it would never do for he , with such a secret , to be catch , and bring to book , or even to awake suspicion of his have it . the ancient roman of whom he have think would have break parole for his country 's sake , and then fall on his sword for his own sake ; but although such behaviour should be much admire , it be nice to read of such thing than to do they . Captain Scuddy be of large and steady nature , and nothing come to he with a jerk or jump perhaps because he be such a jumper and he wear his hat well on the back of his head , because he have no fear of lose it . but for all that he find himself in a sad quandary now . 
 to begin with , his parole be not an ordinary leave , afford by his captor to save themselves trouble ; but a special grace , issue from friendship , and therefore require to be treat in a friendly vein . the liberality of these term have enable he to dwell as a friend among friend , and to overhear all that he have hear . in the balance of perplexity , this weigh heavily against his first impulse to cast away all except paramount duty to his country . in the next place , he know that private feeling urge he as hotly as public duty to cast away all thought of honour , and make off . for what he have hear about the " fair secretary " be rankle bitterly in his deep heart . he recall at this moment the admirable precept of an ancient sage , that in such a conflict of duty the doubter should incline to the course least agreeable to himself , inasmuch as the reason against it be sure to be urge the most feebly in self - council . upon the whole , the question be a nice one for a casuist ; and if there have not be a day to spare , duty to his country must have overridden private faith . 
 however , as there be time to spare , he resolve to reconcile private honour with the sense of public duty ; and return to his room , write a careful letter   of which he keep a copy   to his friend desporte , now on board , and command the flagship of one division of the flotilla . he simply say , without give his reason , that his parole must expire in eight day after date , allow one day for delivery of his letter . then he tell M. Jalais what he have do , and much sorrow be feel in the household . when the time have expire without any answer from Captain Desportes , who mean to come and see he but be unable to do so , Scudamore pack up a few thing needful , expect to be place in custody , and resolve to escape from it , at any risk of life . then he walk to Etaples , a few mile down the river , and surrender himself to the commandant there . this be a rough man as Desportes have say and with more work to do than he could manage . with very little ceremony he place the english prisoner in charge of a veteran corporal , with order to take he to the lock - up in the barrack , and there await further instruction . and then the commandant , in the hurry of his duty , forget all about he . 
 Captain Scuddy now find himself in quarter and under treatment very try to his philosophy . not that the man who have he in charge be purposely unkind to he , only they be careless about his comfort , and have more important work to see to , feed he at their leisure , which do not always coincide with his appetite . much of his food be watery and dirty , and seem to be grow its own vegetable , and sometimes to have overripene they . therefore he begin to lose substance , and his cheek become stranger to the buxom gloss which have be the delight of Madame Fropot . but although they do not feed he well , they take good care of he in other way , afford no chance of exit . 
 but sour fruit often contain good pip . Scudamore 's food be not worth say grace for , and yet a true blessing attend it : forasmuch as the Frenchmen diminish the width of their prisoner , but not of the window . fall away very rapidly , for his mind be fare as badly as his body   have nothing but regret to feed upon , which be no well diet than daisy soup , the gentle Scuddy , who must have become a good wrangler if he have stop at Cambridge , begin to frame a table of cubic measure , and consider the ratio of his body to that window , or rather the aperture thereof . one night , when his supper have be quite forget by everybody except himself , he lie awake thinking for hour and hour about his fair dolly and the wicked Carne , and all the lie he must have tell about she for not a single syllable would Scudamore believe and the next day he find himself become so soft and limp , as well as reduce to his low dimension , that he know , by that just measure which a man take of himself when he have but a shred of it leave , that now he be small enough to go between the bar . and now it be high time to feel that assurance , for the morning bring news that the order for his removal to a great prison far inland be come , and would be carry out the next day . " now or never " be the only chance before he . 
 have make up his mind , he feel refresh , and take his food with gratitude . then , as soon as the night be dark and quiet , and the mighty host for league and league launch into the realm of slumber , spring with both foot well together , as he spring from the tub at Stonnington , Scuddy lay hold of the iron bar which span the window vertically , open the lattice softly , and peep out in quest of sentinel . there be none on duty very near he , though he hear one pacing in the distance . then fling himself on his side , he manage , with some pain to his well - rounded chest , to squeeze it through the narrow slit , and hang from the bar , drop gently . the drop be deep , and in spite of all precaution he roll to the bottom of a grassy ditch . there he lie quiet to rest his bruise , and watch whether any alarm be raise . luckily for he , the moon be down , and no one have observe his venture . crawl on all four along a hollow place , he pass the outpost , and be free . 
 free in mind as well as body , acquit from all claim of honour , and able without a taint upon his name to bear most important news to England , if he could only get away from France . this would be difficult , as he be well aware ; but his plan have be thoroughly consider in his prison , and he set forth to make the good of it . before his escape have be discover , he be under M. Jalais ' roof once more , and find his good friend resolve never to betray he . " but I must not expose you to the risk , " say he , " of heavy fine and imprisonment . I shall have to say good - bye to all your goodness in an hour . and I shall not even allow you to know what road I take , lest you should be blame for send my pursuer on the wrong one . but search my room in three day ' time , and you will find a packet to pay for something which I must steal for the present . I pray you , ask nothing , for your own sake . " 
 they feed he well , and he take three loaf , and a little keg of cider , as well as the bag he have pack before he surrender himself at Etaples . Madame Fropot weep and kiss he , because he remind she of her lost son ; and M. Jalais embrace he , because he be not at all like any son of his . with hearty good wish , and sweet regret , and promise never to forget they , the Englishman quit this kind french house , and become at once a lawful and a likely mark for bullet . 
 the year be now fill with the flurry of Spring , the quick nick of time when a man be astonish at the power of Nature 's memory . a great many thing have be leave behind , mainly for their own good , no doubt some of the animal , some of the vegetable , some of the mineral kingdom even yet none of they start for anarchy . all be content to be pick up and bring on accord to the power of the world , make allowance for the pinch of hard time , and the blow of east wind that have blow themselves out . even the prime grumbler of the earth a bipe , who look up to heaven for that purpose mainly be as nearly content with the present state of thing as he can be with anything , until it be the past . Scudamore only meet one man , but that one declare it be a lovely night ; and perhaps he be easy to please because he have only one leg leave . 
 the star have appear , and the young leaf turn the freshness of their freedom towards they , whether from the crisp impulse of night , or the buoyant influence of kindness in the air . there be very little wind , and it be laden with no sound , except the distant voice of an indefatigable dog ; but Scudamore perceive that when the tide set downwards , a gentle breeze would follow down the funnel of the river . then he draw the ancient boat which he have use before to the mossy bank , and have place his good on board , fetch a pair of oar and the short mast and brown sail from the shed where they be keep , and at the top of a full tide launch forth alone upon his desperate enterprise . 
 there be faint light in the channel , but the bank look very dark ; and just as he cast loose he hear the big clock at Montreuil , a great way up the valley , slowly strike midnight . and he take it for good oman , as he swiftly pass the orchard , that his old friend the ox trot down to the corner , and show his white forehead under a sprawl apple - tree , and give he a salute , though he scarcely could have know he . by this time the breeze be freshen nicely , and Scudamore , cease to row , step the mast , and hoist the brown sail , glide along at a merry pace and with a hopeful heart . pass the mouth of the creek , he see no sign of the traitorous pilot - boat , neither do he meet any other craft in channel , although he see many moor at either bank . but nobody challenge he , as he keep in mid - stream , and brace up his courage for the two great peril still before he ere he gain the open sea . the first of these would be the outpost on either side at Etaples , not far from the barracks where he have be jail , and here no doubt the sentinel would call he to account . but a far great danger would be near the river 's mouth , where a bridge of boat , with a broad gangway for troop , span the tidal opening . 
 there be no bridge across the river yet near the town itself , but , upon challenge from a sentry , Scudamore stand up and wave his hat , and shout in fine nasal and provincial French , " the fisherman , Auguste Baudry , of Montreuil ! " and the man withdraw his musket , and wish he good success . then he pass a sandy island with some man asleep upon it , and begin to fear the daybreak as he near the bridge of boat . this cross the estuary at a narrow part , and have to bear much heavy traffic , be as solid as a float bridge can be . a double row of barge be lash and chain together , between pile drive deep into the river 's bed ; along they a road of heavy plank be lay , rise and fall as they rise and fall with tide , and a drawbridge near the middle of about eight yard ' span must suffice for the traffic of the little river . this fabric be protect from the heavy western surge by the shoal of the bar , and from any english dash by a strong shore battery at either end . at first sight it look like a black wall across the river . 
 the darkness of night be suppose to be deep just before dawn but that depend upon the weather and the sleep of weary man be often in its prime at that time . scudamore   although his life , and all that life hang on from heaven , be quiver at the puff of every breeze   be enable to derive some satisfaction from a yawn , such as go the round of a good company sometimes , like the smell of the supper of sleep that be to come . then he see the dark line of the military bridge , and lower his sail , and unstep his little mast . the strength of the tide be almost spend , so that he could deal with this barrier at his leisure , instead of be hurl against it . 
 unship the rudder and lay one oar astern , Scudamore fetch along the inner row of pile , for he durst not pass under the drawbridge , steer his boat to an inch while he sit with his face to the oar , work noiselessly . then he spy a narrow opening between two barge , and drive his boat under the chain that join they , and after some fending and grope with his hand in the darkness under the plank of the bridge , contrive to get out , when he almost despair of it , through the low tier of the supporter . he be quit of that formidable barrier now , but a faint flush of dawn and of reflection from the sea compel he to be very crafty . instead of push straightway for the bar and hoisting sail which might have bring a charge of grape - shot after he he keep in the gloom of the pile nearly into the left bank , and then hug the shadow it afford . nothing but the desolate sand survey he , and the pile of wrack cast up by gale from the west . then with a stout heart he step his little mast , and the breeze , which freshen towards the rise of the sun , carry he briskly through the tumble of the bar . 
 the young man kneel and say his morning prayer , with one hand still upon the tiller ; for , like most man who have fight well for England , he have staunch faith in the power that have make and guide the nation , until they rebel against it . so far his success have be more than his own unaided hand might work , or his brain with the utmost of its labour second . of himself he cast all thought away , for his love seem lost , and his delight be go ; the shore of his country , if he ever reach they , would contain no pleasure for he ; but the happiness of million might depend upon his life , and first of all that of his mother . 
 all by himself in this frail old tub , he could scarcely hope to cross the Channel , even in the good of weather , and if he should escape the enemy , while his scanty supply hold out . he have nothing to subsist on but three small loaf , and a little keg of cider , and an old tar tub which he have fill with brackish water , upon which the oily curdle of the tar be float . but , for all that , he trust that he might hold out , and retain his wit long enough to do good service . 
 the french coast , trend here for league and league nearly due north and south , be expose to the long accumulate power of a western gale , and the mountain roll of billow that have know no check . if even a smart breeze from the west spring up , his rickety little craft , intend only for inland navigation , would have small chance of live through the tumult . but his first care be to give a wide berth to the land and the many french vessel that be moor or move , whether belong to the great flotilla , or hasten to supply its want . many a time he would have stand forth boldly , as fast as the breeze and tide permit ; but no soon have he shape a course for the open sea than some hostile sail appear ahead and force he to bear away until she be far onward . thus , after a long day of vigilance and care , he be not more than five mile from land when the sun set , and probably far from the english coast than when he set forth in the morning ; because he have stand towards the south of west all day , to keep out of sight of the left wing of the enemy ; and as the straight outline of the coast begin to fade , he suppose himself to be about half - way between the mouth of the Canche and that of the little Authie . 
 watch with the eye of one accustom to the air the last communication of the sun , and his postscript   which , like a lady 's , be the gist of what he mean , Scudamore perceive that a change of weather might come shortly , and must come ere long . there be nothing very angry in the sky , nor even threaten ; only a general uncertainty and wavering ; " I wish you well all round , " instead of " here be a guinea apiece for you . " Scuddy understand it , and resolve to carry on . 
 have no compass , and small knowledge of the coast which lie out of range of the british investment he have make up his mind to lie by for the night , or at any rate to move no more than he could help , for fear of go altogether in the wrong direction . he could steer by the star as great mariner do , when the world be all discovery so long as the star hold their skirt up ; but , on the other hand , those star might lead he into the thick of the enemy . of this , however , he must now take his chance , rather than wait and let the wind turn against he . for his main hope be to get into the track where british frigate , and ship of light draught like his own dear Blonde , be upon patrol , inside of the course of the great war chariot , the ship of the line , that drave heavily . revolve much grist in the mill of his mind , as the sage Ulysses use to do , he find it essential to supply the motive power bodily . one of Madame Fropot 's loaf be very soon disposed of , and a good draught of sound cider help to renew his flagging energy . 
 throughout that night he keep wide - awake , and manage to make fair progress , steering , as well as he could judge , a little to the west of north . but before sunrise the arrear of sleep increase at compound interest , and he lower his sail , and discharge a part of the heavy sum score against he . but when he awake , and glance around he with eye that resent scanty measure , even a sleepy glance suffice to show much more than he wish to see . both sky and sea be overcast with doubt , and alarm , and evil foreboding . a dim streak lie where the land have be , and a white gleam quiver from the sunrise on the wave , as if he be spread water - lily instead of scatter rose . as the earth have its dew that foretell a bright day whenever the dew be of the proper sort , for three kind be establish now so the sea have a flit of bloom in the early morning   neither a colour , nor a sparkle , nor a vapour   which indicate peace and content for the day . but now there be no such fair token upon it , but a heavy and surly and treacherous look , with lump here and there ; as a man who intend to abuse we thrust his tongue to get sharp in his cheek . 
 Scudamore see that his poor old boat , scarcely sound enough for the man of Gotham , be already complain of the uncouth manner of the strange place to which she have be carry in the dark . that be to say , she be begin to groan , at a very quiet slap in the cheek , or even a thoroughly well - mean push in the rear . 
 " you be welcome to groan , if you do not   strain , " exclaim the heartless Captain Scuddy . 
 even as he speak he behold a trickle of water glisten down the forward bend , and then a little rill , and then a spurt , as if a serious leak be sprung . he find the source of this , and contrive to caulk it with a strand of tar rope for the present ; but the sinking of his knife into the forward timber show he that a great part of the bow be rotten . if a head - sea arise , the crazy old frame would be prone to break in bodily , whereas if he attempt to run before the sea , already begin to rise heavily from the west , there be nothing to save the frail craft from be poope . on every side it be a bad lookout , there be every sign of a gale impending , which he could not even hope to weather , and the only chance of rescue lie in the prompt appearance of some british ship . 
 even in this sad plight his courage and love of native land prevail against the acceptance of aid from Frenchmen , if any should approach to offer it . rather would he lie at the bottom of the Channel , or drift about among contend fish , than become again a prisoner with his secret in his mind , and no chance of send it to save his country . as a forlorn hope , he pull out a stump of pencil , and write on the back of a letter from his mother a brief memorandum of what he have hear , and of the urgency of the matter . then take a last draught of his tarry water , he empty the little tub , and fix the head in , after he have enclose his letter . then he fasten the tub to an oar , to improve the chance of its being observe , and lay the oar so that it would float off , in case of the frail boat founder . the other oar he keep at hand to steer with , as long as the boat should live , and to help he to float , when she should have disappear . 
 this be do , he feel easy in his mind , as a man who have prepare for the bad should do . he renew his vigour , which have begin to flag under constant labour and long solitude , by consume another of his loaf , and take almost the last draught of his cider , and after that he battle throughout the dreary day against the increase of bad weather . towards the afternoon he see several ship , one of which he take to be a british frigate ; but none of they espy his poor labour craft , or at any rate show sign of do so . then a pilot - boat run by he , stand probably for Boulogne , and at one time less than a league away . she appear to be English , and he be just about to make signal for aid , when a patch in her foresail almost convince he that she be the traitor of the Canche return . she be probably out of her proper course in order to avoid the investing fleet , and she would run inside it when the darkness fall . well to go to the bottom than invoke such aid ; and he drop the oar with his neckerchief upon it , and face the angry sea again and the lonely despair of impend night . 
 what follow be wipe from his memory for year , and the loss be not much to be regret . when he try to think about it , he find nothing but a roaring of wind and of wave in his ear , a numbness of arm as he labour with the oar thole abaft to keep her heavy head up , a prickly chill in his leg as the brine in the wallowing boat run up they , and then a great wallop and gollop of the element too abundant round he . 
 but at last , when long year should have bring more wisdom , he go poach for supper upon Welsh rabbit . that night all the ghastly time come back , and stand minute by minute before he . every swing of his body , and sway of his head , and swell of his heart , be repeat , the buffet of the billow when the plank be go , the numb grasp of the slippery oar , the sucking down of leg which seem turn into sea - weed , the dashing of dollop of surf into mouth and nose close ever so carefully , and then the last sense of have fight a good fight , but fall away from human arm , into " oh Lord , receive my spirit ! " 




 CHAPTER LV 

 in SAVAGE GUISE 

 " a man come out of the sea to - day , and make I believe we be all find out , " say the gay Charron to the gloomy Carne , a day or two after poor Scudamore 's wreck . " I never behold a more strange - look creature as the owner of our human face divine , as some of your poet have find to say . he have hair from his head all down to here " the little Captain point to a part of his system which would have be large in more tranquil time " and his clothe be so thin that one be able to see through they , and the tint of his face be of roasted sugar , such as it be not to obtain in England . a fine place for fat thing , but not for thin one . " 
 " my friend , you arouse my curiosity , " the master of the feast , which be not a very fat one , answer , as he lazily cross his long leg ; " you be always apprehensive about detection , of which I have cease to entertain all fear , during the short time that remain . this stranger of yours must have be very wet , if he have just appear out of the sea . be it that which make his clothe transparent , like those of the high class of lady ? " 
 " you have not the right understanding of word . he be appear out of the sea , but the wood of a boat be spread between they . he be as dry as I be ; and that be say much , with nothing but this squeeze of bad apple for to drink . " 
 " ah , we shall have well soon . what an impatient throat it be ! well , what become of this transparent man , make of burn sugar , and with hair below his belt ? " 
 " I tell you that you take it in a very different way . but he be a long man , as long almost as you be , and with much less of indolence in the moving of his leg . it be not sincerely wise for I to exhibit myself , in the land . I be watch for a signal from the sea , and a large ship , not of the navy but of merchant , be hang off about a league and delay for her boat . for this reason I prevent he from see I , and that create difficulty of my behold he . but he be go along the basin of the sea towards Springhaven ' Springport ' it be designate by the little Corporal ; ah ha , how the language of the English come leave to he ! " 
 " and how right it come to you , my friend , through your fine self - denial in speak it with I ! it be well for our cause that it be not sincerely wise for you to exhibit yourself in the land , or we should have you make sweet eye at english young lady , and settle down to roast beef and nut - brown ale . Fie , then , my friend ! where be your patriotism ? " 
 " these english young lady , " say the Frenchman , unabashed , " be very fine , in my opinion very fine indeed ; and they could be make to dress , which be sincerely an external thing . by occasion , I have see the very most belle , and charming and adorable of all the creature ever make by the good God . and if she be to say to I , ' Abandon France , my captain , and become my good husband ' and she have the money also the fair France would go to the bottom , and the good ship Charron hoist the Union - jack . " 
 " this become serious : " Carne have long learn to treat his french colleague with a large contempt : " I shall have to confine you in the Yellow Jar , my friend . but what young lady have bewitch you so , and lead your most powerful mind astray ? " 
 " I will tell you . I will make no secret of it . you have none of those lofty feeling , but you will be able in another to comprehend they . it be the daughter of the Coast - Defender Admiral Charles Sir Darling . " 
 " Admiral Darling have two daughter . which of they have the distinguished honour of win the regard of Captain Charron ? " 
 " if there be two , it be so much more well . if I succeed not with one , I will try with the other . but the one who have make I captive for the present be the lady with the dark hair do up like this . " 
 in a moment Charron have put up his hair , which be thick but short , into a double sheaf ; and Carne know at once that it be Faith whose charm have make havoc of the patriotism of his colleague . then he smile and say , " my friend , that be the eld daughter . " 
 " I have some knowledge of the law of England , " the Frenchman continue , complacently ; " the elder will have the most money , and I be not rich , though I be courageous . in the confusion that ensue I shall have the very good chance of commend myself ; and I confide in your honourable feeling to give I the push forward by occasion . Say , be it well conceive , my friend ? we never shall conquer these Englishmen , but we may be triumphant with their lady . " 
 " it be a most excellent scheme of invasion , " Carne answer , with his slow sarcastic smile , " and you may rely on I for what you call the push forward , if a Frenchman ever need it with a lady . but I wish to hear more about that brown man . " 
 " I can tell you no more . but the matter be strange . perhaps he be visit the fat Captain Stoobar . I feel no solicitude concern he with my angel . she would never look twice at such a savage . " 
 but the gallant French Captain miss the mark this time . the strange - look man with the long brown beard quit the shore before he reach the stepping - stone , and make a short - cut across the rabbit - warren , enter the cottage of Zebedee Tugwell , without even stop to knock at the door . the master be away , and so be all the child ; but stout Mrs. Tugwell , with she back to the door , be tend the pot that hang over the fire . at the sound of a footstep she turn round , and her red face grow white than the ash she be stir . 
 " oh , Mr. Erle , be it you , or your ghostie ? " she cry , as she fall against the door of the brick oven . " do ' e speak , for God 's sake , if he have give the power to ' e. " 
 " he have almost take it away again , so far as the english language go , " Erle Twemlow answer , with a smile which be visible only in his eye , through long want of a razor ; " but I be pick up a little . shake hand , Kezia , and then you will know I . though I have not quite recover that art as yet . " 
 " oh , Mr. Erle ! " exclaim Zebedee 's wife , with tear ready to start for his sake and her own , " how many a time I have   have you on my knee , afore I be bless with any of my own , and a bad sort of bless the good of them prove . not that I would listen to a word again ' he . I suppose you never do happen to run again ' my Dan'el , in any of they furrin part , from the way they make the hair grow . I do hear tell of he over to Pebbleridge ; but not likely , so nigh to his own mother , and never come no nigh . and if they furrin part put on the hair so heavily , who could ' a know he to Pebbleridge ? they never be like we be . they would as lief tell a lie as look at you , over there . " 
 in spite of his own long year of trouble , or perhaps by reason of they , Erle Twemlow , eager as he be to get on , listen to the sad tale that seek for his advice , and depart from wisdom as good - nature always do by offer useless counsel counsel that could not be take , and yet be far from be worthless , because it stir anew the fount of hope , towards which the parch affection creep . 
 " but Lor bless I , sir , I never think of you ! " Mrs. Tugwell exclaim , have think out her self . " what do Parson say , and your mother , and Miss Faith ? it must ' a be well than a play to see they . " 
 " not one of they know a word about it yet ; nor anybody in Springhaven , except you , Kezia . you be as good as my nurse , you know ; I have never have a chance of write to they , and I want you to help I to let they know it slowly . " 
 " oh , Mr. Erle , what a lovely young woman your Miss Faith be grow up by now ! some think more of Miss dolly , but , to my mind , you may as well put a mackerel before a salmon , for the sake of the stripe and the glittering . now what can I do to make you decent , sir , for they dud and that hair be barbarious ? my Tabby and Debby will be back in half an hour , and they grow up into young maiden now . " 
 Twemlow explain that after live so long among savage in a burn clime , he have find it impossible to wear thick clothe , and have be rig up in some indian stuff by the tailor of the ship which have rescue he . but now he suppose he must reconcile himself by degree to the old imprisonment . but as for his hair , that should never be touch , unless he be restore to the British Army , and oblige to do as the other do . with many little joke of a homely order , Mrs. Tugwell , regard he still as a child , supply he with her husband 's summer suit of thin duck , which be ample enough not to gall he ; and then she send her daughter with a note to the Rector , beg he to come at seven o'clock to meet a gentleman who wish to see he upon important business , near the plank bridge across the little river . Erle write that note , but do not sign it ; and after many year of happy freedom from the pen , his handwriting be so change that his own father would not know it . what he fear be the sudden shock to his good mother ; his father 's nerve be strong , and must be use as buffer . 
 " another trouble , probably ; there be nothing now but trouble , " Mr. Twemlow be think , as he walk unwillingly towards the place appoint . " I wish I could only guess what I can have do to deserve all these trial , as I become less fit to bear they . I would never have come to this lonely spot , except that it may be about shargeloe . everything now be turn upside down ; but the Lord know well , and I must bear it . Sir , who be you ? and what do you want I for ? " 
 at the corner where Miss dolly have rush into the Rector 's open arm so fast , a tall man , clothe in white , be stand , with a staff about eight foot long in his hand . have carry a spear for four year now , Captain Twemlow find no comfort in his native land until he have cut the tall growth in Admiral Darling 's osi bed , and peel it , and shave it to a seven - sided taper . he rest this point in a socket of moss , that it might not be blunt , and then reply : 
 " Father , you ought to know I , although you have grow much stouter in my absence ; and perhaps I be thin than I use to be . but the climate disagree with I , until I get to like it . " 
 " Erle ! do you mean to say you be my boy Erle ? " the Rector be particular about his clothe . " do not   think of touch I . you be hair all over , and I dare say never have a comb . I will not   believe a word of it until you prove it . " 
 " well , mother will know I , if you do not . " the young man answer calmly , have be toss upon so many horn of adventure that none could make a hole in he . " I think that you would have be glad to see I ; and I manage to bring a good many present ; only they be go on to London . they could not be get at , to land they with I ; but Captain Southcombe will be sure to send they . you must not suppose , because I be empty - handed now " 
 " my dear son , " cry the father , deeply hurt , " do you think that your welcome depend upon present ? you have indeed fall into savage way . come , and let I examine you through your hair ; though the light be scarcely strong enough now to go through it . to think that you should be my own Erle , alive after such a time , and with such a lot of hair ! only , if there be any palm - oil on it this be my last new coat but one . " 
 " no , father , nothing that you ever can have dream of . something that will make you a bishop , if you like , and I a member of the House of Lords . but I do not find it out myself which make success more certain . " 
 " they have teach you some great truth , my dear boy . the man who begin a thing never get on . but I be so astonished that I know not what I say . I ought to have thank the Lord long ago . have you get a place without any hair upon it large enough for I to kiss you ? " 
 Erle Twemlow , whose hand in spite of all adventure tremble a little upon his spear , lift his hat and find a smooth front , sure to be all the smoother for a father 's kiss . 
 " let we go home , " say the old man , try to exclude all excitement from his throat and heart ; " but you must stay outside until I come to fetch you . I feel a little anxious , my dear boy , as to how your dear mother will get over it . she have never be strong since the bad news come about you . and somebody else have to be consider . but that must stand over till to - morrow . " 




 CHAPTER LVI 

 the silver voice 

 many shrewd writer have observe that Britannia have a special luck which the more devout call Providence in hold her own , against not only her true and lawful enemy , but even those of her own bosom who labour most to ruin she . and truly she have need of all her fortune now , to save she from the skulk traitor , as well as the rag adversary . 
 " now I will have my revenge , " say Carne , " on all who have outrage and plunder I . crow carrion - crow I will turn they into owl without a nest . prowl owl , to come blink even now at the last of my poor relic ! Charron , what do that fellow say to old Jerry , the day I tie the dog up ? " 
 " he say , my dear friend , that he miss from the painting which he have take to his house the most precious of they all the picture of your dear grandmother , by a man whose name it be hard to pronounce , but a Captain in the British Army , very much fond of belove and paint all the most beautiful lady ; and since he have paint the mother of Vash Vash the man that conquer England in America all his work be go up to a wonderful price , and old Sheray should have one guinea if he would exhibit to he where to find it . Meedle or Beedle he have set his heart on get it . he declare by the good God that he would have it , and that you have get it under a tombstone . " 
 " a sample of their persecution ! you know that I have never see it , nor even hear of the Captain Middleton who go on his roving from Springhaven . and , again , about my own front - door , or rather the door of my family for some four century , because it be carve as they can not carve now , it be put into that vile indenture . I care very little for my ancestor benight Britons of the county type but these thing be personal insult to I . I seldom talk about they , and I will not do so now . " 
 " my captain , you should talk much about it . that would be the good relief to your extensive mind . revenge be not of the bright french nature ; but the sky of this island procreate it . my faith ! how I would rage at England , if it be not for the people , and their daughter ! we shall see ; in a few day more we shall astonish the fat John Bull ; and then his little kitten what do you call they ? calf of an ox , will come run to we . " 
 " enough of your foolish talk , " say Carne . " the woman be as resolute as the man . even when we have take London , not an english woman will come near we , until all the man have yield . go down to your station and watch for the boat . I expect an important despatch to - night . but I can not stay here for the chance of it . I have business in Springhaven . " 
 his business in Springhaven be to turn young love to the base use , to make a maiden   rash and flighty , but not as yet dishonourable   a traitor to her friend and father - land , and most of all to her own father . he have try to poison Dolly 's mind with dos of social nonsense in which he believe about as much as a quack believe in his own pill but his main reliance now be place in his hold upon her romantic heart , and in her vague ambition . pure and faithful love be not to be expect from his nature ; but he have invest in dolly all the affection he could spare from self . he have labour long , and suffer much , and the red crown of his work be nigh . 
 rid slowly down the hill about half a mile from the village , Carne see a tall man come towards he with a firm , deliberate walk . the stranger be dress very lightly , and wear a hat that look like a tobacco leaf , and carry a long wand in his hand , as if he be go to keep order in church . these thing take the eye afar , but at short range become as nothing , compare with the aspect of the man himself . this be grand , with its steadfast gaze no stare , but a calm and kind regard its large tranquillity and power of receive without believe the word of man ; and most of all in the depth of expression reserve by experience in the forest of its hair . 
 Carne be about to pass in silent wonder and uneasiness , but the other gently lay the rod across his breast and stop he , and then wait for he to ask the reason why . 
 " have you any business with I , good sir ? " Carne would have speak rudely , but see that rudeness would leave no mark upon a man like this . " if so , I must ask you to be quick . and perhaps you will tell I who you be . " 
 " I think that you be Caryl Carne , " say the strange , not unpleasantly , but as if it matter very little who be Caryl Carne , or whether there be any such existence . 
 Carne star fiercely , for he be of touchy temper ; but he might as well have star at a bucket of water in the hope of derange its tranquillity . " you know I . but I do not   know you , " he answer at last , with a jerk of his rein . 
 " be in no hurry , " say the other , mildly ; " the weather be fine , and time plentiful . I hope to have much pleasant knowledge of you . I have the honour to be your first cousin , Erle Twemlow . shake hand with your kinsman . " 
 Carne offer his hand , but without his usual grace and self - possession . Twemlow take it in his broad brown palm , in which it seem to melt away , firm though it be and muscular . 
 " I be go up to call on you , " say Twemlow , who have acquire a habit of speak as if he mean all the world to hear . " I feel a deep interest in your fortune , and hope to improve they enormously . you shall hear all about it when I come up . I have pass four year in the wild of Africa , where no white man ever trod before , and I have find out thing no white man know . we call those people savage , but they know a great deal more than we do . shall I call to - morrow , and have a long talk ? " 
 " I fear , " reply Carne , who be curse his luck for bring this fellow home just now , " that I shall have no time for a week or two . I be engage upon important business now , which will occupy my whole attention . let I see ! you be stay at the rectory , I suppose . the good plan will be for I to let you know when I can afford the pleasure of receive you . in a fortnight , or three week at the late " 
 " very well . I be never in a hurry . and I want to go to London to see about my thing . but I dare say you will not object to my roving about the old castle now and then . I love the old place as a boy , and I know every crick and cranny and snake - hole in it . " 
 " how glad they must have be to see you restore from the dead , and with such rich discovery ! but you must be more careful , my good cousin , and create no more anxiety . glad as I shall be to see you , when time allow that indulgence , I must not encourage you to further roving , which might end in your final disappearance . two boar - hound , exceedingly fierce and strong , and compel by my straiten circumstance to pick up their own living , be at large on my premise night and day , to remonstrate with my creditor . we fear that they eat a man last night , who have steal a valuable picture , and be eager for another by the same distinguished artist . his boot and hat be find unhurt ; but of his clothe not a shred remain , to afford any pattern for enquiry . what would my feeling be if Aunt Maria arrive hysterically in the pony - carriage , and at great personal risk enquire " 
 " I fear no dog , " say Erle Twemlow , without any flash of anger in his steadfast eye . " I can bring any dog to lick my foot . but I fear any man who sink low than a dog , by obtain a voice and speak lie with it . if you wish , for some reason of your own , to have nought to do with I , you should have say so ; and I might have respect you afterwards . but flimsy excuse and trumpery lie belong to the low race of savage , who live near the coast , and have be teach by Frenchmen . " 
 Erle Twemlow stand , as he leave off speak , just before the shoulder of Carne 's horse , ready to receive a blow , if offer , but without preparation for return it . but Carne , for many good reason which occur to his mind long afterwards control his fury , and console his self - respect by repay in kind the contempt he receive . 
 " well do , Mr. Savage ! " he say , with a violent effort to look amiable . " you and I be accustom to the opposite extreme of society , and the less we meet , the well . when a barbarian insult I , I take it as a foul word from a clodhopper , which do not hurt I , but may damage his own self - respect , if he cherish such an illusion . perhaps you will allow I to ride on , while you curb your very natural curiosity about a civilized gentleman . " 
 Twemlow make no answer , but look at he with a gentle pity , which infuriate Carne more than the keen insult . he lash his horse , and gallop down the hill , while his cousin stroke his beard , and look after he with sorrow . 
 " everything go against I now , " think Caryl Carne , while he put up his horse and set off for the Admiral 's roundhouse . " I want to be cool as a cucumber , and that insolent villain have make pepper of I . what devil send he here at such a time ? " 
 for the moment it do not cross his mind that this man of lofty rudeness be the long - expect lover of Faith Darling , and therefore in some sort entitle to a voice about the doing of the young sister . by many quiet sneer , and much expressive silence , he have set the brisk dolly up against the quiet Faith , as a man who understand fowl nature can set even two young pullet pull each other 's hackle out . 
 " so you be come at last ! " say dolly . " no one who know I keep I wait , because I be not accustomed to it . I expect to be call for at any moment , by matter of real importance not like this . " 
 " your mind be a little disturbed , " reply Carne , as he take her hand and kiss it , with less than the proper rapture ; " be it because of the brown and hairy man just return from Africa ? " 
 " not altogether . but that may be something . he be not a man to be laugh at . I wish you could have see my sister . " 
 " I would rather see you ; and I have no love of savage . he be my first cousin , and that afford I a domestic right to object to he . as a brother - in - law I will have none of he . " 
 " you forget , " answer dolly , with a flash of her old spirit , which he be subdue too heavily , " that a matter of that sort depend upon we , and our father , and not upon the gentleman . if the gentleman do not   like it , they can always go away . " 
 " how can they go , when they be chain up like a dog ? woman may wander from this one to that , because they have nothing to bind they ; but a man be of steadfast material . " 
 " Erle Twemlow be , at any rate though it be hard to see his material through his hair ; but that must come off , and I mean to do it . he be the well - natured man I have ever yet know , except one ; and that one have get nothing to shave . man never seem to understand about their hair , and the interest we feel concern it . but it do not matter very much , compare to their high principle . " 
 " that be where I carry every vote , of whatever sex you please " Carne see that this girl must be humour for the moment . " anybody can see what I be . straightforward , and ready to show my tooth . why should an honest man live in a bush ? " 
 " faith like it very much ; though she always use to say that it do seem so unchristian . could you manage to come and meet he , Caryl ? we shall have a little dinner on Saturday , I believe , that every one may see Erle Twemlow . his beloved parent will be there , who be go quite wild about he . Father will be at home for once ; and the Marquis of Southdown , and some officer , and Captain Stubbard and his wife will come , and perhaps my brother Frank , who admire you so much . you shall have an invitation in the morning . " 
 " such delight be not for I , " Carne answer , with a superior smile ; " unhappily my time be too important . but perhaps these festivity will favour I with the chance of a few word with my darling . how I long to see she , and how little chance I get ! " 
 " because , when you get it , you spend three - quarter of the time in argue , and the rest in find fault . I be sure I go as far as anybody can ; and I will not   take you into my father 's Roundhouse , because I do not   think it would be proper . " 
 " lady alone understand such subject ; and a gentleman be thankful that they do . I be quite content to be outside the Roundhouse so call because it be square , perhaps though the wind be go back to the east again , as it always do now in an english summer , accord to a man who have study the subject Zebedee Tugwell , the captain of the fleet . dolly , beloved , and most worthy to be more so , clear your bright mind from all false impression , whose only merit be that they be your , and allow it to look clearly at a matter of plain sense . " 
 she be pleased to have compliment pay to her mind , even more than to her body because there be no doubt about the merit of the latter and she say : " that be very nice . go on . " 
 " well , beauty , you know that I trust you in everything , because of your very keen discretion , and freedom from stupid little prejudice . I have be surprise at time , when I think of it in your absence , that any one so young , who have never be through any course of political economy , should be able to take such a clear view of subject which be far beyond the intellect of even the old lady . but it must be your brother ; no doubt he have help you to " 
 " not he ! " cry the innocent dolly , with fine pride ; " I rather look down upon his reasoning power ; though I never could make such a pretty tink of rhyme like the bell of the sheep when the ground be full of turnip . " 
 " he approve of your elevated view , " say Carne , look as grave as a crow at a church clock ; " they may not have come from he , because they be your own , quite as much as his poetry be his . but he perceive their truth , and he know that they must prevail . in a year or two we shall be wonder , sweet dolly , when you and I sit side by side , as the stupid old King and Queen do now , that it ever have be possible for narrow - minded nonsense to prevail as it do until we rise above it . we shall be admire as the benefactor , not of this country only , but of the whole world . " 
 Miss dolly be fairly endow with common - sense , but often fail to use it . she would fain have say now , " that sound wonderfully fine ; but what do it mean , and how be we to work it ? " but unluckily she could not bring herself to say it . and when million be fool by the glibness of one man even in these day of wisdom who can be surprised at a young maid 's weakness ? 
 " you wish I to help you in some way , " she say ; " your object be sure to be good ; and you trust I in everything , because of my discretion . then why not tell I everything ? " 
 " you know everything , " Carne reply , with a smile of affection and sweet reproach . " my object be the large that a man can have ; and until I see you , there be not the least taint of self - interest in my proceeding . but now it be not for the universe alone , for the grandeur of humanity , and the triumph of peace , that I have to strive , but also for another little somebody , who have come I be ashamed to say to outweigh all the rest in the balance of my too tender heart . " 
 this be so good , and so well deliver , that the lady of such love could do no less than vouchsafe a soft hand and a soft glance , instead of pursue hard reason . 
 " Beauty , it be plain enough to you , though it might not be so to stupid people , " Carne continue , as he press her hand , and vanquish the doubt of her enquire eye with the strength of his resolute gaze , " that bold measure be sometimes the only wise one . many english girl would stand aghast to hear that it be needful for the good of England that a certain number , a strictly limited number , of Frenchmen should land upon this coast . " 
 " I should rather think they would ! " cry dolly ; " and I would be one of they you may be quite sure of that . " 
 " for a moment you might , until you come to understand . " Carne 's voice always take a silver tone when his word be big with roguery ; as the man who be tout for his neighbour 's bee strike the frying - pan softly at first , to tone the pulsation of the murmur mob . " but every safeguard and every guarantee that can be demand by the wild prudence will be afford before a step be take . in plain truth , a large mind be almost shocked at such deference to antique prejudice . but the feeling of old woman must be consider ; and our measure be fence with such security that even the most timid must be satisfy . there must be a nominal landing , of course , of a strictly limited number , and they must be secure for a measurable period from any ill - judge interruption . but the great point of all be to have no blood - guiltiness , no outbreak of fanatic native against benefactor come in the garb of peace . a truly noble offer of the olive - branch must not be misinterpret . it be the fine idea that have ever be conceive ; and no one possess a liberal mind can help admire the perfection of this plan . for the sake of this country , and the world , and ourselves , we must contribute our little share , darling . " 
 Carne , with the grace of a lofty protector , as well as the face of an ardent lover , draw the bewildered maiden towards he , and tenderly kiss she pretty forehead , hold up his hand against all protest . 
 " it be useless to dream of draw back , " he continue ; " my beauty , and my poor outcast self , be in the same boat , and must sail on to success such success as there never have be before , because it will bless the whole world , as well as secure our own perfect happiness . you will be more than the Queen of England . statue of you will be set up everywhere ; and where could the sculptor find such another model ? I may count upon your steadfast heart , I know , and your wonderful quickness of perception . " 
 " yes , if I could only see that everything be right . but I feel that I ought to consult somebody of more experience in such thing . my father , for instance , or my brother Frank , or even Mr. Twemlow , or perhaps Captain Stubbard . " 
 " if you have think of it a little soon , and allow I time to reason with they , " Carne reply , with a candid smile , " that would have be the very thing I should have wish , as take a great responsibility from I . but alas , it would be fatal now . the main object now be to remove all chance of an ill - judge conflict , which would ruin all good feeling , and cost many valuable life , perhaps even that of your truly gallant father . no , my dolly , you must not open your beautiful lip to any one . the peace and happiness of the world depend entirely upon your discretion . all will be arrange to a nicety , and a happy result be certain . only I must see you , about some small point , as well as to satisfy my own craving . on Saturday you have that dinner party , when somebody will sit by your side instead of I . how miserably jealous I shall be ! when the gentleman be at their wine , you must console I by slip away from the lady , and come to the window of the little room where your father keep his paper . I shall quit everything and watch there for you among the shrub , when it grow dark enough . " 




 CHAPTER LVII 

 below the line 

 of the British Admirals then on duty , Collingwood alone , so far as now appear , have any suspicion of Napoleon 's real plan . 
 " I have always have an idea that Ireland alone be the object they have in view , " he write in July , 1805 , " and still believe that to be their ultimate destination that they   i. e. , the Toulon fleet   will now liberate the Ferrol squadron from Calder , make the round of the bay , and take the Rochefort people with they , appear off Ushant , perhaps with 34 sail , there to be join by 20 more . Cornwallis collect his out - squadron may have 30 and upwards . this appear to be a probable plan ; for unless it be to bring their great fleet and army to some point of service some rash attempt at conquest they have be only subject they to chance of loss ; which I do not believe the Corsican would do , without the hope of an adequate reward . this summer be big with event . " 
 this be write to Lord Nelson upon his return to Europe , after chase that Toulon fleet to the West Indies and back again . and a day or two later , the same Vice - Admiral write to his friend very clearly , as before : 
 " truly glad will I be to see you , and to give you my good opinion on the present state of affair , which be in the high degree intricate . but reasoning on the policy of the present french government , who never aim at little thing while great object be in view , I have consider the invasion of Ireland as the real mark and butt of all their operation . the flight to the West Indies be to take off the naval force , which be the great impediment to their undertaking . the Rochefort squadron 's return confirm I . I think they will now collect their force at Ferrol which Calder tell I be in motion pick up those at Rochefort , who , I be tell , be equally ready , and will make they above thirty sail ; and then , without go near Ushant or the Channel fleet , proceed to Ireland . detachment must go from the Channel fleet to succour Ireland , when the Brest fleet 21 I believe of they will sail , either to another part of Ireland , or up the Channel a sort of force that have not be see in those sea , perhaps ever . " 
 Lord Nelson just lately have suffer so much from the disadvantage of not " follow his own head , and so be much more correct in judgment than follow the opinion of other , " that his head be not at all in a receptive state ; and like all who have doubt about be right , and find the doubt wrong , he be harden into the merit of his own conclusion . " why have I go on a goose - chase ? " he ask ; " because I have twice as many ear as eye . " 
 this be so , he stick fast to the conviction which he have nourish all along , that the scheme of invasion be a sham , intend to keep the british fleet at home , while the enemy ravage our commerce and colony afar . and by this time the country , grow heartily tired of groundless alarm and suspend menace , be begin to view with contempt a camp that be wear out its own encampment . little be it dream in the sweet rose garden of England , or the fragrant hay - field , that the curl of blue smoke while the dinner be cook , the call of milkmaid , the haymaker 's laugh , or the whinny of Dobbin between his mouthful , might be turn   ere a man of good appetite be full   into foreign shout , and shriek of English maiden , crackle homestead , and blaze stack - yard , blare of trumpet , and roar of artillery , cold flash of steel , and the soft warm trickle of a father 's or a husband 's blood . 
 but the chance of this hang upon a hair just now . one hundred and sixty thousand soldier the fine son of Mars that demon have ever yet beget fifteen thousand warlike horse , ready to devour all the oats of England , cannon that never could be count   because it be not always safe to go near they , and ship that no reckoner could get to the end of , because he be always begin again . 
 who be there now to meet all these ? Admiral Darling , and Captain Stubbard , and Zebedee Tugwell   if he find they intrusive , and Erle Twemlow , as soon as he get his thing from London . there might be a few more to come forward , as soon as they see the necessity ; but Mr. John Prater could not be rely on because of the trade he might expect to drive ; Mr. Shargeloes have never turn up again ; and as for poor Cheeseman , he have lose himself so entirely now that he make up the weight of a pound of sausage , in the broad summer light , with a tallow candle . like other concern in this history , he have jump at the star , and crack his head against a beam , in manner to be record . 
 the country be destitute thus of defender for even Stubbard 's battery be not half man , because it have never be want the plan of invasion be thrive well , in all but one particular . the fleet under Villeneuve be at large , so be that under Lallemand , who have supersede Missiessy , so be the force of Gravina and another spanish admiral ; but Ganteaume have fail to elude the vigilance of that hero of storm , Cornwallis . Napoleon arrive at Boulogne on the 3rd of August , and review his troop , in a line on the beach some eight mile long . a fine sight he have never see , and he write in his pride : " the English know not what be hang over their ear . if we be master of the passage for twelve hour , England be conquer . " but all depend on Villeneuve , and happily he could not depend upon his nerve . 
 meanwhile the young man who be charge with a message which he would gladly have die to discharge be far away , eat out his heart in silence , or vainly relieve it with unknown word . at the last gasp , or after he cease to gasp for the time , and be drift insensible , but happily with his honest face still upward , a Dutchman , keep a sharp lookout for english cruiser , espy he . he be take on board of a fine bark bind from Rotterdam for Java , with order to choose the track least infest by that ravenous shark Britannia . Scudamore be treat with the warm kindness and the most gentle attention , for the captain 's wife be on board , and her tender heart be move with compassion . yet even so , three day pass by with no more knowledge of time on his part than the face of a clock have of its hand ; and more than a week be go before both body and mind be in tone and tune again . by that time the stout dutch bark , have give a wide berth to the wakes of war , be forty league west of Cape Finisterre , under order to touch no land short of the cape , except for fresh water at St. Jago . 
 Blyth Scudamore be bl with that natural feeling of preference for one 's own kin and country which the much large mind of the present period flout , and scout as barbarous . happily our periodical blight be expire , like cuckoo - spit , in its own bubble ; and the time be return when the bottle - blister will not be accept as the good ripe peach . Scudamore be of the time that have be   and perhaps may be come again , in the tooth and the jaw of universal suffrage , of resolute , vigorous , loyal people , hold fast all that God give they , and decline to be lead by the tail , by a gentleman who tack their tail on as his handle . 
 this certainty of belong still to a firm and substantial race of man   whose extinction would leave the world nothing to breed from   make the gallant Scudamore so anxious to do his duty , that he could not do it . why do we whistle to a horse overburden with a heavy load uphill ? that his mind may grow tranquil , and his ear train forward , his eye lose their nervous contraction , and a fine sense of leisure pervade he . but if he have a long hill to surmount , with none to restrain his ardour , the sense of duty grow strong than any consideration of his own good , and the good man have not the conscience needful to understand half his emotion . 
 thus the sense of duty keep Blyth Scudamore full of misery . every day carry he far from the all - important issue ; and the chance of return in time grow faint , and fainter at every sunset . the kindly Dutchman and his wife be aware of some burden on his mind , because of its many groan sally while astray from judgment . but as soon as his wit be clear again , and his body fit to second they , Blyth see that he could not crave their help , against the present interest of their own land . Holland be at enmity with England , not of its own accord , but under the pressure of the man who work so hard the great european mangle . Captain Van Oort have pick up some English , and his wife could use tongue and ear in French , while Scudamore afford himself and they some little diversion by attempt in Dutch . be of a wonderfully happy nature for happiness be the great wonder in this world he could not help many a wholesome laugh , in spite of all the project of Napoleon . 
 little thing seldom jump into bigness , till a man set his microscope at they . accord to the everlaste harmony , Blyth have not get a penny , because he have not get a pocket to put it in . a pocketful of money would have send he to the bottom of the sea , that breezy April night , when he drift for hour , with eye full of salt , twinkle feeble answer to the twinkle of the star . but he have make himself light of his little cash leave , in his preparation for a slow decease , and perhaps the fish have pay tribute with it to the Caesar of this Millennium . Captain Van Oort be a man of his inch in length , but in breadth about one - third more , be thicken and spread by the year that do this to a body contain a christian mind . " you will never get out of they , " say Mrs. Van Oort , when he get into her husband 's large smallclothe ; but he who have often jump out of a tub feel no despair about jump out of two . in every way Scudamore hop for the good which be the only right course for a man who have do his own good , and be helpless . 
 keep out of the usual track of commerce , because of the privateer and other pest of war waylay it , they meet no sail of either friend or foe until they cast anchor at St. Jago . here there be no ship bind for England , and little chance of find one , for week or perhaps for month to come . the good chance of get home lie clearly in go yet far away from home , and so he stick to the good ship still , and they weigh for the Cape on the 12th of May . everything set against poor Scuddy wind , and wave , and the power of man . it have be the 16th of April when he be rescue from the devouring sea ; some day have be spend by the leisurely Dutchman in provide fresh supply , and the stout bark 's favourite maxim seem to be , " the more haste the less speed . " baffle wind and a dead calm help to second this philosophy , and the first week of June be past before they swing to their mooring in Table Bay . 
 " what chance be there now of my do any good ? " the young Englishman ask himself , bitterly . " this place be again in the hand of the Dutch , and the english ship stand clear of it , or only receive supply by stealth . I be friendless here , I be penniless ; and bad of all , if I even get a passage home , there will be no home left . too late ! too late ! what use be there in strive ? " 
 tear stand in his blue eye , which be gentle as a lady 's ; and his forehead   usually calm and smooth and ready for the flicker of a very pleasant smile   be as grave and determine as the brow of Caryl Carne . Captain Van Oort would have lend he 500 guilde with the great pleasure , but Scudamore would not take more than fifty , to support he until he could obtain a ship . then with hearty good - will , and life - long faith in each other , the two man part , and Scudamore 's heart be uncommonly low for a substance that be not a " Jack - in - the - box " as he watch from the shore the slow fading into dream - land of the Katterina . 
 nothing except patriotic feeling may justify a man , who have do no harm , in long - continue misery . the sense of violent bodily pain , or of perpetual misfortune , or of the baseness of all in whom he trust , and other steady influx of many - fountaine sorrow , may wear he for a time , and even fetch his spirit low than the more vicarious woe can do . but the firm conviction that the family of man to which one belong , and be proud of belong , have fall into the hand of traitor , eloquent liar , and vile hypocrite , and can not escape without crawl in the dust this produce a large deep gloom , and a crush sense of doom beyond philosophy . Scudamore could have endure the loss and the disillusion of his love pure and strong as that power have be but the ruin of his native land would turn his lively heart into a lump of stone . 
 for two or three day he rove about among the people of the water - side boatman , pilot , shipping agent , store - keeper , stevedore , crimp , or any other likely to know anything to help he . some of these could speak a little English , and many have some knowledge of French ; but all shake their head at his eagerness to get to England . " you may wait week , or you may wait month , " say the one who know most of the subject ; " we be very jealous of the english ship . that country swallow up the sea so . it have be forbid to supply the english ship ; but for plenty money it be do sometimes ; but the finger must be place upon the nose , and upon the two eye what you call the guinea ; and in six hour where be they ? swallow up by the mist from the mountain . no , sir ! if you have the great money , it be very difficult . but if you have not that , it be impossible . " 
 " I have not the great money ; and the little money also have escape from a quicksand in the bottom of my pocket . " 
 " then you will never get to England , sir , " this gentleman answer , pleasantly ; " and unless I have be tell thing too severely , the good man that life have well not go there , without a rock of gold in his pocket grand enough to fill a thousand quicksand . " 
 Scudamore lift the relic of his hat , and go in search of some other Job 's comforter . instead of a passage to England , he see in a straight line before he the only journey which a mortal may take without pay his fare . 
 to save himself from this gratuitous tour , he earn a little money in a porter 's gang , till his quick step rouse the indignation of the rest . with the lofty perception of the right of man , they turn he out of that employment   for the one ' sacred principle of labour " be to play , and he , understand now the nature , of democracy , perceive that of all the many short - cut to starvation , the one with the few elbow to it be to work . 
 while he be meditate upon these point which person of big word love to call " question of political economy " his hat , now become a patent ventilator , sit accord to custom on the back of his head , expose his large calm forehead , and the kind honesty of his countenance . then he start a little , for his nerve be not quite as strong as when they have good feeding , at the sudden sense of be scrutinize by the most piercing gaze he have ever encounter . 
 the stranger be an old man of tall spare frame , wear a shovel - hat and long black gown draw in with a belt , and around his bare neck be a steel chain support an ebony cross . with a smile , which display the firm angle of his face , he address the young man in a language which Scudamore could not understand , but believe to be portuguese . 
 " Thy word I be not able to understand . but the Latin tongue , as it be pronounce in England , I be able to interpret , and to speak , not too abundantly . " Scudamore speak the good Latin he could muster at a moment 's notice , for he see that this gentleman be a catholic priest , and probably therefore of good education . 
 " art thou , then , an Englishman , my son ? " the stranger reply , in the same good tongue . " from thy countenance and walk , that opinion stand fast in my mind at first sight of thee . every Englishman be to I beloved , and every Frenchman unfriendly as many , at least , as now govern the state . Father Bartholomew be my name , and though most man here be heretical , among the faithful I avail sufficiently . what saith the great venusian ? ' in straiten fortune quit thyself as a man of spirit and of mettle . ' I find thee in straiten fortune , and would gladly enlarge thee , if that which thou art do be pleasing to the God omnipotent . " 
 after a few more word , he lead the hapless and hungry Englishman to a quiet little cot which overlook the noble bay , and itself be overlook by a tall flag - staff bear the colour of Portugal . here in the first place he regale his guest with the flank of a kid serve with cucumber , and fruit gather early , and some native wine , scarcely good enough for the venusian bard , but as rich as ambrosia to Scudamore . then he supply he with the fine tobacco that ever ascend in spiral incense to the cloud - compelling jove . at every soft puff , away fly the blue - devil , pagan , or Christian , or even scientific ; and the brightness of the sleep - forbid eye return , and the sweetness of the smile so long go hence in dread of trespass . Father Bartholomew , neither eating , drinking , nor smoking , till the sun should set for this be one of his fast - day be heartily pleased with his guest 's good cheer , and smile with the large benevolence which a lean face express with more decision than a plump and jolly one . " and now , my son , " he begin again , in Latin more fluent and classical than the sailor could compass after Cicero throw by , " thou hast return thank to Almighty God , for which I the more esteem thee . Oblige I , therefore , if it irk thee not , among smoke of the genial Nicotium , by tell thy tale , and explain what hard necessity hath drive thee to these distant shore . fear not , for thou seest a lover of England , and hater of France the infidel . " 
 then Scudamore , sometimes hesitate and laugh at his own bad Latin , tell as much of his story as be needful , strive especially to make clear the importance of his swift return , and his fear that even so it would be too late . 
 " Man may believe himself too late , but the Lord ariseth early , " the good priest answer , with a smile of courage refresh the heart of the Englishman . " behold how the hand of the Lord be steadfast over those who serve he ! to - morrow I might have be far away ; to - day I be in time to help thee . whilst thou wert feeding , I receive the signal of a swift ship for Lisbon , whose captain be my friend , and would neglect nothing to serve I . this night he will arrive , and with favourable breeze , which have set in this morning , he shall spread his sail again to - morrow , though he mean to linger perhaps for three day . be of good cheer , my son ; thou shalt sail to - morrow . I will supply thee with all that be needful , and thank God for a privilege so great . thou shalt have money as well for the passage from Lisbon to England , which be not long . remember in thy prayer for thou art devout that old man , Father Bartholomew . " 




 CHAPTER lviii 

 in early MORN 

 one Saturday morning in the month of August , an hour and a half before sunrise , Carne walk down to the big yew - tree , which stand far enough from the brink of the cliff to escape the salt , and yet near enough to command an extensive sea - view . this be the place where the young shoemaker , belong to the race of shank , have be scar so sadly that he lose his sweetheart , some two year and a half ago ; and this be the tree that have be love by painter , especially the conscientious Sharples , a pupil of Romney , who study the nick and the trick of the bole , and the many fantastic fret of time , with all the love care which ensure the truth of his simple and powerful portrait . but Sharples have long be away in the West ; and Carne , have taste for no art except his own , have despatch his dog Orso , the fiercer of the pair , at the only son of a brush who have lately make ready to encamp against that tree ; upon which he decamp , and go over the cliff , with a loss of much personal property . 
 the tree look ghostly in the shady light , and gaunt armstretch of depart darkness , go as if it have not sleep its sleep out . now be the time when the day be afraid of come , and the night unsure of go , and a large reluctance to acknowledge any change keep everything wait for another thing to move . what be the use of light and shadow , the fuss of the morning , and struggle for the sun ? fair darkness have fill all the gap between they , and why should they be sever'd into single life again ? for the gladness of daybreak be not come yet , nor the pleasure of see the way again , the lifting of the darkness leave heaviness beneath it , and if a rashly early bird flop down upon the grass , he can not count his distance , but quiver like a moth . 
 " pest on this abominable early work ! " mutter Carne with a yawn , as he grope his way through the deep gloom of black foliage , and enter the hollow of the ancient trunk ; " it be all very well for sailor , but too hard upon a quiet gentleman . very likely that fellow will not   come for two hour . what a cursed uncomfortable maggoty place ! but I will have put the sleep he have rob I of . " he stretch his long form on the rough bench inside , gather his cloak around he , and rouse the dull echo of the honey - comb hollow with long loud snore . 
 " awake , my vigilant commander , and behold I ! Happy be the landsman , to whom the star bring sleep . I have not sleep for three night , and the fruit be here for you . " 
 it be the lively voice of Renaud Charron ; and the rosy fan of the dawn , unfold over the sea and the gray rock , glance with a flutter of shade into the deep - rib tree . affect a lofty indifference , Carne , who have a large sense of his own dignity , rise slowly and come out into the well light . " sit down , my dear friend , " he say , take the sealed packet ; " there be bread and meat here , and a bottle of good Macon . you be nearly always hungry , and you must be starve now . " 
 Charron perceive that his mouth be offer employment at the expense of his eye ; but the kernel of the matter be his own already , and he smile to himself at the mystery of his chief . " in this matter , I should implore the tree to crush I , if my father be an Englishman , " he think ; " but every one to his taste ; it be no affair of mine . " just as he be get on good term with his refreshment , Carne come back , and watch he with a patronising smile . 
 " you be the brother of my toil , " he say , " and I will tell you as much as it be good for you to know . a few hour now will complete our enterprise . Napoleon be at Boulogne again , and even he can scarcely restrain the rush of the spirit he have provoke . the first Division be on board already , with a week 's supply , and a thousand horse , ready to sail when a hand be hold up . the hand will be hold up at my signal , and that I shall trust you to convey to - night , as soon as I have settle certain matter . where be that sullen young Tugwell ? what have you do with he ? " 
 " wonderfully clever be your new device , my friend , " Charron reply , after a long pull at the bottle . " to vanquish the mind by a mind superior be a glory of high reason ; but to let it remain in itself and compel it to perform what be desire by the other , be a stroke of genius . and under your pharmacy he must do it that have be prove already . the idea be grand , very noble , magnificent . it never would have show itself to my mind . " 
 " probably not . when that have be accomplish , we will hang he for a traitor . but , my dear friend , I have sad news for you , even in this hour of triumph . the lady of your adoration , the Admiral 's eld daughter , Faith , have recover the man for whom she have wait four year , and she mean to marry he . the father have give his consent , and her pride be beyond description . she have long love a mystery what woman can help it ? and now she have one for life , a husband eclipse in his own hair . my renaud , all rivalry be futile . your hair , alas , be quite short and scanty . but this man have discover in Africa a nut which turn a man into the husk of himself . no wonder that he come out of the sea all dry ! " 
 " Tush ! he be a pig . it be a pig that find the nut . I will be the butcher for that long pig , and the lady will rush into the arm of conquest . then will I possess all the Admiral 's land , and pursue the fine chase of the rabbit . and I will give dinner , such dinner , my faith ! ha ! that be excellent say embrace I my Faith will sit at the right side of the table , and explain to the english company that such dinner could proceed from nobody except a french gentleman commingle all the knowledge of the joint with the lofty conception of the hash , the mince the what you call ? ah , you have no name for it , because you do not know the proper thing . then , in the presence of admire Englishmen , I will lean back in my chair , the most comfortable chair that can be find " 
 " stop . you have get to get into it yet , " carne interrupt , rudely ; " and the way to do that be not to lean back in it . the fault of your system have always be that you want to enjoy everything before you get it . " 
 " and of your , " retort Charron , begin to imbibe the pugnacity of an english landlord , " that when you have get everything , you will enjoy what ? nothing ! " 
 " even a man of your levity hit the nail on the head sometimes , " say Carne , " though the blow can not be a very heavy one . nature have not fashion I for enjoyment , and therefore afford I very little . but some little I do expect in the great inversion come , in the upset of the scoundrel who have fatten on my flesh , and steal my land , to make country gentleman if it be possible of themselves . it will take a large chimney to burn their title - deed , for the robbery have last for a century . but I hold the great Emperor 's process sign for that ; and if you come to my cookery , you will say that I be capable of enjoyment . fight I enjoy not , as hot man do , nor guzzle , nor swigging , nor singing of song ; for all of which you have a talent , my friend . but the triumph of quiet skill I like ; and I love to turn the balance on my enemy . of these there be plenty , and among they all who live in that fishy little hole down there . " 
 Carne point contemptuously at Springhaven , that poor little village in the valley . but the sun have just lift his impartial face above the last highland that baulk his contemplation of the home of so many and great virtue ; and in the brisk moisture of his early salute the village in the vale look lovely . for a silvery mist be flush with rose , like a bridal veil warm by the blush of the bride , and the curve of the land , like a dewy palm leaf , shine and sink alternate . 
 " what a rare blaze they will make ! " continue Carne , as the sunlight glance along the russet thatch , and the blue smoke arise from the early chimney . " every cottage there shall be a bonfire , because it have cast off allegiance to I . the whole race of Darling will be at my mercy the pompous old Admiral , who refuse to call on I till his idiot of a son persuade he that wretched poetaster , who reduce I to the ignominy of read his own rubbish to he and the haughty young woman that worship a savage who have treat I with insult . I have they all now in the hollow of my hand , and a thorough good crumpling be prepared for they . the first house to burn shall be Zebedee Tugwell 's , that conceite old dolt of a fishing fellow , who give I a nod of suspicion , instead of pull off his dirty hat to I . then we blow up the church , and old Twemlow 's house , and the Admiral 's , when we have do with it . the fishing - fleet , as they call their wretched tub , will come home , with the usual fuss , to - night , and on Monday it shall be ash . how like you my programme ? be it complete ? " 
 " too much , too much complete ; too barbarous , " answer the kindly hearted Frenchman . " what harm have all the poor man do to you ? and what insanity to provoke enemy of the people all around who would bring we thing to eat ! and worse if the house be consume with fire , where will be the revenue that be design for I , as the fair son of the Admiral ? no , no ; I will allow none of that . when the landing be make , you will not be my master . Soult will have charge of the subject inferior , and he be not a man of rapine . to he will I address myself in favour of the village . thus shall I ascend in the favour of my charming , and secure my property . " 
 " Captain , I be your master yet , and I will have no interference . no more talk ; but obey I to the letter . there be no sign of any rough weather , I suppose ? you sailor see thing which we do not observe . " 
 " this summer have not be of fine weather , and the sky be always change here . but there be not any token of a temp now . though there be a little prospect of rain always . " 
 " if it rain , all the well , for it obscure the sea . you have feed enough now to last even you till the evening ; or if not , you can take some with you . remain to the westward , where the cliff be high , and look out especially for british ship of war that may be appear up Channel . take this second spy - glass ; it be quite strong enough . but first of all tell Perkins to stand off again with the pilot - boat , as if he be look out for a job , and if he see even a frigate come eastward , to run back and let you know by a signal arrange between you . Dan Tugwell , I see , be ship yesterday on board of Prame no . 801 , a very handy vessel , which will lead the van , and five hundred will follow in her track on Sunday evening . my excellent uncle will be at the height of his eloquence just when his favourite Sunday - school boy be bring an addition to his congregation . but the church shall not be blow up until Monday , for fear of premature excitement . by Monday night about two hundred thousand such soldier as Britain could never produce will be able to quell any childish excitement such as Great Britain be apt to give way to . " 
 " but what be for I , this same Saturday night ? I like very much to make polite the people , and to marry the most beautiful and the rich ; but not to kill more than there be to be help . " 
 " the breaking of the egg may cut the finger that have be suck till their skin be go . you have plague I all along with your english hankering , which in your post of trust be traitorous . " 
 Charron be accustom to submit to the infinitely strong will of Carne . moreover , his sense of discipline often check the speed of his temper . but he have never be able to get rid of a secret contempt for his superior , as a traitor to the race to which he really belong , at least in the Frenchman 's opinion . and that such a man should charge he with treachery be more than his honest soul could quite endure , and his quick face flush with indignation as he speak : 
 " your position , my commander , do not excuse such word . you shall answer for they , when I be discharge from your command ; which , I hope , will be the case next week . to be speak of as a traitor by you be very grand . " 
 " take it as you please , " Carne reply , with that cold contemptuous smile which the other detest . " for the present , however , you will not be grand , but carry out the order which I give you . as soon as it be dark , you will return , keep the pilot - boat in readiness for my last despatch , with which you will meet the frigate Torche about midnight , as arrange on Thursday . all that and the signal you already understand . wait for I by this tree , and I may go with you ; but that will depend upon circumstance . I will take good care that you shall not be keep starve ; for you may have to wait here three or four hour for I . but be sure that you do not go until I come . " 
 " but what be I to do if I have see some british ship , or perkin have give I token of they ? " 
 " observe their course , and learn where they be likely to be at nightfall . there will probably be none . all I fear be that they may intercept the Torche . Farewell , my friend , and let your sense of duty subdue the small suffering of temper . " 




 CHAPTER LIX 

 NEAR our SHORES 

 " this be how it be , " say Captain Tugwell , that same day , to Erle Twemlow : " the folk they go on with a thing , till a man as have any head leave twist it round on his neck , with his chin look down his starn - post . then the enemy cometh , with his spy - glass and his gun , and afore he can look round , he hath nothing leave to look for . " 
 " then you think , Tugwell , that the danger be not over ? that the french mean business even now , when every one be tired of hear of it ? I have be away so long that I know nothing . but the universal opinion be " 
 " opinion of the universe be dash ! " Master Zebedee answer , with a puff of smoke . " we call ourselves the universe , when we be the rope that drag astarn of it . Cappen , to my mind there be mischief in the wind , more than there hath be for these three year ; and that be why you see I here , instead of go with the smack . Holy Scripture saith a dream cometh from the Lord ; leastway , to a man of sense , as hardly ever dreameth . the wind be so bad again we , Monday afternoon , that we put off sailing till the Tuesday , and Monday night I lie on my own bed , without a thought of nothing but to sleep till five o'clock . I have not   take nothing but a quart of John Prater 's ale and you know what his measure be not a single sip of grog ; but the Hangel of the Lord he come and stand by I in the middle of the night . and he take I by the hand , or if he do not   it come to the same thing of my get there , and he set I up in a dark high place , the like of the yew - tree near Carne Castle . and then he saith , ' look back , Zeb ' ; and I look , and behold Springhaven be all afire , like the bottomless pit , or the thunder - storm of Egypt , or the city of Sodom and Gomorrah . and two figure be jump about in the flame , like the furnace in the plain of Dura , and one of they be young Squire Carne , and the other be my son Daniel , as behaveth below his name . and I call out , ' Daniel , thou son of Zebedee and Kezia Tugwell , come forth from the burn fiery furnace ' ; but he answer not , neither heed I . and then Squire Darling , Sir Charles be now the name of he , out he come from his Round - house , and by the white gate above high - water mark , to order out the fire , because they be all his own cottage . but while he be go about , as he doth for fear of be hard upon any one , out jump Squire Carne , from the thickest of the blaze , and take the poor squire by the forepart of his neck , which he liketh to keep open when he getteth off of duty , and away with he into the burn fiery furnace make of his own house ! that be more than I could put up with , even under the Hangel , and I give such a kick that Kezia , though she saith she be the most quiet of woman , feel herself a force to bounce I up . " 
 " a dream of that sort deserve notice , " answer Erle , who have pass many month among sailor ; " and over and above that , I see proof of a foolish security in England , and of sharp activity in France . last Monday I be only five mile from Boulogne , on board of our frigate the Melpomene , for I want the captain 's evidence to help I in my own affair ; and upon my word I be quite amazed at the massing of the french force there , and the evident readiness of their hundred of troop - ship . score of they even have horse on board , for I see they quite clearly with a spy - glass . but the officer only laugh at I , and say they be tired of see that . and another thing I do not   like at all be the landing of a french boat this side of Pebbleridge . I be come home after dark one night , and as soon as they see I they push off , and pretend to be english fisherman ; but if ever I see Frenchmen , these be french ; and I believe they have a ship not far away , for I see a light show and then turn off . I examine the place in the morning , and see the footprint of man on a path up the cliff , as if they have go inland towards Carne Castle . when the Admiral come home , I tell he of it ; but he seem to think it be only some smuggling . " 
 " ah , there be smooglin ' of a bad kind over there , to my belief . I would not   tell your honour not a quarter what I think , because of the young gentleman be near akin to you . but a thing or two have come to my ear , very much again a young squire over that way . a man as will do what he have do be a black one in some way ; and if some , why not in all ? " 
 " tell I what you mean , " say Twemlow , sternly . " after say so much , you be bind to say more . Caryl Carne be no friend of mine , although he be my cousin . I dislike the man , though I know but little of he . " 
 " for sartin then a kind gentleman like you will not   like he none the well for betraying of a nice young maid as put her trust in he , as lively and pretty a young maid as ever step , and might have have the pick of all the young man in the parish . " 
 " what ! " exclaim Erle , with a sudden chill of heart , for Faith have not conceal from he her anxiety about dolly . " tugwell , do you mean to say " 
 " yes , sir ; only you must keep it to yourself , for the sake of the poor young thing ; though too many know it already , I be afeared . and that be how poor Jem Cheeseman change from a dapper money - turn man , as pleasant as could be , to a down - hearte , stick - in - door , honest - weighted fellow . poor little Polly be as simple as a dove , and she mean to break none of the Lord 's commandment , unless it be a sin to look so much above she . he take she aboard her father 's trading - craft , and make pretence to marry she across the water , her know nothing of the lingo , to be sure ; and then when there come a thumping boy , and she demand for the sake of the young ' un that her marriage should be sartifie in the face of all the world , what do he do but turn round and ask she if she be fool enough to suppose that a Carne have marry a butter - man 's daughter ? with a few word more , she go off of her head , and have never be right again , they say ; and her father , who be mighty proud to have a grandson heir to an old ancient castle , he be so take aback with this disappointment that he puzzle all the village , include of I , as I be free to own , by jump into his own rope . ' twas only now just that I hear all this ; and as the captain of this here place , I shall ask leave of Cheeseman to have it out with Master Carne , as soon as may be do without hurt the poor thing . if she have be my child , the rope should have go round his neck first , if it come to mine there - arter ! " 
 " the - villain ! " Twemlow use a strong short word , without add heavily , it may be hop , to the score against he . " and to think that all this time he have be dare to address himself but never mind that now . it will be a bad time for he when I catch he by himself , though I must not speak of Polly . poor little polly ! what a pretty child she be ! I use to carry sugar - plum on purpose for she . good - bye , Tugwell ; I must think about all this . " 
 " and so must I , sir . what a strap chap ' a be ! " Captain Zebedee continue to himself , as Twemlow stride away with the light step of a mountain savage , carry a long staff from force of habit , and look even large than himself from the flow of chestnut hair and beard around he . " never do see such a hairy chap . never show no sign of it when ' a be a lad , and Miss ' Liza quite smooth in the front of her neck . must come of Hottentot climate , I reckon . they call it the bush , from the folk be so bushy . I use to think as my beard be a pretty good example ; but , Lord bless I and keep I , it would all go on his nose ! if ' a spreadeth that over the face of Squire Carne , ' a will ravish he , as the wicked doth ravish the poor . " 
 Twemlow have many sad thing to consider , and among they the impending loss of this grand mane . after diver delay , and infinitude of form , and much evidence of thing self - evident in the spirit which drive Sir Horatio Nelson to pin a certificate of amputation to the sleeve of his lost arm this Twemlow have establish that he be the Twemlow leave behind upon the coast of Africa , and have be capture in the service of his country , be entitle at least to restoration . in such a case small liberality be show in those day , even as now prevaileth , the object of all in authority be to be hard upon those who be out of it . at last , when he be become well weary , and nothing but an Englishman 's love of his country and desire to help in her danger prevent he from turn to private pursuit wherein he hold a key to fortune he find himself restore to his rank in the Army , and appoint to another regiment , which happen to be short of officer . then he fling to the wind , until peace should return , his prospect of wealth beyond reckon , and lock in a black leather trunk material worth their weight in diamond . but , as life be uncertain , he tell his beloved one the secret of his great discovery , which she , in sweet ignorance of mankind , regard as of no importance . 
 but as war appear and disappear , nation wax and wane , and the holy principle of one age become the scoff of the next , yet human nature be the same throughout , it would be wrong to cast no glance even with the French so near our shore at the remarkable discovery of this young man , and the circumstance lead up to it . for with keen insight into civilized thought , which yearn with the deep remorse for those blessing which itself have banish , he know that he hold a master - key to the treasury of Croesus , Mycerinus , Attalus , and every other King who have dazzle the world with his talent . the man who can minister to human need may , when he be lucky , earn a little towards his own ; the man who contribute to the pleasure of his fellow must find reward in his own ; but he who can gratify the vanity of his race be the master of their pocket . 
 Twemlow have be carry from the deadly coast   as before relate by Captain Southcombe   to the mountainous district far inland , by the great King Golo of the Quackwas nation , mighty warrior of lofty stature . here he be treat well , and soon learn enough of their simple language to understand and be understand ; while the King , who consider all white man as of canine origin , be pleased with he , and prepare to make he useful . then Twemlow be send , with an escort of chief , to the land of the Houlas , as a medicine - man , to win Queen Mabonga for the great King Golo . but she so strange be the perversity of woman behold this man of a pearly tint , as fair as the moon , and as soft as a river for he take many month to get properly tan with one long gaze of amazement yield to he what he seek for another . a dwarf and a whipster he might be among the great darky around she for he have only six foot and one inch of stature , and forty - two inch round the chest but , to her fine taste , tone and quality more than covered defect of quantity . the sight of male member of her race have never move she , because she have hear of their wickedness ; but the gaze of this white man , so tender and so innocent , set she on a long course of wonder about herself . then she draw back , and pass into the private hut behind , where no one be allow to disturb she . for she never have feel like this before , and she want nobody to notice it . 
 but the Houla maiden , with the deep interest in matter that come home to they outside their understanding , hold council with their mother , and these impart to the angelic stranger , as plainly as modesty permit , the distressing result of his whiteness , and implore he to depart , before further harm be do . Twemlow perceive that he have tumble into a difficult position , and the only way out of it be to make off . give pledge to return in two moon at the late , he make his salaam to the sensitive young Queen , whose dignity be only surpass by her grace , and expect to be shorten by the head , return with all speed to the great King Golo . Honesty be the good policy as we all know so well that we forbear to prove it and the Englishman see that the tale would be dark from the lip of his black attendant . the negro monarch be of much - endure mind , but these tiding outwent his philosophy . he order Twemlow 's head to come off by dinner - time , and , alas , that royal household keep very early hour ; and the poor captain , cord to a tree , sniff sadly the growth of good roast , which he never should taste , and could only succeed in succession of fare . for although that enlighten King have discard the taste of the nation around he , it be not half so certain as the prisoner could have wish that his prejudice would resist the relish of a candid rival in prime condition . 
 while Twemlow be dwell upon this nice question , and sympathise deeply with the animal on the spit , Tuloo , the head councillor of the realm , appear , an ancient negro full of wisdom and resource . discover that the white man set more value on his head than be usual with these philosopher , he propose condition which be eagerly accept , and release the captive , lead he into his own hut . here the man of wisdom spat three time into his very ample bosom , to exorcise evil spell , and take from a hole in the corner something which he handle very carefully , and with a touch as light as possible . follow everything with his good eye , Twemlow perceive in the hand of Tuloo a spongy - look substance of conical form , and in colour and size very like a morel , but possess a peculiar golden glow . " Kneel here , my son , and move not until I tell you , " the old man whisper , and be obey . then he strip off all cover from the white neck and shoulder , and begin immediately below the eye , brush all the cheek and the chin , throat and neck and upper part of the bosom , with the substance in his hand , from which a yellow powder pass , moist rather than dusty , into the open pore . " in one moon you will be a beast of the wood , and in two you shall return to the queen that love you , " say Councillor Tuloo , with a sly little grin . 
 but Twemlow be rob of no self - respect by the growth of a forest about he ; and when he be send again to Queen Mabonga , and the dewy glance of love die at the very first wink into a stony glare because of his face be cover with hair he say to himself that he know where he could inflict a very different impression upon lady . for these can not have too much hair in England , at the back of their own head , and front of their admirer ' . 
 Councillor Tuloo be gift with a deep understanding of a thing which look shallow to a man who have never yet hear of false bottom . he say to King Golo : " I know what woman be . as long as she never have think about man , you might crawl , and be only a hog to she . but her eye have be open to this white man , and there be room for a black one to go into they . and unless you be at hand , it will be do by some one else . " 
 in short , all be manage so beautifully that in six more moon the coy Mabonga split the Durra straw with King Golo , amid vast rejoicing and in din almost equal to that which a wedding in Wales arouse . but from time to time it be consider needful to keep up her Majesty 's repulsion by serve Erle Twemlow with another dose of that which would have create for the English fair capillary attraction . thus he become a great favourite with the King , who listen with deep interest to his description of the houseful of bead and button to be earn in England by a little proper management of Tuloo 's magic dust . before very long it be arrange that as soon as a good supply of Pong could be collect , Twemlow should be send back to the coast and place under the charge of Bandeliah , who be now a tributary of this great king . and here he might have wait year and year for the trading station be abandon now but for the benevolence of Captain Southcombe , who , be drive to the eastward of his course upon one of his return from India , stand in a little far to enquire about his friend , and with no small pleasure convey he home . 




 CHAPTER LX 

 no danger , GENTLEMEN 

 the little dinner at Springhaven Hall , appoint for that same Saturday , have now grow into a large one . Carne have refuse dolly 's offer to get he an invitation , and for many reason he be not invite . he ought to have be glad of this , because he do not want to be there ; but his nature , like a saw 's , be full of tooth , and however he be use , he grate . but without any aid of his tooth , a good dinner , well planned and well serve , bade fair in due course to be well digest also by forty at least of the forty - two people who sit down to consider it . for as yet the use of tongue be understand , and it be not allow to obstruct by perpetual motion the duty of the palate . and now every person in the parish of high culture which seem to be akin to the Latin for a knife , though a fork expel nature more forcibly as well as many other of locality less favour , join in this muster of good people and good thing . at the outset , the Admiral have intend nothing more than a quiet recognition of the goodness of the Lord in bring home a husband for the daughter of the house ; but what Englishman can forbear the pleasure of kill two bird with one stone ? 
 it be Stubbard who first suggest this , and Sir Charles at once see the force of it , especially with the Marquis of Southdown come . Captain Stubbard have never admire anybody , not even himself without which there be no happiness much less Mr. Pitt , or Lord Nelson , or the King , until justice be do to the race of Stubbard , and their hand be plunge into the revenue . but now , ever since the return of the war to its proper home in England , this Captain have be pay well for do the very good thing that a man can do , i. e. , nothing . he could not help desire to celebrate this , and as soon as he receive his invitation , he go to the host and put it clearly . the Admiral soon enter into his view , and as guest be not farm by the head as yet at table entertain self - respect , he perceive the advantage of a good dinner score to his credit with forty at the cost of twenty ; and Stubbard 's proposal seem thoroughly well time , so long be it now since the leader of Defence have celebrate their own vigilance . twenty - two , allow for the lady needful , be thus add to the score of chair intend , and the founder of the feast could scarcely tell whether the toast of the evening be to be the return of the traveller , or the discomfiture of Boney . that would mainly depend upon the wish of the Marquis , and these again be likely to be guide by the treatment he have meet with from the government lately and the commander of his Division . 
 this nobleman be of a character not uncommon eighty year ago , but now very rare among public man , because a more flexible fibre have choke it . Steadfast , honourable , simple , and straightforward , able to laugh without bitterness at the arrogant ignorance of mob , but never to smile at the rogue who lead they , scorn all shuffle of word , foul haze , and snaky maze of evasion , and refuse to believe at first sight that his country must be in the wrong and her enemy in the right , he add to all these exterminate foible a leisurely dignity now equally extinct . trimmer , time - server , and hypocrite fear he , as thief fear an honourable dog ; and none could quote his word against one another . this would have make he unpopular now , when perjury mean popularity . for the present , however , self - respect exist , and no one think any the bad of his lordship for not have find he a liar . especially with lady , who insist on truth in man as a pleasant proof of their sex , Lord Southdown have always be a prime favourite , and an authority largely misquote . and to add to his influence , he possess a quick turn of temper , which render it very agreeable to agree with he . 
 Lord Southdown be think , as he lead Miss Darling to her chair at the head of the table , that he never have see a more pleasing young woman , though he grieve at her taste in prefer the brown young man on she leave to his elegant friend Lord Dashville . also he marvel at hear so much , among the young officer of his acquaintance , concern the beauty of the young sister , and so little about this far sweet young person at least in his opinion . for verily dolly be not at she good ; her beautiful colour be go , her neck have lose its sprightly turn , and her gray eye move heavily instead of sparkle . " that girl have some burden upon her mind , " he think as he watch she with interest and pity ; ' she have put on her dress anyhow , and she do not even look to see who be look at she ! " 
 for the " Belle of all Sussex , " as the young spark entitle she , be ill at ease with herself , and ready to quarrel with every one except herself . she have conscience enough to confess , whenever she could not get away from it , that for week and month she have be slip far and far from the true and honest course . sometimes , with a pain like a stitch in the side , the truth would spring upon she ; and perhaps for a moment she would wonder at herself , and hate the man mislead she . but this happen chiefly when he be present , and say or do something to vex she ; and then he soon set it to right again , and make everything feel delightful . and this way of have her misgiving ease make they easy when they come again with no one to appease they . for she begin to think of what he have do , and how kind and considerate his mind must be , and how hard it must seem to mistrust he . 
 another thing that urge she to keep on now , without make any fuss about it , be the wonderful style her sister Faith have show since that hairy monster come back again . it be manifest that the world contain only one man of any high quality , and nobody must dare to think even twice about any conclusion he lay down . he have say to she , with a penetrate glance and it must have be that to get through such a thicket that dangerous people be about , and no girl possess any self - respect must think of wander on the shore alone . the more she be spy upon and admonish , the more she would do what she think right ; and a man who have live among savage for year must be a queer judge of propriety . but , in spite of all these defiant thought , her heart be very low , and her mind in a sad flutter , and she could not even smile as she meet her father 's gaze . suppose that she be frightened at the number of the guest , and the noise of many tongue , and the grandeur of the people , the gentle old man make a little signal to she to come and have a whisper with he , as a child might do , under courtesy of the good company . but dolly feign not to understand , at the penalty of many a heart - pang . 
 the dinner go on with a very merry sound , and a genuine strength of enjoyment , such as hearty folk have who know one another , and be meet together not to cut caper of wit , but refresh their goodwill and fine principle . and if any dinner party can be so arrange that only five per cent . have any trouble on its mind , the gentleman who whip away the plate , at a guinea a mouth , will have to go home with a face of willow pattern . 
 the other whose mind be away from her food , and reckless of its own nourishment , be Blyth Scudamore 's mother , as gentle a lady as ever try never to think of herself . in spite of all goodness , and faith in the like , she have enough to make she very miserable now , whenever she allow herself to think about it , and that be fifty - nine minute out of sixty . for a brief account of her son 's escape from Etaples have reach she , through the kindness of Captain Desportes , who find mean to get a letter deliver to the Admiral . that brave french officer speak most highly of the honourable conduct of his english friend , but have very small hope of his safety . for he add the result of his own inquiry to the statement of M. Jalais , and from these it be clear that poor Scuddy have set forth alone in a rickety boat , ill find and ill fit to meet even moderate weather in the open Channel . another young Englishman have do the like , after lurk in the forest of Hardelot , but he have be recapture by the French at the outset of his hopeless voyage . Scudamore have not be so retake ; and the Captain   who have not receive his letter until it be too late to interfere , by reason of his own despatch to Dieppe   have encounter a sharp summer gale just then , which must have prove fatal to the poor old boat . the only chance be that some english ship might have pick up the wanderer , and if so the highly respected Admiral would have hear of it before he receive this letter . as no such tiding have be receive , there could be little doubt about the issue in any reasonable mind . but the heart of a woman be not a mind , or the man that be bear of her might as well forego the honour . 
 however , as forty people be quite happy , the wise course be to rejoin they . the lady be resolve upon this occasion to storm the law of usage which require their withdrawal before the toast begin ; and so many gentle voice challenge the garrison of man behind their bottle that term of unusual scope be arrange . it be know that the Marquis would make a fine speech short , and therefore all the finer in propose the toast of the evening , to wit , " our king , and our Country . " under the vigorous lead of Mrs. Stubbard , the lady demand to hear every word ; after which they would go , and discuss their own affair , or possibly those of their neighbour . but the gentleman must endure their presence till his lordship have speak , and the Admiral reply . faith be against this arrangement , because she foresaw that it would make they very late ; but she yield to the wish of so many of her guest , console with the thought that she would be support by some one on her left hand , who would be her support for life . 
 when all have do well , except the two aforesaid , and good - will bear of good deed be crown comfort with jocund pleasure , and the long oak table , rich of grain and dark with the friction of a hundred year , shine in the waver flow of dusk with the gleam of purple and golden fruit , the glance of brilliant glass that puzzle the light with its claim to shadow , and the glow of amber and amethyst wine decant to settle that question then the bold Admiral , stand up , say , " bring in the light , that we may see his lordship . " 
 " I like to speak to some intelligence , " say the guest , who be shrewd at an answer . and dolly , be quick at occasion , seize it , and in the shifting of chair leave she own for some one else . 
 the curtain be draw across the western window , to close the conflict between God 's light and man 's , and then this well - know gentleman , have place his bottle handily for he never " put wine into two white , " to use his own expression arise with his solid frame as tranquil as a rock , and his full - fronted head like a piece of it . every gentleman bow to his bow , and wait with silent respect for his word , because they would be true and simple . 
 " my friend , I will take it for grant that we all love our country , and hate its enemy . we may like and respect they personally , for they be as good as we be ; but we be bind to hate they collectively , as man who would ruin all we love . for the stuff that be talk about freedom , democracy , march of intellect , and so forth , I have nothing to say , except to bid you look at the result among themselves . be there a man in France whose body be his own if he can carry arm , or his soul if it venture to seek its own good ? as for mind there be only the mind of one man ; a large one in many way ; in other a small one , because it consider its owner alone . 
 " but we of England have refuse to be strip of all that we hold dear , at the will of a foreign upstart . we have fight for year , and we still be fight , without any brag or dream of glory , for the right of ourselves and of all mankind . there have be among we weak - minded fellow , babbler of abstract nonsense , and even , I grieve to say traitor . but , on the whole , we have stand together , and therefore have not be tread on . how it may end be within the knowledge of the Almighty only ; but already there be sign that we shall be help , if we continue to help ourselves . 
 " and now for the occasion of our meeting here . we rejoice most heartily with our good host , the vigilant Defender of these shore , at the restoration to his arm or rather , to a still more delightful embrace of a british officer , who have prove a truth we know already , that nothing stop a british officer . I see a gentleman strike so keenly with the force of that remark , because he himself have prove it , that I must beg his next neighbour to fill up his glass , and allow nothing to stop he from toss it off . and as I be get astray from my text , I will clear my poor head with what you can see through . " 
 the Marquis of Southdown fill his glass from a bottle of grand old Chambertin six of which have be lay most softly in a cupboard of the wainscote for his use and then he have it fill again , and see his meaning brilliantly . 
 " our second point be the defeat of the French , and of this we may now assure ourselves . they have not be defeat , for the very good reason that they never would come out to fight ; but it come to the same thing , because they be give it over as a hopeless job . I have see too many up and down to say that we be out of danger yet ; but when our fleet have be chase theirs all over the world , be they likely to come and meet we in our own water ? Nelson have anchor at Spithead , and be rush up to London , as our host have hear to - day , with his usual impetuosity . every man must stick to his own business , even the mighty Nelson ; and he might not meddle with Billy Blue , or anybody else up Channel . still , Nelson be not the sort of man to jump into a chaise at Portsmouth if there be the very small chance of the French come over to devour we . 
 " well , my friend , we have do our good , and have some right to be proud of it ; but we should depart from our nature if we even exercise that right . the nature of an Englishman be this to be afraid of nothing but his own renown . feel this great truth , I will avoid offence by hide as a crime my admiration of the glorious soldier and sailor here , yet beg they for once to remember themselves , as have enable I to propose , and all present to pledge , the welfare of our King and Country . " 
 the Marquis wave his glass above his head , without spill a single drop , although it be a bumper , then drain it at a draught , invert it , and cleverly snap it in twain upon the table , with his other hand lay on his heart , and a long low reverence to the company . thereupon up stand squire and dame , and repeat the good toast , pledge it , with a deep bow to the proposer ; and as many of the gentleman as understand the art , without peril to fair neighbour , snap the glass . 
 his lordship be delighted , and in the spirit of the moment hold up his hand , which mean , " Silence , silence , till we all sing the National Anthem ! " in a clear loud voice he lead off the strain , Erle Twemlow from his hairy depth strike in , then every man , follow as he might , and with all his might , sustain it , and the lady , accord to their wo not , give proof of the height they can scale upon rapture . 
 the Admiral , standing , and beat time now and then with his heel though all the time deserve incessant beating enjoy the performance a great deal more than if it have be much well , and join in the main roar as loudly as he think his position as host permit . for although he be near the haven now of threescore year and ten , his throat and heart be so sea - worthy that he could very sweetly have outroar they all . but while he be prepare just to prove this , if encourage , and smile very pleasantly at a friend who say , " strike up , Admiral , " he be call from the room , and in the climax of the roar slip away for a moment , unheeded , and mean to make due apology to his guest as soon as he come back . 




 CHAPTER LXI 

 DISCHARGED from DUTY 

 while loyalty thus rejoice and throve in the warmth of its own geniality , a man who be loyal to himself alone , and have no geniality about he , be watch with contempt these british doing . Carne have tether his stout black horse , who deserve a well master , in a dusky dell of dark - wing tree at the back of the eastern shrubbery . here the good horse might rest unseen , and consider the mysterious way of man ; for the main approach be by the western road , and the shade of evening stretch their arm to the peaceful yawn of sunset . and here he find good stuff spread by nature , more worthy of his attention , and tuck back his foreleg , fare as well as the iron between his tooth permit . 
 then the master draw his green riding - coat of thin velvet close round he , and button the lappet in front , because he have heavy weight in the pocket . keep warily along the line of shadow , he gain a place of vantage in the shrubbery , a spot of thick shelter have loop of outlook . above and around he hang a curtain of many - point ilex , and before he a barberry bush , whose coral cluster catch the wan light . in this snug nook he rest calmly , lean against the ilex trunk , and finish his little preparation for anything adverse to his plan . in a belt which be hide by his velvet coat he wear a short dagger in a sheath of shagreen , and he fix it so that he could draw it in a moment , without unfasten the riding - coat . then from the pocket on either side he draw a pair of pistol , prim they well from a little flask , and replace they with the butt beneath the lappet . " death for at least three man , " he mutter , " if they be fool enough to meddle with I . my faith , these darling be grow very grand , on the strength of the land that belong to we ! " 
 for he hear the popping of champagne cork , and the clink of abundant silver , and tuning of instrument by the band , and he see the flash of light , and the dash of serve - man , and the rush of hot hospitality ; and although he have not enough true fibre in his stomach to yearn for a taste of the good thing go round , there can be little doubt , from what he do thereafter , that his gastric juice must have turn to gall . 
 with all these sound and sight and scent of thing that he have no right to despise , his patience be try for an hour and a half , or at any rate he believe so . the beautiful glow in the west die out , where the sun have be ripen his harvest - field of sheafy gold and awny cloud ; and the pulse of quivering dusk beat slowly , so that a man might seem to count it , or rather a child , who see such thing , which later man lose sight of . the form of the deepening distance against the departure of light grow faint , and prominent point become obscure , and line retire into mass , while Carne maintain his dreary watch , with his mood become dark . as the sound of joyful voice , and of good - will double by good fare , come to his unfed vigil from the open window of the dining - room , his heart be not enlarge at all , and the only solace for his lip be to swear at british revelry . for the dining - room be at the western end , some fifty yard away from he , and its principal window face the sunset , but his lurking - place afford a view of the southern casement obliquely . through these he have see that the lamp be bring , and hear the increase of merry noise , the clapping of hand , and the jovial cheer at the rise of the popular Marquis . 
 at last he see a white kerchief wave at the window near to he , the window of the Admiral 's little study , which open like a double door upon the eastern grass - plat . with an ill - condition mind , and body stiff and lacking nourishment , he cross the grass in a few long stride , and be admit without a word . 
 " what a time you have be ! I be give it up , " he whisper to the trembling dolly . " where be the candle ? I must strike a light . surely you might have bring one . Bolt the door , while I make a light , and close the curtain quietly , but leave the window open . do not   shake , like a child that be go to be whip . too late now for nonsense . what be you afraid of ? silly child ! " 
 as he speak he be strike a light in a little french box contain a cube of jade , and with very little noise he light two candle stand on the high oak desk . dolly draw a curtain across the window , and then go softly to the door , which open opposite the corner of a narrow passage , and make pretence to bolt it , but shoot the bolt outside the socket . 
 " come and let I look at you , " say Carne , for he know that he have be rough with she , and she be not of the kind that submit to that . " Beauty , how pale you look , and yet how perfectly lovely in this evening gown ! I should like to kill the two gentleman who sit next to you at dinner . darling , you know that whatever I do be only for your own sweet sake . " 
 " if you please not to touch I , it will be well , " say the lady , not in a whisper , but a firm and quiet voice , although her hand be tremble ; " you be come upon business , and you should do it . " 
 if Carne have but catch she in his arm , and hold she to his heart , and vow that all business might go to the devil while he hold his angel so , possibly the glow of nobler feeling might have be lose in the fire of passion . but he keep his selfish end alone in view , and neglect the womanly road to it . 
 " a despatch from London arrive today ; I must see it , " he say , shortly ; " as well as the copy of the answer send . and then my beauty must insert a not in the order to be issue in the morning , or otherwise invert its meaning , simply to save useless bloodshed . the key for a moment , the key , my darling , of this fine old piece of furniture ! " 
 " be it likely that I would give you the key ? my father always keep it . what right have you with his private desk ? I never promise anything so bad as that . " 
 " I be not to be trifle with , " he whisper , sternly . " do you think that I come here for kiss ? the key I must have , or break it open ; and how will you explain that away ? " 
 his rudeness settle her grow purpose . the misery of indecision vanish ; she would do what be right , if it cost her life . her face be as white as her satin dress , but her dark eye flash with menace . 
 " there be a key that open it , " she say , as she point to the bookcase ; " but I forbid you to touch it , sir . " 
 Carne 's only reply be to snatch the key from the upper glass door of the book - shelf , which fit the lock of the Admiral 's desk , though the owner be not aware of it . in a moment the intruder have unlock the high and massive standing - desk , throw back the cover , and place one candlestick among the document . many of they he brush aside , as useless for his purpose , and become bewildered among the rest , for the Commander of the Coast - defence be not a man of order . he never know where to put a thing , nor even where it might have put itself , but find a casual home for any paper that deserve it . this lack of method have one compensation , like other human defect , to wit , that it puzzle a clandestine searcher more deeply than cypher or cryptogram . Carne have the Admiral 's desk as wide as an oyster throw back on his valve , and just be undertucked with the knife , to make he go down easily . yet so great be the power of disorder that nothing could be make out of anything . " watch at the door , " he have say to dolly ; and this suit her intention . 
 for while he be thus absorb , with his back towards she , she open the door a little , and presently see the trusty Charles come hurry by , as if England hang upon his labour . " tell my father to come here this moment ; go softly , and say that I send you . " as she finish her whisper she close the door , without any sound , and stand patiently . 
 " show I where it be ; come and find it for I . everything here be in the vile mess , " cry Carne , grow reckless with wrath and hurry . " I want the despatch of this morning , and I find tailor ' bill , way to make water - proof blacking , a list of old woman , and a stump of old pipe ! come here , this instant , and show I where it be . " 
 " if you forget your good manner , " answer dolly , still keep in the dark near the door , " I shall have to leave you . surely you have practice enough in spying , to find what you want , with two candle . " 
 Carne turn for a moment , and star at she . her attitude surprise he , but he could not believe in her courage to rebel . she stand with she back to the door , and meet his gaze without a sign of fear . 
 " there be no official paper here , " he say , after another short ransack ; " there must have be some , if this desk be the one . have you dare to delude I by show the wrong desk ? " 
 dolly meet his gaze still , and then walk towards he . the band have strike up , and the company be sing with a fine patriotic roar , which ring very nobly in the distance " Britannia , rule the wave ! " dolly feel like a Briton as the word roll through she , and the melody lift her proud heart . 
 " you have delude yourself , " she say , stand proudly before the baffled spy ; " you have ransack my father 's private desk , which I allow you to do , because my father have no secret . he leave it open half the time , because he be a man of honour . he be not a man of plot , and wile , and trickery upon woman . and you have delude yourself , in dream that a daughter of his would betray her Country . " 
 " by the God that make I , I will have your life ! " cry Carne in French , as he dash his hand under his coat to draw his dagger ; but the pressure of the desk have displace that , so that he could not find it . she think that her time be come , and shriek for she be not at all heroic , and love life very dearly but she could not take her eye from his , nor turn to fly from the spell of they ; all she could do be to step back ; and she do so into her father 's arm . 
 " Ho ! " cry the Admiral , who have enter with the smile of good cheer and good company glow on his fine old countenance ; " my dolly and a stranger at my private desk ! Mr. Carne ! I have have a glass or two of wine , but my eye must be play I extraordinary trick . a gentleman search my desk , and apparently threaten my dear daughter ! have the kindness to explain , before you attempt to leave we . " 
 if the curtain have not be draw across the window , Carne would have make his escape , and leave the situation to explain itself . but the stuff be thick , and it get between his leg ; and before he could slip away , the stout old Admiral have he by the collar with a sturdy grasp , attest the substance of the pass generation . and a twinkle of good - humour be in the old eye still such a wonder be his Dolly that he might be do wrong in lay hand of force upon a visitor of her . thing as strange as this have be within his knowledge , and prove to be of little harm with forbearance . but his eye grow stern , as Carne try to dash his hand off . 
 " if you value your life , you will let I go , " say the young man to the old one . 
 " I will not let you go , sir , till you clear up this . a gentleman must see that he be bind to do so . if I prove to be wrong , I will apologise . what ! be you go to fire at I ? you would never be such a coward ! " 
 he drop upon the floor , with a bullet in his brain , and his course of duty end . Carne dash aside the curtain , and be nearly through the window , when two white arm be cast round his waist . he throw himself forward with all his might , and wrench at the little hand clasp around he , but they hold together like clench iron . " will you force I to kill you ? " " you may , if you like " be the dialogue of these lover . 
 the strength of a fit be in her despair . she set her bent knee against the window - frame , and a shower of glass fall between they ; but she flinch not from her convulsive grasp . " let I come back , that I may shoot myself , " Carne pant , for his breath be straiten ; " what be life to I after lose you ? " she make no answer , but take good care not to release so fond a lover . then he throw himself back with all his weight , and she fall on the floor beneath he . her clasp relax , and he be free ; for her eye have encounter her father 's blood , and she swoon away , and lie as dead . 
 Carne arise quickly , and bolt the door . his breath be short , and his body trembling , but the wit of the traitor be active still . " I must have something to show for all this , " he think as he glance at the body on the floor . " those reveller may not have hear this noise . I know where it be now , and I will get it . " 
 but the sound of the pistol , and shriek of the girl , have ring through the guest , when the wine be at their lip , and all be nod to one another . faith spring up , and then fall back trembling , and several man run towards the door . Charles , the footman , meet they there , with his face whiter than his napkin , and hold up his hand , but could not speak . Erle Twemlow dash past he and down the passage ; and Lord Southdown say : " gentleman , see to the lady . there have be some little mishap , I fear . Bob , and Arthur , come with I . " 
 Twemlow be first at the study door , and find it fasten , strike with all his force , and shout , at the very moment when Carne stand before the true desk of office . " good door , and good bolt , " muttered Carne ; " my rule be never to be hurry by noise . dolly will be quiet for a quarter of an hour , and the old gentleman forever . all I want be about two minute . " 
 Twemlow step back a few yard , and then with a good start deliver a rushing kick ; but the only result be a jar of his leg through the sole of his thin dress sandal . 
 " the window ! " cry the Marquis . " we will stop here ; you know the house ; take the short cut to the window . whoever be there , we shall have he so . I be too slow . boy Bob , go with he . " 
 " what a fool I be not to think of that ! " shout Twemlow , as he set off for the near house door , and unluckily Carne hear he . he have strike up the ledge of the desk with the butt of the pistol he have fire , and pocket a roll of fresh despatch , he stride across the body of the Admiral , and with a glance at dolly whose eye be wide open , but her face draw aside , like a peach with a split stone out he go . he smile as he hear the thundering of full - bodied gentleman against the study door , and their oath , as they damage their knuckle and knee - cap . then he set off hot - foot , but be stop by a figure advance from the corner of the house . 
 this be not a graceful figure , as of gentle maiden , nor venerable and slow of foot , as that of an ancient mariner , but a man in the prime of strength , and largely endow with that blessing the mate of truth . Carne perceive that he have meet his equal , and perhaps his well , in a bout of muscle , and he try to escape by superior mind . 
 " Twemlow , how glad I be that I have meet you ! you be the very man I want . there have be a sad accident in there with one of the Admiral 's pistol , and the dear old man be badly wounded . I be off for a doctor , for my horse be at hand . for God 's sake run in , and hold his head up , and try to staunch the bleeding . I shall be back in half an hour with the man that live at Pebbleridge . do not   lose a moment . Particulars hereafter . " 
 " particular now ! " reply Twemlow , sternly , as he plant himself before his cousin . " for year I have live among liar , and they call a lie Crom , and worship it . if this be not Crom , why do you bolt the door ? " 
 " you shall answer for this , when time allow . if the door be bolt , he must have do it . let I pass ; the last chance depend on my speed . " 
 Carne make a rush to pass , but Twemlow catch he by the breast , and hold he . " come back , " he say , fiercely , " and prove your word . without that , you go no far . " 
 Carne seize he by the throat , but his mighty beard , like a collar of hemp , protect he , and he bring his big brown fist like a hammer upon the traitor 's forehead . carne wrench at his dagger , but fail to draw it , and the two strong man roll on the grass , fight like two bull - dog . Reason , and think , and even sense of pain be lose in brutal fury , as they writhe , and clutched , and dig at one another , gash their knuckle , and gnash their tooth , froth with one another 's blood , for Carne bit like a tiger . at length tough condition and power of endurance get the mastery , and Twemlow plant his knee upon the gasp breast of Carne . 
 " Surrend , " he say , for his short breath could not fetch up the third syllable ; and Carne with a sign of surrender lie on his back , and put his chin up , and shut his eye as if he have faint . Twemlow with self - congratulation wait a little to recover breath , still keep his knee in the post of triumph , and pin the foe 's right arm to his side . but the foe 's left hand be free , and with the eye still shut , and a continuance of gasp , that left hand steal its way to the left pocket , quietly draw forth the second pistol , press back the hammer on the grass , and with a flash   both of eye and of flint   fire into the victor 's forehead . the triumphant knee roll off the chest , the body swing over , as a log be roll by the woodman 's crowbar , and Twemlow 's back be on the grass , and his eye be close to the moonlight . 
 Carne scramble up and shake himself , to be sure that all his limb be sound . " Ho , ho , ho ! " he chuckle ; " it be not so easy to beat I . why , who be you ? down with you , then ! " 
 Lord Robert Chancton , a lad of about sixteen , the eld son of the Marquis , have lose his way inside the house , in try to find a short - cut to the door , and come up after the pistol be fire , make a very gallant rush at the enemy . with a blow of the butt Carne send he sprawl ; then dash among the shrub and tree , in another minute be in the saddle , and gallop towards the ancestral ruin . 
 as he strike into the main road through the ground , Carne pass and just miss by a turn of the bridle another horseman ascend the hill , and urge a weary animal . the face of the man shoot past each other within a short yard , and gaze meet gaze ; but neither in the dark flash know the other , for a big tree bar the moonlight . but Carne , in another moment , think that the man who have pass must be Scudamore , probably fraught with hot tiding . and the thought be confirm , as he meet two trooper rid as hard as ride they might ; and then see the beacon on the headland flare . from point to point , and from height to height , like a sprinkle of blood , the red light run ; and the roar of gun from the moon - light sea make echo that they be ready . then the rub - a - dub - dub of the drum arise , and the thrilling blare of trumpet ; the great deep of the night be heave and break with the stir of human storm ; and the staunch and strong piece of earth our England be ready to defend herself . 




 CHAPTER LXII 

 the way out of it 

 " my father ! my father ! I must see my father . who be you , that dare to keep I out ? let I know the bad , and try to bear it . what be any of you to he ? " 
 " but , my dear child , " Lord Southdown answer , hold the door against poor faith , as she strove to enter the room of death , " wait just one minute , until we have lift he to the sofa , and let we bring your poor sister out . " 
 " I have no sister . she have kill my father , and the good thing she can do be to die . I feel that I could shoot she , if I have a pistol . let I see he , where he lie . " 
 " but , my poor dear , you must think of other . your dear father be beyond all help . your gallant lover lie on the grass . they hope to bring he round , God willing ! go where you can be of use . " 
 " how cruel you be ! you must want to drive I mad . let his father and mother see to he , while I see to my own father . if you have a daughter , you would understand . be I cry ? do I even tremble ? " 
 the Marquis offer his arm , and she take it in fear of fall , though she do not tremble ; so he lead she to her father 's last repose . the poor Admiral lie by the open window , with his head upon a stool which Faith have work . the ghastly wound be in his broad smooth forehead , and his fair round cheek be white with death . but the heart have not quite cease to beat , and some remnant of the mind still hover somewhere in the lacerated brain . Stubbard , sob like a child , be lift and clumsily chafe one numb hand ; while his wife , who have sponge the wound , be make the white curl wave with a fan she have shape from a long official paper find upon the floor . 
 dolly be recover from her swoon , and sit upon a stool by the bookcase , faintly wonder what have happen , but afraid to ask or think . the corner of the bookcase , and the burly form of Stubbard , conceal the window from she , and the torpid oppression which ensue upon a fit lay between she and her agony . faith , as she pass , dart one glance at she , not of pity , not of love , but of cold contempt and satisfaction at her misery . 
 then Faith , the quiet and gentle maid , the tranquil and the self - control   whom every one have charge with want of heart , because she have bear her own grief so well , stand with the body of her father at her foot , and utter an exceed bitter cry . the other have see enough of grief , as every human being must , but nothing half so sad as this . they fear to look at her face , and durst not open lip to comfort she . 
 " do not   speak . do not   look at he . you have no right here . when he come to himself , he will want none but I . I have always do everything for he since dear mother die ; and I shall get he to sit up . he will be so much well when he sit up . I can get he to do it , if you will only go . oh , father , father , it be your own Faith come to make you well , dear , if you will only look at I ! " 
 as she take his cold limp hand and kiss it , and wipe a red splash from his soft white hair , the die man feel , by nature 's feeling , that he be be touch by a child of his . a faint gleam flit through the dimness of his eye , which he have not the power to close , and the longing to say " farewell " contend with the drooping of the underlip . she be sure that he whisper , " bless you , darling ! " though nobody else could have make it out ; but a sudden rush of tear improve her hearing , as rain bring high voice down . 
 " dolly too ! " he seem to whisper next ; and Faith make a sign to Mrs. Stubbard . then dolly be bring , and fall upon her knee , at the other side of her father , and do not know how to lament as yet , and be scarcely sure of have anything to mourn . but she spread out her hand , as if for somebody to take they , and bow her pale face , and close her lip , that she might be rebuke without answer . 
 her father know she ; and his yearning be not to rebuke , but to bless and comfort she . he have forget everything , except that he be die , with a daughter at each side of he . this appear to make he very happy , about everything , except those two . he could not be expect to have much mind leave ; but the last of it be busy for his child 's good . once more he try to see they both , and whisper his last message to they " forgive and love each other . " 
 Faith bow her head , as his fall back , and silently offer to kiss her sister ; but dolly neither move nor look at she . " as you please , " say Faith ; " and perhaps you would like to see a little more of your handiwork . " 
 for even as she speak , her lover 's body be carry past the window , with his father and mother on either side , support his limp arm and sobbing . then dolly arise , and with one hand grasp the selvage of the curtain , fix one long gaze upon her father 's corpse . there be no tear in her eye , no sign of anguish in her face , no proof that she know or feel what she have do . and without a word she leave the room . 
 " hard to the last , even hard to you ! " cry Faith , as her tear fall upon the cold forehead . " oh , darling , how could you have love she so ? " 
 " it be not hardness ; it be madness . follow your sister , " Lord Southdown say . " we have have calamity enough . " 
 but Faith be fight with all her strength against an attack of hysteric , and fetch long gasp to control herself . " I will go , " reply Mrs. Stubbard ; " this poor child be quite unfit . what on earth be become of Lady Scudamore ? a doctor 's widow might have do some good . " 
 the doctor 's widow be do good elsewhere . in the first rush from the dining - room , Lady Scudamore have be push back by no less a person than Mrs. Stubbard ; when at last she reach the study door she find it close against she , and enter the next room , see the flash of the pistol fire at Twemlow . bravely hurry to the spot by the near outlet she could find , she become at once entirely occupy with this new disaster . for two man who run up with a carriage lamp declare that the gentleman be as dead as a door - nail , and hasten to make good their word by swing he up heel over head . but the lady make they set he down and support his head , while she bath the wound , and send to the house for his father and mother , and when he could be safely bring in - door , help with her soft hand beneath his hair , and then become so engross with he that the arrival of her long - lost son be for several hour unknown to she . 
 for so many thing come all at once be enough to upset any one . urgent despatch come hot for the hand that now be cold for ever ; not a moment to lose , when time have cease for the man who be to urge it . there be plenty of officer there , but no one clearly entitle to take command . moreover , the public service clash with the personal rage of the moment . some be for rush to the stable , mount every horse that could be find , and scour the country , sword in hand , for that infernal murderer . some , have just descry the flash of beacon from the headland , and hear the alarm - gun from shore and sea , be for hurrying to their regiment , or ship , or home and family   accord to the head - quarter of their life , while other put their coat on to ride for all the doctor in the county , who should fetch back the Admiral to this world , that he might tell everybody what to do . Scudamore stand with his urgent despatch in the large well - candle hall , and vainly desire to deliver they . " send for the Marquis , " suggest some one . 
 Lord Southdown come , without be send for . " I shall take this duty upon myself , " he say , " as Lord - Lieutenant of the county . Captain Stubbard , as commander of the near post , will come with I and read these order . gentleman , see that your horse be ready , and have all of the Admiral 's saddle . Captain Scudamore , you have discharge your trust , and doubtless ride far and hard . my order to you be a bottle of wine and a sirloin of roast beef at once . " 
 for the sailor be now in very low condition , weary , and worry , and in want of food . rid express , and change horse twice , not once have he recruit the inner man , who be therefore quite unfit to wrestle with the power of sudden grief . when he hear of the Admiral 's death , he stagger as if a horse have stumble under he , and his leg be stiff from hard sticking to saddle , have as much as they could do to hold he up . yet he feel that he could not do the right thing now , he could not go and deal with the expedient victual , neither might he dare intrude upon the lady now ; so he go out to comfort himself by attend to the trouble of his foundered horse , and by shed unseen among the tree the tear which have gather in his gentle eye . 
 accord to the sure law of nature , that break - down animal have be forget as soon as he be do with . he would have give his four leg if he could legally dispose of they for a single draught of sweet delicious rapturous ecstatic water ; but his bloodshot eye seek vainly , and his welt tongue find nothing wet , except the flake of his own salt foam . until , with the help of the moon , a sparkle   worth more to his mind than all the diamond he could draw   a sparkle of the pure water gleam into his dim eye from the distance . recall to his mind 's eye the grand date of his existence when he be a colt , and have a meadow to himself , with a sparkling river at the end of it , he set forth in good faith , and , although his leg be weary , " negotiate " as the sporting writer say the distance between he and the object of his desire . he have not the least idea that this have cost ten guineas as much as his own good self be worth ; for it happen to be the first dahlia see in that part of the country . that gaudy flower at its first appearance make such a stir among gardener that Mr. Swipes give the Admiral no peace until he allow he to order one . and so great be this gardener 's pride in his profession that he would not take an order for a rooted slip or cutting , from the rich man in the neighbourhood , for less than half a guinea . therefore Mr. Swipes be attend to the plant with the diligence of a wet - nurse , and the weather be dry , he have soak it overhead , even before he do that duty to himself . 
 a man of no tooth can take his nourishment in soup ; and nature , invert her manifold device which she would much rather do than be beat have provide that a horse can chew his solid into liquid , if there be a drop of juice in their composition , when his artificial life have fail to supply he with the bucket . this horse , be very dry , lay his tongue to the water - drop that sparkle on the foliage . he find they delicious , and he long for more , and very soon his ready mind suggest that the wet must have come out of the leaf , and there must be more there . proceed on this argument , he find it quite correct , and ten guineas ' worth of dahlia be go into his stomach by the time that Captain Scudamore come courteously to look after he . 
 Blyth , in equal ignorance of his sumptuous repast , give he a pat of approval , and be turn his head towards the stable yard , when he see a white figure glide swiftly through the tree beyond the belt of shrubbery . weary and melancholy as he be , and bewilder with the tumult of disaster , his heart bound hotly as he perceive that the figure be that of his Dolly dolly , the one love of his life , steal forth , probably to mourn alone the loss of her beloved father . as yet he know nothing of her share in that sad tale , and therefore feel no anxiety at first about her purpose . he would not intrude upon her grief ; he have no right to be her comforter ; but still she should have some one to look after she , at that time of night , and with so much excitement and danger in the air . so the poor horse be again abandon to his own resource , and be well use to such treatment , gaze as wistfully and delicately after the young man Scudamore as that young man gaze after his lady - love . 
 to follow a person stealthily be not conducive to one 's self - respect , but something in the lady 's walk and gesture impel the young sailor to follow she . she appear to be hasten , with some set purpose , and without any heed of circumstance , towards a part of the ground where no house be , no living creature for company , nor even a bench to rest upon . there be no foot - path in that direction , nor anything to go to , but the inland cliff that screen the Hall from northeastern wind , and at its foot a dark pool have no good name in the legend of the neighbourhood . even Parson Twemlow would not go near it later than the afternoon milking of the cow , and Captain Zeb would much rather face a whole gale of wind in a twelve - foot boat than give one glance at its dead calm face when the moon like a ghost stand over it . 
 " she be go towards corpse - walk pit , " think Scuddy " a cheerful place at this time of night ! she might even fall into it unawares , in her present state of distraction . I be absolutely bind to follow she . " 
 Duty fall in with his wish , as it have a knack of do . forget his weariness , he follow , and become more anxious at every step . for the maiden walk as in a dream , without regard of anything , herself more like a vision than a good substantial being . to escape Mrs. Stubbard she have go upstairs and lock herself in her bedroom , and then slip out without change dress , but throw a dark mantle over it . this have fall off , and she have not care to stop or think about it , but go on to her death exactly as she go in to dinner . her dress of white silk take the moonlight with a soft gleam like itself , and her clustering curl   release from fashion by the power of passion   fall , like the shadow , on her sweet white neck . but she never even ask herself how she look ; she never turn round to admire her shadow : tomorrow she would throw no shade , but be one ; and how she look , or what she be , would matter , to the world she use to think so much of , never more . 
 suddenly she pass from the moonlight into the blackness of a lonely thicket , and force her way through it , without heed of bruise or rent . at the bottom of the steep lie the long dark pit , and she stand upon the brink and gaze into it . to a sane mind nothing could look less inviting . all above be air and light , freedom of the wind and play of moon with summer foliage ; all below be gloom and horror , cold eternal stillness , and oblivion everlasting . even the new white frock awake no flutter upon that sullen breast . 
 dolly heave a sigh and shudder , but she do not hesitate . her mind be wander , but her heart be fix to make atonement , to give its life for the life destroy , and to lie too deep for shame or sorrow . suddenly a faint gleam catch her eye . the sob of self - pity from her fair young breast have bring into view her cherish treasure , bright keepsake of the girlish day when many a lover worship she . take from her neck the silken braid , she kiss they , and lay they on the bank . " they be all too good for I , " she think ; " they shall not perish with I . " 
 then , with one long sigh , she call up all her fleeting courage , and spring upon a fall trunk which overhang the water . " there will be no Dan to save I now , " she say as she reach the end of it . " Poor Dan ! he will be sorry for I . this be the way out of it . " 
 her white satin shoe for a moment shone upon the black bark of the tree , and , with one despairing prayer to Heaven , she leap into the liquid grave . 
 Dan be afar , but another be near , who love she even more than Dan . Blyth Scudamore hear the plunge , and rush to the brink of the pit , and tear his coat off . for a moment he see nothing but black water heaving silently ; then something white appear , and move , and a faint cry arose , and a hopeless struggle with engulf death begin . 
 " keep still , do not   struggle , only spread your arm , and throw your head back as far as you can , " he cry , as he swam with long stroke towards she . but if she hear , she could not heed , as the light of the deep sky come and go , and the choke water flash between , and gurgle into her ear and mouth , and smother her face with her own long hair . she dash her poor helpless form about , and fling out her foot for something solid , and grasp in dim agony at the wave herself have make . then her dress become heavily bagged with water , and the love of life be quench , and the night of death envelop she . without a murmur , down she go , and the bubble of her breath come up . 
 Scudamore utter a bitter cry , for his heart be almost break within an arm' - length of his love , and she be go for ever ! for the moment he do not perceive that the clasp of despair must have drown they both . point his hand and throw up his heel , he make one vain dive after she , then he know that the pit be too deep for the bottom to be reach in that way . he swam to the trunk from which dolly have leap , and judge the distance by the sullen ripple , dash in with a dive like a terrified frog . like a bullet he sink to the bottom , and grope with three fathom of water above he . just as his lung be give out , he feel something soft and limp and round . grasp this by the trail hair , he strike mightily up for the surface , and draw a long breath , and sustain above water the head that fall back upon his pant breast . 
 some three hour later , dolly Darling lie in her own little bed , as pale as death , but sleep the sleep of the world that see the sun ; while her only sister kneel by her side , weep the tear of a high world than that . " how could I be so brutal , and so hard ? " sob Faith . " if father have see it , will he ever forgive I ? his last word be ' forgive , and love . ' " 




 CHAPTER LXIII 

 the FATAL step 

 as Carne ride up the hill that night towards his ruin castle , the flush of fierce excitement and triumphant struggle die away , and self - reproach and miserable doubt strike into he like ague . for the death of Twemlow as he suppose he feel no remorse whatever . he he have shoot in furious combat , and as a last necessity ; the fellow have twice insult he , and then insolently collar he . and Faith , who have thwart he with dolly , and be from the first his enemy , now would have to weep and wail , and waste her youth in constancy . all that be good ; but he could not regard with equal satisfaction the death of the ancient Admiral . the old man have bring it upon himself by his stupid stubbornness ; and look fairly upon that matter , Carne scarcely see how to blame himself . still , it be a most unlucky thing , and must lead to a quantity of mischief . to - morrow , or at the late Monday , be to have crown with grand success his year of toil and danger . there still might be the landing , and he would sail that night to hasten it , instead of arrange all ashore ; but it could no long be a triumph of crafty management . the country be up , the Admiral 's death would spread the alarm and treble it ; and bad of all , in the hot pursuit of himself , which be sure to follow when people 's wit come back to they , all the store and ammunition , bring together by so much skill and patience and hardihood , must of necessity be discover and fall into the hand of the enemy . farewell to his long - cherish hope of specially neat retribution , to wit , that the ruin of his family should be the ruin of the land which have reject he ! then a fierce thought cross his mind , and become at once a stern resolve . if he could never restore Carne Castle , and dwell there in prosperity , neither should any of his oppressor . the only trace of his ancestral home should be a vast black hole in earth . 
 for even if the landing still succeed , and the country be subdue , he could never make his home there , after what he have do to - night . dolly be lose to he for ever ; and although he have love she with all the ardor he could spare from his high purpose , he must make up his mind to do without she , and perhaps it be all the well for he . if he have marry she , no doubt he could soon have teach she her proper place ; but no one could tell how she might fly out , through her self - will and long indulgence . he would marry a french woman ; that would be the good ; perhaps one connect with the Empress Josephine . as soon as he have make up his mind to this , his conscience cease to trouble he . 
 from the crest of the hill at the eastern gate many a bend of shore be clear , and many a league of summer sea lie waver in the moonlight . along the beach red torch flare , as man of the Coast - Defence push forth , and yellow flash of cannon inland signal for the Volunteers , while the light gleam   like window open from the depth   where sloop and gun - boat , frigate and ship of the line , be crowd sail to rescue England . for the semaphore , and when day be out the beacon - light , have glow along the backbone of the english hill , and England call every Englishman to show what he be make of . 
 " that will do . enough of that , John Bull ! " defy his native land , Carne shake his fist in the native manner . " stupid old savage , I shall live to make you howl . this country have become too hot to hold I , and I will make it hotter before I have do . here , Orso and Leo , good dog , good dog ! you can kill a hundred british bull - dog . Mount guard for an hour , till I call you down the hill . you can pull down a score of Volunteers apiece , if they dare to come after I . I have an hour to spare , and I know how to employ it . Jerry , old Jerry Bowles , stir your crooked shank . what be you rub your blear eye at ? " 
 the huge boar - hound , who obey no voice but his , take post upon the rugged road   which have never be repair since the Carnes be a power in the land , and sit side by side beneath the crumble arch , with their long fang glistening and red eye roll in the silver moonlight , while their deep chest pant for the chance of good fresh human victual . then Carne give his horse to ancient Jerry , say , " feed he , and take he with his saddle on to the old yew - tree in half an hour . wait there for Captain Charron , and for I . you be not to go away till I come to you . who be in the old place now ? think well before you answer I . " 
 " no one now in the place but she " the old man lift his elbow , as a coachman do in pass " and he down in the yellow jug . all the french sailor be at sea . only she will not   go away ; and she moaneth worse than all the owl and ghost . ah , your honour should never ' a do that respectable folk to Springhaven too ! " 
 " it be a slight error of judgment , Jerry . what a mealy lot these English be , to make such a fuss about a trifle ! but I be too soft - hearted to blow she up . tell she to meet I in half an hour by the break dial , and to bring the brat , and all her affair in a bundle such as she can carry , or kick down the hill before she . in half an hour , do you understand ? and if you care for your stiff old bone , get out of the way by that time . " 
 in that half - hour Carne gather in small compass , and strap up in a little " mail " as such light baggage then be call all his important document , despatch , letter , and paper of every kind , and the cash he be entrust with , which he use to think safe at Springhaven . then he take from a desk which be fix to the wall a locket bright with diamond , and kiss it , and fasten it beneath his neck - cloth . the wisp of hair inside it come not from any young or lovely head , but from the resolute brow of his mother , the woman who hat England . he should have put something well to his mouth ; for instance , a good beef sandwich . but one great token of his perversion be that he never do feed well a sure proof of the unrighteous man , as suggest by the holy Psalmist , and more distinctly put by Livy in the character he give Hannibal . 
 regard as a light thing his poor unfurnishe stomach , Carne mount the broken staircase , in a style which might else have be difficult . he have make up his mind to have one last look at the broad land of his ancestor , from the last that ever should be see of the wall they have rear and ruin . he stand upon the high vantage - point that he could attain with safety , where a shaggy gnarl of the all - pervade ivy serve as a friendly stay . to the right and left and far behind he all have once be their domain every tree , and meadow , and rock that face the moon , have belong to his ancestor . " be it a wonder that I be fierce ? " he cry , with unwonted self - inspection ; " who , that have be rob as I have , would not try to rob in turn ? the only thing amazing be my patience and my justice . but I will come back yet , and have my revenge . " 
 descend to his hyena den as Charron always call it he catch up his packet , and take a lantern , and a coil of tow which have be prepare , and stride forth for the last time into the slop court behind the wall . pass towards the eastern vault , he see the form of some one by the break dial , above the hedge of bramble , which have once be of rose and sweetbriar . " oh , that woman ! I have forget that affair ! " he mutter , with annoyance , as he push through the thorn to meet she . 
 Polly Cheeseman , the former belle of Springhaven , be lean against the wreck dial , with a child in her arm and a bundle at her foot . her pride and gaiety have leave she now , and she look very wan through frequent weeping , and very thin from nursing . her beauty   like her friend   have prove unfaithful under shame and sorrow , and little of it now remain except the long brown tress and the large blue eye . those eye she fix upon Carne with more of terror than of love in they ; although the fear be such as turn with a very little kindness to adore love . 
 Carne leave she to begin , for he really be not without shame in this matter ; and Polly be far well suited than dolly for a scornful and arrogant will like his . deeply despise all the female race as the greek tragedian call they save only the one who have give he to the world , he might have be a God to polly if he have but behave as a man to she . she look at he now with an implore gaze , from the gentleness of her ill - use heart . 
 their child , a fine boy about ten month old , break the silence by say " booh , booh , " very well , and hold out little hand to his father , who have often be scornfully kind to he . 
 " oh , Caryl , Caryl , you will never forsake he ! " cry the young mother , hold he up with rapture , and support his fat arm in that position ; " he be the very image of you , and he seem to know it . baby , say ' da - da . ' there , he have put his mouth up , and his memory be so wonderful ! oh , Caryl , what do you think of that and the first time of try it by moonlight ? " 
 " there be no time for this nonsense , polly . he be a wonderful baby , I dare say ; and so be every baby , till he get too old . you must obey order , and be off with he . " 
 " oh no ! you be come to take we with you . there , I have cover his face up , that he may not suppose you look cross at I . oh , Caryl , you would never leave he behind , even if you could do that to I . we be not grand people , and you can put we anywhere , and now I be nearly as well as ever . I have put up all his little thing ; it do not matter about my own . I be never bring up to be idle , and I can earn my own living anywhere ; and it might be a real comfort for you , with the great people go against you , to have somebody , not very grand , of course , but as true to you as yourself , and belong altogether to you . I know many people who would give their eye for such a baby . " 
 " there be no time for this , " Carne answer , sternly ; " my arrangement be make , and I can not take you . I have no fault to find with you , but argument be useless . " 
 " yes , I know that , Caryl ; and I be sure that I never would attempt to argue with you . you should have everything your own way , and I could attend to so many thing that no man ever do properly . I will be a slave to you , and this little darling love you , and then you will feel that you have two to love you , wherever you go , and whatever you do . and if I speak crossly when first I find out that that I go away for nothing with you , you must have forgive I by this time , and I never will remind you again of it ; if I do , send I back to the place I belong to . I belong to you now , Caryl , and so do he ; and when we be away from the people who know I , I shall be pleasant and cheerful again . I be only two - and - twenty the day the boat come home last week , and they use to say the young man jump into the water as soon as they catch sight of I . try to be kind to I , and I shall be so happy that I shall look almost as I use to do , when you say that the great lady might be grander , but none of they fit to look into my look - glass . Dear Caryl , I be ready ; I do not   care where it be , or what I may have to put up with , so long as you will make room for your polly , and your baby . " 
 " I be not at all a hard man , " say Carne , retreat as the impulsive Polly offer he the baby , " but once for all , no more of this . I have quite forgive any strong expression you may have make use of when your head be light ; and if all go well , I shall provide for you and the child , accord to your rank in life . but now you must run down the hill , if you wish to save your life and his . " 
 " I have run down the hill already . I care not a pin for my own life ; and hard as you be you would never have the heart to destroy your own little Caryl . he may be call Caryl you will not deny he that , although he have no right to be call Carne . oh , Caryl , Caryl , you can be so good , when you think there be something to gain by it . only be good to we now , and God will bless you for it , darling . I have give up all the world for you , and you can not have the heart to cast I off . " 
 " what a fool the woman be ! have you ever know I change my mind ? if you scorn your own life , through your own folly , you must care for the brat 's . if you stop here ten minute , you will both be blow to piece . " 
 " through my own folly ! oh , God in heaven , that you should speak so of my love for you ! Squire Carne , you be the bad man that ever live ; and it serve I right for trust you . but where be I to go ? who will take I and support I , and my poor abandon child ? " 
 " your parent , of course , be your natural supporter . you be hurt your child by this low abuse of I . now put aside excitement , and run home , like a sensible woman , before your good father go to bed . " 
 she have watch his face all the time , as if she could scarcely believe that he be in earnest , but he prove it by leave she with a wave of his hat , and hasten back to his lantern . then take up that , and the coil of tow , but leave his package against the wall , he disappear in the narrow passage lead to the powder vault . polly stand still by the break dial , with her eye upon the moon , and her arm around the baby , and a pang in her heart which prevent she from speak , or move , or even know where she be . 
 then Carne , stepping warily , unlock the heavy oak door at the entrance of the cellarage , hold down his lantern , and fix with a wedge the top step of the ladder , which have be make to revolve with a pin and collar at either end , as before describe . after try the step with his hand , to be sure that it be now wedge safely , he fling his coil into the vault and follow . some recollection make he smile as he be go down the step : it be that of a stout man lie at the bottom , shake in every bone , yet sound as a grape ensconce in jelly . as he touch the bottom he hear a little noise as of some small substance fall , but see a piece of old mortar dislodge , he do not turn round to examine the place . if he have do so he would have find behind the ladder the wedge he have just insert to secure the level of the " Inspector 's step . " 
 unwind his coil of tow , which have be steep in saltpetre to make a long fuse , with a toss of his long leg he cross the barricade of solid oak rail about six foot high securely fasten across the vault , for the enclosure of the dangerous storage . inside it be a passage , between chest of arm , dismount cannon , and case from every department of supply , to the explosive part of the magazine , the devourer of the human race , the pulp of the marrow of the Furies gunpowder . 
 of this there be now collect here , and store in tier that reach the roof , enough to blow up half the people of England , or lie they all low with a bullet before it ; yet not enough , not a millionth part enough , to move for the breadth of a hair the barrier betwixt right and wrong , which a very few barrel be enough to do with a man who have sap the foundation . treading softly for fear of a spark from his boot , and guard the lantern well , Carne approach one of the cask in the low tier , and lift the tarpaulin . then he slip the wooden slide in the groove , and allow some five or six pound to run out upon the floor , from which the cask be raise by timber baulk . leave the slide partly open , he spread one end of his coil like a broad lamp - wick in the pile of powder which have run out , and put a brick upon the tow to keep it from shift . then he pay out the rest of the coil on the floor like a snake some thirty foot long , with the tail about a yard inside the barricade . with a very steady hand he take the candle from inside the horn , and kindle that tail of the fuse ; and then replace his light , he recrosse the open timber - work , and swiftly remount the ladder of escape . " twenty minute ' or half an hour 's grace , " he think , " and long before that I shall be at the yew - tree . " 
 but , as he plant his right foot sharply upon the top step of the ladder , that step swing back , and cast he heavily backwards to the bottom . the wedge have drop out , and the step revolve like the treadle of a fox - trap . 
 for a minute or two he lie stunned and senseless , with the lantern before he on its side , and the candle burn a hole in the bubbly horn . slowly recover his wit , he strive to rise , as the deadly peril be bear in upon he . but instead of rise , he fall back again with a curse , and then a long - draw groan ; for pain   like the thrill of a man on the rack   have get hold of he and mean to keep he . his right arm be snap at the elbow , and his left leg just above the knee , and the jar of his spine make he feel as if his core have be split out of he . he have no fat , like shargeloe , to protect he , and no sheath of hair like Twemlow 's . 
 writhe with anguish , he hear a sound which do not improve his condition . it be the spluttering of the fuse , eat its merry way towards the five hundred cask of gunpowder . in the fury of peril he contrive to rise , and stand on his right foot with the other hang limp , while he stay himself with his left hand upon the ladder . even if he could crawl up this , it would benefit he nothing . before he could drag himself ten yard , the explosion would overtake he . his only chance be to quench the fuse , or draw it away from the priming . with a hobble of agony he reach the barricade , and strove to lift his crippled frame over it . it be hopeless ; the power of his back be go , and his limb be unable to obey his brain . then he try to crawl through at the bottom , but the opening of the rail would not admit his body , and the train of ductile fire have leave only ash for he to grasp at . 
 quiver with terror , and mad with pain , he return to the foot of the step , and clung till a gasp of breath come back . then he shout , with all his remain power , " polly , oh , Polly , my own polly ! " 
 Polly have be stand , like a statue of despair , beside the break dial . to she it matter little whether earth should open and swallow she , or fire cast she up to heaven . but his shout arouse she from this trance , and her heart leap up with the fond belief that he have relent , and be call she and the child to share his fortune . there she stand in the archway and look down , and the terror of the scene overwhelm she . through a break arch beyond the barricade pale moonbeam cross the darkness , like the bar of some soft melody ; in the middle the serpent coil be hiss with the deadly nitre ; at the foot of the step be her false lover husband he have call himself with his hat off , and his white face turn in the last supplication towards she , as hers have be turn towards he just now . should a woman be as pitiless as a man ? 
 " come down , for God 's sake , and climb that curse wood , and pull back the fuse , pull it back from the powder . oh , Polly ! and then we will go away together . " 
 " it be too late . I will not risk my baby . you have make I so weak that I could never climb that fence . you be blow up the castle which you promise to my baby ; but you shall not blow up he . you tell I to run away , and run I must . good - bye ; I be go to my natural supporter . " 
 Carne hear her step as she flee , and he fancy that he hear therewith a mocking laugh , but it be a sob , a hysterical sob . she would have help he , if she dare ; but her wit be go in panic . she know not of his shattered limb and horrible plight ; and it flash across she that this be another trick of his to destroy she and the baby , while he flee . she have prove that all his vow be lie . 
 then Carne make his mind up to die like a man , for he see that escape be impossible . limp back to the fatal barrier , he raise himself to his full height , and stand proudly to see , as he put it , the last of himself . not a quiver of his haughty feature show the bodily pain that rack he , nor a flinch of his deep eye confess the tumult move in his mind and soul . he pull out his watch and lay it on the top rail of the old oak fence : there be not enough light to read the time , but he could count the tick he have to live . suddenly hope flash through his heart , like the crack of a gun , like a lightning fork a big rat be bite an elbow of the yarn where some tallow have fall upon it . would he cut it , would he drag it away to his hole ? would he pull it a little from its fatal end ? he be strong enough to do it , if he only understand . the fizz of saltpetre disturb the rat , and he hoist his tail and skip back to his home . 
 the last thought of this unhappy man go back upon his early day ; and thing , which he have pass without think of , stand before he like his tombstone . none of his recent crime come now to his memory to disturb it there be time enough after the body for they but trifle which have first deprave the mind , and slip whose repetition have make slippery the soul , like the alphabet of death , grow plain to he . then he think of his mother , and cross himself , and say a little prayer to the Virgin . 
 Charron be wait by the old yew - tree , and Jerry sit tremble , with his eye upon the castle , while the black horse , rope to a branch , be mourn the scarcity of oats and the abundance of gnat . 
 " pest and the devil , but the coast be all alive ! " cry the Frenchman , soothe anxiety with solid and liquid comfort . " something have go wrong behind the tail of everything . and there go that big Stoobar , blaze with his sordid battery ! arouse thee , old Cheray ! the time too late be over . those light thrice accurse will display our little boat , and John Bull be rush with a thousand sail . the Commander be mad . they will have he , and we too . shall I dance by a rope ? it be the only dance probable for I in England . " 
 " I have never expect any good to come , " the old man answer , without move . " the curse of the house be upon the young Squire . I see it in his eye this morning , the same as I see in his father 's eye , when the sun be go down the very night he die . I shall never see he more , sir , nor you either , nor any other man that bid to the right side of his coffin . " 
 " Bah ! what a set you be of funeral , you englishman ! but if I think he be in risk , I would stay to see the end of it . " 
 " here come the end of it ! " the old man cry , leap up and catch at a rugged cord of trunk , with his other hand point up the hill . from the base of the castle a broad blaze rush , show window and battlement , arch and tower , as in a flicker of the northern light . then up go all the length of fabric , as a wanton child toss his Noah 's ark . keep and buttress , tower and arch , mullioned window and battlement , in a fiery furnace leap on high , like the outburst of a volcano . then , with a roar that rock the earth , they break into a storm of ruin , sweep the heaven with a flood of fire , and spread the sea with a mantle of blood . follow slowly in stately spire , and calmly swallow everything , a fountain of dun smoke arise , and solemn silence fill the night . 
 " all over now , thank the angel and the saint ! my faith , but I make up my mind to join they , " cry Charron , who have fall , or be fell by the concussion . " Cheray , art thou still alive ? the smoke be in my neck . I can not liberate my word , but the lump must be all come down by this time , without add to the weight of our poor brain . something fall in this old tree , a long way up , as high as where the crow build . it be like a long body , with one leg and one arm . I hope it be not the Commander ; but one thing be certain he be go to heaven . let we pray that he may stop there , if St. Peter admit a man who be sell the key of his country to the enemy . but we must do duty to ourselves , my Cheray . let we hasten to the sea , and give the signal for the boat . La Torche will be a weak light after this . " 
 " I will not go . I will abide my time . " the old man stagger to a broken column of the ancient gateway which have fall near they , and fling his arm around it . " I remember this since I first could toddle . the way of the Lord be wonderful . " 
 " come away , you old fool , " cry the Frenchman ; " I hear the tramp of soldier in the valley . if they catch you here , it will be drum - head work , and you will swing before morning in the ruin . " 
 " I be very old . my time be short . I would liefer hang from an english beam than deal any more with your outlandish lot . " 
 " farewell to thee , then ! thou art a faithful clod . here be five guineas for thee , of English stamp . I doubt if napoleon shall ever be coin in England . " 
 he be off while he might a gallant Frenchman , and an honest enemy ; such as our country have respect always , and often endeavour to turn into fast friend . but the old man stand and watch the long gap , where for century the castle of the Carnes have tower . and his sturdy faith be reward . 
 " I be starve " these word come feebly from a gaunt , ragged figure that approach he . " for three day my food have be forget ; and bad as it be , I miss it . there come a great rumble , and my wall fall down . Ancient Jerry , I can go no far . I be empty as a shank bone when the marrow - toast be serve . your duty be to feed I , with inferior stuff at any rate . " 
 " no , sir , no ; " the old servitor be rouse by the charge of neglect duty . " Sir Parsley , it be no fault of mine whatever . Squire undertake to see to all of it himself . do not   blame I , sir ; do not   blame I . " 
 " never mind the blame , but make it good , " Mr. Shargeloes answer , meagrely , for he feel as if he could never be fat again . " what do I see there ? it be like a crust of bread , but I be too weak to stoop for it . " 
 " come inside the tree , sir . " the old man lead he , as a grandsire lead a famished child . " what a shame to starve you , and you so hearty ! but the Squire clean forget it , I doubt , with his foreign trick come to this great blow - up . here , sir , here ; please to sit down a moment , while I light a candle . they french chap be so wasteful always , and always grumble at good english victual . here be enough to feed a family Captain Charron have throw by bread , and good mutton , and pretty near half a ham , and a bottle or so of thin nasty foreign wine . eat away , Sir Parsley ; why , it do I good to see you . you feed something like an Englishman . but you know , sir , it be all your own fault at bottom , for come among they foreigner a - meddling . " 
 " you be a fine fellow . you shall be my head butler , " Percival Shargeloes reply , while he make such a meal as he never make before , and never should make again , even when he come to be the right honourable the Lord Mayor of London . 




 CHAPTER LXIV 

 WRATH and SORROW 

 the two most conspicuous man of the age be sadden and cast down just now one by the natural kindly sorrow into which all man live for other , till other live into it for they ; and one by the petulant turn of fortune , twisting and break his well - weave web . Lord Nelson arrive at Springhaven on Monday , to show his affection for his dear old friend ; and the Emperor Napoleon , at the same time , be pace the opposite cliff in grief and dudgeon . 
 he have take his post on some high white land , about a league southward of Boulogne , and with strong field - glass , which he pettishly exchange in doubt of their power and truth , he be scan all the roadway of the shore and the trackless breadth of sea . his quick brain be burn for despatch overland whether from the coast road past Etaples , or far inland by the great route from Paris , or away to the southeast by special courier from the austrian frontier as well as for signal out at sea , and the movement of the british ship , to show that his own be come . he have treat with disdain the suggestion of his faithful Admiral Decres , who have fear to put the truth too plainly , that the fleet order up from the west have fail , and with it the Master 's mighty scheme . have yet to learn the lesson that his good plan might be foil , he be furious when doubt be cast upon this pet design . like a giant of a spider at the nucleus of his web , he watch the broad fan of radiant thread , and the hovering of filmy woof , but without the mild philosophy of that spider , who be verse in the very sad capriciousness of fly . 
 just within hearing   and fain to be far , in his present state of mind   be several young officer of the staff , make little mouth at one another , for want of well pastime , but look as grave , when the mighty man glance round , as schoolboy do under the master 's eye . " send Admiral Decres to I , " the Emperor shout , as he lay down his telescope and return to his petulant to - and - fro . 
 in a few minute Admiral Decres arrive , and after a salute which be not acknowledge , walk in silence at his master 's side . the great man , talk to himself aloud , and revile almost every one except himself , take no more notice of his comrade for some minute than if he have be a poodle keep pace with he . then he turn upon he fiercely , with one hand throw out , as if he would have like to strike he . 
 " what then be the meaning of all this ? " he speak too fast for the other to catch all his word . " you have lose I three day of it . how much long will you conceal your knowledge ? Carne 's scheme have fail , through treachery probably his own . I never like the man . he want to be the master of I of I ! I can do without he ; it be all the well , if my fleet will come . I have three fleet , besides these . any one of they would do . they would do , if even half their crew be dead , so long as they disturb the enemy . you know where Villeneuve be , but you will not tell I . " 
 " I tell your Majesty what I think , " M. Decres reply , with dignity , " but it do not please you to listen to I . shall I now tell your Majesty what I know ? " 
 " ha ! you have dare to have secret despatch ! you know more of the movement of my fleet than I do ! you have be screen he all along . which of you be the bad traitor ? " 
 " your Majesty will regret these word . Villeneuve and myself be devoted to you . I have not hear from he . I have receive no despatch . but in a private letter just receive , which be here at your Majesty 's service , I find these word , which your Majesty can see . ' from my brother on the spanish coast I have just hear . Admiral Villeneuve have sail for Cadiz , believe Nelson to be in chase of he . my brother see the whole fleet crowd sail southward . no doubt it be the good thing they could do . if they come across Nelson , they would be knock to piece . ' your Majesty , that be an opinion only ; but it seem to be share by M. Villeneuve . " 
 Napoleon 's wrath be never speechless except upon one great occasion and its outburst put every other in the wrong , even while he know that he be in the right . regard Decres with a glare of fury , such as no other eye could pour , or meet a glare as of burnish steel fire from a cannon he drive he out of every self - defence or shelter , and shatter he in the dust of his own principle . it be not the difference of rank between they , but the difference in the power of their mind , that chase like a straw before the wind the very stable sens of the man who understand thing . he know that he be right , but the right be rout , and away with it fly all capacity of reason in the pitiless torrent of passion , like a man in a barrel , and the barrel in Niagara . 
 M. Decres know not head from tail , in the rush of invective pour upon he ; but he take off his hat in soft search for his head , and to let in the compliment rain upon it . 
 " it be good , " reply the Emperor , reply to himself , as the foam of his fury begin to pass ; " you will understand , Decres , that I be not angry , but only lament that I have such a set of fool . you be not the bad . I have big fool than you . alas that I should confess it ! " 
 Admiral Decres put his hat upon his head , for the purpose of take it off , to acknowledge the kindness of this compliment . it be the first polite expression he have receive for half an hour . and it would have be the last , if he have dare to answer . 
 " villeneuve can not help it that he be a fool , " continue Napoleon , in a milder strain ; " but he owe it to his rank that he should not be a coward . Nelson be his black beast . Nelson have reduce he to a condition of wet pulp . I shall send a braver man to supersede he . be french fleet forever to turn tail to an inferior force of stupid English ? if I be on the sea , I would sweep Nelson from they . our man be far braver , when they learn to spread their leg . as soon as I have finish with those filthy german , I will take the command of the fleet myself . it will be a bad day for that brag Nelson . give I pen and paper , and send Daru to I . I must conquer the continent once more , I suppose ; and then I will return and deal with England . " 
 in a couple of hour he have shape and finish the plan of a campaign the most triumphant that even he ever plan and accomplish . then his mind become satisfied with good work , and he mount his horse , and for the last time ride through the grand encampment the sun have ever see , distribute his calm smile , as if his nature be too large for tempest . 
 on the sacred white coast , which the great of Frenchmen should only approach as a prisoner , stand a man of less imperious mould , and of sweet and gentle presence a man who be able to command himself in the keen disappointment , because he combine a quick sense of humour with the power of prompt action , and be able to appreciate his own great quality without conclude that there be no other . his face , at all time except those of hot battle , be fill with quiet sadness , as if he be send into the world for some great purpose beyond his knowledge , yet surely not above his aim . year of deep anxiety and ever urgent duty have make he look old before his time , but in no wise abate his natural force . he know that he have duty before he still , and he feel that the only discharge be death . 
 but now , in the tenderness of his heart , he have forget all about himself , and even for the moment about his country . Nelson have take the last fond look at the dear old friend of many changeful year , so true and so pleasant throughout every change . though one eye have fail for the work of the brain , it still be in sympathy with his heart ; and a tear shone upon either wrinkle cheek , as the us of sadness outlast the bright view . he hold Faith by the hand , or she hold by his , as they come forth , without know it , through nature 's demand for an open space , when the air be choke with sorrow . 
 " my dear , you must check it ; you must leave off , " say Nelson , although he be go on himself . " it be useless for I to say a word to you , because I be almost as bad myself . but still I be old , and I feel that I ought to be able to comfort you , if I only know the way . " 
 " you do comfort I , more than I can tell , although you do not   say anything . for any one to sit here , and be sorry with I , make it come a little light . and when it be a man like you , Lord Nelson , I feel a sort of love that make I feel less bitter . Mr. Twemlow drive I wild with a quantity of text , and a great amount of talk about a well land . how would he like to go to it himself , I wonder ? there be a great hole in my heart , and nothing that anybody say can fill it . " 
 " and nothing that any one can do , my dear , " her father 's friend answer , softly , " unless it be your own good self , with the kindness of the Lord to help you . one of the good thing to begin with be to help somebody else , if you can , and lead yourself away into another person 's trouble . be there any one here very miserable ? " 
 " none that I can think of half so miserable as I be . there be great excitement , but no misery . Miss Twemlow have recover her Lord Mayor the gentleman that wear that extraordinary coat oh , I forget , you be not here then . and although he have have a very sad time of it , every one say that the total want of diet will be much well for he than any mere change . I be ashamed to be talk of such trifle now ; but I respect that man , he be so straightforward . if my brother Frank have be at all like he , we should never have be as we be this day . " 
 " my dear , you must not blame poor Frank . he would not come down to the dinner because he hat warlike speech . but he have see the error of his way . no more treasonable stuff for he . he think it be large , and poetic , and all that , like give one 's shirt to an impostor . all of we make mistake sometimes . I have make a great many myself , and have always be the foremost to perceive they . but your own brave lover have you forget he ? he fight like a hero , I be tell ; and nothing could save his life except that he wear a new - fashioned periwig . " 
 " I would rather not talk of he now , Lord Nelson , although he have no periwig . I be deeply thankful that he escape ; and no doubt do his good , as he be bind to do . I try to be fair to everybody , but I can not help blame every one , when I come to remember how blind we have be . Captain Stubbard must have be so blind , and Mrs. Stubbard a great deal bad , and bad of all his own aunt , Mrs. Twemlow . oh , Lord Nelson , if you have only stop here , instead of hurry away for more glory ! you see the whole of it ; you predict everything ; you even warn we again in your last letter ! and yet you must go away , and leave we to ourselves ; and this be how the whole of it have end . " 
 " my dear child , I will not deny that the eye of Nelson have a special gift for pierce the wile of the scoundrelly foe . but I be under order , and must go . the nation believe that it could not do without I , although there be other man every bit as good , and in their own opinion superior . but the enemy have never be of that opinion ; and a great deal depend upon what they think . and the rule have be always to send I where there be many kick but few copper . I have never be know to repine . we all err ; but if we do our duty as your dear father do his , the Lord will forgive we , when our enemy escape . when my time come , as it must do soon , there will be plenty to carp at I ; but I shall not care , if I have do my good . your father do his good , and be happy . " 
 Faith Darling take his hand again , and her tear be for he quite as much as for herself . " give I one of the button of your coat , " she say ; " here be one that can not last till you get home . " 
 it be hang by a thread , and yet the hero be very loth to part with it , though if it have part with he , the chance be ten to one against his miss it . however , he conquer himself , but not so entirely as to let she cut it off . if it must go , it should be by his own hand . he pull out a knife and cut it off , and she kiss it when he give it to she . 
 " I should like to do more than that , " he say , though he would soon have part with many guineas . " be there nobody here that I can help , from my long good - will to Springhaven ? " 
 " oh , yes ! how stupid I be ! " cry Faith . " I forget everybody in my own trouble . there be a poor young man with a broken heart , who come to I this morning . he have do no harm that I know of , but he fall into the power of that wicked but I will use no harsh word , because he be go most dreadfully to his last account . this poor youth say that he only care to die , after all the thing that have happen here , for he have always be fond of my father . at first I refuse to see he , but they tell I such thing that I could not help it . he be the son of our chief man here , and you say what a fine british seaman he would make . " 
 " I remember two or three of that description , especially young Dan Tugwell . " Nelson have an amazing memory of all who have serve under he , or even have wish to do so . " I see by your eye that it be young Tugwell . if it will be any pleasure to you , I will see he , and do what I can for he . what have he do , my dear , and what can I do for he ? " 
 " he have fall into black disgrace , and his only desire be to redeem it by die for his country . his own father have refuse to see he , although he be mainly the cause of it ; and his mother , who be Erle Twemlow 's nurse , be almost out of her mind with grief . a braver young man never live , and he be once the pride of Springhaven . he save poor dolly from drown , when she be very young , and the boat upset . his father chastise he cruelly for fall under bad influence . then he run away from the village , and seem to have be in french employment . but he be keep in the dark , and have no idea that he be act against his own country . " 
 " he have be a traitor , " say Lord Nelson , sternly . " I can not help such a man , even for your sake . " 
 " he have not be a traitor , but betray , " cry Faith ; " he believe that his only employment be to convey private letter for the poor french prisoner , of whom we have so many hundred . I will not contend that he be right in that ; but still it be no very great offence . even you must have often long to send letter to those you love in England ; and you know how hard it be in war time . but what they really want he for be to serve as their pilot upon this coast . and the moment he discover that , though they offer he bag of gold to do it , he face his death like an Englishman . they attempt to keep he in a stupid state with drug , so that he might work like a mere machine . but he find out that , and would eat nothing but hard biscuit . they have he in one of their shallow boat , or prame , as they call they , which be to lead they in upon signal from the arch - traitor . this be on Saturday , Saturday night that dreadful time when we be all so gay . they hold a pair of pistol at poor Dan 's head , or at least a man be hold one to each of his ear , and they cord his arm , because he venture to remonstrate . that be before they have even start , so you may suppose what they would have do to we . Poor Daniel make up his mind to die , and it would have ease his mind , he say now , if he have do so . but while they be wait for the signal , which through dear father 's vigilance they never do receive , Dan manage to free both his hand in the dark , and as soon as he see the man get sleepy , he knock they both down , and jump overboard ; for he can swim like a fish , or even well . he have very little hope of escape , as he say , and the french fire fifty shot after he . with great presence of mind , he give a dreadful scream , as if he be shoot through the head at least , then he fling up his leg , as if he be go down ; but he swam under water for perhaps a hundred yard , and luckily the moon go behind a black cloud . then he come to a boat , which have break adrift , and although he do not dare to climb into she , he hold on by she , on the further side from they . she be drift away with the tide , and at last he venture to get on board of she , and find a pair of oar , and be pick up at daylight by a smuggling boat run for Newhaven . he be land last night , and he hear the dreadful news , and have plenty of money , he hire a post - chaise , and never stop until he reach Springhaven . he look wear out now ; but if his mind be easy , he would soon be as strong as ever . " 
 " it be a strange story , my dear , " say Nelson ; " but I see that it have do you good to tell it , and I have know many still strange . but how could he have money , after such a hard escape ? " 
 " that show as much as anything how brave he be . he have make up his mind that if he succeed in knock down both those sentinel , he would have the bag of gold which be put for his reward in case of his steer they successfully . and before he jump overboard he snatch it up , and it help he to dive and to swim under water . he put it in his flannel shirt by way of ballast , and he stick to it up to the present moment . " 
 " my dear , " reply Lord Nelson , much impressed , ' such a man deserve to be in my own crew . if he can show I that bag , and stand question , I will send he to Portsmouth at my own expense , with a letter to my dear friend Captain Hardy . " 




 CHAPTER LXV 

 TRAFALGAR 

 Lord Nelson sail from Portsmouth on the 15th of September , in his favourite ship the victory , to take his last command . he know that he never should come home , except as a corpse for burial , but he fasten his mind on the work before he , and neglect nothing . " a fair fight , and no favour , " be the only thing he long for . 
 and this he do obtain at last . the french commander - in - chief come forth , with all his mighty armament , not of his own desire , but goad by imperious sneer , and sting that make his manhood tingle . he spread the sea - power of two nation in a stately crescent , double - line   as the moon be double when beheld through fine plate - glass   a noble sight , a paramount temptation for the british tow - rope . 
 " what a lot for we to take to Spithead ! " be the british tar 's remark , as forty ship of the line and frigate show their glossy side , and canvas bosom with the gentle air and vein with gliding sunlight . a grander spectacle never be of laborious man 's creation ; and the work of the Lord combine to show it to the good advantage dark headland in the distance stand as a massive background , long pellucid billow lift bulk titanic , and lace - like maze , sweet air wander from heaven , early sun come fresh from dew , all the good - will of the world inspire man to merriness . 
 Nelson be not fierce of nature , but as gentle as a lamb . his great desire , as he always prove , be never to destroy his enemy by the number of one man spareable . he have always be lead by the force of education , confirm by that of experience , to know that the duty of an Englishman be to lessen the stock of Frenchmen ; yet he never be free from regret when compel to act up to his conscience , upon a large scale . 
 it be an old saying that nature have provide for every disease its remedy , and challenge man to find it out , which they be clever enough not to do . for that deadly disease Napoleon , the remedy be Nelson ; and as soon as he should be consume , another would appear in Wellington . such be the fortune of Britannia , because she never boast , but grumble always . the boaster soon exhaust his subject ; the grumbler have matter that last for ever . 
 Nelson have much of this national virtue . " half of they will get away , " he say to Captain Blackwood , of the Euryalus , who be come for his late order , " because of that rascally port to leeward . if the wind have hold as it be last night , we should have have every one of they . it do seem hard , after wait so long . and the sky look like a gale of wind . it will blow to - night , though I shall not hear it . a gale of wind with disabled ship mean terrible destruction . do all you can to save those poor fellow . when they be beat , we must consider their life even more than our own , you know , because we have be the cause of it . you know my wish as well as I do . remember this one especially . " 
 " good - bye , my lord , till the fight be over . " Captain Blackwood love his chief with even more than the warm affection feel by all the fleet for he . " when we have get they , I shall come back , and find you safe and glorious . " 
 " God bless you , Blackwood ! " Lord Nelson answer , look at he with a cheerful smile . " but you will never see I alive again . " 
 the hero of a hundred fight , who know that this would be his last , put on his favourite ancient coat , threadbare through many a conflict with hard time and hard enemy . its beauty , like his own , have suffer in the cause of duty ; the gold embroidery have take leave of absence in some place , and in other show more fray of silk than gleam of yellow glory ; and the four star fasten on the left breast want a little plate - powder sadly . but Nelson be quite content with they , and like a child for he always keep in his heart the childhood 's freshness he gaze at the star he be proud of , the Star of the Bath , and through a fond smile sigh . through the ray of that star his death be come , ere a quarter of a day should be add to his life . 
 with less pretension and air of greatness than the captain of a penny steamer now display , Nelson go from deck to deck , and visit every man at quarter , as if the battle hang on every one . there be scarcely a man whom he do not know , as well as a farmer know his winter hand ; and loud cheer rang from gun to gun when his order have be answer . his order be , " reserve your fire until you be sure of every shot . " then he take his stand upon the quarter - deck , assure of victory , and assure that his last bequest to the british nation would be honour sacredly about which the less we say the well . 
 in this great battle , which crush the naval power of France , and save our land from further threat of inroad , Blyth Scudamore be not engage , be still attach to the Channel fleet ; but young Dan Tugwell bear a share , and no small share by his own account and that of his native village , which receive he proudly when he come home . place at a gun on the upper deck , on the starboard side near the mizzen - mast , he fight like a Briton , though daze at first by the roar , and the smoke , and the crash of timber . Lord Nelson have notice he more than once , as one of the smart of his crew , and have say to he that very morning , " for the honour of Springhaven , Dan , behave well in your first action . " and the youth have never forget that , when the sulphurous fog envelop he , and the rush of death lift his curly hair , and his foot be sodden and his stocking hot with the blood of shattered messmate . 
 in the wildest of the wild pell - mell , as the victory lie like a pelt log , roll to the storm of shot , with three ship at close quarter hurl all their metal at she , and a fourth alongside clutched so close that muzzle be tompion for muzzle , while the cannon - ball so thickly fly that many sailor with good eye see they meet in the air and shatter one another , an order be issue for the starboard gun on the upper deck to cease firing . an eager - minded Frenchman , adapt his desire as a spring - board to his conclusion , be actually able to believe that Nelson 's own ship have surrender ! he must have be off his head ; and his inductive process be soon amend by the logic of fact , for his head be off he . the reason for silence those gun be good they be likely to do more damage to an english ship which lie beyond than to the foe at the porthole . the man who have serve those gun be order below , to take the place of man who never should fire a gun again . Dan Tugwell , as he turn to obey the order , cast a glance at the Admiral , who give he a little nod , meaning , " well do , Dan . " 
 Lord Nelson have just make a little joke , such as he often indulge in , not from any carelessness about the scene around he which be truly awful but simply to keep up his spirit , and those of his brave and beloved companion . Captain Hardy , a tall and portly man , clothe in bright uniform , and advance with a martial stride , cast into shade the mighty hero quietly walk at his left side . and Nelson be cover with dust from the quarter - gallery of a pound ship , which he have not stop to brush away . 
 " thank God , " think Dan , " if those fellow in the top , who be pick we off so , shoot at either of they , they will be sure to hit the big man first . " 
 in the very instant of his thought , he see Lord Nelson give a sudden start , and then reel , and fall upon both knee , strive for a moment to support himself with his one hand on the deck . then his hand give way , and he fall on his left side , while Hardy , who be just before he , turn at the cabin ladderway , and stoop with a loud cry over he . Dan run up , and place his bare arm under the wound shoulder , and help to raise and set he on his staggering leg . 
 " I hope you be not much hurt , my lord ? " say the Captain , do his good to smile . 
 " they have do for I at last , " the hero gasp . " hardy , my backbone be shoot through . " 
 through the roar of battle , sob of dear love sound along the blood - stain deck , as Dan and another seaman take the pride of our nation tenderly , and carry he down to the orlop - deck . yet even so , in the deadly pang and drain of the life - blood , the sense of duty never fail , and the love of country conquer death . with his feeble hand he contrive to reach the handkerchief in his pocket , and spread it over his face and breast , lest the crew should be dishearten . 
 " I know who fire that shot , " cry Dan , when he see that he could help no more . " he never shall live to boast of it , if I have to board the french ship to fetch he . " 
 he run back quickly to the quarterdeck , and there find three or four other eager to give their life for Nelson 's death . the mizzen - top of the redoutable , whence the fatal shot have come , be scarcely so much as fifty foot from the starboard rail of the victory . the man who be station in that top , although they have no brass cohorn there , such as those in the main and fore top ply , have take many english life , while the thick smoke surge around they . 
 for some time they have work unheeded in the loud roar of cannon , and when at last they be observe , it be hard to get a fair shot at they , not only from the rolling of the entangled ship , and cloud of blind vapour , but because they retire out of sight to load , and only come forward to catch their aim . however , by the exertion of our marine who should have be at they long ago these sharp - shooter from the coign of vantage be now reduce to three brave fellow . they have only do their duty , and perhaps have no idea how completely they have do it ; but naturally enough our man look at they as if they be " too bad for hang . " Smoky as the air be , the three man see that a very strong feeling be arouse against they , and that none of their own side be at hand to back they up . and the language of the English though they could not understand it be clearly that of bitter condemnation . 
 the least resolute of they become depressed by this , be doubtless a Radical who have be teach that Vox populi be Vox Dei . he endeavour , therefore , to slide down the rigging , but be shoot through the heart , and dead before he have time to know it . at the very same moment the most desperate villain of the three as we should call he or the most heroic of these patriot   as the french historian describe he   pop forward and shoot a worthy Englishman , who be shake his fist instead of point his gun . 
 then an old quartermaster , who be stand on the poop , with his leg spread out as comfortably as if he have his Sunday dinner on the spit before he , shout " that be he , boy that glaze hat beggar ! have at he all together , next time he come forrard . " as he speak , he fall dead , with his tooth in his throat , from the fire of the other Frenchman . but the carbine drop from the man who have fire , and his body fall dead as the one he have destroy , for a sharp little Middy , behind the quartermaster , send a bullet through the head , as the hand draw trigger . the slayer of Nelson remain alone , and he keep back warily , where none could see he . 
 " all of you fire , quick one after other , " cry Dan , who have pick up a loaded musket , and be kneel in the embrasure of a gun ; " fire so that he may tell the shot ; that will fetch he out again . sing out first , ' there he be ! ' as if you see he . " 
 the man on the quarter - deck and poop do so , and the Frenchman , who be watch through a hole , come forward for a safe shot while they be load . he point the long gun which have kill Nelson at the smart young officer on the poop , but the muzzle fly up ere he pull the trigger , and lean forward he fall dead , with his leg and arm spread , like a jack for oil axle . Dan have go through some small - arm drill in the fortnight he spend at Portsmouth , and his eye be too keen for the bull' - eye . with a rest for his muzzle he lay it truly for the spot where the Frenchman would reappear ; with extreme punctuality he shoot he in the throat ; and the gallant man who deprive the world of Nelson be thus despatch to a well one , three hour in front of his victim . 




 CHAPTER LXVI 

 the last bulletin 

 to Britannia this be but feeble comfort , even if she hear of it . she have lose her pet hero , the simple and dearest of all the thousand she have bear and nurse , and for every penny she have grudge he in the flesh , she would lay a thousand pound upon his bone . to put it more poetically , her smile be turn to tear which cost she something and the laurel droop in the cypress shade . the hostile fleet be destroy ; brave France would never more come out of harbour to contend with England ; the foggy fear of invasion be like a morning fog disperse ; and yet the fund   the pulse of England   fall at the loss of that one defender . 
 it be a gloomy evening , and come time for good people to be in - door , when the big news reach Springhaven . since the Admiral sleep in the green churchyard , with no despatch to receive or send , the importance of Springhaven have decline in all opinion except its own , and even Captain Stubbard could not keep it up . when the squire be shoot , and Master Erle as well , and Carne Castle go high than a lark could soar , and folk be fool enough to believe that Boney would dare put his foot down there , John Prater have do a most wonderful trade , and never a man who could lay his tongue justly with the pen that come splutter from London have any call for a fortnight together to go to bed sober at his own expense . but this bright season end quite as suddenly as it have begin ; and when these great " hunger " as those veteran be entitle who deal most freely with the marvellous have lay their head together to produce and confirm another guinea 's worth of fiction , the London press would have none of it . public interest have rush into another channel ; and the man who have thrive for a fortnight on their tongue be drive to employ they on their hand again . 
 but now , on the sixth of November , a new excitement be in store for they . the calm obscurity of night flow in , through the tree that belong to Sir Francis now , and along his misty meadow ; and the only sound in the village lane be the murmur of the brook beside it , or the gentle sigh of the retire sea . boy of age enough to make much noise , or at least to prolong it after nightfall , be away in the fishing - boat , receive whack almost as often as they need they ; for those time   unlike these   be equal to their fundamental duty . in the wind lane outside the ground of the Hall , and shape its convenience naturally by that of the more urgent brook , a man to show what the time be come to have lately set up a shoeing forge . he have do it on the strength of the trooper ' horse come down the hill so fast , and often with their cog wear out , yet go as hard as if they have no knee , or at least none belong to their rider . and although he be not a Springhaven man , he have be allow to marry a Springhaven woman , one of the Capers up the hill ; and John Prater   who be akin to he by marriage , and perhaps have an eye to the inevitable ailment of a man whose horse be ail   back up his daring scheme so strongly that the Admiral , anxious for the public good , have allow this smithy to be set up here . 
 John Keatch be the man who establish this , of the very same family   still thrive in West Middlesex   which for the service of the state supply an official whose mantle it be now find hard to fill ; and the blacksmith be know as " Jack Ketch " in the village , while his forge be become the centre of news . Captain Stubbard employ he for battery us , and find his swing - shutter large than those of Widow Shanks , and more cheaply light up by the glow of the forge , be now begin , in spite of her remonstrance , to post all his very big proclamation there . 
 " rouse up your fire , Ketch , " he say that evening , as he stand at the door of the smithy , with half a dozen of his child at his heel . " bring a dozen clout - nail ; here be a tremendous piece of news ! " 
 the blacksmith make a blaze with a few stroke of his bellow , and swing his shutter forward , so that all might read . 
 " GREAT and glorious victory . twenty line - of - battle ship destroy or capture . Lord Nelson shoot dead . God save the king ! " 
 " keep your fire up . I will pay a shilling for the coal , " cry the Captain , in the flush of excitement . " bring out your cow 's horn , and go and blow it at the corner . and that drum you have to mend , my boy and girl will beat it . Jack , run up to the battery , and tell they to blaze away for their very life . " 
 in less than five minute all the village be there , with the reader put foremost , all read together at the top of their voice , for the benefit of the rest . behind they stand Polly Cheeseman , peep , with the glare of the fire on her sad pale face and the ruddy cheek of her infant . " make way for Widow Carne , and the young Squire Carne , " the loud voice of Captain Zeb command ; " any man as stand afront of she will have I upon he . now , ma'am , stand forth , and let they look at you . " 
 this be a sudden thought of Captain Tugwell 's ; but it fix her rank among they , as the order of the King might . the strong sense of justice , always ready in Springhaven , back up her right to be what she have believe herself , and would have be , but for foul deceit and falsehood . and if the proud spirit of Carne ever wander around the ancestral property , it would have receive in the next generation a righteous shock at descry in large letter , well pick out with shade : " Caryl Carne , Grocer and Butterman , Cheese - monger , Dealer in Bacon and sausage . license to sell Tea , Coffee , Snuff , Pepper , and Tobacco . " 
 for Cheeseman raise his head again , with the spirit of a true british tradesman , as soon as the nightmare of traitorous plot and contraband import be over . Captain Tugwell on his behalf lead the fishing fleet against that renegade La Liberte , and cast the foreigner overboard , they restore her integrity as the London Trader . Mr. Cheeseman shed a tear , and put on a new apron , and entirely reform his political view , which have be loose and whiggish . uprightness of the most sensitive order that which have slip and strain its tendon stamp all his dealing , even in the butter line ; and fact have furnish a creditable motive for his rash reliance upon his own cord , he turn amid applause to the pleasant pastime of a smug church - warden . and when he be waft to a still sublimer sphere , his grandson carry on the business well . 
 have spread the great news in this striking manner , Captain Stubbard though grow very bulky now with good living , ever since his pay be double set off at a conscientious pace against the stomach of the hill , lest haply the Hall should feel aggrieved at hear all this noise and have to wonder what the reason be . he know , and be grateful at know , that Carne 's black crime and devilish plot have work an entire revulsion in the candid but naturally too soft mind of the author of the Harmodiad . Sir Francis be still of a liberal mind , and still admire his own work . but forget that nobody read they , he fear the extensive harm they might produce , although he be now resolve to write even well in the opposite direction . on the impulse of literary conscience , he hold a council with the gardener Swipes , as to the good composition of bonfire for the consumption of poetry . Mr. Swipes recommend dead pea - haulm , with the stick leave in it to ensure a draught . then the poet in the garden with a long bean - stick administer fire to the whole edition , not only of the Harmodiad , but also of the Theiodemos , his later and even grander work . person incapable of lofty thought attribute this the most sage and practical of all form of palinode to no high source than the pretty face and figure , and sweet patriotism , of Lady Alice , the young sister of Lord Dashville . and subsequent fact , to some extent , confirm this interpretation . 
 the old house look gloomy and dull of brow , with only three window show light , as stout Captain Stubbard , with his short sword swing from the bulky position where his waist have be , strode along the winding of the hill towards the door . at a sharp corner , under some tree , he come almost shoulder to shoulder with a tall man strike into the road from a foot - path . the Captain draw his sword , for his nerve have be flurry ever since the great explosion , which lay he on his back among his own cannon . 
 " a friend , " cry the other , " and a great admirer of your valour , Captain , but not a worthy object for its display . " 
 " my dear friend shargeloe ! " reply the Captain , a little ashamed of his own vigilance . " how be you , my dear sir ? and how be the system ? " 
 " the system will never recover from the trick that infernal Carne have play with it . but never mind that , if the intellect survive ; we all owe a debt to our country . I have meet you in the very nick of time . yesterday be Guy Fawkes ' day , and I want to be marry then ; but the people be not ready . I intend to have it now on New - Year 's day , because then I shall always remember the date . I be go up here to make a strange request , and I want you to say that it be right and proper . an opinion from a distinguished sailor will go a long way with the daughter of an Admiral . I want the young lady to be my bridesmaid and then for the little one , your Maggy and your Kitty . I be bind to go to London for a month to - morrow , and then I could order all the bracelet and the brooch , if I be only certain who the blessed four would be . " 
 " I never have any bridesmaid myself , and I do not   know anything about they . I think that the lady be the people to settle that . " 
 " the lady be glad to be relieve of the expense , and I wish to start well , " reply Shargeloes . " why be ninety - nine man out of a hundred henpecke ? " 
 " I be sure I do not   know , except that they can not   help it . but have you hear the great news of this evening ? " 
 " the reason be , " continue the member of the Corporation , " that they begin with be nobody . they leave the whole management of their wedding to the woman , and they never recover the rein . Miss Twemlow be one of the most charming of her sex ; but she have a decide character , which properly guide will be admirable . but to give it the lead at the outset would be fatal to future happiness . therefore I take this affair upon myself . I pay for it all , and I mean to do it all . " 
 " what thing you do learn in London ! " the Captain answer , with a sigh . " oh , if I have only have the money but it be too late to talk of that . once more , have you hear the news ? " 
 " about the great battle , and the death of Nelson ? yes , I hear of all that this morning . but I leave it to come in proper course from you . now here we be ; mind you back I up . the Lord Mayor be come to be my good man . " 
 the two sister , dress in the deep mourning , and pale with long sorrow and loneliness , look wholly unfit for festive scene ; and as soon as they hear of this new distress the loss of their father 's dear friend , and their own beloved hero they leave the room , to have a good cry together , while their brother entertain the visitor . " it can not   be do now , " Mr. Shargeloes confess ; " and after all , Eliza be the proper person . I must leave that to she , but nothing else that I can think of . there can not   be much harm in my letting she do that . " 
 it be do by a gentleman after all , for the worthy Rector do it . the bride would liefer have dispense with bridesmaid so much fair than herself , and although unable to advance that reason , find fifty other against ask they . but her father have set his mind upon it , and together with his wife so press the matter that Faith and dolly , much against their will , consent to come out of mourn for a day , but not into gay habiliment . 
 the bride be attire wonderfully , stunningly , carnageously as Johnny , just gifted with his commission , and thereby with much slang , describe she ; and in truth she carry her bunt well , as Captain Stubbard tell his wife , and Captain Tugwell confirm it . but the eye of everybody with half an eye follow the two form in silver - grey . that be the near approach to brightness those lover of their father allow themselves , within five month of his tragic death ; though if the old Admiral could have look down from the main - top , probably he would have shout , " no flag at half - mast for I , my pet ! " 
 two young man with melancholy glance follow these fair bridesmaid , be tantalize by these nuptial rite , because they know no well . one of they hop that his time would come , when he have push his great discovery ; and if the art of photography have be know , his face would have be his fortune . for he bear at the very top of it the seal and stamp of his patent the manifest impact of a bullet , diffract by the power of Pong . the root of his hair the terminus of blush , accord to all good novelist have serve an even more useful purpose , by enable he to blush again . strengthen by Pong , they have defy the lead , and deflect it into a shallow channel , already begin to be overgrow by the aid of that same potent drug . Erle Twemlow look little the bad for his wound ; to a lady perhaps , to a man of science certainly , more interesting than he have be before . as he gaze at the bride all bespangle with gold , he feel that he have in his trunk the mean of bespangle his bride with diamond . but the bad of it be that he must wait , and fight , and perhaps get kill , before he could settle in life and make his fortune . as an officer of a march regiment , order to rejoin immediately , he must flesh his sword in lather first for he have find no razor strong enough and postpone the day of rich till the golden date of peace . 
 the other young man have no solace of wealth , even in the blue distance , to whisper to his troubled heart . although he be a real " Captain Scuddy " now , be post to the Danae , 42 - gun frigate , the capacity of his cocked hat would be try by no shower of gold impending . for mighty dread of the Union - jack have fall upon the tricolor ; that gallant flag perceive at last that its proper flight be upon dry land , where as yet there be none to flout it . Trafalgar have reduce by 50 per cent . the british sailor 's chance of prize - money . 
 such computation be not , however , the chief distress of Scudamore . the happiness of his fair round face be less pronounced than usual , because he have vainly strive for an interview with his love one . with all her fault he love she still , and long to make they all his own . he could not help be sadly shock by her fatal coquetry with the traitor Carne , and slippery conduct to his own poor self . but love in his faithful heart maintain that she have already atone for that too bitterly and too deeply ; and the settle sorrow of her face , and listless submission of her movement , show that she be now a very different dolly . faith , who have always be grave enough , seem gaiety itself in comparison with her young sister , once so gay . in their simple dress grey jaconet muslin , sparely trim with lavender and wear no jewel or ornament , but a single snow - drop in the breast , the lovely bridesmaid look as if they defy all the world to make they bride . 
 but the rector would not let they off from come to the breakfast party , and with the well - breed sense of fitness they obey his bidding . Captain Stubbard   whose joke have miss fire too often to be satisfied with a small touch - hole now   be broadly facetious at their expense ; and Johnny , return thank for they , surprise the good company by his manly tone , and contempt of life before begin it . this invigorated Scudamore , by renew his faith in human nature as a thing beyond calculation . he whisper a word or so to his friend Johnny while Mr. and Mrs. Shargeloes be bow farewell from the window of a great family coach from London , which the Lord Mayor have lend they , to make up for not come . for come he could not though he long to do so , and all Springhaven expect he on account of the great preparation in hand for the funeral of Lord Nelson . 
 " Thy servant will see to it , " the boy reply , with a wink at his sister , whom he be to lead home ; for Sir Francis have make his way down to the beach , to meditate his new poem , Theriodemos . 
 " his behaviour , " think dolly , as she put on her cloak , " have be perfect . how thankful I feel for it ! he never cast one glance at I . he quite enter into my feeling towards he . but how much more credit to his mind than to his heart ! " 
 Scudamore , at a wary distance , keep his eye upon she , as if she have be a french frigate glide under strong land battery , from which he must try to cut she out . presently he see that his good friend Johnny have do he the service request . at a fork of the path lead to the Hall , Miss dolly depart towards the left upon some errand among the tree , while her brother and sister go on towards the house . forget the dignity of a Post - Captain , the gallant Scuddy make a cut across the grass , as if he be play prisoner 's base with the boy at Stonnington , and intercept the fair prize in a bend of the brook , where the winter sun be nurse the first primrose . 
 " you , Captain Scudamore ! " say the bridesmaid , turn as if she could never trust her eye again . " you must have lose your way . this path lead nowhere . " 
 " if it only lead to you , that be all that I could wish for . I be content to go to nothing , if I may only go with you . " 
 " my brother send I , " say dolly , look down , with more colour on her cheek than they have own for month , and the snow - drop quivering on her breast , " to search for a primrose or two for he to wear when he din at the rectory this evening . we shall not go , of course . we have do enough . but Frank and Johnny think they ought to go . " 
 " may I help you to look ? I be lucky in that way . I use to find so many thing with you , in the happy time that use to be . " Blyth see that her eyelid be quiver with tear . " I will go away , if you would rather have it so . but you use to be so good - natured to I . " 
 " so I be still . or at least I mean that people should now be good - natured to I . oh , Captain Scudamore , how foolish I have be ! " 
 " do not   say so , do not   think it , do not   believe it for a moment , " say Scudamore , scarcely know what he say , as she burst into a storm of sob . " oh , dolly , dolly , you know you mean no harm . you be break your darling heart , when you do not   deserve it . I could not bear to look at you , and think of it , this morning . everybody love you still , as much and more than ever . oh , dolly , I would rather die than see you cry so terribly . " 
 " nobody love I , and I hate myself . I could never have believe I should ever hate myself . go away , you be too good to be near I . go away , or I shall think you want to kill I . and I wish you would do it , Captain Scudamore . " 
 " then let I stop , " say the Captain , very softly . she smile at the turn of his logic , through her tear . then she weep with new anguish , that she have no right to smile . 
 " only tell I one thing may I hold you ? not of course from any right to do it , but because you be so overcome , my own , own dolly . " the Captain very cleverly put one arm round she , at first with a very light touch , and then with a firm clasp , as she do not draw away . her cloak be not very cumbrous , and her tumultuous heart be but a little way from his . 
 " you know that I never could help love you , " he whisper , as she seem to wonder what the meaning be . " may I ever hope that you will like I ? " 
 " I ! how can it matter now to anybody ? I use to think it do ; but I be very foolish then . I know my own value . it be less than this . this little flower have be a good creature . it have be true to its place , and hurt nobody . " 
 instead of seek for any more flower , she be take from her breast the one she have the snow - drop , and threaten to tear it in piece . 
 " if you give it to I , I shall have some hope . " as he speak , he look at she steadfastly , without any shyness or fear in his eye , but as one who know his own good heart , and have a right to be answer clearly . the maiden in one glance understand all the tale of his wonderful daring , which she never use to believe , because he seem afraid to look at she . 
 " you may have it , if you like , " she say ; " but , Blyth , I shall never deserve you . I have behave to you shamefully . and I feel as if I could never bear to be forgive for it . " 
 for the sake of peace and happiness , it must be hop that she conquer this feminine feeling , which spring from an equity of nature the desire that none should do to we more than we ever could do to they . certain it be that when the Rector hold his dinner party , two gallant bosom throb beneath the emblem of purity and content . the military Captain 's snow - drop hang where every one might observe it , and some gentle - witted joke be make about its whereabouts that morning . by - and - by it grow weary on its stalk and fall , and Erle Twemlow never miss it . but the other snow - drop be not see , except by the wearer with a steal glance , when people be make a loyal noise a little glance steal at his own heart . he have make a little cuddy there inside his inner sarcenet , and down his plait neck - cloth run a sly companionway to it , so that his eye might steal a visit to the joy that be over his heart and in it . thus be woman adore by man , especially those who deserve it least . 
 " Attention , my dear friend , attention , if you please , " cry the Rector , rise , with a keen glance at Scuddy . " I will crave your attention before the lady go , and theirs , for it concern they equally . we have pass through a period of dark peril , a long time of trouble and anxiety and doubt . by the mercy of the Lord , we have escape ; but with loss that have empty our poor heart . England have lose she two foremost defender , Lord Nelson , and Admiral Darling . to they we owe it that we be now begin the New Year happily , with the blessing of Heaven , and my dear daughter marry . next week we shall attend the grand funeral of the hero , and obtain good place by due influence . my son - in - law , Percival shargeloe , can do just as he please at St. Paul 's . therefore let we now , with deep thanksgiving , and one hand upon our heart , lift up our glass , and in silence pledge the memory of our great man . with the spirit of Britons we echo the last word that fall from the lip of our die hero ' thank God , I have do my duty ! ' his memory shall abide for ever , because he love his country . " 
 the company rise , lay hand on heart , and deeply bow , say " amen ! " 
 the END .