erema ; 

 OR , MY FATHER 's SIN 


 by R. D. Blackmore 



 1877 





 content 


 CHAPTER I 

 CHAPTER II 

 CHAPTER III 

 CHAPTER IV 

 CHAPTER V 

 CHAPTER VI 

 CHAPTER VII 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 CHAPTER ix 

 CHAPTER x 

 CHAPTER XI 

 CHAPTER XII 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 CHAPTER XV 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 chapter XVII 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 CHAPTER XX 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXIX 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 CHAPTER XXXII 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 CHAPTER XL 

 CHAPTER XLI 

 CHAPTER XLII 

 CHAPTER XLIII 

 CHAPTER XLIV 

 CHAPTER XLV 

 CHAPTER XLVI 

 CHAPTER XLVII 

 CHAPTER XLVIII 

 CHAPTER XLIX 

 CHAPTER L 

 CHAPTER LI 

 CHAPTER LII 

 CHAPTER LIII 

 CHAPTER LIV 

 CHAPTER LV 

 CHAPTER LVI 

 CHAPTER LVII 

 CHAPTER LVIII 








 CHAPTER I 

 a lost landmark 

 " the sin of the father upon the child , unto the third and fourth generation of they that hate I . " 
 these be the word that have follow I always . this be the curse which have fall on my life . 
 if I have not know my father , if I have not love he , if I have not close his eye in desert silence deeply than the silence of the grave , even if I could have bury and bewail he duly , the common business of this world and the universal carelessness might have lead I down the general track that lead to nothing . 
 until my father fall and die I never dream that he could die . I know that his mind be quite make up to see I safe in my new home , and then himself to start again for still remoter solitude . and when his mind be thus make up , who have ever know he fail of it ? 
 if ever a resolute man there be , that very man be my father . and he show it now , in this the last and fatal act of his fatal life . " captain , here I leave you all , " he shout to the leader of our wagon train , at a place where a dark , narrow gorge depart from the moilsome mountain track . " my reason be my own ; let no man trouble himself about they . all my baggage I leave with you . I have pay my share of the venture , and shall claim it at Sacramento . my little girl and I will take this short - cut through the mountain . " 
 " General ! " answer the leader of our train , stand up on his board in amazement . " forgive and forget , Sir ; forgive and forget . what be a hot word speak hotly ? if not for your own sake , at least come back for the sake of your young daughter . " 
 " a fair haven to you ! " reply my father . he offer I his hand , and we be out of sight of all that wearisome , drearisome , uncompanionable company with whom , for eight long week at least , we have be drag our rough way . I have know in a moment that it must be so , for my father never argue . Argument , to his mind , be a very nice amusement for the weak . my spirit rise as he swing his bear - skin bag upon his shoulder , and the last sound of the labor caravan groan in the distance , and the fresh air and the freedom of the mountain move around we . it be the 29th of May Oak - apple Day in England and to my silly youth this vast extent of snowy mountain be a nice place for a cool excursion . 
 moreover , from day to day I have be in most wretched anxiety , so long as we remain with people who could not allow for we . my father , by his calm reserve and dignity and largeness , have always , among european people , keep himself seclude ; but now in this rough life , so pent in trackless tract , and press together by perpetual peril , every body 's manner have be grow free and easy . every man have be compel to tell , as truly as he could , the story of his life thus far , to amuse his fellow - creature every man , I mean , of course , except my own poor father . some tell their story every evening , until we be quite tired although they be never the same twice over ; but my father could never be coax to say a syllable more than , " I be bear , and I shall die . " 
 this make he very unpopular with the man , though all the woman admire it ; and if any rough fellow could have see a sign of fear , the speaker would have be insult . but his manner and the power of his look be such that , even after ardent spirit , no man see fit to be rude to he . nevertheless , there have always be the risk of some sad outrage . 
 " Erema , " my father say to I , when the dust from the rear of the caravan be lose behind a cloud of rock , and we two stand in the wilderness alone " do you know , my own Erema , why I bring you from they ? " 
 " Father dear , how should I know ? you have do it , and it must be right . " 
 " it be not for their paltry insult . child , you know what I think all that . it be for you , my only child , that I be do what now I do . " 
 I look up into his large , sad eye without a word , in such a way that he lift I up in his arm and kiss I , as if I be a little child instead of a maiden just fifteen . this he have never do before , and it make I a little frightened . he see it , and speak on the spur of the thought , though still with one arm round I . 
 " perhaps you will live to be thankful , my dear , that you have a stern , cold father . so will you meet the world all the well ; and , little one , you have a rough world to meet . " 
 for a moment I be quite at a loss to account for my father 's manner ; but now , in look back , it be so easy to see into thing . at the time I must have be surprised , and full of puzzled eagerness . 
 not half so well can I recall the weakness , anguish , and exhaustion of body and spirit afterward . it may have be three day of wandering , or it may have be a week , or even more than that , for all that I can say for certain . whether the time be long or short , it seem as if it would never end . my father believe that he know the way to the house of an old settler , at the western foot of the mountain , who have treat he kindly some year before , and with whom he mean to leave I until he have make arrangement elsewhere . if we have only go straightway thither , night - fall would have find we safe beneath that hospitable roof . 
 my father be vex , as I well remember , at come , as he think , in sight of some great landmark , and find not a trace of it . although his will be so very strong , his temper be good about little thing , and he never begin to abuse all the world because he have make a mistake himself . 
 " Erema , " he say , " at this corner where we stand there ought to be a very large pine - tree in sight , or rather a great redwood - tree , at least twice as high as any tree that grow in Europe , or Africa even . from the plain it can be see for a hundred mile or more . it stand high up the mountainside than any other tree of even half its size , and that make it so conspicuous . my eye must be fail I , from all this glare ; but it must be in sight . can you see it now ? " 
 " I see no tree of any kind whatever , but scrubby bush and yellow tuft ; and oh , father , I be so thirsty ! " 
 " naturally . but now look again . it stand on a ridge , the last ridge that bar the view of all the lowland . it be a very straight tree , and regular , like a mighty column , except that on the northern side the wind from the mountain have tear a gap in it . be you sure that you can not see it a long way off , but conspicuous ? " 
 " Father , I be sure that I can not see any tree half as large as a broomstick . far or near , I see no tree . " 
 " then my eye be well than my memory . we must cast back for a mile or two ; but it can not make much difference . " 
 " through the dust and the sand ? " I begin to say ; but a glance from he stop my murmuring . and the next thing I can call to mind must have happen a long time afterward . 
 beyond all doubt , in this desolation , my father give his life for mine . I do not know it at the time , nor have the faint dream of it , be so young and weary - worn , and obey he by instinct . it be a fearful thing to think of now that I can think of it but to save my own little worthless life I must have drain every drop of water from his flat half - gallon jar . the water be hot and the cork - hole sandy , and I grumble even while drink it ; and what must my father   who be die all the while for a drop , but never take one   what must he have think of I ? 
 but he never say a word , so far as I remember ; and that make it all the bad for I . we have stray away into a dry , volcanic district of the mountain , where all the snow - river run out quite early ; and of natural spring there be none forth - come . all we have to guide we be a little traveler 's compass   whose needle stick fast on the pivot with sand   and the glare sun , when he come to sight behind the hot , dry , drive cloud . the cloud be very low , and fly almost in our face , like vulture sweep down on we . to I they seem to shriek over our head at the other rush after they . but my father say that they could make no sound , and I never contradict he . 




 CHAPTER II 

 a PACIFIC sunset 

 at last we come to a place from which the great spread of the earth be visible . for a time I can not tell how long we have wholly lose ourselves , go up and down , and turn corner , without get far . but my father say that we must come right , if we make up our mind to go long enough . we have be in among all shape , and want of shape , of dreariness , through and in and out of every thrup and thrum of weariness , scarcely hop ever more to find our way out and discover memory of man for we , when all of a sudden we see a grand sight . the day have be dreadfully hot and baffling , with sudden swirl of red dust arise , and drive the great drought into we . to walk have be bad than to drag one 's way through a stubbly bed of sting - nettle . but now the quick sting of the sun be go , and his power descend in the balance toward the flat place of the land and sea . and suddenly we look forth upon an immeasurable spread of these . 
 we stand at the gate of the sandy range , which here , like a vast brown patch , disfigure the beauty of the sierra . on either side , in purple distance , sprang sky - pierce obelisk and vapor - mantle glacier , spangle with bright snow , and shodden with eternal forest . before we lie the broad , luxuriant plain of California , checker with more tint than any other piece of earth can show , sleep in alluvial ease , and vein with soft blue water . and through a gap in the brown coast range , at twenty league of distance , a light   so faint as to seem a shadow   hover above the Pacific . 
 but none of all this grandeur touch our heart except the water gleam . parch with thirst , I catch my father 's arm and try to urge he on toward the blue enchantment of ecstatic living water . but , to my surprise , he stagger back , and his face grow as white as the distant snow . I manage to get he to a sandy ledge , with the help of his own endeavor , and there let he rest and try to speak , while my frightened heart throb over his . 
 " my little child , " he say at last , as if we be fall back ten year , " put your hand where I can feel it . " 
 my hand all the while have be in his , and to let he know where it be , it move . but cold fear stop my talking . 
 " my child , I have not be kind to you , " my father slowly speak again , " but it have not be from want of love . some day you will see all this , and some day you will pardon I . " 
 he lay one heavy arm around I , and forget thirst and pain , with the last intensity of eyesight watch the sun depart . to I , I know not how , great awe be every where , and sadness . the conical point of the furious sun , which like a barb have pierce we , be broaden into a hazy disk , inefficient , but benevolent . underneath he depth of night be wait to come upward   after let he fall through   and stain his track with redness . already the arm of darkness grow in readiness to receive he : his upper arc be pure and keen , but the low be flake with atmosphere ; a glow of hazy light soon would follow , and one bright glimmer   address more to the sky than to the earth , and after that a broad , soft gleam ; and after that how many a man should never see the sun again , and among they would be my father . 
 he , for the moment , rest there , with heavy light upon he , and the dark jaw of the mountain desert yawn wide behind he , and all the beautiful expanse of liberal earth before he even so he seem to I , of all the thing in sight , the one that first would draw attention . his face be full of quiet grandeur and impressive calm , and the sad tranquillity which come to those who know what human life be through continual human death . although , in the matter of bodily strength , he be little past the prime of life , his long and abundant hair be white , and his broad and upright forehead mark with the mesh of the net of care . but drought and famine and long fatigue have fail even now to change or weaken the fine expression of his large , sad eye . those eye alone would have make the face remarkable among ten thousand , so deep with settle gloom they be , and dark with fatal sorrow . such eye might fitly have tell the grief of Adrastus , son of Gordias , who , have slay his own brother unwitte , unwitte slew the only son of his generous host and savior . 
 the pale globe of the sun hung tremble in the haze himself have make . my father rise to see the last , and rear his tall form upright against the deepening background . he gaze as if the course of life lie vanish below he , while level land and water draw the breadth of shadow over they . then the last gleam flow and flee upon the face of ocean , and my father put his dry lip to my forehead , say nothing . 
 his lip might well be dry , for he have not swallow water for three day ; but it frighten I to feel how cold they be , and even tremulous . " let we run , let we run , my dear father ! " I cry . " delicious water ! the dark fall quickly ; but we can get there before dark . it be all down hill . oh , do let we run at once ! " 
 " Erema , " he answer , with a quiet smile , " there be no cause now for hurrying , except that I must hurry to show you what you have to do , my child . for once , at the end of my life , I be lucky . we have escape from that starve desert at a spot at a spot where we can see " 
 for a little while he could say no more , but sink upon the stony seat , and the hand with which he try to point some distant landmark fall away . his face , which have be so pale before , become of a deadly whiteness , and he breathe with gasp of agony . I knelt before he and take his hand , and try to rub the palm , and do whatever I could think of . 
 " oh , father , father , you have starve yourself , and give every thing to I ! what a brute I be to let you do it ! but I do not know ; I never know ! please God to take I also ! " 
 he could not manage to answer this , even if he understand it ; but he firmly lift his arm again , and try to make I follow it . 
 " what do it matter ? oh , never mind , never mind such , a wretch as I be ! Father , only try to tell I what I ought to do for you . " 
 " my child ! my child ! " be his only word ; and he keep on say , " my child ! my child ! " as if he like the sound of it . 
 at what time of the night my father die I know not then or afterward . it may have be before the moon come over the snowy mountain , or it may not have be till the wear - out star in vain repel the daybreak . all I know be that I ever strove to keep more near to he through the night , to cherish his fail warmth , and quicken the slow , laborious , harass breath . from time to time he try to pray to God for I and for himself ; but every time his mind begin to wander and to slip away , as if through want of practice . for the chill of many wretched year have deaden and benumb his faith . he know I , now and then , betwixt the conflict and the stupor ; for more than once he mutter feebly , and as if from out a dream , 
 " time for Erema to go on her way . go on your way , and save your life ; save your life , Erema . " 
 there be no way for I to go , except on my knee before he . I take his hand , and make they lissome with a soft , light rubbing . I whisper into his ear my name , that he might speak once more to I ; and when he could not speak , I try to say what he would say to I . 
 at last , with a blow that stun all word , it smite my stupid , wander mind that all I have to speak and smile to , all I care to please and serve , the only one leave to admire and love , lie here in my weak arm quite dead . and in the anguish of my sobbing , little thing come home to I , a thousand little thing that show how quietly he have prepare for this , and provide for I only . cold despair and self - reproach and strong rebellion daze I , until I lay at my father 's side , and sleep with his dead hand in mine . there in the desert of desolation pious awe embrace I , and small phantasm of individual fear could not come nigh I . 
 by - and - by long shadow of morning creep toward I dismally , and the pallid light of the hill be stretch in weary streak away from I . how I arise , or what I do , or what I think , be nothing now . such time be not for talk of . how many heart of anguish lie forlorn , with none to comfort they , with all the joy of life die out , and all the fear of have yet to live , in front arise ! 
 young and weak , and wrong of sex for do any valiance , long I lie by my father 's body , wring out my wretchedness . thirst and famine now have fly into the opposite extreme ; I seem to loathe the thought of water , and the smell of food would have make I sick . I open my father 's knapsack , and a pang of new misery seize I . there lie nearly all his ration , which he have make pretense to eat as he give I mine from time to time . he have starve himself ; since he fail of his mark , and learn our risk of famish , all his own food he have keep for I , as well as his store of water . and I have do nothing but grumble and groan , even while consume every thing . compare with I , the hover vulture might be consider angel . 
 when I find all this , I be a great deal too wear out to cry or sob . simply to break down may be the pure mercy that can fall on truly hopeless misery . scream of ravenous maw and flap of fetid wing come close to I , and , faint into the arm of death , I try to save my father 's body by throw my own over it . 




 CHAPTER III 

 a sturdy colonist 

 for the contrast betwixt that dreadful scene and the one on which my dim eye slowly open , three day afterward , first I thank the Lord in heaven , whose gracious care be over I , and after he some very simple member of humanity . 
 a bronze - color woman , with soft , sad eye , be look at I steadfastly . she have see that , under tender care , I be just begin to revive , and be acquaint with many trouble , she have learn to succor all of they . this I know not then , but feel that kindness be around I . 
 " Arauna , arauna , my shild , " she say , in a strange but sweet and soothing voice , " you be with the good man in the safe , good house . let old Suan give you the good food , my shild . " 
 " where be my father ? oh , show I my father ? " I whisper faintly , as she raise I in the bed and hold a large spoon to my lip . 
 " you shall you shall ; it be too very much Inglese ; I tell you when have long Sunday time to think . my shild , take the good food from poor old Suan . " 
 she look at I with such beseech eye that , even if food have be loathsome to I , I could not have resist she ; whereas I be now in the quick - revive agony of starvation . the indian woman feed I with far great care than I be worth , and hush I , with some soothing process , into another abyss of sleep . 
 More than a week pass by I thus , in the struggle between life and death , before I be able to get clear knowledge of any body or any thing . no one , in my wakeful hour , come into my little bedroom except this careful indian nurse , who hush I off to sleep whenever I want to ask question . Suan Isco , as she be call , possess a more than mesmeric power of soothe a weary frame to rest ; and this be seconded , where I lay , by the soft , incessant cadence and abundant roar of water . thus every day I recover strength and natural impatience . 
 " the master be come to see you , shild , " Suan say to I one day , when I have sit up and do my hair , and long to be down by the water - fall ; " if , if too much Inglese old Suan say no more can now . " 
 " if I be ready and able and willing ! oh , Suan , run and tell he not to lose one moment . " 
 " no sure ; Suan no sure at all , " she answer , look at I calmly , as if there be century yet to spare . " suan no hurry ; shild no hurry ; master no hurry : come last of all . " 
 " I tell you , Suan , I want to see he . and I be not accustomed to be keep wait . my dear father insist always but oh , Suan , Suan , he be dead I be almost sure of it . " 
 " he old man quite dead enough , and big hole dig in the land for he . very good ; more good than could be . suan no more Inglese . " 
 well as I have know it long , a catching of the breath and hollow , helpless pain come through I , to meet in dry word thus the dread which might have be but a hover dream . I turn my face to the wall , and beg she not to send the master in . 
 but presently a large , firm hand be lay on my shoulder softly , and turn sharply round , I behold an elderly man look down at I . his face be plain and square and solid , with short white curl on a rugged forehead , and fresh red cheek , and a triple chin fit base for remarkably massive jaw . his frame be in keep with his face , be very large and powerful , though not of my father 's command height . his dress and appearance be those of a working and a really hard - work man , sober , steadfast , and self - respecting ; but what engage my attention most be the frank yet shrewd gaze of deep - set eye . I speak of thing as I observe they later , for I could not pay much heed just then . 
 " ' tis a poor little missy , " he say , with a gentle tone . " what thing she hath be through ! will you take an old man 's hand , my dear ? your father hath often take it , though different from his rank of life . Sampson Gundry be my name , missy . have you ever hear your father tell of it ? " 
 " many and many a time , " I say , as I place my hot little hand in his . " he never find more than one man true on earth , and it be you , Sir . " 
 " come , now , " he reply , with his eye for a moment sparkle at my warmth of word ; " you must not have that in your young head , missy . it lead to a miserable life . your father hath always be unlucky the most unlucky that ever I do know . and luck cometh out in nothing clear than in the kind of folk we meet . but the Lord in heaven ordereth all . I speak like a poor heathen . " 
 " oh , never mind that ! " I cry : " only tell I , be you in time to save to save " I could not bear to say what I want . 
 " in plenty of time , my dear ; thank to you . you must have fight when you could not fight : the real stuff , I call it . your poor father lie where none can harm he . come , missy , missy , you must not take on so . it be the good thing that could befall a man so bind up with calamity . it be what he hath pray for for many a year if only it be not for you . and now you be safe , and for sure he know it , if the angel hee their business . " 
 with these word he withdraw , and kindly send Suan back to I , know that her soothe way would help I more than argument . to my mind all thing lie in deep confusion and abasement . overcome with bodily weakness and with bitter self - reproach , I even fear that to ask any question might show want of gratitude . but a thing of that sort could not always last , and before very long I be quite at home with the history of Mr. Gundry . 
 Solomon Gundry , of Mevagissey , in the county of Cornwall , in England , betook himself to the United States in the last year of the last century . he have always be a most upright man , as well as a first - rate fisherman ; and his family have make a rule as most respectable family at that time do to run a nice cargo of contraband good not more than twice in one season . a highly querulous old lieutenant of the british navy   who have serve under Nelson and lose both , arm , yet keep " the rheumatic " in either stump   be appoint , in an evil hour , to the Cornish coast - guard ; and he never rest until he have catch all the good county family smuggle . through this he lose his situation , and have to go to the workhouse ; nevertheless , such a stir have be rouse that   to satisfy public opinion   they make a large sacrifice of inferior people , and among they this Solomon Gundry . now the Gundries have long be a thickset race , and have furnish some champion wrestler ; and Solomon keep to the family stamp in the matter of obstinacy . he make a bold mark at the foot of a bond for 150 pound ; and with no other sign than that , his partner in their stanch herring - smack   the Good Hope , of Mevagissey   allow he to make sail across the Atlantic with all he care for . 
 this cornish partner deserve to get all his money back ; and so he do , together with good interest . Solomon Gundry thrive among a thrifty race at Boston ; he marry a sweet New England lass , and his eld son be Sampson . Sampson , in the prime of life , and at its headstrong period , seek the far West , overland , through not much less of distance , and through even more of danger , than his english father have go through . his name be know on the western side of the mighty chain of mountain before Colonel Fremont be hear of there , and before there be any gleam of gold on the lonely sunset frontage . 
 here Sampson Gundry live by tillage of the nobly fertile soil ere Sacramento or San Francisco have any name to speak of . and though he do not show regard for any kind of society , he manage to have a wife and son , and keep they free from danger . but   as it appear to I the more , the more I think of every thing   no one must assume to be aside the reach of Fortune because he have gather himself so small that she should not care to strike at he . at any rate , good or evil power smite Sampson Gundry heavily . 
 first he lose his wife , which be a " great denial " to he . she fall from a cliff while she be peg out the linen , and the substance of her frame prevent she from ever get over it . and after that he lose his son , his only son for all the Gundries be particular as to quality ; and the way in which he lose his son make it still more sad for he . 
 a reputable and value woman have disappear in a hasty way from a cattle - place down the same side of the hill . the desire of the Indians be to enlarge her value and get it . there be very few white man as yet within any distance to do good ; but Sampson Gundry vow that , if the will of the Lord go with he , that woman should come back to her family without rob they of sixpence . to this intent he start with a company of some twenty man white or black or middle - colored   accord to circumstance . he be their captain , and his son Elijah their lieutenant . Elijah have only be marry for a fortnight , but be full of spirit , and eager to fight with enemy ; and he seem to have carry this too far ; for all that come back to his poor bride be a lock of his hair and his blessing . he be bury in a bed of lava on the western slope of Shasta , and his wife die in her confinement , and be bury by the Blue River . 
 it be say at the time and long afterward that Elijah Gundry thus cut short be the fine and noble young man to be find from the mountain to the ocean . his father , in whose arm he die , lead a sad and lonely life for year , and scarcely even care   although of Cornish and New England race   to seize the glorious chance of wealth which lie at his foot beseech he . by settlement he have possess himself of a large and fertile district , slop from the mountain - foot along the bank of the swift Blue River , a tributary of the San Joaquin . and this be not all ; for he also claim the ownership of the upper valley , the whole of the mountain gorge and spring head , whence that sparkle water flow . and when that fury of gold - digging in 1849 arise , very few man could have do what he do without even think twice of it . 
 for Sampson Gundry stand , like a bull , on the bank of his own river , and defy the bad and most desperate man of all nation to pollute it . he have scarcely any follower or steadfast friend to back he ; but his fame for stern courage be clear and strong , and his bodily presence most manifest . not a shovel be thrust nor a cradle rock in the bed of the Blue River . 
 but when a year or two have pass , and all the town and village , and even hovel and way - side hut , begin to clink with money , Mr. Gundry gradually recover a wholesome desire to have some . for now his grandson Ephraim be grow into biped shape , and have lose his mother when he first come into the world , be sure to need the more natural and maternal nutriment of money . 
 therefore Sampson Gundry , though he would not dig for gold , work out a plan which he have long thought of . nature help he with all her power of mountain , forest , and headlong stream . he set up a saw - mill , and build it himself ; and there be no other to be find for twelve degree of latitude and perhaps a score of longitude . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 the " king of the MOUNTAINS . " 

 if I think , and try to write forever with the strong word , I can not express to any other mind a thousandth part of the gratitude which be and be , and ought to be forever , in my own poor mind toward those who be so good to I . from time to time it be say   whenever any man with power of speech or fancy get some little grievance   that all mankind be simply selfish , miserly , and miserable . to contradict that say need experience even large , perhaps , than that which have suggest it ; and this I can not have , and therefore only know that I have not find man or woman behave at all accord to that view of they . 
 whether Sampson Gundry owe any debt , either of gratitude or of loyalty , to my father , I do not ask ; and he seem to be   like every one else   reserve and silent as to my father 's history . but he always treat I as if I belong to a rank of life quite different from and much above his own . for instance , it be long before he would allow I to have my meal at the table of the household . 
 but as soon as I begin in earnest to recover from starvation , loss , and loneliness , my heart be draw to this grand old man , who have see so many trouble . he have be here and there in the world so much , and deal with so many people , that the natural frankness of his mind be sharpen into caution . but any weak and helpless person still could get the good of he ; and his shrewdness certainly do not spring from any form of bitterness . he be rough in his way sometimes , and could not bear to be contradict when he be sure that he be right , which generally happen to he . but above all thing he have one very great peculiarity , to my mind highly vexatious , because it seem so unaccountable . Sampson Gundry have a very low opinion of feminine intellect . he never show this contempt in any unpleasant way , and indeed he never , perhaps , display it in any positive saying . but as I grow old and begin to argue , sure I be that it be there ; and it always provoke I tenfold as much by seem to need no assertion , but to stand as some great axiom . 
 the other member of the household be his grandson Ephraim   or " firm " Gundry , the indian woman Suan Isco , and a couple of help , of race or nation almost unknown to themselves . Suan Isco belong to a tribe of respectable Black Rock Indians , and have be the wife of a chief among they , and the mother of several child . but Klamath Indians , enemy of theirs   who carry off the lady of the cattle ranch , and afterward shoot Elijah , have Suan Isco in their possession , have murder her husband and child , and be use she as a mere beast of burden , when Sampson Gundry fall on they . he , with his follower , be enrage at the cold - blooded death of Elijah , fall on those miscreant to such purpose that woman and child alone be leave to hand down their bad propensity . 
 but the white man rescue and bring away the steal wife of the stockman , and also the widow of the Black Rock chief . she be in such poor condition and so broken - hearted that none but the fine humanity would have consider her worth a quarter of the trouble of her carriage . but she prove to be worth it a thousandfold ; and Sawyer Gundry   as now he be call   know by this time all the value of uncultivated gratitude . and her virtue be so many that it take a long time to find they out , for she never put they forward , not know whether they be good or bad . 
 until I know these people , and the pure depth of their kindness , it be a continual grief to I to be a burden upon they . but when I come to understand they and their simple greatness , the only thing I be ashamed of be my own mistrust of they . not that I expect ever that any harm would be do to I , only that I know myself to have no claim on any one . 
 one day , when I be fit for nothing but to dwell on trouble , Sampson Gundry 's grandson " firm " as he be call for Ephraim run up the stair to the little room where I be sit by myself . 
 " Miss Rema , will you come with we ? " he say , in his deep , slow style of speech . " we be go up the mountain , to haul down the great tree to the mill . " 
 " to be sure I will come , " I answer , gladly . " what great tree be it , Mr. Ephraim ? " 
 " the large tree any where near here the one we cut down last winter . ten day it take to cut it down . if I could have save it , it should have stand . but grandfather do it to prove his right . we shall have a rare job to lead it home , and I doubt if we can tackle it . I think you might like to see we try . " 
 in less than a minute I be ready , for the warmth and softness of the air make cloak or shawl unbearable . but when I run down to the yard of the mill , Mr. Gundry , who be give order , come up and give I an order too . 
 " you must not go like this , my dear . we have three thousand foot to go upward . the air will be sharp up there , and I doubt if we shall be home by night - fall . Run , Suan , and fetch the young lady 's cloak , and a pair of thick boot for change . " 
 Suan Isco never run . that manner of motion be foreign to she , at least as we accomplish it . when speed be require , she attain it by increase length of stride and great vigor of heel . in this way she conquer distance steadily , and with very little noise . 
 the air , and the light , and the beauty of the mountain be a sudden joy to I . in front of we all strode Sampson Gundry , clear all tangle with a short , sharp axe , and mount steep place as if twoscore be strike off his threescore year and five . from time to time he turn round to laugh , or see that his man and train bullock be right ; and then , as his bright eye meet my dark one , he seem to be sorry for the noise he make . on the other hand , I be ashamed of damp any one 's pleasure by be there . 
 but I need not have feel any fear about this . like all other child , I wrap myself up too much in my own importance , and behave as if my state of mind be a thing to be consider . but the long we rise through the freedom and the height , the light grow the heart of every one , until the thick forest of pine close round we , and we walk in a silence that might be feel . 
 hence we issue forth upon the rough bare rock , and after much trouble with the cattle , and some bruise , stand pant on a rugged cone , or crest , which have once be crown with a Titan of a tree . the tree be still there , but not its glory ; for , alas ! the mighty trunk lie prostrate a grander column than ever be or will be build by human hand . the tapering shaft stretch out of sight for something like a furlong , and the bulk of the butt rise over we so that we could not see the mountain . have never see any such tree before , I must have be amazed if I have be old enough to comprehend it . 
 Sampson Gundry , large as he be , and accustom to almost every thing , collect his man and the whole of his team on the ground - floor or area of the stump before he would say any thing . here we all look so sadly small that several of the man begin to laugh ; the bullock seem nothing but raccoon or beaver to run on the branch or the fibre of the tree ; and the chain and the shackle , and the block and crane , and all the rest of the thing they mean to use , seem nothing whatever , or at all to be consider , except as a spider 's web upon this tree . 
 the sagacious bullock , who know quite well what they be expect to do , look blank . some rub their horn into one another be sadly , and some cock their tail because they feel that they could not be call upon to work . the light of the afternoon sun come glance along the vast pillar , and light its die hue cinnamon , purple , and glabrous red , and soft gray where the lichen grow . 
 every body look at Mr. Gundry , and he begin to cough a little , have have lately some trouble with his throat . then in his sturdy manner he speak the truth , accord to his nature . he set his great square shoulder against the butt of the tree , and deliver himself : 
 " friend and neighbor , and hand of my own , I be take in here , and I own to it . it serve I right for disbelieve what my grandson , Firm Gundry , say . I know that the tree be a big one , of course , as every body else do ; but till you see a tree lay upon earth you get no grip of his girth , no more than you do of a man till he lieth a corpse . at the time of felling I could not come anigh he , by reason of an accident ; and I have some word with this boy about it , which keep I away ever since that time . firm , you be right , and I be wrong . it be a real shame , now I see it , to throw down the ' King of the Mountains . ' but , for all that , be down , we must use he . he shall be saw into fifty - foot length . and I invite you all to come again , for six or seven good turn at he . " 
 at the hearing of this , a cheer arise , not only for the Sawyer 's manly truth , but also for his hospitality ; because on each of these visit to the mountain he be the host , and his supply be good . but before the descent with the empty team begin , young Ephraim do what appear to I to be a gallant and straightforward thing . he stand on the chine of the fall monster , forty foot above we , have gain the post of vantage by activity and strength , and he ask if he might say a word or two . 
 " say away , lad , " cry his grandfather , supposing , perhaps , in his obstinate way   for truly he be very obstinate , that his grandson be go now to clear himself from art or part in the murder of that tree an act which have rouse indignation over a hundred league of lowland . 
 " neighbor , " say Firm , in a clear young voice , which shake at first with diffidence , " we all have to thank you , more than I can tell , for come to help we with this job . it be a job which require to be do for legal reason which I do not understand , but no doubt they be good one . for that we have my grandfather 's word ; and no one , I think , will gainsay it . now , have go so far , we will not be beat by it , or else we shall not be Americans . " 
 these simple word be receive with great applause ; and an orator , stand on the large stump to be find even in America , deliver a speech which be very good to hear , but need not now be repeat . and Mr. Gundry 's eye be moist with pleasure at his grandson 's conduct . 
 " Firm knoweth the right thing to do , " he say ; " and like a man he doeth it . but whatever aileth you , Miss Rema , and what can ' e see in the distance yonner ? never mind , my dear , then . tell I by - and - by , when none of these folk be ' longside of we . " 
 but I could not bear to tell he , till he force it from I under pain of his displeasure . I have spy on the sky - line far above we , in the desert track of mountain , the very gap in which my father stand and bid I seek this landmark . his memory be true , and his eyesight also ; but the great tree have be fell . the death of the " King of the Mountains " have lead to the death of the king of mankind , so far as my little world contain one . 




 CHAPTER V 

 UNCLE SAM 

 the influence of the place in which I live begin to grow on I . the warmth of the climate and the cloud of soft and fertile dust be break by the refresh rush of water and the clear soft green of leaf . we have fruit tree of almost every kind , from the peach to the amber cherry , and countless oak by the side of the river not large , but most fantastic . here I use to sit and wonder , in a foolish , childish way , whether on earth there be any other child so strangely place as I be . of course there be thousand far bad off , more desolate and destitute , but be there any more thickly wrap in mystery and loneliness ? 
 a wanderer as I have be for year , together with my father , change of place have not supply the knowledge which flow from lapse of time . faith , and warmth , and trust in other have not be dash out of I by any rude blow of the world , as happen with unlucky child huddle together in large city . my father have never allow I much acquaintance with other child ; for six year he have leave I with a community of lay sister , in a little town of Languedoc , where I be the only pupil , and where I be to remain as I be bear , a simple heretic . those sister be very good to I , and teach I as much as I could take of secular accomplishment . and it be a bitter day for I when I leave they for America . 
 for during those six year I have see my father at long interval , and have almost forget the early day when I be always with he . I use to be the one little comfort of his perpetual wandering , when I be a careless child , and say thing to amuse he . not that he ever play with I any more than he play with any thing ; but I be the last of his seven child , and he like to watch I grow . I never know it , I never guess it , until he give his life for mine ; but , poor little common thing as I be , I become his only tie to earth . even to I he be never love , in the way some father be . he never call I by pet name , nor dandle I on his knee , nor kiss I , nor stroke down my hair and smile . such thing I never expect of he , and therefore never miss they ; I do not even know that happy child always have they . 
 but one thing I know , which be not always know to happy child : I have the pleasure of know my own name . my name be an english one Castlewood and by birth I be an english girl , though of England I know nothing , and at one time speak and think most easily in French . but my longing have always be for England , and for the sound of english voice and the quietude of english way . in the chatter and heat and drought of South France some faint remembrance of a greener , cool , and more silent country seem to touch I now and then . but where in England I have live , or when I have leave that country , or whether I have relation there , and why I be doom to be a foreign girl all these question be but as curl wisps of cloud on memory 's sky . 
 of such thing   much as I long to know a good deal more about they   I never have dare to ask my father ; nor even could I , in a roundabout way , such as clever child have , get second - hand information . in the first place , I be not a clever child ; for the next point , I never have underhand skill ; and finally , there be no one near I who know any thing about I . like all other girl and perhaps the very same tendency be to be find in boy I have strong though hazy idea of caste . the noble sense of equality , fraternity , and so on , seem to come later in life than childhood , which be an age of ambition . I do not know who in the world I be , but feel quite sure of be somebody . 
 one day , when the great tree have be saw into length , and with the aid of many team bring home , and the pit and the hoist tackle be be prepare and strengthen to deal with it , Mr. Gundry , be full of the subject , declare that he would have his dinner in the mill yard . he be anxious to watch , without loss of time , the settlement of some heavy timber newly sink in the river 's bed , to defend the outwork of the mill . have his good leave to bring he his pipe , I find he sit upon a bench with a level fix before he , and his empty plate and cup lay by , among a great litter of tool and thing . he be look along the level with one eye shut , and the other most sternly intent ; but when I come near he rise and raise his broad pith hat , and make I think that I be not interrupt he . 
 " here be your pipe , Uncle Sam , " I say ; for , in spite of all his formal way , I would not be afraid of he . I have know he now quite long enough to be sure he be good and kind . and I know that the world around these part be divide into two hemisphere , the well half be of those who love , and the base half make of those who hat , Sawyer Sampson Gundry . 
 " what a queer world it be ! " say Mr. Gundry , accept his pipe to consider that point . " who ever would have dream , fifty year agone , that your father 's daughter would ever have come with a pipe to light for my father 's son ? " 
 " Uncle Sam , " I reply , as he slowly begin to make those puff which seem to be of the high essence of pleasure , and wisps of blue smoke flit through his white eyebrow and among the snowy curl of hair " dear Uncle Sam , I be sure that it would be an honor to a princess to light a pipe for a man like you . " 
 " Miss Rema , I should rather you would talk no nonsense , " he answer , very shortly , and he set his eye along his level , as if I have offend he . not know how to assert myself and declare that I have speak my honest thought , I merely sit down on the bench and wait for he to speak again to I . but he make believe to be very busy , and scarcely to know that I be there . I have a great mind to cry , but resolve not to do it . 
 " why , how be this ? what be the matter ? " he exclaim at last , when I have be watch the water so long that I sigh to know where it be go to . " why , missy , you look as if you have never a friend in all the wide world leave . " 
 " then I must look very ungrateful , " I say ; " for at any rate I have one , and a good one . " 
 " and do not   you know of any one but I , my dear ? " 
 " you and Suan Isco and Firm those be all I have any knowledge of . " 
 " ' tis a plenty to my mind , almost too many . my plan be to be a good friend to all , but not let too many be friend with I . rest you quite satisfied with three , Miss Rema . I have live a good many year , and I never have more than three friend worth a puff of my pipe . " 
 " but one 's own relation , Uncle Sam people quite nearly related to we : it be impossible for they to be unkind , you know . " 
 " do I , my dear ? then I wish that I do . except one 's own father and mother , there be not much to be hop for out of they . my own brother take a twist against I because I try to save he from ruin ; and if any man ever wish I ill , he do . and I think that your father have the same tale to tell . but there ! I know nothing whatever about that . " 
 " now you do , Mr. Gundry ; I be certain that you do , and beg you to tell I , or rather I demand it . I be old enough now , and I be certain my dear father would have wish I to know every thing . whatever it be , I be sure that he be right ; and until I know that , I shall always be the most miserable of the miserable . " 
 the Sawyer look at I as if he could not enter into my meaning , and his broad , short nose and quiet eye be beset with wrinkle of inquiry . he quite forget his level and his great post in the river , and tilt back his ancient hat , and let his pipe rest on his big brown arm . " Lord bless I ! " he say , " what a young gal you be ! or , at least , what a young Miss Rema . what good can you do , miss , by make of a rout ? here you be in as quiet a place as you could find , and all of we like and pity you . your father be a wise man to settle you here in this enlightened continent . let the doggoned old folk t'other side of the world think out their own flustration . a female young American you be now , and a very fine speciman you will grow . ' tis the fine thing to be on all God 's earth . " 
 " no , Mr. Gundry , I be an english girl , and I mean to be an Englishwoman . the Americans may be more kind and generous , and perhaps my father think so , and bring I here for that reason . and I may be glad to come back to you again when I have do what I be bind to do . remember that I be the last of seven child , and do not even know where the rest be bury . " 
 " now look straight afore you , missy . what do you see yonner ? " the Sawyer be get a little tired , perhaps , of this long interruption . 
 " I see enormous log , and a quantity of saw , and tool I do not   even know the name of . also I see a bright , swift river . " 
 " but over here , missy , between they two oak . what do you please to see there , Miss Rema ? " 
 " what I see there , of course , be a great saw - mill . " 
 " but it would not   have be ' of course , ' and it would not   have be at all , if I have spend all my day a - dwelling on the injury of my family . could I have put that there unekaled sample of water - power and human ingenuity together without labor hard for whole month of a stretch , except upon the Sabbath , and lay awake night after night , and bend all my intellect over it ? and could I have do that , think you now , if my heart be a - moon upon family wrong , and this , that , and the other ? " 
 here Sampson Gundry turn full upon I , and fold his arm , and spread his great chin upon his deer - skin apron , and nod briskly with his deep gray eye , survey I in triumph . to his mind , that mill be the wonder of the world , and any argument base upon it , with or without coherence , be , like its circular saw , irresistible . and yet he think that woman can not reason ! however , I do not say another word just then , but give way to he , as behoove a child . and not only that , but I always find he too good to be argue with too kind , I mean , and large of heart , and wed to his own peculiar turn . there be nothing about he that one could dislike , or strike fire at , and be captious ; and he always proceed with such pity for those who be oppose to he that they always know they must be wrong , though he be too polite to tell they so . and he have such a pleasant , paternal way of look down into one 's little thought when he put on his spectacle , that to say any more be to hazard the risk of ungrateful inexperience . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 a BRITISHER 

 the beautiful Blue River come from the jagged depth of the mountain , full of light and liveliness . it have scarcely run six mile from its source before it touch our mill - wheel ; but in that space and time it have gather strong and copious volume . the lovely blue of the water   like the inner tint of a glacier   be partly due to its origin , perhaps , and partly to the rich , soft tone of the granite sand spread under it . whatever the cause may have be , the river well deserve its title . 
 it be so bright and pure a blue , so limpid and pellucid , that it even seem to out - vie the tint of the sky which it reflect , and the myriad spark of sunshine on it twinkle like a crystal rain . plod through the parched and scorch dust of the mountain - foot , through the stifle vapor and the blinding , ochreous glare , the traveler suddenly come upon this cool and calm delight . it be not to be descry afar , for it lie below the level , and the oak and other tree of shelter scarcely top the narrow comb . there be no canyon , such as be and some of they know over all the world both to the north and south of it . the Blue River do not owe its birth to any fierce convulsion , but sparkle on its cheerful way without impend horror . stand here as a child , and thinking , from the manner of my father , that strong man never weep nor own the conquest of emotion , I feel sometimes a fool 's contempt for the gush transport of brave man . for instance , I have see a miner , or a tamer of horse , or a rough fur - hunter , or   perhaps the brave of all   a man of science and topography , jade , worn , and nearly dead with drought and dearth and choking , suddenly , and beyond all hope , strike on this bury Eden . and then he drop on his knee and spread his starve hand upward , if he could , and thank the God who make he , till his head go round , and who know what remembrance of love one come to he ? and then , if he have any moisture leave , he fall to a passion of weeping . 
 in childish ignorance I think that this man weakly degrade himself , and should have be bear a woman . but since that time I have truly learn that the brave of man be those who feel their maker 's Land most softly , and be not ashamed to pay the tribute of their weakness to he . 
 living , as we do , in a lonely place , and yet not far from a track along the crest of the great Californian plain from Sacramento southward , there be scarcely a week which do not bring we some traveler need comfort . Mr. Gundry use to be tell that if he would set up a rough hotel , or house of call for cattle - drover , miner , loafer , and so on , he might turn twice the money he could ever make by his thrive saw - mill . but he only use to laugh , and say that nature have make he too honest for that ; and he never think of charge any thing for his hospitality , though if a rich man leave a gold piece , or even a nugget , upon a shelf , as happen very often , Sawyer Gundry do not disdain to set it aside for a rainy day . and one of his rich or most lavish guest arrive on my account , perhaps . 
 it happen when daylight be grow short , and the red heat of the earth be go , and the snow - line of distant granite peak have creep already low , and the chatter bird that spend their summer in our band of oak - tree be begin to find their food get short , and to prime swift wing for the lowland ; and I , have never feel bitter cold , be tremble at what I hear of it . for now it be clear that I have no choice but to stay where I be for the present , and be truly thankful to God and man for have the chance of do so . for the little relic of my affair so far as I have any have take much time in arrangement , perhaps because it be so hard to find they . I know nothing , except about my own little common wardrobe , and could give no information about the content of my father 's package . but these , by dint of perseverance on the part of Ephraim   who be very keen about all right , have mainly be recover , and Mr. Gundry have do the good that could be do concern they . whatever seem of a private nature , or likely to prove important , have be bring home to Blue River Mills ; the rest have be sell , and have fetch large price , unless Mr. Gundry enlarge they . 
 he more than enlarge , he multiply they , as I find out long afterward , to make I think myself rich and grand , while a beggar upon his bounty . I have never be accustom to think of money , and feel some little contempt for it not , indeed , a lofty hatred , but a careless wonder why it seem to be always think of . it be one of the last thing I ever think of ; and those who be wait for it be until I get use to they oblige in self - duty to remind I . 
 this , however , be not my fault . I never dream of wrong they . but I have earn no practical knowledge of the great world any where , much though I have wander about , accord to vague recollection . the duty of pay have never be mine ; that important part have be do for I . and my father have such a horror always of any growth of avarice that he never give I sixpence . 
 and now , when I hear upon every side continual talk of money , from Suan Isco upward , I think at first that the New World must be different from the old one , and that the gold mine in the neighborhood must have make they full of it ; and once or twice I ask Uncle Sam ; but he only nod his head , and say that it be the practice every where . and before very long I begin to perceive that he do not exaggerate . 
 nothing could prove this point more clearly than the circumstance above refer to the arrival of a stranger , for the purpose of bribe even Uncle Sam himself . this happen in the month of November , when the pass be begin to be block with snow , and those of the high mountain tract have long be overwhelm with it . on this particular day the air be laden with gray , oppressive cloud , threaten a heavy downfall , and instead of fare forth , as usual , to my beloved river , I be keep in - door , and even up stair , by a violent snow - headache . this be a crush weight of pain , which all new - comer , or almost all , be oblige to endure , sometimes for as much as eight - and - forty hour , when the first great snow of the winter be breed , as they express it , overhead . but I be more lucky than most people be ; for after about twelve hour of almost intolerable throbbing , during which the sweetest sound be odious , and the idea of food quite loathsome , the agony leave I , and a great desire for something to eat succeed . Suan Isco , the kind of the kind , be go down stair at last , for which I feel ungrateful gratitude because she have be do she good to charm away my pain by low , monotonous indian ditty , which make it ten time bad ; and yet I could not find heart to tell she so . 
 now it must have be past six o'clock in the evening of the November day when the avalanche slide off my head , and I be able to lift it . the light of the west have be faint , and be dead ; though often it use to prolong our day by the backward glance of the ocean . with pang of youthful hunger , but a head still weak and dazy , I grope my way in the dark through the passage and down the stair of redwood . 
 at the bottom , where a railed landing be , and the door open into the house - room , I be surprised to find that , instead of the usual cheerful company enjoy themselves by the fire - light , there be only two people present . the Sawyer sit stiffly in his chair of state , delay even the indulgence of his pipe , and have his face set sternly , as I have never before beheld it . in the visitor 's corner , as we call it , where people sit to dry themselves , there be a man , and only one . 
 something tell I that I have well keep back and not disturb they . the room be not in its usual state of comfort and hospitality . some kind of meal have be make at the table , as always must be in these part ; but not of the genial , reckless sort which random traveler carry on without any check from the Sawyer . for he of all man ever bear in a civilized age be the fine host , and a guest beneath his roof be sacred as a lady to a knight . hence it happen that I be much surprised . proper conduct almost compel I to withdraw ; but curiosity make I take just one more little peep , perhaps . look back at these thing now , I can not be sure of every thing ; and indeed if I could , I must have an almost supernatural memory . but I remember many thing ; and the headache may have clear my mind . 
 the stranger who have bring Mr. Gundry 's humor into such stiff condition be sit in the corner , a nook where light and shadow make an eddy . he seem to be perfectly unconcerned about all the trick of the hearth flame , present as he do a most solid face for any light to play upon . to I it seem to be a weather - beat face of a bluff and resolute man , the like of which we attribute to John Bull . at any rate , he be like John Bull in one respect : he be sturdy and square , and fit to hold his own with any man . 
 stranger of this sort have come   as Englishmen rove every where , and be kindly welcome by Uncle Sam , who , be of recent English blood , have a kind of hanker after it , and would almost rather have such at his board than even a true - bear American ; and infinitely more welcome be they than Frenchman , Spaniard , or German , or any man not to be distinguish , as be the case with some of they . even now it be clear that the Sawyer have not grudge any token of honor , for the tall , square , brazen candlestick , of Boston make , be on the table , and very little light they give . the fire , however , be grandly roar of stub - oak and pine antler , and the black grill of the chimney brick be fringe with lift filament . it be a rich , ripe light , afford breadth and play for shadow ; and the face of the two man glisten , and darken in their crease . 
 I be dress in black , and could not be see , though I could see they so clearly ; and I doubt whether to pass through , upon my way to the larder , or return to my room and starve a little long ; for I do not wish to interrupt , and have no idea of listen . but suddenly I be compel to stop ; and to listen become an honest thing , when I know what be speak of or , at any rate , I do it . 
 " Castlewood , Master Colonist ; Castlewood be the name of the man that I have come to ask about . and you will find it worth your while to tell I all you know of he . " thus speak the Englishman sit in the corner ; and he seem to be certain of produce his effect . 
 " Wal , " say Uncle Sam , assume what all true briton believe to be the universal Yankee tone , while I know that he be laugh in his sleeve , " squire , I guess that you may be right . consideration of that ' ere kind desarve to be consider of . " 
 " just so . I know that you must see it , " the stranger continue , bravely . " a stiff upper lip , as you call it here , be all very well to begin with . but all you enlighten member of the great republic know what be what . it will bring you more than ten year ' income of your saw - mill , and farm , and so on , to deal honestly with I for ten minute . no more beat about the bush and fence with I , as you have do . now can you see your own interest ? " 
 " I never be reckon a fool at that . squire , make track , and be do with it . " 
 " then , Master Colonist , or Colonel for I believe you be all colonel here your task be very simple . we want clear proof , swear properly and attest duly , of the death of a villain George Castlewood , otherwise the honorable George Castlewood , otherwise Lord Castlewood : a man who murder his own father ten year ago this November : a man commit for trial for the crime , but who bribe his jailer and escape , and wander all over the continent . what be that noise ? have you get rat ? " 
 " plenty of foreign rat , and native ' coon , and skunk , and other varmint . Wal , Squire , go on with it . " 
 the voice of Uncle Sam be stern , and his face full of rise fury , as I , who have make that noise in my horror , try to hush my heart with patience . 
 " the story be well know , " continue the stranger : " we need make no bone of it . George Castlewood go about under a curse " 
 " not quite so loud , Squire , if you please . my household be not altogether season . " 
 " and perhaps you have get the young lady somewhere . I hear a report to that effect . but here you think nothing of a dozen murder . now , Gundry , let we have no squeamishness . we only want justice , and we can pay for it . ten thousand dollar I be authorize to offer for a mere act of duty on your part . we have an extradition treaty . if the man have be alive , we must have have he . but as he have cheat the hangman by die , we can only see his grave and have evidence . and all well - dispose people must rejoice to have such a quiet end of it . for the family be so well know , you see . " 
 " I see , " Mr. Gundry answer , quietly , lay a finger on his lip . " guess you want something more than that , though , Squire . be there nothing more than the grave to oblige a noble Britisher with ? " 
 " yes , Colonel ; we want the girl as well . we know that she be with he in that caravan , or wagon train , or whatever you please to call it . we know that you have make oath of his death , produce his child , and obtain his trunk , and draw his share in the insurance job . your law must be queer to let you do such thing . in England it would have take at least three year , and cost a deal more than the thing be worth , even without a Chancery suit . however , of his paper I shall take possession ; they can be of no earthly use to you . " 
 " to be sure . and possession of his darter too , without so much as a Chancery suit . but what be to satisfy I , Squire , agin go wrong in this little transaction ? " 
 " I can very soon satisfy you , " say the stranger , " as to their identity . here be their full , particular , and correct description name , weight , and color of the party . " 
 with a broad grin at his own exquisite wit , the bluff man draw forth his pocket - book , and take out a paper , which he begin to smooth on his knee quite leisurely . meanwhile , in my hiding - place , I be tremble with terror and indignation . the sense of eavesdropping be wholly lose , in that of my own jeopardy . I must know what be arrange about I ; for I feel such a hatred and fear of that stranger that soon than be surrender to he I would rush back to my room and jump out of the window , and trust myself to the trackless forest and the snowy night . I be very nearly do so , but just have sense enough to wait and hear what would be say of I . so I lurk in the darkness , behind the rail , while the strange read slowly and pompously . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 DISCOMFITURE 

 the Englishman draw forth a double eyeglass from a red velvet waistcoat , and mount it on his broad nose , come near to get the full light of the candle . I see he as clearly as I could wish , and , indeed , a great deal too clearly ; for the more I see of the man , the more I shrink from the thought of be in his power . not that he seem to be brutal or fierce , but selfish , and resolute , and hard - hearted , and scornful of lofty feeling . short dust - color hair and frizzly whisker frame his large , thick - feature face , and wear no mustache , he show the clumsy sneer of a wide , coarse mouth . I watch he with all my eye , because of his tone of authority about myself . he might even be my guardian or my father 's near relation though he seem to be too ill - breed for that . 
 " sorry to keep you wait , Colonel , " he go on , in a patronizing tone , such as he have assume throughout . " here it be . now prick your ear up , and see if these candid remark apply . I be read from a print form , you see : 
 " ' George Castlewood be forty - eight year old , but look perhaps ten year old . his height be over six foot two , and he do not stoop or slouch at all . his hair be long and abundant , but white ; his eye be dark , pierce , and gloomy . his feature be fine , and of italian cast , but stern , morose , and forbidding , and he never use razor . on the back of his left hand , near the wrist , there be a broad scar . he dress in half - mourning always , and never wear any jewelry , but strictly shun all society , and prefer uncivilized region . he never stay long in any town , and follow no occupation , though his aspect and carriage be military , as he have be a cavalry officer . from time to time he have be hear of in Europe , Asia , and Africa , and be now believe to be in America . 
 " ' his only survive child , a girl of about fifteen , have be see with he . she be tall and slight and very straight , and speak french well than English . her hair be very nearly black , and her eye of unusual size and lustre . she be shy , and appear to have be keep under , and she have a timid smile . whether she know of her father 's crime or not be quite uncertain ; but she follow he like a dog almost . ' 
 " there now , Colonel , " cry the Englishman , as he fold the paper triumphantly ; " most of that come from my information , though I never set eye upon the child . do the cap fit or not , Brother Jonathan ? " 
 Mr. Gundry be lean back in his own corner , with a favorite pipe , carve by himself , repose on his waistcoat . and be thus appeal to , he look up and rub his eye as if he have be doze , though he never have be more wide awake , as I , who know his attitude , could tell . and my eye fill with tear of love and shame , for I know by the mere turn of his chin that he never would surrender I . 
 " Stranger , " he say , in a most provoking drawl , " a hard day 's work tell its tale on I , you bet . you do read so bootiful , you read I hard asleep . and the guttural of that furrin English be always a little hard to catch . Mought I trouble you just to go through it again ? you like the sound of your own voice ; and no blame to you , be such a swate un . " 
 the Englishman look at he keenly , as if he have some suspicion of be chaff ; but the face of the Sawyer be so grave and the bend of his head so courteous that he could not refuse to do as he be ask . but he glance first at the whiskey bottle stand between the candlestick ; and I know it bode ill for his errand when Uncle Sam , the most hospitable of man , feign pure incomprehension of that glance . the man should have no more under that roof . 
 with a sullen air and a muttered curse , at which Mr. Gundry blow a wreath of smoke , the stranger unfold his paper again , and say , " now I beg you to attend this time , " read the whole of his description , with much emphasis , again , while the Sawyer turn away and beat time upon the hearth , with his white hair , broad shoulder , and red ear prominent . the Englishman look very seriously vex , but go through his business doggedly . " be you satisfied now ? " he ask when he have finish . 
 " Wal , now , Squire , " reply Uncle Sam , still keep up his provoke drawl , but turn round and look at the stranger very steadfastly , ' some thin 's be so pooty and so ilegantly do , they seem a'most as good as well - sling flapjack . a natteral honest stomick can not   nohow have enough of they . Mought I be so bold , in a silly , mountaneous sort of a way , as to ax for another heerin ' of it ? " 
 " do you mean to insult I , Sir ? " shout the visitor , leap up with a flaming face , and throw himself into an attitude of attack . 
 " Stranger , I mought , " answer Mr. Gundry , stand squarely before he , and keep his hand contemptuously behind his back " I mought so do , barrin ' one little point . the cute commissioner in all the West would have to report ' non compos ' if his order be to diskiver something capable of bein ' insult in a fellow of your natur ' . " 
 with these word Uncle Sam sit down , and powerfully close his mouth , signify that now the matter be take through every phase of discussion , and have be thoroughly exhaust . his visitor star at he for a moment , as if at some strange phenomenon , and then fall back into self - command , without attempt bluster . 
 " Colonel , you be a ' cure , ' as we call it on our side of the herring pond . what have I do to ' riz your dander , ' as you elegantly express it here ? " 
 " Britisher , nothing . you know no well . it take more than that to put my back up . but forty year agone I do believe I must ' a heave you out o ' window . " 
 " why , Colonel , why ? now be reasonable . not a word have I say reflect either upon you or your country ; and a fine offer than I have make can not come to many of you , even in this land of gold . ten thousand dollar I offer , and I will exceed my instruction and say fifteen , all pay on the nail by an order on Frisco , about which you may assure yourself . and what do I ask in return ? legal proof of the death of a man whom we know to be dead , and the custody of his child , for her own good . " 
 " squire , I have no other answer to make . if you offer I all the gold dig in these mountain since they be discover , I could only say what I have say before . you come from Sylvester 's ranch there be time for you to get back ere the snow begin . " 
 " what a hospitable man you be ! upon my word , Gundry , you deserve to have a medal from our Humane Society . you propose to turn I out of door to - night , with a great fall of snow impend ? " 
 " Sir , the fault be entirely your own . what hospitality can you expect after come to buy my guest ? if you be afraid of the ten - mile ride , my man at the mill will bed you . but here you must not sleep , because I might harm you in the morning . I be apt to lose my temper sometimes , when I go on to think of thing . " 
 " Colonel , I think I have well ride back . I fear no man , nor his temper , nor crotchet . but if I be snow up at your mill , I never might cross the hill - foot for month ; but from Sylvester 's I can always get to Minto . you refuse , then , to help I in any way ? " 
 " More than that . I will do every thing in my power to confound you . if any one come prowl after that young lady , he shall be shoot . " 
 " that be most discouraging . however , you may think well of it . write to this address if you do . you have the girl here , of course ? " 
 " that be her concern and mine . do your guide know the way right well ! the snow be begin . you do not know our snow , any more than you know we . " 
 " never mind , Mr. Gundry . I shall do very well . you be rough in your way , but you mean to do the right ; and your indignation be virtuous . but mark my word upon one little point . if George Castlewood have be live , I have such credential that I would have drag he back with I in spite of all your bluster . but over his corpse I have no control , in the present condition of treaty . neither can I meddle with his daughter , if it be worth while to do so . keep she and make the good of she , my man . you have take a snake in the grass to your bosom , if that be what you be up for . a very handsome girl she may be , but a bad lot , as her father be . if you wish the name of Gundry to have its due respect hereafter , let the heir of the sawmill have nothing to do with the honorable Miss Castlewood . " 
 " let alone , let alone , " Uncle Sam say , angrily . " it be well for you that the ' heir of the saw - mill ' hath not hear your insolence . firm be a steady lad ; but he knoweth well which foot to kick with . no fear of lose the way to Sylvester 's ranch with firm behind you . but , meddlesome as you be , and a bitter weed to my experience , it shall not be say that Sampson Gundry send forth a fellow to be frozen . drink a glass of hot whiskey before you get to saddle . not in friendship , mind you , Sir , but in common human nature . " 
 that execrable man comply , for he begin to be doubtful of the drive snow , now huddle against the window - frame . and so he go out ; and when he be go , I come forth into the fire - light , and throw my arm round the Sawyer 's neck and kiss he till he be ashamed of I . 
 " Miss Rema , my dear , my poor little soul , what make you carry on so ? " 
 " because I have hear every word , Uncle Sam , and I be base enough to doubt you . " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 a doubtful loss 

 when I try to look out of my window in the morning , I be quite astonished at the state of thing . to look out fairly be impossible ; for not only be all the low part of the frame hillocke up like a sandglass , and the side fill in with dusky plait , but even in the middle , where some outlook be , it lead to very little . all the air seem choke with snow , and the ground come up in pile to meet it ; all sound be deaden in the thick gray hush , and nothing have its own proportion . never have see such a thing before , I be frightened , and long to know more of it . 
 Mr. Gundry have a good laugh at I , in which even Suan Isco join , when I propose to sweep a path to the mill , and keep it open through the winter . 
 " it can be do I be sure it can , " I exclaim , with vigorous ignorance . " may I do it if I can ? it only require perseverance . if you keep on sweeping as fast as it fall , you must overcome it . do not   you see , Uncle Sam ? " 
 " to be sure I do , Miss Rema , as plain as any pikestaff . Suan , fetch a double bundle of new broom from top loft , and do not   forget while you be up there to give special order no snow be to fall at night or when missy be at dinner . " 
 " you may laugh as much as you please , Uncle Sam , but I intend to try it . I must try to keep my path to somewhere . " 
 " what a fool I be , to be sure ! " say Mr. Gundry , softly . " there , now , I beg your pardon , my dear , for never give a thought to it . firm and I will do it for you , as long as the Lord allow of it . why , the snow be two foot deep a'ready , and twenty foot in place . I wonder whether that rogue of a Goad get home to Sylvester 's ranch last night ? no fault of mine if he never do , for go he would in spite of I . " 
 I have not be think of Mr. Goad , and indeed I do not know his name until it be tell in this way . my mind be dwell on my father 's grave , where I use to love to sit and think ; and I could not bear the idea of the cold snow lie over it , with nobody come to care for he . kind hand have bear he down the mountain   while I lay between life and death   and bury he in the soft peach orchard , in the soothe sound of the mill - wheel . here have be plant above his head a cross of white un - paint wood , bear only his initial , and a small " amen " below they . 
 with this I be quite content , believe that he would have wish no well , be a very independent man , and desirous of no kind of pomp . there be no " consecrated ground " within mile and mile of travel ; but I hop that he might rest as well with simple tear to hallow it . for often and often , even now , I could not help give way and sobbing , when I think how sad it be that a strong , commanding , mighty man , of great will and large experience , should drop in a corner of the world and die , and finally be think lucky when he could think for himself no long to obtain a tranquil , unknown grave , and end with his initial , and have a water - wheel to sing to he . many a time it set I cry , and make I long to lie down with he , until I think of earth - worm . 
 all that could be do be do by Sampson and Firm Gundry , to let I have my clear path , and a clear bourne at the end of it . but even with a steam snow - shovel they could not have keep the way unstopped , such solid mass of the mountain cloud now descend over we . and never have I be so humor in my foolish wish : I be quite ashamed to see the trouble great man take to please I . 
 " well , I be sorry to hear it , firm , " say the Sawyer , come in one day , with clout of snow in his snowy curl . " not that I care a cent for the fellow and an impudenter fellow never suck a pipe . still , he might have have time to mend , if his time have be as good as the room for it . however , no blame rest on we . I tell he to bed down to saw - mill . they englishman never know when they be well off . but the horse get home , they tell I ? " 
 " the horse get home all right , grandfather , and so do the other horse and man . but Sylvester think that a pile of dollar must have die out in the snow - drift . it be a queer story . we shall never know the right . " 
 " how many time do I tell he , " the Sawyer reply , without much discontent , " that it be a risky thing to try the gulch , such a night as that ? his own way he would have , however ; and fine liar than he could ever stick up to be for a score of year have go , time upon time , to the land of truth by mean of that same view of thing . they take every body else for a liar . " 
 " oh , Uncle Sam , who be it ? " I cry . " be it that dreadful that poor man who want to carry I away from you ? " 
 " now you go in , missy ; you go to the fire - hearth , " Mr. Gundry answer , more roughly than usual . " leave you all such point to the Lord . they be not for young lady to talk about . " 
 " Grandfather , do not   you be too hard , " say Firm , as he see I hurry away . " Miss Rema have ask nothing unbecoming , but only concern her own affair . if we refuse to tell she , other will . " 
 " very well , then , so be it , " the Sawyer reply ; for he yield more to his grandson than to the rest of the world put together . " turn the log up , firm , and put the pan on . you boy can go on without victual all day , but an old man must feed regular . and , bad as he be , I thank God for send he on his way home with his belly full . if ever he turneth up in the snow , that much can be prove to my account . " 
 Young as I be , and little practice in the way of settler , I could not help perceive that Uncle Sam be very much put out not at the death of the man so sadly , as at the worry of his die so in go from a hospitable house . Mr. Gundry care little what any body say concern his honor , or courage , or such like ; but the thought of a whisper against his hospitality would rouse he . 
 " find he , firm , find he , " he say , in his deep sad voice , as he sit down on the antlere stump and gaze at the fire gloomily . " and when he be find , call a public postmortem , and prove that we give he his bellyful . " 
 Ephraim , know the old man 's way , and the manner , perhaps , of the neighborhood , beckon to Suan to be quick with something hot , that he might hurry out again . then he take his dinner stand , and without a word go forth to seek . 
 " take the snow - harrow , and take Jowler , " the old man shout after he , and the youth turn round at the gate and wave his cap to show that he hear he . the snow be again fall heavily , and the afternoon be wan ; and the last thing we see be the brush of the mighty tail of the great dog Jowler . 
 " oh , uncle , Firm will be lose himself ! " I cry , in dismay at the great white waste . " and the poor man , whoever he be , must be dead . do call he back , or let I run . " 
 Mr. Gundry 's only answer be to lead I back to the fireside , where he make I sit down , and examine I , while Suan be fry the butter - bean . 
 " who be it spy you on the mountain , missy , the whole of the way from the redwood - tree , although you lay senseless on the ground , and he be hard at work with the lopping ? " 
 " why , Ephraim , of course , Uncle Sam ; every body say that nobody else could have notice such a thing at such a distance . " 
 " very well , my dear ; and who be it carry you all the way to this house , without stop , or even let your head droop down , although it be a burn hot May morn ? " 
 " Mr. Gundry , as if you do not know a great deal well than I do ! it be week before I could thank he , even . but you must have see he do it all . " 
 the Sawyer rub his chin , which be large enough for a great deal of rub ; and when he do that , I be always sure that an argument go to his liking . he say nothing more for the present , but have his dinner , and enjoy it . 
 " suppose now that he do all that , " he resume , about an hour afterward , " be firm the sort of boy you would look to to lose his own self in a snow - drift ? he have three man with he , and he be worth all three , let alone the big dog Jowler , who have dig out forty foot of snow ere now . if that rogue of an Englishman , Goad , have have the luck to cheat the hangman , and the honor to die in a Californy snow - drift , you may take my experience for it , missy , Firm and Jowler will find he , and clear Uncle Sam 's reputation . " 




 CHAPTER ix 

 WATER - spout 

 if Mr. Gundry be in one way right , he be equally wrong in the other . Firm come home quite safe and sound , though smother with snow and most hungry ; but he think that he should have staid out all the night , because he have fail of his errand . Jowler also be full of discontent and trouble of conscience . he know , when he kick up his heel in the snow , that his duty be to find somebody , and be of Alpine pedigree , and train to act up to his ancestry , he now drop his tail with failure . 
 " it come to the same thing , " say Sawyer Gundry ; " it be foolish to be so particular . a thousand well man have sink through be so pig - head . we shall find the rogue toward the end of March , or in April , if the season suit . firm , eat your supper and shake yourself . " 
 this be exactly the Sawyer 's way to take thing quietly when convince that there be no chance to better they . he would always do his good about the small trifle ; but after that , be the matter small or great , he have a smile face for the end of it . 
 the winter , with all its weight of sameness and of dreariness , go at last , and the lovely spring from the soft Pacific find its gradual way to we . accustom as I be to gentle climate and more easy change , I lose myself in admiration of this my first californian spring . the flower , the league and league of flower , that burst into color and harmony purple , yellow , and delicate lilac , weave with bright crimson thread , and fringe with emerald - green by the bank , and blue by the course of river , while deepen here and there by woode shelter and cool place , with the silver - gray of the soft Pacific wan in far distance , and silken vapor draw toward the card fork of the mountain range ; and over all the never - weary azure of the limpid sky : child as I be , and full of little worldly trouble on my own account , these grand and noble sight enlarge I without any thinking . 
 the wheat and the maize be grow apace , and bean come into full blossom , and the peach swing in the western breeze be almost as large as walnut , and all thing in their prime of freshness , ere the yellow dust arrive , when a sudden melting of snow in some gully send a strong flood down our Blue River . the saw - mill happen to be hard at work ; and before the gear could be lift , some damage be do to the float by the heavy , impetuous rush of the torrent . Uncle Sam be away , and so be firm ; from which , perhaps , the mischief grow . however , the blame be all put on the river , and little more be say of it . 
 the follow morning I go down before even Firm be out - of - door , under some touch , perhaps , of natural desire to know thing . the stream be as pure and bright as ever , hasten down its gravel - path of fine granite just as usual , except that it have more volume and a strong sense of freshness . only the bent of the grass and the swath of the pendulous twig down stream remain to show that there must have be some violence quite lately . 
 all Mr. Gundry 's strengthen pile and shore be as firm as need be , and the clear blue water play around they as if they be no constraint to it . and none but a practiced eye could see that the great wheel have be wound , be undershot , and lift now above the power of the current , accord to the fine old plan of lock the door when the horse be go . 
 when I be look up and wonder where to find the mischief , Martin , the foreman , come out and cross the plank , with his mouth full of breakfast . 
 " show I , " I say , with an air , perhaps , of very young importance , " where and what the damage be . be there any strain to the iron - work ? " 
 " Lor ' a mercy , young missus ! " he answer , gruffly , be by no mean a polished man , " where do you ever hear of ironwork ? needle and pin be enough for you . now do not   you go and make no mischief . " 
 " I have no idea what you mean , " I answer . " if you have be careless , that be no concern of mine . " 
 " Careless , indeed ! and the way I work , when other be a - snorin ' in their bed ! I might just as well do nort , every bit , and get more thank and well wage . that be the way of the world all over . come Saturday week , I shall better myself . " 
 " but if it be the way of the world all over , how will you well yourself , unless you go out of the world altogether ! " I put this question to Martin with the earnest simplicity of the young , mean no kind of sarcasm , but know that scarcely a week go by without his threatening to " well himself . " and they say that he have do so for seven year or more . 
 " do not   you be too sharp , " he reply , with a grim smile , partly at himself , perhaps . " if half as I hear about you be true , you will want all your sharpness for yourself , Miss Remy . and the Britishers be bad than we be . " 
 " well , Martin , I be sure you would help I , " I say , " if you see any person injure I . but what be it I be not to tell your master ? " 
 " my master , indeed ! well , you need not tell old Gundry any thing about what you have see . it might lead to hard word ; and hard word be not the style of thing I put up with . if any man try hard word with I , I knock he down , up stick , and make track . " 
 I could not help smile at the poor man 's talk . Sawyer Gundry could have take he with one hand and toss he over the undershot wheel . 
 " you forget that I have not see any thing , " I say , " and understand nothing but ' needle and pin . ' but , for fear of do any harm , I will not even say that I have be down here , unless I be ask about it . " 
 " Miss Remy , you be a good girl , and you shall have the mill some day . Lord , do not   your little great eye see the job they be a - do of ? the fine stroke in all Californy , when the stubborn old chap take to quartz - crushing . " 
 all this be beyond I , and I tell he so , and we part good friend , while he shake his long head and go home to feed many pappoose . for the strange thing of all thing be , though I never at that time thought of it , that there be not any one about this place whom any one could help like . Martin take as long as any body to be like , until one understand he ; but after that he be one of the good , in many way that can not be describe . also there be a pair of negro , simply and sweetly delightful . they work all day and they sing all night , though I have not the pleasure of hear they ; and the more Suan Isco despise they because they be black , and she be only brown the more they make up to she , not at all because she govern the supply of victual . it be childish to have such idea , though Suan herself could never get rid of they . the truth , as I come to know afterward , be that a large , free - hearted , and determined man be at the head of every thing . Martin be the only one who ever grumble , and he have establish a long right to do so by never himself be grumble at . 
 " I will be bind that poor fellow be in a sad way , " Mr. Gundry say at breakfast - time . " he know how much he be to blame , and I fear that he will not   eat a bit for the day . Martin be a most conscientious man . he will offer to give up his berth , although it would be his simple ruin . " 
 I be wise enough not to say a word , though Firm look at I keenly . he know that I have be down at the mill , and expect I to say something . 
 " we all must have our little mistake , " continue Sawyer Gundry ; " but I never like to push a man when he feel it . I shall not say a syllable to Martin ; and , Ephraim , you will do the like . when a fellow stick well to his work like Martin , never blame he for a mere accident . " 
 Firm , accord to his habit , make no answer when he do not quite agree . in talk with his own age he might have argue , but he do not argue with his grandfather . 
 " I shall just go down and put it right myself . Martin be a poor hand at repair . firm , you go up the gulch , and see if the fresh have hurt the hurdle . Missy , you may come with I , if you please , and sketch I at work in the mill - wheel . you have draw that wheel such a sight of time , you must know every feather of it well than the man who make it . " 
 " Uncle Sam , you be too bad , " I say . " I have never get it right , and I never shall . " 
 I do not dare as yet to think what really prove to be true in the end that I could not draw the wheel correctly because itself be incorrect . in spite of all Mr. Gundry 's skill and labor and ingenuity , the wheel be no true circle . the error begin in the hub itself , and increase , of course , with the distance ; but still it work very well , like many other thing that be not perfect . 
 have no idea of this as yet , and doubt nothing except my own perception of " perspective , " I sit down once more in my favorite spot , and wait for the master to appear as an active figure in the midst of it . the air be particularly bright and clear , even for that pure climate , and I could even see the blue - wing fly dart in and out of the oozy float . but half - way up the mountain a white cloud be hang , a cloud that keep on change shape . I only observe it as a thing to put in for my background , because I be fond of try to tone and touch up my sketch with french chalk . 
 presently I hear a harsh metallic sound and creaking of machinery . the bite , or clamp , or whatever they be call , be be put on , to keep the wheel from revolve with the Sawyer 's weight . Martin , the foreman , be grumble and growl , accord to his habit , and peer through the slot , or channel of stone , in which the axle work , and the cheery voice of Mr. Gundry be put down his objection . be much too large to pass through the slot , Mr. Gundry come round the corner of the building , with a heavy leathern bag of tool strap round his neck , and his canvas breech girt above his knee . but the foreman staid inside to hand he the needful material into the wheel . 
 the Sawyer wad merrily down the shallow blue water , for he be always like a boy when he be at work , and he wave his little skull - cap to I , and swing himself up into the wheel , as if he be near seventeen than seventy . and presently I could only see his leg and arm as he fall to work . therefore I also fall to work , with my good attempt at penciling , have be carefully teach enough of draw to know that I could not draw . and perhaps I catch from the old man 's presence and the sound of his activity that strong desire to do my good which he seem to impart to every one . 
 at any rate , I be so engross that I scarcely observe the change light , except as a hindrance to my work and a trouble to my distance , till suddenly some great drop fall upon my paper and upon my hat , and a rush of dark wind almost sweep I from the log upon which I sit . then again all be a perfect calm , and the young leaf over the stream hang heavily on their tender foot - stalk , and the point of the breeze - sweep grass turn back , and the ruffle of all thing smooth itself . but there seem to be a sense of fear in the wait silence of earth and air . 
 this deep , unnatural stillness scar I , and I make up my mind to run away . but the hammer of the Sawyer sound as I have never hear it sound . he be much too hard at work to pay any heed to sky or stream , and the fall of his stroke be dead and hollow , as if the place resent they . 
 " come away , come away , " I cry , as I run and stand on the opposite bank to he ; " there be something quite wrong in the weather , I be sure . I entreat you to come away at once , Uncle Sam . every thing be so strange and odd . " 
 " why , what be to do now ? " ask the Sawyer , come to my side of the wheel and look at I , with his spectacle tilt up , and his apron wedge in a piece of timber , and his solid figure rest in the impossibility of hurry . " Missy , do not   you make a noise out there . you can not   have your own way always . " 
 " oh , Uncle Sam , do not   talk like that . I be in such a fright about you . do come out and look at the mountain . " 
 " I have see the mountain often enough , and I be up to every trick of they . there may be a corn or two of rain ; no more . my sea - weed be like tinder . there can not   be no heavy storm when it be like that . do not   you make pretense , missy , to know what be beyond you . " 
 Uncle Sam be so seldom cross that I always feel that he have a right to be so . and he give I one of his noble smile to make up for the sharpness of his word , and then back he go to his work again . so I hop that I be altogether wrong , till a bolt of lightning , like a blue dagger , fall at my very foot , and a crash of thunder shake the earth and stun I . these open the sluice of the heaven , and before I could call out I be drench with rain . cling to a bush , I see the valley lash with cloudy blast , and a whirling mass of spiral darkness rush like a giant toward I . and the hissing and tossing and roar mix whatever be in sight together . 
 such terror fall upon I at first that I could not look , and could scarcely think , but cower beneath the blaze of lightning as a sing moth drop and shiver . and a storm of wind strike I from my hold , so that I fall upon the wet earth . every moment I expect to be kill , for I never could be brave in a thunder - storm , and have not be tell much in France of God 's protection around I . and the dart of lightning hiss and cross like a blue and red web over I . so I lay hold of a little bent of weed , and twist it round my dabbled wrist , and try to pray to the Virgin , although I have often be tell it be vanity . 
 then suddenly wipe my eye , I behold a thing which entirely change I . a vast , broad wall of brown water , nearly as high as the mill itself , rush down with a crest of foam from the mountain . it seem to fill up all the valley and to swallow up all the tree ; a whole host of animal flee before it , and bird , like a volley of bullet , fly by . I lose not a moment in run away , and climb a rock and hiding . it be base , ungrateful , and a nasty thing to do ; but I do it almost without think . and if I have staid to cry out , what good could I have do only to be sweep away ? 
 now , as far as I can remember any thing out of so much horror , I must have peep over the summit of my rock when the head of the deluge strike the mill . but whether I see it , or whether I know it by any more summary process , such as outrun the eye sometimes , be more than I dare presume to say . whichever way I learn it , it be thus : 
 a solid mass of water , much big than the mill itself , burst on it , dash it to atom , leap off with it , and spin away the great wheel anyhow , like the hoop of a child send trundling . I hear no scream or shriek ; and , indeed , the bellow of a lion would have be a mere whisper in the wild roar of the element . only , where the mill have be , there be nothing except a black streak and a boil in the deluge . then score of tear - up tree sweep over , as a bush - harrow jump on the clod of the field ; and the unrelenting flood cast its wrath , and shine quietly in the lightning . 
 " oh , Uncle Sam ! Uncle Sam ! " I cry . but there be not a sign to be see of he ; and I think of his gentle , good , obstinate way , and my heart be almost broken . " what a brute what a wretch I be ! " I keep say , as if I could have help it ; and my fear of the lightning be go , and I stand and rave with scorn and amazement . 
 in this misery of confusion it be impossible to think , and instinct alone could have drive my despair to a desperate venture . with my soaked clothe stick between my leg , I run as hard as they would go , by a short - cut over a field of corn , to a spot where the very last bluff or headland jut into the river . this be a good mile below the mill accord to the bend of channel , but only a furlong or so from the rock upon which I have take refuge . however , the flood be there before I , and the wall of water dash on to the plain , with a brindled comb behind it . 
 behind it also come all the ruin of the mill that have any floatage , and body of bear and great hog and cattle , some of they alive , but the most part dead . a grand black bull toss back his horn , and look at I beseechingly : he have frighten I often in quiet day , but now I be truly grieve for he . and then on a wattle of brush - wood I see the form of a man the Sawyer . 
 his white hair draggle in the wild brown flood , and the hollow of his arm be heap with froth , and his knot leg hang helpless . senseless he lie on his back , and sometimes the wash of the wave go over he . his face be livid , but his brave eye open , and a heavy weight hang round his neck . I have no time to think , and deserve no praise , for I know not what I do . but just as an eddy sweep he near I , I make a desperate leap at he , and clutch at something that tear my hand , and then I go under the water . my sens , however , be not yet go , and my weight on the wattle stop it , and I come up gurgle , and fling one arm round a fat , woolly sheep go by I . the sheep be water - log , and could scarcely keep his own poor head from drown , and he turn his mild eye and look at I , but I could not spare he . he strike for the shore in forlorn hope , and he tow we in some little . 
 it be no good for I to pretend to say how thing be manage for we , for of course I could do nothing . but the sheep must have pilot we to a tree , whose branch sweep the torrent . here I let he go , and catch fast hold ; and Uncle Sam 's raft must have stick there also , for what could my weak arm have do ? I remember only to have feel the ground at last , as the flood be exhaust ; and good people come and find he and I , stretch side by side , upon rubbish and mud . 




 CHAPTER X 

 a nugget 

 in a sacred corner   as soon as ever we could attend to any thing   we hang up the leathern bag of tool , which have do much more toward save the life of Uncle Sam than I do ; for this have serve as a kind of kedge , or drag , upon his little craft , retard it from the great roll of billow , in which he must have be drown outright . and even as it be , he take some day before he be like himself again . 
 Firm , who have be at the head of the valley , repair some break hurdle , declare that a water - spout have burst in the bosom of the mountain gorge where the Blue River have its origin , and the whole of its power get ponde back by a dam , which the Sawyer himself have make , at about five furlong above the mill . Ephraim , be far up the gulch , and high above the roar flood , do his utmost with the keen edge of his eye to pierce into the mischief ; but it rain so hard , and at the same time blow so violently around he , that he could see nothing of what go on , but hop for the good , with uneasiness . 
 now when the Sawyer come round so well as to have a clear mind of thing , and learn that his mill be go and his business lose , and himself , at this ripe time of life , almost drive to begin the world again , it be natural to expect that he ought to indulge in a good deal of grumble . many people come to comfort he , and to offer he deep condolence and the truest of true sympathy , and every thing that could be think of , unless it be a loan of money . of that they never think , because it be such a trifling matter ; and they all have confidence in his power to do any thing but pay they . they tell he that he be a young man still , and Providence watch over he ; in a year or two he would be all the well for this sad visitation . and he say yes to their excellent advice , and be very much oblige to they . at the same time it be clear to I , who watch he like a daughter , that he become heavy in his mind , and sigh , as these kind friend , one after the other , enjoy what he still could do for they , but ride away out of his gate with too much delicacy to draw purse - string . not that he would have accept a loan from the heartiest heart of all of they , only that he would have like the offer , to understand their meaning . and several of they be man as firm , in his young indignation , tell I who have be altogether set up in life by the kindness of Sampson Gundry . 
 perhaps the Sawyer , after all his year , have no right to be vex by this . but whether he be right or wrong , I be sure that it prey upon his mind , though he be too proud to speak of it . he know that he be not ruin , although these friend assume that he must be ; and some of they be quite angry with he because they have vainly warn he . he could not remember these warning , yet he contradict none of they ; and fully believe in the goodness of the world , he become convinced that he must have be hard in the day of his prosperity . 
 no soon be he able to get about again than he go to San Francisco to raise money on his house and property for the rebuilding of the mill . Firm ride with he to escort he back , and so do Martin , the foreman ; for although the time be not so bad as they use to be some ten year back , in the height of the gold fever , it still be a highly undesirable thing for a man who be know to have money about he to ride forth alone from San Francisco , or even Sacramento town . and have mention the foreman Martin , in justice to he I ought to say that although his entire loss from the disaster amount only to a wear - out waistcoat of the value of about twenty cent , his vehemence in grumble could only be equal by his lofty persistence . by his great activity in run away and leave his employer to meet the brunt , he have save not only himself , but his wife and child and good and chattel . this fail , however , to remove or even assuage his regret for the waistcoat ; and he moan and threaten to such good purpose that a speedy subscription be raise , which must have find he in clothe for the rest of his life , as well as a silver tea - pot with an inscription about his bravery . 
 when the three be go , after strict injunction from Mr. Gundry , and his grandson too , that I be on no account to venture beyond call distance from the house , for fear of be run away with , I find the place so sad and lonesome that I scarcely know what to do . I have no fear of robber , though there be plenty in the neighborhood ; for we still have three or four man about , who could be thoroughly trust , and who staid with we on half wage rather than abandon the Sawyer in his trouble . Suan Isco , also , be as brave as any man , and could shoot well with a rifle . moreover , the great dog Jowler be know and dread by all his enemy . he could pull down an Indian , or two half - caste , or three Mexicans , in about a second ; and now he always go about with I , have form a sacred friendship . 
 Uncle Sam have kiss I very warmly when he say " good - by , " and Firm have show some disposition to follow his example ; but much as I like and admire Firm , I have my own idea as to what be unbecoming , and now in my lonely little walk I begin to think about it . my father 's resting - place have not be invade by the imperious flood , although a line of driftage , in a zigzag swath , lie near the mound . this be my favorite spot for thinking , when I feel perplexed and downcast in my young unaided mind . for although I have not speak of my musing very copiously , any one would do I wrong who fancy that I be indifferent . through the great kindness of Mr. Gundry and other good friend around I , I have no bitter sense as yet of my own dependence and poverty . but the vile thing I have hear about my father , the horrible slander and wicked falsehood for such I be certain it must be this be continually in my thought , and quite destroy my cheerfulness . and the bad of it be that I never could get my host to enter into it . whenever I begin , his face would change and his manner grow constrain , and his chief desire always seem to lead I to some other subject . 
 one day , when the heat of the summer come forth , and the peach begin to blush toward it , and bronze - rib fig grow damask - gray with a globule of sirup in their eye , and melon and pumpkin already have curve their fluted stalk with heaviness , and the dust of the plain be begin to fly , and the bright spring flower be dead more swiftly even than they first be bear , I sit with Suan Isco at my father 's cross , and tell she to make I cry with some of all the many sad thing she know . she know a wondrous number of thing insatiably sad and wild ; and the quiet way in which she tell they   not only without any horror , but as if they be rightly to be expect , also the deep and rather guttural tone of voice , and the stillness of the form , make it impossible to help believe verily every word she say . 
 that there should be in the world such thing , so dark , unjust , and full of woe , be enough to puzzle a child bring up among the noble philosopher ; whereas I have simply be educate by good unpretentious woman , who have partly retire from the world , but not to such a depth as to drown all thought of what be leave behind they . these be ready at any time to return upon good opportunity ; and some of they have do so , with many tear , when they come into property . 
 " please to tell I no more now , " I say at last to Suan ; " my eye be so sore they will be quite red , and perhaps Uncle Sam will come home to - night . I be afraid he have find some trouble with the money , or he ought to have be at home before . do not   you think so , Suan ? " 
 " yes , yes ; trouble with the money . always with the white man that . " 
 " very well . I shall go and look for some money . I have a most wonderful dream last night . only I must go quite alone . you have well go and look to the larder , Suan . if they come , they be sure to be hungry . " 
 " yes , yes ; the white man always hungry , sep when thirsty . " 
 the indian woman , who have in her heart a general contempt for the white race , save those of our own household , draw her bright - colored shawl around she , and set off with her peculiar walk . her walk be not ungraceful , because it be so purely natural ; but it differ almost as much as the step of a quadrupe from what we be teach . I , with heavy thought but careless step , set off on my wandering . I want to try to have no set purpose , course , or consideration , but to go wherever chance should lead I , without choice , as in my dream . and after many vague turn , and even closing of rebellious eye , I find myself , perhaps by the force of habit , at the ruin of the mill . 
 I seem to recognize some resemblance   which be as much as one can expect   to the scene which have be in my sleep before I . but sleep I have see roar torrent ; wake , I behold a quiet stream . the little river , as blue as ever , and shrink from all thought of wrath , show nothing in its pure gaze now but a gladness to refresh and cool . in many nicely shelter corner it be full of soft reflection as to the good it have to do ; and then , in silver and golden runnel , on it go to do it . and the happy voice and many sweetly flash little glance tell that it know of the lovely life beside it , create and comfort by itself . 
 but I look at the dark ruin it have work , and like a child I be angry with it for the sake of Uncle Sam . only the foundation and the big heavy stone of the mill be leave , and the clear bright water purl around , or make little eddy among they . all be touch with silvery sound , and soft caressing dimple . but I look at the passionate mountain first , to be sure of no more violence ; for if a burned child dread the fire , one half drown may be excuse for little faith in water . the mountain in the sunshine look as if nothing could move their grandeur , and so I step from stone to stone , in the bed of the placid brightness . 
 presently I come to a place where one of the great black pile , drive in by order of the sawyer , to serve as a back - stay for his wall , have be sweep by the flood from its vertical sinking , but have not be sweep away . the square tar post of mountain pine recline down stream , and gently nod to the current 's impact . but overthrow as it be , it could not make its exit and float away , as all its brother have do . at this I have wonder before , and now I go to see what the reason be . by throw a short piece of plank from one of the shattered foundation into a nick in the shoulder of the recline pile , I manage to get there and sit upon it , and search for its obstruction . 
 the water be flow smoothly toward I , and as clear as crystal , be scarcely more than a foot in depth . and there , on the upper verge of the hole , raise by the leverage of the butt from the granite sand of the river - bed , I see a great bowlder of rich yellow light . I be so much amazed that I cry out at once , " oh ! what a beautiful great yellow fish ! " and I shout to Jowler , who have find where I be , and follow I , as usual . the great dog be famous for his love of fishing , and have often bring a fine salmon forth . 
 Jowler be always a zealous fellow , and he answer eagerly to my call by dash at once into the water , and follow the guidance of my hand . but when he see what I point at , he be bitterly disappointed , and give I to understand as much by look at I foolishly . " now do not   be a stupid dog , " I say ; " do what I tell you immediately . whatever it be , bring it out , Sir . " 
 Jowler know that I would be obey whenever I call he " Sir ; " so he duck his great head under the water , and tug with his tooth at the object . his back cord up , and his tail grow rigid with the intensity of his labor , but the task be quite beyond he . he could not even stir the mighty mass at which he struggle , but he bite off a little project corner , and come to I with it in his mouth . then he lay his dripping jaw on my lap , and his ear fall back , and his tail hang down with utter sense of failure . 
 I pat his broad intelligent forehead , and wipe his black eye with his ear , and take from his lip what he offer to I . then I see that his grinder be frame with gold , as if he have be to a dentist regardless of expense , and into my hand he drop a lump of solid glitter virgin ore . he have not the small idea of have do any thing worthy of human applause ; and he put out his long red tongue and lick his tooth to get rid of uneatable dross , and give I a quiet nudge to ask what more I want of he . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 rover 

 from Jowler I want nothing more . such matter be too grand for he . he have beat the dog of Hercules , who have only bring the purple dye a thing require skill and art and taste to give it value . but gold do well without all these , and well in their absence . from handle many little nugget , and hearken to Suan Isco 's tale of treachery , theft , and murder do by white man for the sake of this , I know that here I have find enough to cost the life of fifty man . 
 at present , however , I be not possess with dread so much as I be with joy , and even a secret exultation , at the power place in my hand . for I be too young to moralize or attempt philosophy . here I have a knowledge which the wise of mankind might envy , much as they despise it when they have no chance of get it . I look at my father 's grave , in the shadow of the quiet peach - tree , and I could not help cry as I think that this be come too late for he . then I call off Jowler , who wish   like a man   to have another tug at it ; and home I run to tell my news , but fail of breath , have time to think . 
 it be lucky enough that this be so , for there might have be the great mischief ; and sadly excited as I be , the trouble I have see so much of come back to my beat heart and tell I to be careful . but surely there could be no harm in trust Suan Isco . however , I look at her several time , and be not quite so sure about it . she be wonderfully true and faithful , and scarcely seem to concede to gold its paramount rank and influence . but that might only have be because she have never know the want of it , or have never see a lump worth stealing , which I be sure that this must be ; and the unregenerate state of all who have never be baptize have be impress on I continually . how could I mistrust a Christian , and place confidence in an Indian ? therefore I try to sleep without tell any one , but be unable . 
 but , as it happen , my good discovery do not keep I so very long awake , for on the following day our troop of horseman return from San Francisco . of course I have do very foolish thing once and again throughout my life , but perhaps I never do any thing more absurd than during the whole of that day . to begin with , I be up before the sun , and down at the mill , and along the plank , which I have remove overnight , but now replace as my bridge to the pine - wood pile . then I gaze with eager desire and fear which be the strong I scarcely know for the yellow under - gleam , to show the safety of my treasure . there it lay , as safe as could be , massive , grand , and beautiful , with tone of vary richness as the ripple vary over it . the pale light of the morning breathe a dewy lustre down the bank ; the sun   although unrisen yet   draw furrow through the mountain gap ; the bird from every hang tree address the day with melody ; the crystal water , purer than religion 's bright dream , go by ; and here among they lay , unmoved , unthought of , and inanimate , the thing which to a human being be worth all the rest put together . 
 this contemplation have upon I an effect so noble that here I resolve to spend my time , for fear of any robbery . I be afraid to gaze more than could be help at this grand sight , lest other eye should spy what be go on , and long to share it . and after hurry home to breakfast and return in like haste , I get a scare , such as I well deserve , for be so extremely foolish . 
 the carpentry of the mill - wheel have prove so very stanch and steadfast that even in that rag deluge the whole have hold together . it have be bodily tear from its hold and sweep away down the valley ; but somewhere it ground , as the flood ebb out , and a strong team have tug it back again . and the Sawyer have vow that , come what would , his mill should work with the self - same wheel which he with young hand have work . now this wheel   to prevent any warp , and save the dry timber from the sun   be lay in a little shady cut , where water trickle under it . and here I have take up my abode to watch my monster nugget . 
 I have pull my shoe and stocking off , and be paddle in the runnel , shelter by the deep rim of the wheel , and enjoy the water . little fish dart by I , and lovely spot lizard play about , and I be almost begin even to forget my rock of gold . in self - defense it be right to say that for the gold , on my own account , I care as much as I might have do for a fig worm - eat . it be for Uncle Sam , and all his dear love , that I watch the gold , hop in his sad disaster to restore his fortune . but suddenly over the rim of the wheel   lay flat in the tributary brook   I descry across the main river a move company of horsemen . 
 these man could have nothing to do with Uncle Sam and his party , for they be come from the mountain - side , while he would return by the track across the plain . and they be already so near that I could see their dress quite plainly , and know they to be mexican rover , mix with loose Americans . there be few bad man on the face of the earth than these , when in the humor , and unluckily they seem almost always to be in that humor . therefore , when I see their battered sun - hat and baggy slouch boot , I fear that little ruth , or truth , or mercy dwelt between they . 
 on this account I shrink behind the shelter of the mill - wheel , and hold my head in one trembling hand , and with the other draw my wind - toss hair into small compass . for my blood run cold at the many dreadful thing that come into my mind . I be sure that they have not spy I yet , and my overwhelming desire be to decline all introduction . 
 I count fourteen gentleman , for so they always style themselves , and would pistol any man who express a contrary opinion . fourteen of they ride to the brink of the quiet blue river on the other side ; and there they let their horse drink , and some dismount and fill canteen , and some of long reach stoop from the saddle and do likewise . but one , who seem to be the captain , want no water for his rum . 
 " cut it short , boy , " I hear he say , with a fine south californian twang   which , as well as his free swearing , I will freely omit . " if we mean to have fair play with the gal , now or never be the time for it : old Sam may come home almost any time . " 
 what miserable coward ! though there be so many of they , they really have no heart to face an old man know for courage . frightened as I be , perhaps good indignation help I to flutter no more , and not faint away , but watch those miscreant steadily . 
 the horse put down their sandy lip over and over again to drink , scarcely know when they ought to stop , and seem to get thick before my eye . the dribbling of the water from their mouth prepare they to begin again , till the rider strike the savage unroweled spur into their refreshment . at this they jerk their nose up , and look at one another to say that they expect it , and then they lift their weary leg and begin to plash through the river . 
 it be a pretty thing to see a skillful horse plod through a stream , probe with his eye the depth , and stretch his head before his foot , and at every step he whisk his tail to tell himself that he be right . in my agony of observation all these thing I heed , but only know that I have do so when I think long afterward . at the moment I be in such a fright that my eye work well than my mind . however , even so , I think of my golden millstone , and be aware that they cross below , and could not see it . 
 they gain the bank upon our side within fifty yard of where I crouch ; and it be not presence of mind , but abject fear , which keep I crouch . I count they again as they leap the bank and seem to look at I . I could see the dark array of eye , and could scarcely keep from shriek . but my throat be dry and make no sound , and a frightened bird set up a scream , which draw off their attention . 
 in peril of later day I often think of this fear , and almost feel that the hand of Heaven have be stretch forth on purpose to help my helplessness . 
 for the moment , however , I lay as close as if under the hand of the evil one ; and the snorting of the horse pass I , and wicked laughter of the man . one be tell a horrible tale , and the rest rejoice in it ; and the bright sun , glow on their withered skin , discover perhaps no viler thing in all the world to shine upon . one of they even point at my mill - wheel with a witty gibe at least , perhaps , it be wit to he about the Sawyer 's misfortune ; but the sun be then in his eye , and my dress be just of the color of the timber . so on they ride , and the pleasant turf   have lately receive some rain   softly answer to the kneading of their hoof as they gallop away to surround the house . 
 I be just at the very point of rise and run up into the dark of the valley , when a stroke of arithmetic stop I . fourteen man and fourteen horse I have count on the other side ; on this side I could not make any more than thirteen of they . I might have make a mistake ; but still I think I would stop just a minute to see . and in that minute I see the other man walk slowly on the opposite bank . he have tether his horse , and be leave as outpost to watch and give warning of poor Uncle Sam 's return . 
 at the thought of this , my frightened courage , in some extraordinary way , come back . I have play an ignoble part thus far , as almost any girl might have do . but now I resolve that , whatever might happen , my dear friend and guardian should not be entrap and lose his life through my cowardice . we have be expect he all the day ; and if he should come and fall into an ambush , I only might survive to tell the tale . I ought to have hurry and warn the house , as my bitter conscience tell I ; but now it be much too late for that . the only amend that I could make be to try and warn our traveler . 
 stoop as low as I could , and watch my time to cross the more open place when the sentry be look away from I , I pass up the winding of the little watercourse , and shelter in the swampy thicket which conceal its origin . hence I could see for mile over the plain broad reach of corn land already turn pale , mazy river fringe with reed , hamlet scatter among cluster tree , and that which I chiefly care to see , the dusty track from Sacramento . 
 whether from ignorance of the country or of Mr. Gundry 's plan , the sentinel have be post badly . his beat command well enough the course from San Francisco ; but that from Sacramento be not equally clear before he . for a jut of pine forest run down from the mountain and cut off a part of his view of it . I have not the sense or the presence of mind to perceive this great advantage , but have a plain , quick path before I , forth I set upon it . of course if the watchman have see I , he would have leap on his horse and soon catch I ; but of that I scarcely even think , I be in such confusion . 
 when I have run perhaps a mile   be at that time very slight , and of active figure , I see a cloud of dust , about two mile off , rise through the bright blue haze . it be rich yellow dust of the fertile soil , which never seem to cake or clot . sometimes you may walk for mile without the small fear of sinking , the earth be so elastic . and yet with a slight exertion you may push a walking - stick down through it until the handle stop it . my heart give a jump : that cloud of dust be a sign of man on horseback . and who could it be but Uncle Sam and Firm and the foreman Martin ? 
 as soon as it begin to show itself , it prove to be these very three , carelessly lounge on their horse ' back , overcome with heat and dust and thirst . but when they see I there all alone under the fury of the sun , they know that something must have go amiss , and be all wide awake in a moment . 
 " well , now , " say the Sawyer , when I have tell my tale as well as short breath allow , " put this thing over your head , my dear , or you may gain a sun - stroke . I call it too bad of they skunk to drive you in Californy noon , like this . " 
 " oh , Uncle Sam , never think of I ; think of your house and your good and Suan , and all at those bad man 's mercy ! " 
 " the old house be not   afire yet , " he answer , look calmly under his hand in that direction . " and as for Suan , no fear at all . she know how to deal with such gallows ; and they will keep she to cook their dinner . firm , my lad , let we go and embrace they . they would not   ' a make much bone of shoot we down if we have not   know of it , and if they have get miss afore the saddle . but if they do not   give bail , as soon as they see I ride up to my door , my name 's not Sampson Gundry . only you keep out of the way , Miss Remy . you go to sleep a bit , that be a dear , in the graywitch spinny yonder , and wait till you hear Firm sound the horn . and then come you in to dinner - time ; for the Lord be always over you . " 
 I hasten to the place which he point out a beautiful covert of birch - tree but to sleep be out of the question , wear out though I be with haste and heat , and   bad of all   with horror . in a soft mossy nest , where a breeze from the mountain play with the in and out way of the wood , and the murmurous dream of genial insect now be begin to drowse upon the air , and the heat of the sun could almost be see thrill through the alley like a cicale 's drum here , in the middle of the languid peace , I wait for the terror of the rifle - crack . 
 for though Uncle Sam have speak softly , and make so little of the peril he would meet , I have see in his eye some token of the deep wrath and strong indignation which have keep all his household and premise safe . and it seem a most ominous sign that Firm have never say a word , but grasp his gun , and slowly get in front of his grandfather . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 GOLD and GRIEF 

 it may have be an hour , but it seem an age , ere the sound of the horn , in Firm 's strong blast , release I from my hiding - place . I have hear no report of fire - arm , nor perceive any sign of conflict ; and certainly the house be not on fire , or else I must have see the smoke . for be still in great alarm , I have keep a very sharp lookout . 
 Ephraim Gundry come to meet I , which be very kind of he . he carry his bugle in his belt , that he might sound again for I , if needful . but I be already run toward the house , have make up my mind to be resolute . nevertheless , I be highly pleased to have his company , and hear what have be do . 
 " please to let I help you , " he say , with a smile . " why , miss , you be tremble dreadfully . I assure you there be no cause for that . " 
 " but you might have be kill , and Uncle Sam , and Martin , and every body . oh , those man do look so horrible ! " 
 " yes , they always do till you come to know they . but big coward be never bear . if they can take people by surprise , and shoot they without any danger , it be a splendid treat to they . but if any one like grandfather meet they face to face in the daylight , their respect for law and life return . it be not the first visit they have pay we . Grandfather keep his temper well . it be lucky for they that he do . " 
 remember that the Rovers must have number nearly three to one , even if all our man be stanch , I think it lucky for ourselves that there have be no outbreak . but Firm seem rather sorry that they have depart so easily . and know that he never brag , I begin to share his confidence . 
 " they must be shoot , soon or later , " he say , " unless , indeed , they should be hang . their manner of go on be out of date in these day of settlement . it be all very well ten year ago . but now we be a civilized state , and the hand of law be over we . I think we be wrong to let they go . but of course I yield to the governor . and I think he be afraid for your sake . and to tell the truth , I may have be the same . " 
 here he give my arm a little squeeze , which appear to I quite out of place ; therefore I withdraw and hurry on . before he could catch I I enter the door , and find the Sawyer sit calmly with his own long pipe once more , and watch Suan cooking . 
 " they rogue have have all the good of our victual , " he say , as soon as he have kiss I . " respectable visitor be my delight , and welcome to all of the larder ; but at my time of life it go agin the grain to lease out my dinner to galley - raker . Suan , you be burn the fat again . " 
 Suan Isco , be an excellent cook   although of quiet temper , never pay heed to criticism , but lift her elbow and go on . Mr. Gundry know that it be wise to offer no further meddling , although it be well to keep they up to their work by a little grumbling . but when I come to see what broken bit be leave for Suan to deal with , I only wonder that he be not cross . 
 " thank God for a well meal than I deserve , " he say , when they all have finish . " Suan , you be a treasure , as I tell you every day a'most . now if they have leave we a bottle of wine , let we have it up . we be all in the dump . but that will never do , my lad . " 
 he pat firm on the shoulder , as if he be the young man of the two , and his grandson go down to the wreck of the cellar ; while I , who have try to wait upon they in an eager , clumsy way , perceive that something be go amiss , something more serious and lasting than the mischief make by the robber troop . be it that his long ride have fail , and not a friend could be find to help he ? 
 when Martin and the rest be go , after a single glass of wine , and Ephraim have make excuse of something to be see to , the Sawyer lean back in his chair , and his cheerful face be troubled . I fill his pipe and light it for he , and wait for he to speak , well know his simple and outspoken heart . but he look at I and thank I kindly , and seem to be turn some grief in his mind . 
 " it be not   for the money , " he say at last , talk more to himself than to I ; " the money might ' a be all very well and useful in a sort of way . but the feelin ' the feelin ' be the thing I look at , and it ought to have be more hearty . security ! charge on my land , indeed ! and I can run away , but my land must stop behind ! what security do I ask of they ? ' tis enough a'most to make a rogue of I . " 
 " nothing could ever do that , Uncle Sam , " I exclaim , as I come and sit close to he , while he look at I bravely , and begin to smile . 
 " why , what be little missy thinking of ? " he ask . " how solid she look ! why , I never see the like ! " 
 " then you ought to have see it , Uncle Sam . you ought to have see it fifty time , with every body who love you . and who can help love you , Uncle Sam ? " 
 " well , they say that I charge too much for lumber , a - cuttin ' on the cross , and the backstroke work . and it may ' a be so , when I take agin a man . but to bring up all that , with the mill strow down , be a cowardly thing , to my thinking . and to make no count of the beadin ' I throw in , whenever it be a straightforrard job , and the turpsy knot , and the clogging of the tooth ' tis a bad bit to swallow , when the mill be strown . " 
 " but the mill shall not be strown , Uncle Sam . the mill shall be build again . and I will find the money . " 
 Mr. Gundry star at I and shake his head . he could not bear to tell I how poor I be , while I think myself almost make of money . " five thousand dollar you have get put by for I , " I continue , with great importance . " five thousand dollar from the sale and the insurance fund . and five thousand dollar must be five - and - twenty thousand franc . Uncle Sam , you shall have every farthing of it . and if that will not   build the mill again , I have get my mother 's diamond . " 
 " five thousand dollar ! " cry the Sawyer , in amazement , open his great gray eye at I . and then he remember the tale which he have tell , to make I seem independent . " oh yes , to be sure , my dear ; now I recollect . to be sure to be sure your own five thousand dollar . but never will I touch one cent of your nice little fortune ; no , not to save my life . after all , I be not so go in year but what I can build the mill again myself . the Lord hath spar my hand and eye , and gift I still with machinery . and Firm be a very handy lad , and can carry out a job pretty fairly , with well brain to stand over he , although it have not please the Lord to gift he with sense of machinery , like I . but that be all for the good , no doubt . if Ephraim have too much of brain , he might have contradict I . and that I could never abide , God know , from any green young jackanape . " 
 " oh , Uncle Sam , let I tell you something something very important ! " 
 " no , my dear , nothing more just now . it have do I good to have a little talk , and scar the blue something out of I . but just go and ask whatever be become of firm . he be rile with they greaser . it be all I could do to keep the boy out of a difficulty with they . and if they camp any where nigh , it be like enough he may go hankerin ' after they . the grand march of intellect hathn't   manage yet to march old head upon young shoulder . and firm might happen to go outside the law . " 
 the thought of this frighten I not a little ; for firm , though mild of speech , be very hot of spirit at any wrong , as I know from tale of Suan Isco , who have bring he up and make a glorious idol of he . and now , when she could not say where he be , but only be sure that he must be quite safe   in virtue of a charm from a great medicine man which she have hang about he , it seem to I , accord to what I be use to , that in these region human life be hold a great deal too lightly . 
 it be not for one moment that I care about Firm , any more than be the duty of a fellow - creature . he be a very good young man , and in his way good - look , educate also quite enough , and polite , and a very good carver of a joint ; and when I speak , he nearly always listen . but of course he be not to be compare as yet to his grandfather , the true Sawyer . 
 when I run back from Suan Isco , who be go on about her charm , and the impossibility of any one be scalp who wear it , I find Mr. Gundry in a genial mood . he never make himself uneasy about any trifle . he always have a very pure and lofty faith in the way of Providence , and have lose his only son Elijah , he be sure that he never could lose Firm . he have take his glass of hot whiskey and water , which always make he temperate ; and if he feel any of his trouble deeply , he dwell on they now from a high point of view . 
 " I may ' a say a little too much , my dear , about the badness of mankind , " he observe , with his pipe lie comfortably on his breast ; " all saying of that sort be apt to go too far . I ought to have make more allowance for the time , which get into a ticklish state , when a old man be put about with they . never you pay no heed whatever to any harsh word I may have use . all that be a very bad thing for young folk . " 
 " but if they treat you badly , Uncle Sam , how can you think that they treat you well ? " 
 he take some time to consider this , because he be true in all his thought ; and then he turn off to something else . 
 " why , the smashing of the mill may have be a mercy , although in disguise to the present time of sight . it will send up the price of scantling , and we be get on too fast with they . by the time we have build up the mill again we shall have more order than we know how to do with . when I come to reckon of it , to I it appear to be the reasonable thing to feel a lump of grief for the old mill , and then to set to and build a strong one . yes , that must be about the right thing to do . and we will have all the neighbor in when we lay foundation . " 
 " but what will be the good of it , Uncle Sam , when the new mill may at any time be wash away again ? " 
 " never , at any time , " he answer , very firmly , gaze through the door as if he see the vain endeavor . " that little game can easily be stop , for about fifty dollar , by open down the bank toward the old track of the river . the big waterspout that ever come down from the mountain could never come anigh the mill , but go right down the valley . it hath be in my mind to do it often , and now that I see the need , I will . firm and I will begin tomorrow . " 
 " but where be all the money to come from , Uncle Sam ? you say that all your friend have refuse to help you . " 
 " never mind , my dear . I will help myself . it will not   be the first time , perhaps , in my life . " 
 " but suppose that I could help you , just some little ? suppose that I have find the big lump of gold ever find in all California ? " 
 Mr. Gundry ought to have look surprised , and I be amazed that he do not ; but he take it as quietly as if I have tell he that I have just pick up a brass button of his ; and I think that he doubt my knowledge , very likely , even as to what gold be . 
 " it be gold , Uncle Sam , every bit of it gold here be a piece of it ; just look and as large , I be sure , as this table . and it may be as deep as this room , for all that one can judge to the contrary . why , it stop the big pile from come to the top , when even you go down the river . " 
 " well , now , that explain a thing or two , " say the Sawyer , smile peacefully , and begin to think of another pipe , if preparation mean any thing . " two thing have puzzle I about that stump , and , indeed , I might say three thing . why do he take such a time to drive ? and why would he never stand up like a man ? and why would not   he go away when he ought to ? " 
 " because he have the good of all reason , Uncle Sam . he be anchor on his gold , as I have read in French , and he have a good right to be crook about it , and no power could get he away from it . " 
 " Hush , my dear , hush ! it be not at all good for young people to let their mind run on so . but this gold look very good indeed . be you sure that it be a fair sample , and that there be any more of it ? " 
 " how can you be so dreadfully provoking , Uncle Sam , when I tell you that I see it with my own eye ? and there must be at least half a ton of it . " 
 " well , half a hundred - weight will be enough for I . and you shall have all the rest , my dear that be , if you will spare I a bit , Miss Remy . it all belong to you by discovery , accord to the digger ' law . and your eye be so bright about it , miss , that the whole of your heart must be run upon it . " 
 " then you think I as bad as the rest of the world ! how I wish that I have never see it ! it be only for you that I care about it for you , for you ; and I will never touch a scrap of it . " 
 Mr. Gundry have only be try I , perhaps . but I do not see it in that light , and burst into a flood of childish tear , that he should misunderstand I so . Gold have its usual end , in grief . Uncle Sam rise up to soothe I and to beg my pardon , and to say that perhaps he be harsh because of the treatment he have receive from his friend . he take I in his arm and kiss I ; but before I could leave off sobbing , the crack of a rifle ring through the house , and Suan Isco , with a wail , rush out . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 the SAWYER 's PRAYER 

 the darkness of young summer night be fall on earth and tree and stream . every thing look of a different form and color from those of an hour ago , and the rich bloom of shadow mix with color , and cast by snowy mountain , which have store the purple adieu of the sun , be fill the air with delicious calm . the Sawyer run out with his shirt sleeve shin , so that any sneaking foe might shoot he ; but , with the instinct of a settler , he have catch up his rifle . I stand beneath a carob - tree , which have be plant near the porch , and fling fantastic tassel down , like the ear - ring of a negress . and not have sense enough to do good , I be only able to be frightened . 
 listen intently , I hear the sound of skirre step on the other side of and some way down the river ; and the peculiar tread , even thus far off , be plainly Suan Isco 's . and then in the stillness a weary and heavy foot go toil after it . before I could follow , which I long to do , to learn at once the bad of it , I see the figure of a man much near , and even within twenty yard of I , glide along without any sound . faint as the light be , I feel sure that it be not one of our own man , and the barrel of a long gun upon his shoulder make a black line among silver leaf . I long to run forth and stop he , but my courage be not prompt enough , and I shamefully shrink away behind the trunk of the carob - tree . like a sleuth , compact , and calm - hearted villain , he go along without any breath of sound , steal his escape with skill , till a white bower - tent make a background for he , and he leap up and fall flat without a groan . the crack of a rifle come later than his leap , and a curl of white smoke shine against a black rock , and the Sawyer , in the distance , cry , " well , now ! " as he generally do when satisfy . 
 so scared be I that I catch hold of a cluster of pod to steady I ; and then , without any more fear for myself , I run to see whether it be possible to help . but the poor man lie beyond earthly help ; he be too dead to palpitate . his life must have leave he in the air , and he could not even have feel his fall . 
 in violent terror , I burst into tear , and lift his heavy head , and strove to force his hot hand open , and do I know not what , without think , labor only to recall his life . 
 " be you grieve for the skulk who have shoot my firm ? " say a stern voice quite unknown to I ; and rise , I look at the face of Mr. Gundry , unlike the countenance of Uncle Sam . I try to speak to he , but be too frightened . the wrath of blood be in his face , and all his kind desire be go . 
 " yes , like a girl , you be sorry for a man who have stain this earth , till his only atonement be to stain it with his blood . Captain Pedro , there you lie , shot , like a coward , through the back . I wish you be alive to taste my boot . murderer of man and filthy ravisher of woman , miscreant of God , how can I keep from trample on you ? " 
 it never have be in my dream that a good man could so entirely forget himself . I want to think that it must be somebody else , and not our Uncle Sam . but he look toward the west , as all man do when their spirit be full of death , and the wan light show that his chin be triple . 
 whether it may have be right or wrong , I make all haste to get away . the face of the dead man be quite a pleasant thing , compare with the face of the old man live . he may not have mean it , and I hope he never do , but beyond all controversy he look barbarous for the moment . 
 as I slip away , to know the bad , there I see he stand still , long to kick the vile man 's corpse , but quiet by the great awe of death . if the man have stir , or breathe , or even moan , the live man would have lose all reverence in his fury . but the power of the other world be great than even revenge could trample on . he let it lie there , and he stoop his head , and go away quite softly . 
 my little foolish heart be bitterly visit by a thing like this . the Sawyer , though not of great human rank , be gift with the large human nature that I have ever meet with . and though it be impossible as yet to think , a hollow depression , as at the loss of some great ideal , come over I . 
 return wretchedly to the house , I meet Suan Isco and two man bring the body of poor firm . his head and both his arm hang down , and they want somebody to lift they ; and this I run to do , although they call out to I not to meddle . the body be carry in , and lay upon three chair , with a pillow at the head ; and then a light be strike , and a candle bring by somebody or other . and Suan Isco sit upon the floor , and set up a miserable indian dirge . 
 " stow away that , " cry Martin of the mill , for he be one of those two man ; " wait till the lad be dead , and then pipe up to your liking . I feel he try to kick while we carry he along . he come forth on a arrand of that sort , and he seem to ' a be disappoint . a very fine young chap I call he , for to try to do it still , howsomever his mind might be wander . Missy , keep his head up . " 
 I do as I be tell , and watch poor firm as if my own life hang upon any sign of life in he . when I look back at these thing , I think that fright and grief and pity must have turn an excitable girl almost into a real woman . but I have no sense of such thing then . 
 " I tell you he be not   dead , " cry Martin ; " no more dead than I be . he feel the young gal 's hand below he , and I see he try to turn up his eye . he have take a very bad knock , no doubt , and trouble about his breathing . I seed a fellow scalp once , and shoot through the heart ; but he come all round in about six month , and protect his head with a document . firm , now , do not   you be a fool . I have have bad thing in my family . " 
 Ephraim Gundry seem to know that some one be upbraid he . at any rate , his white lip tremble with a weak desire to breathe , and a little shadow of life appear to flicker in his open eye . and on my sleeve , beneath his back , some hot bright blood come trickle . 
 " keep he to that , " say Martin , with some carpenter sort of surgery ; " less fear of the life when the blood begin to run . do not   move he , missy ; never mind your arm . it will be the saving of he . " 
 I be not strong enough to hold he up , but Suan run to help I ; and they tell I afterward that I fall faint , and no doubt it must have be so . but when the rest be go , and have take poor firm to his straw mattress , the cold night air must have flow into the room , and that , perhaps , revive I . I go to the bottom of the stair and listen , and then steal up to the landing , and hear Suan Isco , who have take the command , speak cheerfully in her bad English . then I hop for the good , and , without any knowledge , wander forth into the open air . 
 walk quite as in a dream this time   which I have vainly strive to do when seek for my nugget , I come to the bank of the gleam river , and see the water just in time to stop from step into it . careless about this and every other thing for the moment , I throw myself on the sod , and listen to the mournful melody of night . sundry unknown creature , which by day keep timid silence , be send timid sound into the darkness , hold quiet converse with themselves , or it , or one another . and the silvery murmur of the wavelet soothe the twinkle sleep of leaf . 
 I also , be wear and weary , and have a frock which improve with washing , and be spoil already by nursing Firm , be well content to throw myself into a niche of river - bank and let all thing flow past I . but before any thing have find time to flow far , or the lullaby of night have lull I , there come to I a sad sound than plaintive nature can produce without her Master 's aid , the sad sound in all creation a strong man 's wail . 
 child as I be and , perhaps , all the more for that reason as know so little of mankind I might have be more frightened , but I could not have be a bit more shocked , by the roaring of a lion . for I know in a moment whose voice it be , and that make it pierce I tenfold . it be Uncle Sam , lament to himself , and to his God alone , the loss of his last hope on earth . he could not dream that any other than his Maker   and his maker 's work , if ever they have any sympathy   listen to the wild outpouring of an aged but still very natural heart , which have always be proud of control itself . I could see his great frame through a willow - tree , with the sere grass and wither reed around , and the faint gleam of fugitive water beyond . he be kneel toward his shattered mill , have roll his shirt sleeve back to pray , and his white lock shine in the starlight ; then , after try several time , he manage to pray a little . first   perhaps partly from habit , he say the prayer of our Lord pretty firmly , and then he go on to his own special case , with a doubt whether he should mention it . but as he go on he gather courage , or receive it from above , and be able to say what he want . 
 " Almighty Father of the living and the dead , I have live long , and shall soon be dead , and my day have be full of trouble . but I never have such trouble as this here before , and I do not   think I ever shall get over it . I have sin every day of my life , and not think of Thee , but of victual , and money , and stuff ; and nobody know , but myself and Thou , all the little bad thing inside of I . I care a deal more to be respectable and get on with my business than to be prepare for kingdom come . and I have just be proud about the shooting of a villain , who might ' a go free and repent . there be nobody leave to I in my old age . Thou hast take all of they . Wife , and son , and mill , and grandson , and my brother who rob I the whole of it may have be for my good , but I have get no good out of it . show I the way for a little time , o Lord , to make the good of it ; and teach I to bear it like a man , and not break down at this time of life . Thou know what be right . please to do it . amen . " 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 not far to seek 

 in the present state of controversy most profoundly religious , the Lord alone can decide   though thousand of man would hurry to pronounce   for or against the orthodoxy of the ancient sawyer 's prayer . but if sound doctrine can be establish by success   as it always be , Uncle Sam 's theology must have be unusually sound ; for it please a gracious power to know what he want , and to grant it . 
 Brave as Mr. Gundry be , and much - endure and resign , the latter year of his life on earth must have drag on very heavily , with abstract resignation only , and none of his blood to care for he . be so obstinate a man , he might have never admit this , but prove against every one 's voice , except his own , his special blessedness . but this must have be a trial to he , and happily he be spar from it . 
 for although Firm have be very badly shot , and keep we for week in anxiety about he , his strong young constitution and well - nourish frame get over it . a truly good and learn doctor come from Sacramento , and we hang upon his word , and find that there he leave we hang . and this be the wise thing perhaps that he could do , because in America medical man be not absurdly expect , as they be in England , to do any good , but be value chiefly upon their power of predict what they can not help . and this man of science perceive that he might do harm to himself and his family by predict amiss , whereas he could do no good to his patient by predict rightly . and so he foretell both good and evil , to meet the intention of Providence . 
 he have not be send for in vain , however ; and to give he his due , he save Ephraim 's life , for he draw from the wound a large bullet , which , if leave , must have poison all his circulation , although it be make of pure silver . the Sawyer wish to keep this silver bullet as a token , but the doctor say that it belong to he accord to miner ' law ; and so it come to a moderate argument . each be a thoroughly stubborn man , accord to the bent of all good man , and reasoning increase their unreason . but the doctor win as indeed he deserve , for the extraction have be delicate because , when reason have be exhaust , he just say this : 
 " Colonel Gundry , let we have no more word . the true owner be your grandson . I will put it back where I take it from . " 
 upon this , the Sawyer be tickle , as man very often be in sad moment , take the doctor by the hand , and give he the bullet heartily . and the medical man have a loop make to it , and wear it upon his watch chain . and he tell the story so often   say that another man perhaps might have get it out , but no other man could have keep it , that among a great race who judge by fact it double his practice immediately . 
 the leader of the robber , know far and wide as " Captain Pedro , " be bury where he fall ; and the whole so raise Uncle Sam 's reputation that his house be never attack again ; and if any bad character be force by circumstance to come near he , they never ask for any thing strong than ginger - beer or lemonade , and depart very promptly . for as soon as Ephraim Gundry could give account of his disaster , it be clear that Don Pedro owe his fate to a bottle of the Sawyer 's whiskey . Firm have only intend to give he a lesson for misbehavior , be fire by his grandfather 's word about swing I on the saddle . this idea have justly appear to he to demand a protest ; to deliver which he at once set forth with a valuable cowhide whip . come thus to the Rovers ' camp , and find their captain sit in the shade to digest his dinner , Firm lay hold of he by the neck , and give way to feeling of severity . Don Pedro regret his misconduct , and be lift up for the moment above his ordinary view , perceive that he might have do well , and shape the pattern of his tongue to it . firm , hear this , have good hope of he ; yet know how volatile repentance be , he strove to form a well - mark track for it . and when the captain cease to receive cowhide , he must have have it long enough to miss it . 
 now this might have end honorably and amicably for all concern , if the captain have know when he be well off . unluckily he have purloin a bottle of Mr. Gundry 's whiskey , and he draw the cork now to rub his stripe , and the smell of it move he to try it inside . and before very long his idea of honor , which he have sense enough to drop when sober , begin to come into his eye again , and to stir he up to mischief . hence it be that he follow Firm , who be rid home well satisfied , and appease his honor by shoot in cold blood , and justice by be shoot anyhow . 
 it be beautiful , through all this try time , to watch Uncle Sam 's proceeding : he appear so delightfully calm and almost careless whenever he be look at . and then he be ashamed of himself perpetually , if any one go on with it . nobody try to observe he , of course , or remark upon any of his doing , and for this he would become so grateful that he would long to tell all his thought , and then stop . this must have be a great worry to he , see how open his manner be ; and whenever he want to hide any thing , he inform we of that intention . so that we exhort Firm every day to come round and restore we to our usual state . this be the poor fellow 's special desire ; and often he be angry with himself , and make himself bad again by declare that he must be a milksop to lie there so long . whereas , it be much more near the truth that few other man , even in the Western States , would ever have get over such a wound . I be not learn enough to say exactly where the damage be , but the doctor call it , I think , the sternum , and pronounce that " a building - up process " be require , and must take a long time , if it ever could be do . 
 it be do at last , thank to Suan Isco , who scarcely ever leave he by day or night , and treat he skillfully with healing herb . but he , without mean it , vex she often by call for I a mere ignorant child . Suan be dreadfully jealous of this , and perhaps I be proud of that sentiment of her , and try to justify it , instead of labor to remove it , as would have be the more proper course . and Firm most ungratefully say that my hand be light than poor Suan 's , and every thing I do be well do , accord to he , which be shameful on his part , and as untrue as any thing could be . however , we yield to he in all thing while he be so delicate ; and it often make we poor weak thing cry to be the master of a tall strong man . 
 Firm Gundry receive that shot in May , about ten day before the twelvemonth be complete from my father 's death . the brightness of summer and beauty of autumn go by without his feel they , and while his system be work hard to fortify itself by wall up , as the learn man have call it . there have be some difficulty in this process , cause partly , perhaps , by our too lavish supply of the raw material ; and before Firm 's gap in his ' sternum " be stop , the mountain be come down upon we , as we always use to say when the snow - line stoop . in some season this be a sharp time of hurry , break with storm , and capricious , while man have to slur in the drive weather task that should have be mature long since . but in other year the long descent into the depth of winter be take not with a jump like that , but gently and softly and windingly , with a great many glimpse back at the summer , and a good deal of lean on the arm of the sun . 
 and so it be this time . the autumn and the winter for a fortnight stand look quietly at each other . they have quite agree to share the hour , to suit the arrangement of the sun . the night be starry and fresh and brisk , without any touch of tartness ; and the day be sunny and soft and gentle , without any sense of languor . it be a lovely scene blue shadow glide among golden light . 
 the Sawyer come forth , and cry , " what a shame ! this make I feel quite young again . and yet I have do not a stroke of work . no excuse ; make no excuse . I can do that pretty well for myself . praise God for all his mercy . I might do bad , perhaps , than have a pipe . " 
 then Firm come out to surprise he , and to please we all with the sight of himself . he steady his step with one great white hand upon his grandfather 's Sunday staff , and his clear blue eye be tremble with a sense of gratitude and a fear of tear . and I step behind a red strawberry - tree , for my sense of respect for he almost make I sob . 
 then Jowler think it high time to appear upon the scene , and convince we that he be not a dead dog yet . he have know tribulation , as his master have , and have find it a difficult thing to keep from the shadowy hunting ground of dog who have live a conscientious life . I have wonder at first what his reason could have be for not come forward , accord to his custom , to meet that troop of robber . but his reason , alas ! be too cogent to himself , though nobody else in that dreadful time could pay any attention to he . the Rovers , well know poor Jowler 's repute , and decline the fair mode of test it , have send in advance a very crafty scout , a half - breed Indian , who know as much about dog as they could ever hope to know about themselves . this rogue approach faithful Jowler so we be tell long afterward not in an upright way , but as if he have be a brother quadrupe . and he take advantage of the dog 's unfeigned surprise and interest to accost he with a piece of kidney contain a powerful poison . accord to all sound analogy , this should have stop the dear fellow 's earthly track ; but his spirit be such that he simply go away to nurse himself up in retirement . neither man nor dog can tell what agony he suffer ; and doubtless his torture of mind about duty unperforme be the bad of all . these thing be out of human knowledge in its present unsympathetic state . enough that poor Jowler come home at last , with his rib all up and his tail very low . 
 like friend who have come together again , almost from the jaw of death , we sit in the sunny noon , and thoroughly enjoy ourselves . the tree above we look proud and cheerful , lay aside the mere frippery of leaf with a good grace and contented arm , and a surety of have quite enough next spring . much of the fruity wealth of autumn still be cluster in our sight , heavily fetch the arched bough down to lessen the fall , when fall they must . and against the golden leaf of maple behind the unpretende roof a special wreath of blue shine like a climb Ipomaea . but come to examine this , one find it to be nothing more nor less than the smoke of the kitchen chimney , busy with a quiet roasting job . 
 this show how clear the air be ; but a thousand time as much could never tell how clear our spirit be . nobody make any " demonstration , " or cut any frolicsome caper , or even say any thing exuberant . the steadfast brood breed of England , which despise antic , be present in we all , and strengthen by a soil whose native growth be peril , chance , and marvel . and so we nod at one another , and I run over and courtesie to Uncle Sam , and he take I to he . 
 " you have be a dear good child , " he say , as he rise , and look over my head at Firm . " my own granddarter , if such there have be , could not have do more to comfort I , nor half so much , for aught I know . there be no picking and choose among the female , as God give they . but he have give you for a blessing and save to my old age , my dearie . " 
 " oh , Uncle Sam , now the nugget ! " I cry , desire like a child to escape deep feeling , and fear any strong word from Firm . " you have promise I ever so long that I should be the first to show Firm the nugget . " 
 " and so you shall , my dear , and firm shall see it before he be an hour old , and Jowler shall come down to show we where it be . " 
 Firm , who have little faith in the nugget , but take it for a dream of mine , and have prove conclusively from his pillow that it could not exist in earnest , now with a gentle , satirical smile declare his anxiety to see it ; and I lead he along by his well arm , fast , perhaps , than he ought to have walk . 
 in a very few minute we be at the place , and I run eagerly to point it ; but behold , where the nugget have be , there be nothing except the white bed of the river ! the blue water flow very softly on its way , without a gleam of gold to corrupt it . 
 " oh , nobody will ever believe I again ! " I exclaim , in the sad of sad dismay . " I dream about it first , but it never can have be a dream throughout . you know that I tell you about it , Uncle Sam , even when you be very busy , and that show that it never could have be a dream . " 
 " you tell I about it , I remember now , " Mr. Gundry answer , dryly ; " but it do not follow that there be such a thing . my dear , you may have imagine it ; because it be the proper time for it to come , when my good friend have no money to lend . your heart be so good that it get into your brain , and you must not be vex , my dear child ; it have do you good to dream of it . " 
 " I say so all along , " Firm observe . " Miss Rema feel that it ought to be , and so she believe that it must be , there . she be always so warm and trustful . " 
 " be that all you be good for ? " I cry , with no gratitude for his compliment . " as sure as I stand here , I see a great bowlder of gold , and so do Jowler , and I give you the piece that he bring up . do you take they all in a dream , Uncle Sam ? Come , can you get over that ? " 
 I assure you that for the moment I know not whether I stand upon my foot or head , until I perceive an extraordinary grin on the Sawyer 's ample countenance ; but Firm be not in the secret yet , for he gaze at I with compassion , and Uncle Sam look at we both as if he be balance our ability . 
 " send your dog in , missy , " at last he say . " he be more your dog than mine , I believe , and he obey you like a Christian . let he go and find it if he can . " 
 at a sign from I , the great dog dash in , and scratch with all four foot at once , and make the valley echo with the ring of mighty barking ; and in less than two minute there shine the nugget , as yellow and as big as ever . 
 " ha ! ha ! I never see a fine thing , " shout Uncle Sam , like a school - boy . " I be too many for you , missy dear ; but the old dog wollop the whole of we . I just shoot a barrow - load of gravel on your nugget , to keep it all snug till firm should come round ; and if the boy have never come round , there the gold might have wait the will of the Almighty . it be a big spot , anyhow . " 
 it certainly be not a little spot , though they all seem to make so light of it which vex I , because I have find it , and be as proud as if I have make it . not by any mean that the Sawyer be half as careless as he seem to be ; he put on much of this for my sake , have very lofty principle , especially concern the duty of the young . young people be never to have small idea , so far as he could help it , particularly upon such matter as Mammon , or the world , or fashion ; and not so very seldom he be oblige to catch himself up in his talking , when he chance to be go on and forget that I , who require a high vein of thought for my youth , be take his word downright ; and I think that all this have a great deal to do with his treat all that gold in such an exemplary manner ; for if it have really matter nothing , what make he go in the dark and shoot a great barrow - load of gravel over it ? 




 CHAPTER XV 

 BROUGHT to BANK 

 the sanity of a man be mainly test among his neighbor and kindre by the amount of consideration which he have consistently give to cash . if money have be the chief object of his life , and he for its sake have spar nobody , no soon be he know to be successful than admiration overpower all the ill - will he have cause . he be shrewd , sagacious , long - head , and great ; he have earn his success , and few man grudge , while many seek to get a slice of it ; but he , as a general rule , decline any premature distribution , and for this custody of his wealth he be admire all the more by those who have no hope of share it . 
 as soon as ever it be know that Uncle Sam have lodge at his banker 's a tremendous lump of gold , which rumor declare to be worth at least a hundred thousand dollar , friend from every side pour in , all in hot haste , to lend he their last farthing . the Sawyer be pleased with their kindness , but think that his second - good whiskey meet the merit of the case . and he be more particular than usual with his word ; for , accord to an old saying of the digger , a big nugget always have child , and , be too heavy to go very far , it be likely to keep all its little one at home . many people , therefore , be long to seek for the frog of this great toad ; for so in their slang the miner call they , with a love of preternatural history . but Mr. Gundry allow no search for the frog , or even the tadpole , of his patriarchal nugget . and much as he hat the idea of sow the seed of avarice in any one , he show himself most consistent now in avoid that imputation ; for not only do he refuse to show the bed of his great treasure , after he have secure it , but he fence the whole of it in , and tar the fence , and put loophole in it ; and then he establish Jowler where he could neither be shoot nor poison , and keep a man with a double - barrel rifle in the ruin of the mill , handy to shoot , but not easy to be shoot ; and this be a resolute man , be Martin himself , who have now no business . of course Martin grumble ; but the bad his temper be , the well for his duty , as seem to be the case with a great many man ; and if any one have come to console he in his grumbling , never would he have go away again . 
 it would have be reckless of I to pretend to say what any body ought to do ; from the first to the last I leave every thing to those who know so much well ; at the same time I feel that it might have do no harm if I have be more consult , though I never dream of say so , because the great gold have be find by I , and although I care for it scarcely more than for the tag of a boot - lace , nobody seem to I able to enter into it quite as I do ; and as soon as Firm 's danger and pain grow less , I begin to get rather impatient , but Uncle Sam be not to be hurry . 
 before ever he hoist that rock of gold , he have make up his mind for I to be there , and he even put the business off , because I would not come one night , for I have a superstitious fear on account of its be my father 's birthday . Uncle Sam have forget the date , and beg my pardon for propose it ; but he say that we must not put it off later than the follow night , because the moonlight would be fail , and we durst not have any kind of lamp , and before the next moon the hard weather might begin . all this be before the liberal offer of his friend , of which I have speak first , although they happen to come after it . 
 while the Sawyer have be keep the treasure perdu , to abide the issue of his grandson 's illness , he have take good care both to watch it and to form some opinion of its shape and size ; for , know the pile which I have describe , he could not help find it easily enough ; and indeed the great fear be that other might find it , and come in great force to rob he ; but nothing of that sort have happen , partly because he hold his tongue rigidly , and partly , perhaps , because of the simple precaution which he have take . 
 now , however , it be needful to impart the secret to one man at least ; for firm , though recover , be still so weak that it might have kill he to go into the water , or even to exert himself at all ; and strong as Uncle Sam be , he know that even with hoisting - tackle , he alone could never bring that piece of bullion to bank ; so , after much consideration , he resolve to tell Martin of the mill , as be the most trusty man about the place , as well as the most surly ; but he do not tell he until every thing be ready , and then he take he straightway to the place . 
 here , in the moonlight , we stand wait , Firm and myself and Suan Isco , who have more dread than love of gold , and might be useful to keep watch , or even to lend a hand , for she be as strong as an ordinary man . the night be sultry , and the fire - fly   though dull in the radiance of the moon   dart , like soft little shooting - star , across the still face of shadow , and the flood of the light of the moon be at its height , submerge every thing . 
 while we be whisper and keep in the shade for fear of attract any wanderer 's notice , we see the broad figure of the Sawyer rise from a hollow of the bank , and behind he come Martin the foreman , and we soon see that due preparation have be make , for they take from under some drift - wood   which have prevent we from observe it   a small movable crane , and fix it on a platform of plank which they set up in the river - bed . 
 " paleface eat gold , " Suan Isco say , reflectively , and as if to satisfy herself . " dem eat , drink , die gold ; dem pull gold out of one other 's ear . welly hope Mellican man get enough gold now . " 
 " do not   be sarcastic , now , Suan , " I answer ; " as if it be possible to have enough ! " 
 " for my part , " say Firm , who have be unusually silent all the evening , " I wish it have never be find at all . as sure as I stand here , mischief will come of it . it will break up our household . I hope it will turn out a lump of quartz , gilt on the face , as those big nugget do , ninety - nine out of a hundred . I have have no faith in it all along . " 
 " because I find it , Mr. Firm , I suppose , " I answer , rather pettishly , for I never have like Firm 's incessant bitterness about my nugget . " perhaps if you have find it , Mr. Firm , you would have have great faith in it . " 
 " can not   say , can not   say , " be all Firm 's reply ; and he fall into the silent vein again . 
 " Heave - ho ! heave - ho ! there , you son of cook ! " cry the Sawyer , who be splash for his life in the water . " I have   tackle ' un now . just tighten up the belt , to see if he biteth centre - like . you can not   lift ' un ! Lord bless ' ee , not you . it will take all I know to do that , I guess ; and Firm be not   to lay no hand to it . do not   you be in such a doggoned hurry . hold hard , can not   you ? " 
 for Suan and Martin be haul for their life , and even I catch hold of a rope - end , but have no idea what to do with it , when the Sawyer swing himself up to bank , and in half a minute all be orderly . he show we exactly where to throw our weight , and he use his own to such good effect that , after some creaking and groaning , the long horn of the crane rise steadily , and a mass of dripping sparkle shine in the moonlight over the water . 
 " Hurrah ! what a whale ! how the tough ash bend ! " cry Uncle Sam , pant like a boy , and do nearly all the work himself . " Martin , lie your chest to it . we will grass he in two second . Californy never see a sight like this , I reckon . " 
 there be plenty of room for we all to stand round the monster and admire it . in shape it be just like a fat toad , squat with his shoulder up and pant . even a rough resemblance to the head and the haunch might be discover , and a few spot of quartz shone here and there on the glistening and bossy surface . some of we begin to feel and handle it with vast admiration ; but Firm , with his heavy boot , make a vicious kick at it , and a few bright scale , like spark , fly off . 
 " why , what ail the lad ? " cry the Sawyer , in some wrath ; " what harm hath the stone ever do to he ? to my mind , this here lump be a proof of the whole creation of the world , and who hath live long enough to gainsay ? here this lump hath lain , without change color , since creation 's day ; here it be , as big and heavy as when the Lord lay hand to it . what good to argue agin such fact ? Supposin ' the world come out o ' nothing , with nobody to fetch it , or to say a word of order , how ever could it ' a manage to get a lump of gold like this in it ? they clever feller be too clever . let them put all their head together , and turn out a nugget , and I will believe they . " 
 Uncle Sam 's reasoning be too deep for any but himself to follow . he be not long in perceive this , though we be content to admire his word without ask he to explain they ; so he only say , " well , well , " and begin to try with both hand if he could heft this lump . he stir it , and move it , and raise it a little , as the glisten of the light upon its rounding show ; but lift it fairly from the ground he could not , however he might bow his sturdy leg and bend his mighty back to it ; and , strange to say , he be pleased for once to acknowledge his own discomfiture . 
 " five hundred and a half I use to lift to the height of my knee - cap easily ; I may ' a fall off now a hundred - weight with year , and string in my back , and rheumatic ; but this here little toad be a clear hundredweight out and beyond my heftage . if there be a pound here , there be not an ounce under six hundred - weight , I will lay a thousand dollar . Miss Rema , give a name to he . all the thunder nugget have thunder name . " 
 " then this shall be call ' Uncle Sam , ' " I answer , " because he be the large and the good of all . " 
 " it shall stand , miss , " cry Martin , who be in great spirit , and seem to have better himself forever . " you could not have give it a fine name , miss , if you have consider for a century . Uncle Sam be the name of our glorious race , from the kindness of our natur ' . every body 's uncle we be now , in vartue of superior knowledge , and freedom , and give of general advice , and stickin ' to all the world , or all the good of it . darn if old Sam be not   the front of creation ! " 
 " well , well , " say the Sawyer , " let we call it ' Uncle Sam , ' if the dear young lady like it ; it would be bad luck to change the name ; but , for all that , we must look uncommon sharp , or some of our glorious race will come and steal it afore we unbutton our eye . " 
 " Pooh ! " cry Martin ; but he know very well that his master 's word be common - sense ; and we leave he on guard with a double - barrel gun , and Jowler to keep watch with he . and the next day he tell we that he have spend the night in such a frame of mind from continual thought that when our pet cow come to drink at daybreak , it be but the blowing of her breath that save she from take a bullet between her soft tame eye . 
 now it could not in any kind of way hold good that such thing should continue ; and the Sawyer , though loath to lose sight of the nugget , perceive that he must not sacrifice all the moral of the neighborhood to it , and he barely have time to dispatch it on its road at the bottom of a load of lumber , with Martin to drive , and Jowler to sit up , and firm to ride behind , when a troop of mixed robber come rid across , with a four - wheel cart and two sturdy mule enough to drag off every thing . they have clearly hear of the golden toad , and desire to know more of he ; but Uncle Sam , with his usual blandness , meet these man at the gate of his yard , and upon the top rail , to ease his arm , he rest a rifle of heavy metal , with seven revolve chamber . the robber find out that they have lose their way , and Mr. Gundry answer that so they have , and the soon they find it in another direction , the well it would be for they . they think that he have all his man inside , and they be mighty civil , though we have only two negro to help we , and Suan Isco , with a great gun cock . but their curiosity be such that they could not help ask about the gold ; and , soon than shoot they , Uncle Sam reply that , upon his honor , the nugget be go . and the fame of his word be so well know that these fellow   none of whom could tell the truth , even at confession   believe he on the spot , and beg his pardon for trespassing on his premise . they hop that he would not say a word to the Vigilance Committee , who hang a poor fellow for lose his road ; and he tell they that if they make off at once , nobody should pursue they ; and so they ride off very happily . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 firm and INFIRM 

 strange as it may appear , our quiet little home be not yet disturb by that great discovery of gold . the Sawyer go up to the summit of esteem in public opinion ; but to himself and to we he be the same as ever . he work with his own hard hand and busy head just as he use to do ; for although the mill be still in ruin , there be plenty of the fine work to do , which always require hand - labor . and at night he would sit at the end of the table furth from the fire - place , with his spectacle on , and his red cheek glow , while he design the future mill , which be to be build in the spring , and transcend every mill ever hear , think , or dream of . 
 we all look forward to a quiet winter , snug with warmth and cheer in - door , and bright outside with sparkle tree , brisk air , and frosty appetite , when a foolish idea arise which spoil the comfort at least of two of we . Ephraim Gundry find out , or fancy , that he be entirely fill with love of a very young maid , who never dream of such thing , and hat even to hear of they ; and the maid , unluckily , be myself . 
 during the time of his ailment I have be with he continually , be only too glad to assuage his pain , or turn his thought away from it . I partly suspect that he have incur his bitter wound for my sake ; though I never impute his zeal to more than a young man 's natural wrath at an outrage . but now he leave I no long in doubt , and make I most uncomfortable . perhaps I be hard upon he , and afterward I often think so , for he be very kind and gentle ; but I be an orphan child , and have no one to advise I in such matter . I believe that he should have consider this , and allow I to grow a little old ; but perhaps he himself be too young as yet and too bashful to know how to manage thing . it be the very evening after his return from Sacramento , and the beauty of the weather still abode in the soft warm depth around we . in every tint of rock and tree and playful glass of river a quiet clearness seem to lie , and a rich content of color . the grandeur of the world be such that one could only rest among it , seek neither voice nor think . 
 therefore I be more surprised than pleased to hear my name ring loudly through the echo hollow , and then to see the bush shake , and an eager form leap out . I do not answer a word , but sit with a wreath of white bouvardia and small adiantum round my head , which I have plait anyhow . 
 " what a lovely dear you be ! " cry firm , and then he seem frightened at his own word . 
 " I have no idea that you would have finish your dinner so soon as this , Mr. Firm . " 
 " and you do not want I . you be vex to see I . tell the truth , Miss Rema . " 
 " I always tell the truth , " I answer ; " and I do not want to be disturb just now . I have so many thing to think of . " 
 " and not I among they . oh no , of course you never think of I , Erema . " 
 " it be very unkind of you to say that , " I answer , look clearly at he , as a child look at a man . " and it be not true , I assure you , firm . whenever I have think of dear Uncle Sam , I very often go on to think of you , because he be so fond of you . " 
 " but not for my own sake , Erema ; you never think of I for my own sake . " 
 " but yes , I do , I assure you , Mr. Firm ; I do greatly . there be scarcely a day that I do not remember how hungry you be , and I think of you . " 
 " tush ! " reply Firm , with a lofty gaze . " even for a moment that do not in any way express my meaning . my mind be very much above all eat when it dwell upon you , Erema . I have always be fond of you , Erema . " 
 " you have always be good to I , firm , " I say , as I manage to get a great branch between we . " after your grandfather , and Suan Isco , and Jowler , I think that I like you good of almost any body leave to I . and you know that I never forget your slipper . " 
 " Erema , you drive I almost wild by never understand I . now will you just listen to a little common - sense ? you know that I be not romantic . " 
 " yes , Firm ; yes , I know that you never do any thing wrong in any way . " 
 " you would like I well if I do . what an extraordinary thing it be ! oh , Erema , I beg your pardon . " 
 he have see in a moment , as man seem to do , when they study the much quick face of a girl , that his word have keenly wound I that I have apply they to my father , of whom I be always think , though I scarcely ever speak of he . but I know that Firm have mean no harm , and I give he my hand , though I could not speak . 
 " my darling , " he say , " you be very dear to I dearer than all the world besides . I will not worry you any more . only say that you do not hate I . " 
 " how could I ? how could any body ? now let we go in and attend to Uncle Sam . he think of every body before himself . " 
 " and I think of every body after myself . be that what you mean , Erema ? " 
 " to be sure ! if you like . you may put any meaning on my word that you think proper . I be accustom to thing of that sort , and I pay no attention whatever , when I be perfectly certain that I be right . " 
 " I see , " reply Firm , apply one finger to the side of his nose in deep contemplation , which , of all his manner , annoy I most . " I see how it be ; Miss Rema be always perfectly certain that she be right , and the whole of the rest of the world quite wrong . well , after all , there be nothing like hold a first - rate opinion of one 's self . " 
 " you be not what I think of you , " I cry , be vex beyond bearance by such word , and feel their gross injustice . " if you wish to say any thing more , please to leave it until you recover your temper . I be not quite accustomed to rudeness . " 
 with these word , I draw away and walk off , partly in earnest and partly in joke , not wish to hear another word ; and when I look back , be well out of sight , there he sit still , with his head on his hand , and my heart have a little ache for he . 
 however , I determine to say no more , and to be extremely careful . I could not in justice blame Ephraim Gundry for look at I very often . but I take good care not to look at he again unless he say something that make I laugh , and then I could scarcely help it . he be sharp enough very soon to find out this ; and then he do a thing which be most unfair , as I find out long afterward . he buy an american jest - book , full of idea wholly new to I , and these he commit to heart , and bring they out as his own production . if I have only know it , I must have be exceedingly sorry for he . but Uncle Sam use to laugh and rub his hand , perhaps for old acquaintance ' sake ; and when Uncle Sam laugh , there be nobody near who could help laugh with he . and so I begin to think firm the most witty and pleasant of man , though I try to look away . 
 but perhaps the most careful and delicate of thing be to see how Uncle Sam go on . I could not understand he at all just then , and think he quite change from my old Uncle Sam ; but afterward , when I come to know , his behavior be as clear and shallow as the water of his own river . he have very strange idea about what he generally call " the female kind . " accord to his idea   and perhaps they be not so unusual among mankind , especially settler , all " female " be of a good but weak and consistently inconsistent sort . the sure way to make they do whatever their better want , be to make they think that it be not want , but be hedge with obstacle beyond their power to overcome , and so to provoke and tantalize they to set their heart upon do it . in accordance with this idea   than which there can be none more mistaken , he take the great pain to keep I from have a word to say to Firm ; and even go so far as to hint , with wink and nod of pleasantry , that his grandson 's heart be set upon the pretty Miss Sylvester , the daughter of a man who own a herd of pig , much too near our saw - mill , and herself a young woman of outrageous dress , and in a large light contemptible . but when Mr. Gundry , without any word , convey this piece of news to I , I immediately feel quite a liking for gaudy but harmless Pennsylvania for so her parent have name she when she be too young to help it ; and I heartily hop that she might suit Firm , which she seem all the more likely to do as his conduct could not be call noble . upon that point , however , I say not a word , leave he purely to judge for himself , and feel it a great relief that now he could not say any thing more to I . I be glad that his taste be so easily pleased , and I tell Suan Isco how glad I be . 
 this I have well have leave unsaid , for it lead to a great explosion , and drive I away from the place altogether before the new mill be finish , and before I should otherwise have go from friend who be so good to I ; not that I could have staid there much long , even if this have never come to pass ; for week by week and month by month I be grow more uneasy : uneasy not at my obligation or dependence upon mere friend   for they manage that so kindly that I seem to confer the favor , but from my own sense of lag far behind my duty . 
 for now the bright air , and the wholesome food , and the pleasure of goodness around I , be make I grow , without knowledge or notice , into a tall and not altogether to be overlook young woman . I be exceedingly shy about this , and blush if any one speak of it ; but yet in my heart I feel it be so ; and how could I help it ? and when people say , as rough people will , and even Uncle Sam sometimes , " Handsome be as handsome do , " or " Beauty be only skin - deep , " and so on , I make it my duty not to be put out , but to bear it in mind and be thankful . and though I have no idea of any such influence at the moment , I hope that the grandeur of nature around and the lofty style of every thing may have save I from dwell too much on myself , as Pennsylvania Sylvester do . 
 now the more I feel my grow - up age and health and buoyant vigor , the surer I know that the time be come for I to do some good with they ; not to benefit the world in general , in a large and scattery way   as many young people set out to do , and never get any far , but to right the wrong of my own house , and bring home justice to my own heart . this may be think a partial and paltry object to set out with ; and it be not for I to say otherwise . at the time , it occur to I in no other light except as my due business , and I never take any large view at all . but even now I do believe   though not yet in pickle of wisdom   that if every body , in its own little space and among its own little movement , will only do and take nothing without pure taste of the salt of justice , no reeking atrocity of national crime could ever taint the heaven . 
 such question , however , become I not . I have only to deal with very little thing , sometimes too slim to handle well , and too hazy to be weave ; and if they seem below my sense and dignity to treat of , I can only say that they seem very big at the time when I have to encounter they . 
 for instance , what could be more important , in a little world of life , than for Uncle Sam to be put out , and dare even to think ill of I ? yet this he do ; and it show how shallow be all those theory of the other sex which man be so pleased to indulge in . scarcely any thing could be more ridiculous from first to last , when calmly and truly consider , than the firm belief which no power of reason could for the time root out of he . 
 Uncle Sam , the dear of all mankind to I , and the very kind , be positively low - enough to believe , in his sad opinion of the female race , that my young head be turn because of the wealth to which I have no claim , except through his own justice . he have insist at first that the whole of that great nugget belong to I by right of sole discovery . I ask he whether , if any stranger have find it , it would have be consider his , and whether he would have allow a " greaser , " upon find , to make off with it . at the thought of this , Mr. Gundry give a little grunt , and could not go so far as to maintain that view of it . but he say that my reasoning do not fit ; that I be not a greaser , but a settle inhabitant of the place , and entitle to all a settler 's right ; that the bed of the river would have be his grave but for the risk of my life , and therefore whatever I find in the bed of the river belong to I , and I only . 
 in argument he be so much strong than I could ever attempt to be that I give it up , and could only say that if he argue forever it could never make any difference . he do not argue forever , but only grow obstinate and unpleasant , so that I yield at last to own the half share of the bullion . 
 very well . every body would have think , who have not study the nature of man or be drag through it heavily , that now there could be no more trouble between two people entirely trust each other , and only anxious that the other should have the good of it . yet , instead of that be the case , the mischief , the myriad mischief , of money set in , until I heartily wish sometimes that my miserable self be down in the hole which the pelf have leave behind it . 
 for what do Uncle Sam take into his head   which be full of generosity and large idea , so loosely pack that little one grow between they , especially about womankind   what else do he really seem to think , with the downright stubbornness of all his thought , but that I , his poor debtor and pensioner and penniless dependent , be so set up and elate by this sudden access of fortune that henceforth none of the saw race be high enough for I to think of ? it take I a long time to believe that so fair and just a man ever could set such interpretation upon I . and when it become too plain that he do so , truly I know not whether grief or anger be uppermost in my troubled heart . 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 hard and soft 

 before very long it be manifest enough that Mr. Gundry look down upon Miss Sylvester with a large contempt . but while this raise my opinion of his judgment , it almost deprive I of a great relief the relief of suppose that he wish his grandson to marry this Pennsylvania . for although her father , with his pig and cattle , and a low sort of hostelry which he keep , could settle " a good pile of dollar " upon she , and have keep she at the " learnedest lady ' college " even in San Francisco till he himself tremble at her erudition , still it be scarcely to be believe that a man of the Sawyer 's strong common - sense and disregard of finery would ever accept for his grandchild a girl make of affectation , vulgarity , and conceit . and one day , quite in the early spring , he be so much vex with the fine lady 's air that he leave no doubt about his meaning . 
 Miss Sylvester be very proud of the figure she make on horseback ; and have be bring up , perhaps as a child , to ride after pig and so on , she must have have fine opportunity of acquire a graceful style of horsemanship . and now she dash through thick and thin in a most commanding manner , care no more for a snow - drift than lady do for a scraping of the road . no one with the least observation could doubt that this young woman be extremely anxious to attract Firm Gundry 's notice ; and therefore , on the day above speak of , once more she ride over , with her poor father in wait upon she as usual . 
 now I know very well how many fault I have , and to deny they have never be my practice ; but this be the honest and earnest truth , that no smallness of mind , or narrowness of feeling , or want of large or fine sentiment make I bolt my door when that girl be in the house . I simply refuse , after see she once , to have any thing more to say to she ; by no mean because of my birth and breeding   which be thing that can be most easily waive when the difference be acknowledge , nor yet on account of my be bring up in the company of lady , nor even by reason of any dislike which her bold brown eye put into I . my cause be sufficient and just and wise . I feel myself here as a very young girl , in safe and pure and honest hand , yet throw on my own discretion , without any feminine guidance whatever . and I have learn enough from the wise french sister to know at a glance that Miss Sylvester be not a young woman who would do I good . 
 even Uncle Sam , who be full of thought and delicate care about I , so far as a man can understand , and so far as his simple shrewdness go , in spite of all his hospitable way and open universal welcome , though he say not a word   as on such a point he be quite right in do   even he , as I know by his manner , be quite content with my decision . but Firm , be young and in many way stupid , make a little grievance of it . and , of course , Miss Sylvester make a great one . 
 " oh , I do declare , I be go away , " through my open window I hear her exclaim in her sweetly affect tone , at the end of that long visit , " without even have the honor of say a kind word to your young visitor . do not wait for I , papa ; I must pay my devoir . such a distinguished and travelled person can hardly be afflict with mauvaise honte . why do she not rush to embrace I ? all the french people do ; and she be so french ! let I see she , for the sake of my accent . " 
 " we do not   want no French here , ma'am , " reply Uncle Sam , as Sylvester ride off , " and the young lady want no Doctor Hunt . her health be as good as your own , and you never catch no french action from she . if she want to see you , she would ' a come down . " 
 " oh , now , this be too barbarous ! Colonel Gundry , you be the most tyrannous man ; in your own dominion an autocrat . every body say so , but I never would believe it . oh , do not   let I go away with that impression . and you do look so good - natured ! " 
 " and so I mean to look , Miss Penny , until you be out of sight . " 
 the voice of the Sawyer be more dry than that of his old and rusty saw . the fashionable and highly finished girl have no idea what to make of he ; but give her young horse a sharp cut , to show her figure as she rein he ; and then gallop off , she kiss her tan gauntlet with crimson net - work down it , and leave Uncle Sam to revolve his rudeness , with the dash of the wet road scatter in the air . 
 " I would not   ' a speak to she so course , " he say to Firm , who now return from open the gate and deliver his farewell , " if she be not   herself so extra particular , gild I , and sky - blue my moulding fine . how my mother would ' a stared at the sight of such a gal ! keep free of she , my lad , keep free of she . but no harm to put she on , to keep our missy alive and awake , my boy . " 
 immediately I withdraw from ear - shot , more deeply mortified than I can tell , and perhaps do Firm an injustice by not wait for his answer . I know not then how lightly man will speak of such delicate subject ; and it set I more against all thought of Firm than a month 's reflection could have do . when I come to know more of the world , I see that I have be very foolish . at the time , however , I be firmly set in a strong resolve to do that which alone seem right , or even possible to quit with all speed a place which could no long be suit for I . 
 for several day I fear to say a single word about it , while equally I condemn myself for have so little courage . but it be not as if there be any body to help I , or tell I what to do ; sometimes I be bold with a surety of right , and then again I shake with the fear of be wrong . because , through the whole of it , I feel how wonderfully well I have be treat , and what a great debt I owe of kindness ; and it seem to be only a nasty little pride which make I so particular . and be so unable to settle for myself , I wait for something to settle it . 
 something come , in a way which I have not by any mean expect . I have tell Suan Isco how glad I be that Firm have fix his liking steadily upon Miss Sylvester . if any woman on earth could be trust not to say a thing again , that one be this good Indian . not only because of her provident habit , but also in right of the difficulty which encompass she in our language . but she manage to get over both of these , and to let Mr. Ephraim know , as cleverly as if she have live in drawing - room , whatever I have say about he . she do it for the good ; but it put he in a rage , which he come at once to have out with I . 
 " and so , Miss Erema , " he say , throw down his hat upon the table of the little parlor , where I sit with an old book of Norman ballad , " I have your good wish , then , have I , for a happy marriage with Miss Sylvester ? " 
 I be greatly surprised at the tone of his voice , while the flush on his cheek and the flash of his eye , and even his quick heavy tread , show plainly that his mind be a little out of balance . he deserve it , however , and I could not grieve . 
 " you have my good wish , " I reply , demurely , " for any state of life to which you may be call . you could scarcely expect any less of I than that . " 
 " how kind you be ! but do you really wish that I should marry old Sylvester 's girl ? " 
 Firm , as he ask this question , look so bitterly reproachful   as if he be say , " do you wish to see I hang ? " , while his eye take a form which remind I so of the Sawyer in a furious puzzle , that it be impossible for I to answer as lightly as I mean to do . 
 " no , I can not say , firm , that I wish it at all ; unless your heart be set on it " 
 " do not   you know , then , where my heart be set ? " he ask I , in a deep voice , come nearer , and take the ballad - book from my hand . " why will you feign not to know , Erema , who be the only one I can ever think of twice ? above I , I know , in every possible way birth and education and mind and appearance , and now far above I in money as well . but what be all these thing ? try to think if only you could like I . like get over every thing , and without it nothing be any thing . why do I like you so , Erema ? be it because of your birth , and teaching , and manner , and sweet look , and all that , or even because of your trouble ? " 
 " how can I tell , firm how can I tell ? perhaps it be just because of myself . and why do you do it at all , firm ? " 
 " ah , why do I do it ? how I wish I know ! perhaps then I might cure it . to begin with , what be there , after all , so very wonderful about you ? " 
 " oh , nothing , I should hope . most surely nothing . it would grieve I to be at all wonderful . that I leave for american lady . " 
 " now you do not   understand I . I mean , of course , that you be wonderfully good and kind and clever ; and your eye , I be sure , and your lip and smile , and all your other feature there be nothing about they that can be call any thing else but wonderful . " 
 " now , Firm , how exceedingly foolish you be ! I do hope that you know well . " 
 " Erema , I never shall know well . I never can swerve or change , if I live to be a hundred and fifty . you think I presumptuous , no doubt , from what you be bring up to . and you be so young that to seek to bind you , even if you love I , would be an unmanly thing . but now you be old enough , and you know your own mind surely well enough , just to say whether you feel as if you could ever love I as I love you . " 
 he turn away , as if he feel that he have no right to press I so , and blame himself for selfishness ; and I like he well for do that than for any thing he have do before . yet I know that I ought to speak clearly , and though my voice be full of tear , I try . 
 " dear firm , " I say , as I take his hand and strove to look at he steadily , " I like and admire you very much ; and by - and - by by - and - by , I might , that is , if you do not hurry I . of all the obstacle you have mention , none be worth consider . I be nothing but a poor castaway , owe my life to Uncle Sam and you . but one thing there be which could never be get over , even if I feel as you feel toward I . never can I think of little matter , or of turn my thought to to any such thing as you speak of , as long as a vile reproach and wicked imputation lie on I . and before even that , I have to think of my father , who give his life for I . firm , I have be here too long delaying , and waste my time in trifle . I ought to have be in Europe long ago . if I be old enough for what you talk of , I be old enough to do my duty . if I be old enough for love , as it be call , I be old enough for hate . I have more to do with hate than love , I think . " 
 " Erema , " cry firm , " what a puzzle you be ! I never even dream that you could be so fierce . you be enough to frighten Uncle Sam himself . " 
 " if I frighten you , firm , that be quite enough . you see now how vain it be to say another word . " 
 " I do not see any thing of the sort . come back , and look at I quite calmly . " 
 be frighten at the way in which I have speak , and have pass the prime of it , I obey he in a moment , and come up gently and let he look at I to his liking . for little as I think of such thing till now , I seem already to know more about they , or at least to wonder which be the stir of the curtain of knowledge . I do not say any thing , but labor to think nothing and to look up with unconscious eye . but Firm put I out altogether by his warmth , and make I flutter like a stupid little bird . 
 " my darling , " he say , smooth back my hair with a kindness such as I could not resent , and quiet I with his clear blue eye , " you be not fit for the stormy life to which your high spirit be devote you . you have not the hardness and bitterness of mind , the cold self - possession and contempt of other , the power of dissembling and the iron will in a word , the fundamental nastiness , without which you never could get through such a job . why , you can not be contemptuous even to I ! " 
 " I should hope not . I should earn your contempt , if I could . " 
 " there , you be ready to cry at the thought . Erema , do not mistake yourself . remember that your father would never have wish it would have give his life ten thousand time over to prevent it . why do he bring you to this remote , inaccessible part of the world except to save you from further thought of evil ? he know that we listen to no rumor here , no social scandal , or malignant lie ; but we value people as we find they . he mean this to be a haven for you ; and so it shall be if you will only rest ; and you shall be the queen of it . instead of redress his memory now , you would only distress his spirit . what do he care for the world 's gossip now ? but he do care for your happiness . I be not old enough to tell you thing as I should like to tell they . I wish I could how I wish I could ! it would make all the difference to I . " 
 " it would make no difference , firm , to I ; because I should know it be selfishness . not selfishness of your , I mean , for you never could be selfish ; but the vile selfishness of mine , the same as starve my father . you can not see thing as I see they , or else you would not talk so . when you know that a thing be right , you do it . can you tell I otherwise ? if you do , I should despise you . " 
 " if you put it so , I can say no more . you will leave we forever , Erema ? " 
 " no , not forever . if the good God will it , I will come back when my work be do . forgive I , dear Firm , and forget I . " 
 " there be nothing to forgive , Erema ; but a great deal I never can hope to forgot . " 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 OUT of the golden GATE 

 little thing , or what we call little , always will come in among great one , or at least among those which we call great . before I pass the Golden Gate in the clipper ship Bridal Veil   so call from one of the Yosemite cascade   I find out what I have long wish to know why Firm have a crooked nose . at least , it could hardly be call crooked if any body look aright at it ; but still it depart from the bold straight line which nature must have mean for it , every thing else about he be as straight as could be require . this subject have trouble I more than once , though of course it have nothing whatever to do with the point of view whence I regard he . 
 Suan Isco could not tell I , neither could Martin of the mill ; I certainly could not ask Firm himself , as the Sawyer tell I to do when once I put the question , in despair , to he . but now , as we stand on the wharf exchange farewell , perhaps forever , and tear of anguish be in my eye , and my heart be both full and empty , ample and unexpected light be throw on the curvature of Firm 's nose . 
 for a beautiful girl , of about my own age , and very nicely dress , come up and speak to the Sawyer   who stand at my side , and then , with a blush , take his grandson 's hand . Firm take off his hat to she very politely , but allow she to see perhaps by his manner that he be particularly engage just now ; and the young lady , with a quick glance at I , walk off to rejoin her party . but a garrulous old negro servant , who seem to be in attendance upon she , run up and catch firm by his coat , and peer up curiously at his face . 
 " how young massa 's poor nose dis long time ? how he feel , spose now again ? " he inquire , with a deferential grin . " young massa ebber able take a pinch of good snuff ? he ! he ! missy berry heavy den ? Missy no learn to dance de nose polka den ? " 
 " what on earth do he mean ? " I could not help ask , in spite of our sorrowful farewell , as the negro go on with sundry other joke and cackle at his own facetiousness . and then Uncle Sam , to divert my thought , while I wait for signal to say good - by , tell I how Firm get a slight twist to his nose . 
 Ephraim Gundry have be well teach , in all the common thing a man should learn , at a good quiet school at Frisco , which distinguish itself from all other school by not call itself a college . and when he be leave to begin home life , with as much put into he as he could manage for his nature be not bookish when he be just seventeen year old , and tall and straight and upright , but not set into great bodily strength , which could not yet be expect , a terrible fire break out in a great block of house newly occupy , over against the school - house front . without wait for master 's leave or matron 's , the boy , in the californian style , jump over the fencing and go to help . and they find a great crowd collect , and flame flare out of the top of the house . at the top of the house , accord to a stupid and therefore general practice , be the nursery , make of more nurse than child , as often happen with rich people . the nurse have run away for their life , take two of the child with they ; but the third , a fine little girl of ten , have be leave behind , and now run to the window with red hot flame behind she . the window be open , and barb of fire , like serpent ' tongue , play over it . 
 " jump , child , jump ! for God 's sake , jump ! " cry half a hundred people , while the poor scared creature quiver on the ledge , and shrink from the frightful depth below . at last , sting by a scorch volley , she gather her night - gown tight , and leap , trust to the many face and many arm raise toward she . but though many gallant man be there , only one stand fast just where she fall , and that one be the youth , Firm Gundry . upon he she fall , like a stone from heaven , and though he hold up his arm in the smoky glare , she come down badly : badly , at least , for he , but , as her father say , providentially ; for one of her sol , or heel , alight on the bridge of Ephraim 's young nose . he catch she on his chest , and forgetful of himself , he bear she to her friend triumphantly , unharmed , and almost smile . but the symmetry of an important part of his face be spoil forever . 
 when I hear of this noble affair , and thought of my own pusillanimous rendering for verily I have be low enough , from rumor of Firm 's pugnacity , to attribute these little defect of line to some fisticuff with some miner I look at Firm 's nose through the tear in my eye , and have a great mind not to go away at all . for what be the noble of all thing in man as I bitterly learn thereafter , and already have some guess ? not the power of move multitude with eloquence or by order ; not the elevation of one tribe through the lowering of other , nor even the imaginary lift of all by sentiment as yet above they : there may be glory in all of these , but the greatness be not with they . it remain with those who behave like Firm , and get their nose break . 
 however , I do not know those thing at that time of life , though I think it right for every man to be brave and good ; and I could not help ask who the young lady be , as if that be part of the heroism . the Sawyer , who never be unready for a joke , of however ancient quality , give a great wink at Firm   which I fail to understand , and ask he how much the young lady be worth . he expect that Firm would say , " five hundred thousand dollar " which be about her value , I believe and Uncle Sam want I to hear it ; not that he care a single cent himself , but to let I know what firm could do . 
 Firm , however , be not to be lead into any trap of that sort . he know I well than the old man do , and that nothing would stir I to jealousy , and he quite disappoint the Sawyer . 
 " I have never ask what she be worth , " he say , with a glance of contempt at money ; " but she scarcely seem worth look at , compare compare with certain other . " 
 in the distance I see the young lady again , attempt no attraction , but walk along quite harmlessly , with the talkative negro after she . it would have be below I to pursue the subject , and I wait for other to re - open it ; but I hear no more about she until I have be for more than a week at sea , and be able again to feel interest . then I hear that her name be Annie Banks , of the firm of Heniker , bank , and Co. , who own the ship I sail in . 
 but now it be nothing to I who she be , or how beautiful , or how wealthy , when I clung for the last time to Uncle Sam , and implore he not to forget I . over and over again he promise to be full of thought of I , even when the new mill be start , which would be a most try time . he bow his tall white head into my shevele hair , and bless and kiss I , although I never deserve it , and a number of people be look on . then I lay my hand in Firm 's , and he do not lift it to his lip , or sigh , but press it long and softly , and look into my eye without a word . and I know that there would be none to love like they , wherever I might go . 
 but the last of all to say " good - by " be my beloved Jowler . he jump into the boat after I   for we be oblige to have a boat , the ship have laden far down , and he put his fore - paw on my shoulder , and whine and droop his under - jaw . and when he look at I as he use , to know whether I be in fun or earnest , with more expression in his bright brown eye than any human being have , I fall back under his weight and sob , and could not look at any one . 
 we have beautiful weather , and the view be glorious , as we pass the Golden Gate , the entrance to what will one day be the capital of the world , perhaps . for , as our captain say , all power and human energy and strength be always go westward , and when they come here they must stop , or else they would be go eastward again , which they never yet have do . his argument may have be right or wrong and , indeed , it must have be one or the other but who could think of such thing now , with a grander thing than human power human love fade away behind ? I could not even bear to see the glorious mountain sink , but run below and cry for hour , until all be dark and calm . 
 the reason for my sailing by this particular ship , and , indeed , rather suddenly , be that an old friend and cornish cousin of Mr. Gundry , who have spend some year in California , be now return to England by the Bridal Veil . this be Major Hockin , an officer of the british army , now on half - pay , and get on in year . his wife be go home with he ; for their child be marry and settle in England , all but one , now in San Francisco . and that one be well place in the firm of Heniker , bank , and Co. , have obtain for his father and mother passage upon favorable term , which be , as we say , " an object to they . " 
 for the Major , though admirably connect   as his kinship to Colonel Gundry show , and have a baronet not far off   if the twist of the world be set aside , also have serve his country , and receive a furrow on the top of his head , which make he brush his hair up , nevertheless , or all the more for that , be as poor as a british officer must be without official sesame . how he manage to feed and teach a large and not clever family , and train they all to fight their way in a battle bad than any of his own , and make gentleman and lady of they , whatever they do or wherever they go , he only know , and his faithful wife , and the Lord who help brave poverty . of such thing he never speak , unless his temper be arouse by luxury and self - indulgence and laziness . 
 but now he be a little well off , through have his child off his hand , and by mean of a little property leave he by a distant relative . he be on his way home to see to this ; and a well man never return to England , after always stand up for she . 
 be a child in the way of the world , and accustom to large people , I could not make out Major Hockin at first , and think he no more than a little man with many peculiarity . for he be not so tall as myself , until he put his high - heeled boot on , and he make such a stir about trifle at which Uncle Sam would have only grunt , that I take he to be nothing more than a fidgety old campaigner . he wear a black - rim double eyeglass with blue side - light at his temple , and his hat , from the shape of his forehead , hang back ; he have narrow white wiry whisker , and a roman nose , and most prominent chin , and keen gray eye with gingery brow , which contract , like sharp little gable over they , whenever any thing displease he . rosy cheek , tight - draw , close - shaven , and gleam with friction of yellow soap , add vigor to the general expression of his face , which be firm and quick and straightforward . the weather be warm , and the tropic close at hand , Major Hockin be dress in a fine suit of Nankin , spruce and trim , and beautifully make , set off his spare and active figure , which , though he be sixty - two year of age , seem always to be ready for a game of leap - frog . 
 we be three day out of the Golden Gate , and the hill of the coast ridge be faint and small , and the spire of the low Nevada could only be catch when the hot haze lift ; and every body lie about in our ship where it seem to afford the least smell and heat , and nobody for a moment dream for we really all be dream of any body with energy enough to be disturb about any thing , when Major Hockin burst in upon we all   who be try not to be red - hot in the feeble shade of poop awning , lead by the hand an ancient woman , scarcely dress with decency , and howl in a tone very sad to hear . 
 " this lady have be rob ! " cry the Major ; " rob , not fifteen foot below we . robbed , lady and gentleman , of the most cherished treasure of her life , the portrait of her only son , the saving of a life of honest toil , her poor dead husband 's tobacco - box , and a fine cut of Colorado cheese . " 
 " ten pound and a quarter , gospel true ! " cry the poor woman , wring her hand , and search for any kind face among we . 
 " go to the captain , " mutter one sleepy gentleman . " go to the devil , " say another sleepy man : " what have we to do with it ? " 
 " I will neither go to the captain , " reply the Major , very distinctly , " nor yet to the devil , as a fellow who be not a man have dare to suggest to I " 
 " all tie in my own pocket - handkerchief ! " the poor old woman begin to scream ; " the one with the three - cornered spot upon ' un . only two have I ever own in all my life , and this be the very good of them . oh dear ! oh dear ! that ever I should come to this exposing of my thing ! " 
 " Madam , you shall have justice do , as sure as my name be Hockin . gentleman and lady , if you be not all asleep , how would you like to be treat so ? because the weather be a trifle warm , there you lie like a parcel of Mexicans . if any body pick your pocket , would you have life enough to roll over ? " 
 " I do not   think I should , " say a fat young Briton , with a very good - natured face ; " but for a poor woman I can stand upright . major Hockin , here be a guinea for she . perhaps more of we will give a trifle . " 
 " well do ! " cry the Major ; " but not so much as that . let we first ascertain all the right of the case . perhaps half a crown apiece would reach it . " 
 half a crown apiece would have go beyond it , as we discover afterward , for the old lady 's handkerchief be in her box , lose under some more of her property ; and the tide of sleepy charity take this direction under such vehement impulse , several other steerage passenger lose their good , but find themselves too late in do so . but the Major be satisfied , and the rude man who have tell he to go amiss , beg his pardon , and thus we sail on slowly and peaceably . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 inside the CHANNEL 

 that little incident throw some light upon Major Hockin 's character . it be not for himself alone that he be so particular , or , as many would call it , fidgety , to have every thing do properly ; for if any thing come to his knowledge which he think unfair to any one , it concern he almost as much as if the wrong have be do to his own home self . through this he have fall into many trouble , for his impression be not always accurate ; but they teach he nothing , or rather , as his wife say , " the Major could not help it . " the lead journal of the various place in which Major Hockin sojourn have publish his letter of grievance sometimes , in the absence of the chief editor , and have suffer in purse by do so . but the Major always say , " ventilate it , ventilate the subject , my dear Sir ; bring public opinion to bear on it . " and Mrs. Hockin always say that it be her husband to whom belong the whole credit of this new and spirited use of the fine word " ventilation . " 
 as betwixt this faithful pair , it be scarcely needful perhaps to say that the Major be the master . his sense of justice dictate that , as well as his general briskness . though he be not at all like Mr. Gundry in undervaluing female mind , his large experience and more frequent intercourse with our sex have teach he to do justice to we ; and it be pleasant to hear he often defer to the judgment of lady . but this he do more , perhaps , in theory than in practice ; yet it make all the lady declare to one another that he be a perfect gentleman . and so he be , though he have his fault ; but his fault be such as we approve of . 
 but Mrs. Hockin have no fault in any way worth speak of . and whatever she have be her husband 's doing , through her desire to keep up with he . she be pretty , even now in her sixtieth year , and a great deal pretty because she never try to look young . silver hair , and gentle eye , and a forehead in which all the care of eight child have scarcely imprint a wrinkle , also a kind expression of interest in whatever be speak of , with a quiet voice and smile , and a power of not say too much at a time , combine to make this lady pleasant . 
 without any fuss or declaration , she take I immediately under her care ; and I doubt not that , after two year pass in the society of Suan Isco and the gentle Sawyer , she find many thing in I to amend , which she do by example and without reproof . she shield I also in the clever way from the curiosity of the saloon , which at first be very try . for the Bridal Veil be a well - know ship both for swift passage and for equipment , almost every berth be take , and when the weather be calm , quite a large assembly sit down to dinner . among these , of course , be some ill - breed people , and my youth and reserve and self - consciousness , and so on , make my reluctant face the mark for many a long and search gaze . my own wish have be not to dine thus in public ; but hear that my absence would only afford fresh ground for curiosity , I take my seat between the Major and his wife , the former have pledge himself to the latter to leave every thing to her management . his temper be try more than once to its utmost which be not a very great distance but he keep his word , and do not interfere ; and I have have some experience with firm , eschew all perception of glance . and as for all word , Mrs. Hockin meet they with an obtuse obliqueness ; so that after a day or two it be settle that nothing could be do about " Miss Wood . " 
 it have be a very sore point to come to , and cost an unparalleled shed of pride , that I should be shorn of two - third of my name , and call " Miss Wood , " like almost anybody else . I refuse to entertain such a very poor idea , and clung to the name which have always be mine for my father would never depart from it and I even burst into tear , which would , I suppose , be call ' sentimental ; " but still the stern fact star I in the face I must go as " Miss Wood , " or not go at all . upon this Major Hockin have insist ; and even Colonel Gundry could not move he from his resolution . 
 Uncle Sam have do his utmost , as be say before , to stop I from wish to go at all ; but when he find my whole heart bend upon it , and even my soul imperil by the sense of neglect life 's chief duty , his own stern sense of right come in and side with my prayer to he . and so it be that he let I go , with pity for my youth and sex , but a knowledge that I be in good hand , and an inborn , perhaps " Puritanical " faith , that the Lord of all right would see to I . 
 the Major , on the other hand , have none of this . he differ from Uncle Sam as much as a trim - cut and highly cultured garden tree differ from a great spread king of the wood . he be not without a strict sense of religion , especially when he have to march man to church ; and he never even use a bad word , except when wicked fact compel he . when properly let alone , and allow to nurse his own opinion , he have a respectable idea that all thing be certain to be order for the good ; but nothing enrage he so much as to tell he that when thing go against he , or even against his prediction . 
 it be lucky for I , then , that Major Hockin have take a most adverse view of my case . he form his opinion with the great haste , and with the great perseverance stick to they ; for he be the most generous of mankind , if generous mean one quite full of his genus . and in my little case he have make up his mind that the whole of the fact be against I . " fact " be his favorite word , and one which he always use with great effect , for nobody know very well what it mean , as it do not belong to our language . and so when he say that the fact be against I , who be there to answer that fact be not truth ? 
 this fast - set conclusion of his be know to I not through himself , but through his wife . for I could not yet bring myself to speak of the thing that lie close at my heart to he , though I know that he must be aware of they . and he , like a gentleman , leave I to begin . I could often see that he be ready and quite eager to give I the benefit of his opinion , which would only have turn I against he , and irritate he , perhaps , with I . and have no home in England , or , indeed , I might say , any where , I be to live with the Major and his wife , suppose that they could arrange it so , until I should discover relative . 
 we have a long and stormy voyage , although we set sail so fairly ; and I think that we never should round Cape Horn in the tooth of the furious northeast wind ; and after that we lay becalm , I have no idea in what latitude , though the passenger now talk quite like seaman , at least till the sea get up again . however , at last we make the English Channel , in the dreary day of November , and after more peril there than any where else , we be safely dock at Southampton . here the Major be meet by two dutiful daughter , bring their husband and child , and I see more of family life   at a distance   than have fall to my lot to observe before ; and although there be many little jar and brawl and cut at one another , I be sadly inclined to wish sometimes for some brother and sister to quarrel with . 
 but have none to quarrel with , and none to love , except good Mrs. Hockin , who go away by train immediately , I spend such a wretched time in that town that I long to be back in the Bridal Veil in the very bad of weather . the ooze of the shore and the reek of the water , and the dreary flatness of the land around   after the glorious heaven - clothe height , which make I ashamed of littleness , also the rough , stupid stare of the man , when I go about as an american lady may freely do in America , and the sharpness of every body 's voice   instead of the genial tone which those who can not produce they call " nasal , " but which from a high view be cordial   take one after other , or all together , these thing make I think , in the first flush of thought , that England be not a nice country . after a little while I find that I have be a great deal too quick , as foreigner be with thing which require quiet comprehension . for instance , I be annoy at have a stupid woman put over I , as if I could not mind myself a cook , or a nurse , or housekeeper , or something very useful in the Hockin family , but to I a mere incumbrance , and   as I think in my wrath sometimes   a spy . what be I likely to do , or what be any one likely to do to I , in a thoroughly civilized country , that I could not even stay in private lodging , where I have a great deal to think of , without this dull creature be force upon I ? but the Major so order it , and I give in . 
 there I must have staid for the slow three mouth ever pass without slow starvation finish my growth , but not know how to " form my mind , " as I be tell to do . Major Hockin come down once or twice to see I , and though I do not like he , yet it be almost enough to make I do so to see a little liveliness . but I could not and would not put up with a frightful german baron of music , with a polished card like a toast - rack , whom the Major try to impress on I . as if I could stop to take music lesson ! 
 " Miss Wood , " say Major Hockin , in his strong manner , the last time he come to see I , " I stand to you in loco parentis . that mean , with the duty , relationship , responsibility , and what not , of the unfortunate I should say rather of the beloved parent decease . I wish to be more careful of you than of a daughter of my own a great deal more careful , ten time , Miss Wood ; I may say a thousand time more careful , because you have not have the discipline which a daughter of mine would have enjoy . and you be so impulsive when you take an idea ! you judge every body by your liking . that lead to error , error , error . " 
 " my name be not Miss Wood , " I answer ; " my name be ' Erema Castlewood . ' whatever need may have be on board ship for nobody know who I be , surely I may have my own name now . " 
 when any body say ' surely , " at once up spring a question ; nothing be sure , and the word itself at heart quite interrogative . the Major know all those little thing which manage woman so manfully . so he take I by the hand and lead I to the light and look at I . 
 I have not one atom of russian twist or dye China grass in my hair , nor even the ubiquitous aid of horse and cow ; neither in my face or figure be I conscious of false presentment . the Major be welcome to lead I to the light and to throw up all his spectacle and gaze with all his eye . my only vexation be with myself , because I could not keep the weakness which a stranger should not see out of my eye , upon sudden remembrance who it be that use to have the right to do such thing to I . this it be , and nothing else , that make I drop my eye , perhaps . 
 " there , there , my dear ! " say Major Hockin , in a soft voice than usual . " pretty fit you be to combat with the world , and defy the world , and brave the world , and abolish the world or at least the world 's opinion ! ' bo to a goose , ' you can say , my dear ; but no ' bo ' to a gander . no , no ; do quietly what I advise by - the - bye , you have never ask my advice . " 
 I can not have be hypocritical , for of all thing I detest that most ; but in good faith I say , be conquer by the Major 's relaxation of his eye , 
 " oh , why have you never offer it to I ? you know that I never could ask for it . " 
 for the moment he look surprised , as if our idea have go crosswise ; and then he remember many little symptom of my faith in his opinion ; which be now grow inevitable , with his wife and daughter , and many grandchild all certain that he be a Solomon . 
 " Erema , " he say , " you be a dear good girl , though sadly , sadly romantic . I have no idea that you have so much sense . I will talk with you , Erema , when we both have leisure . " 
 " I be quite at leisure , Major Hockin , " I reply , " and only too happy to listen to you . " 
 " yes , yes , I dare say . you be in lodging . you can do exactly as you please . but I have a basin of ox - tail soup , a cutlet , and a woodcock wait for I at the Cosmopolitan Hotel . bless I ! I be five minute late already . I will come and have a talk with you afterward . " 
 " thank you , " I say ; " we have well leave it . it seem of no importance , compare compare with " 
 " my dinner ! " say the Major ; but he be offend , and so be I a little , though neither of we mean to vex the other . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 BRUNTSEA 

 it would be unfair to Major Hockin to take he for an extravagant man or a self - indulgent one because of the good dinner he have order , and his eagerness to sit down to it . through all the good year of his life he have be most frugal , abstemious , and self - deny , grudge every penny of his own expense , but spar none for his family . and now , when he find himself so much well off , with more income and less outlay , he could not be blame for enjoy good thing with the wholesome zest of abstinence . 
 for , come to the point , and go well into the matter , the Major have discover that the " little property " leave to he , and which he be come to see to , really be quite a fine estate for any one who know how to manage it , and would not spare courage and diligence . and of these two quality he have such abundance that , without any outlet , they might have turn he sour . 
 the property lately devise to he by his cousin , Sir Rufus Hockin , have long be far more plague than profit to that idle baronet . Sir Rufus hat all exertion , yet could not comfortably put up with the only alternative extortion . have no knowledge of his cousin Nick   except that he be indefatigable , and know his own son to be lazy even than himself have be , long also to inflict even posthumous justice upon the land agent , with the glad consent of his heir he leave this distant , fretful , and naked spur of land to his beloved cousin Major Nicholas Hockin . 
 the Major first hear of this unexpected increase of his belonging while he be hover , in the land of gold , between his desire to speculate and his dread of speculation . at once he consult our Colonel Gundry , who meet he by appointment at Sacramento ; and Uncle Sam have a vast idea of the value of land in England , which the Major naturally make the most of , now be an english land - owner , they spend a most pleasant evening , and agree upon the line mark out by Providence . 
 thus it be that he come home , bring   by kind arrangement   I , who be much more trouble than comfort to he , and at first dispose to be cold and curt . and thus it be that I be leave so long in that wretched Southampton , under the care of a very kind person who never could understand I . and all this while   as I ought to have know , without any one to tell I   Major Hockin be test the value and beat the bound of his new estate , and prolong his dinner from one to two course , or three if he have be travel . his property be large enough to afford he many dinner , and rich enough   when rightly treat   to insure their quality . 
 Bruntsea be a quiet little village on the southeast coast of England , in Kent or in Sussex , I be not sure which , for it have a constitution of its own , and say that it belong to neither . it use to be a place of size and valor , furnish ship , and find money for patriotic purpose . and great people both embark and land , one do this and the other that , though nobody seem to have ever do both , if history be to be rely upon . the glory of the place be still preserve in a seal and an immemorial stick , each of which be bless with mark as incomprehensible as could be wish , though both be to be see for sixpence . the name of the place be write in more than forty different way , they say ; and the old inhabitant be less positive than the young how to spell it . 
 this village lie in the mouth , or rather at the eastern end of the mouth , of a long and wide depression among the hill , through which a sluggish river win its muddy consummation . this river once go far along the sea - brink , without enter   like a child who be afraid to bathe , as the Adur do at Shoreham , and as many other river do . and in those day the mouth and harbor be under the cliff at Bruntsea , whence its seal and corporation , stick , and other blessing . but three or four century ago the river be draw by a violent storm , like a badger from his barrel , and force to come straight out and face the sea , without any three mile of dalliance . the time - serve water make the good of this , forsook its ancient bed   as classic nymph and fountain use to do , and leave poor Bruntsea with a dry bank , and no haven for a cockle - shell . a new port , such as it be , incrust the fickle jaw of the river ; pile be drive and earth - work form , lest the water should return to its old love ; and Bruntsea , as concern her traffic , become but a mark of memory . her noble corporation never demand their old channel , but regard the whole as the will of the Lord , and have the good sense to insist upon nothing except their time - honor ceremony . 
 in spite of all these and their importance , land become of no value there . the owner of the Eastern Manor and of many ancient right , have no mean of get at they , sell they for an " old song , " which they be ; and the buyer be one of the Hockin race , a shipwreck mariner from Cornwall , who have be kindly treat there , and take a fancy accordingly . he sell his share in some mine to pay for it , settle here , and die here ; and his son , get on in the world , build a house , and take to serious smuggling . in the chalk cliff 's eastward he find hole of honest value to he , capable of cheap enlargement   which the cornish hole be not , and much more accessible from France . become a magistrate and deputy - lieutenant , he have the duty and privilege of inquire into his own deed , which enable he to check those few who otherwise might have compete with he . he flourish , and buy more secure estate ; and his son , for activity against smuggler , be make a gentle baronet . 
 these thing now have pass away , and the first fee - simple of the Hockin family become a mere load and incumbrance . Sir George and Sir Robert and Sir Rufus , one after another , do not like the hint about contraband dealing which meet they whenever they deign to come down there , till at last the estate   be leave to an agent   cost a great deal more than he ever pay in . and thus as should have be more briefly tell the owner be our Major Hockin . 
 no wonder that this gentleman , with so many care to attend to , have no time at first to send for I . and no wonder that when he come down to see I , he be oblige to have good dinner . for the work do by he in those three month surprise every body except himself , and make in old Bruntsea a stir unknown since the time of the spanish Armada . for he own the house under the eastern cliff , and the warren , and the dairy - farm inland , and the slope of the ground where the sea use to come , and field where the people grow potato gratis , and all the eastern village , where the tenant pay their rent whenever they find it rational . 
 a hot young man , in a place like this , would have do a great deal of mischief . either he would have accept large view , and applaud this fine communism   if he could afford it , and have no wife , or else he would have rush at every body headlong , and bat they back to their abutment . neither course would have create half the excitement which the Major 's do . at least , there might have be more talk at first , but not a quarter so much in sum total . of those thing , however , there be time enough to speak , if I dare to say any thing about they . 
 the thing more to my mind   and therefore more likely to be make plain to another mind   be not the petty flicker phantom of the shadow we call human , and which alone we realize , and dwell inside it and upon it , as if it be all creation ; but the infinitely nobler thing of ever - change but perpetual beauty , and no selfishness . these , without deign to we even sense to be aware of they , shape our little mind and body and our large self - importance , and fail to know when the lord or king who own be bury under they . to have perception of such mighty truth be good for all of we : and I never have keener perception of they than when I sit down on the Major 's camp - stool , and see all his land around I , and even the sea where all the fish be his , as soon as he could catch they and largely reflect that not a square foot of the whole world would ever belong to I . 
 " Bruntlands , " as the house be call , perhaps from stand well above the sea , be shelter by the curve of the eastern cliff , which look down over Bruntsea . the cliff be of chalk , very steep toward the sea , and show a prominent headland toward the south , but prettily rise in grassy curve from the inland and from the westward . and then , where it suddenly chin away from land - slope into sea - front , a long bar of shingle begin at right angle to it , and , as level as a railroad , go to the river 's mouth , a league or so now to the westward . and beyond that another line of white cliff rise , and look well till they come to their headland . inside this bank of shingle , from end to end , might be trace the old course of the river , and to landward of that trough at the hither end stand , or lay , the calm old village . 
 forsake as it be by the river , this village stick to its ancient site and home , and instead of migrating , contract itself , and cast off needless member . shrink Bruntsea clung about the old of its church , while the four other fall to rack and ruin , and settle into cow - yard and barn , and place where old man might sit and sigh . but Bruntsea distinctly and trenchantly keep the old town 's division into east and west . 
 East Bruntsea be wholly in the Major 's manor , which have a special charter ; and most of the house belong to he . this ownership hitherto have mean only that the landlord should do all the tumble - down repair   when the agent report that they must be do , but never must enter the door for his rent . the borough have be disfranchise , though the snug of the snug for generation ; and the freeman , thus be rob of their right , have no power to discharge their duty . and to complicate matter yet far , for the few who wish to simplify they , the custom of " borough - English " prevail , and govern the descent of dilapidation , make nice nicety for clever man of law . 
 " you see a fine property here , Miss Wood , " Major Hockin say to I , as we sit , on the day after I be allow to come , enjoy the fresh breeze from the sea and the newness of the February air , and look abroad very generally : " a very fine property , but neglect shamefully , horribly , atrociously neglect but capable of noble thing , of grand thing , of magnificent , with a trifle of judicious outlay . " 
 " oh , please not to talk of outlay , my dear , " say good Mrs. Hockin , gently ; " it be such an odious word ; and where in the world be it to come from ? " 
 " leave that to I . when I be a boy my favorite copy in my copy - book be , ' where there be a will there be a way . ' Miss Wood , what be your opinion ? but wait , you must have time to understand the subject . first we bring a railway always the first step ; why , the line be already make for it by the course of the old river , and the distance from Newport three mile and a half . it ought not to cost quite 200 pound a mile the mere outlay for rail and sleeper . the land be all mine , and and of course other land proprietor ' . very well : these would all unite , of course ; so that not a farthe need be pay for land , which be the good half of the battle . we have the station here not too near my house ; that would never do ; I could not bear the noise but in a fine central place where nobody on earth could object to it lively , and close at hand for all of they . unluckily I be just too late . we have lose a parliamentary year through that execrable calm you remember all about it . otherwise we would have have Billy Puff stable at Bruntsea by the first of May . but never mind ; we shall do it all the well and cheap by take our time about it . very well : we have the railway open and the trade of the place develop . we build a fine terrace of elegant villa , a crescent also , and a large hotel replete with every luxury ; and we form the fine sea - parade in England by simply assist nature . half London come down here to bathe , to catch shrimp , to flirt , and to do the rest of it . we become a select , salubrious , influential , and yet economical place ; and then what do we do , Mrs. Hockin ? " 
 " my dear , how can I tell ? but I hope that we should rest and be thankful . " 
 " not a bit of it . I should hope not , indeed . Erema , what do we do then ? " 
 " it be useless to ask I . well , then , perhaps you set up a handsome saw - mill ! " 
 " a saw - mill ! what a notion of Paradise ! no ; this be what we do but remember that I speak in the strict confidence ; dishonest antagonism might arise , if we ventilate our idea too soon Mrs. Hockin and Miss Wood , we demand the restoration of our river ! the return of our river to its ancient course . " 
 " I see , " say his wife ; " oh , how grand that would be ! and how beautiful from our window ! that really , now , be a noble thought ! " 
 " a just one simply a just one . justice ought not to be noble , my dear , however rare it may be . generosity , magnanimity , heroism , and so on those be the thing we call noble , my dear . " 
 " and the founding of city . oh , my dear , I remember , when I be at school , it be always say , in what we call our history , that the founder of city have honor pay they , and altar build , and divinity do , and holiday hold in their honor . " 
 " to that I object , " cry the Major , sternly . " if I found fifty city , I would never allow one holiday . the Sabbath be enough ; one day in seven fifteen per cent , of one 's whole time ; and twenty per cent , of your Sunday go in church . very right , of course , and loyal , and truly edify Mrs. Hockin 's father be a clergyman , Miss Wood ; and the last thing I would ever allow on my manor would be a dissenting chapel ; but still I will have no new church here , and a man who might go against I . they all want to pick their own religious view , instead of reflect who support they ! it never use to be so ; and such thing shall never occur on my manor . a good hotel , attendance include , and a sound and moderate table d'hote ; but no church , with a popish bag send round , and money to pay , ' without anything to eat . ' " 
 " my dear ! my dear ! " cry Mrs. Hockin , " I never like you to talk like that . you quite forget who my father be , and your own second son such a very sound priest ! " 
 " a priest ! do not   let he come here , " cry the Major , " or I will let he know what tonsure be , and read he the order of Melchisedec . a priest ! after go round the world three time , to come home and be hail as the father of a priest ! do not   let he come near I , or I will sacrifice he . " 
 " now , Major , you be very proud of he , " his good wife answer , as he shake his stick . " how could he help take order when he be under order to do so ? and his view be sound to the last degree , most strictly correct and practical at least except as to celibacy . " 
 " he hold that his own mother ought never to have be bear ! Miss Wood , do you call that practical ? " 
 " I have no acquaintance with such thing , " I reply ; " we have none of they in California . but be it practical , Major Hockin of course you know well in your engineering I mean , would it not require something like a tunnel for the river and the railway to run on the same ground ? " 
 " why , bless I ! that seem to have escape my notice . you have not be with old Uncle Sam for nothing . we shall have to appoint you our chief engineer . " 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 LISTLESS 

 it seem an unfortunate thing for I , and unfavorable to my purpose , that my host , and even my hostess too , should be so engross with their new estate , its beauty and capability . Mrs. Hockin devote herself at once to fowl and pig and the like extravagant economy , have buy , at some ill - star moment , a book which prove that hen ought to lay egg in a manner to support themselves , their family , and the family they belong to , at the price of one penny a dozen . egg be two shilling a dozen in Bruntsea , here be a margin for profit no less than two thousand per cent , to be make , allow for all accident . the lady also find another book , divulge for a shill the author 's purely invaluable secret how to work an acre of ground , pay house rent , supply the house grandly , and give away a barrow - load of vegetable every day to the poor of the parish , by keep a pig if that pig be keep properly . and after that , pork and ham and bacon come of he , while another golden pig go on . 
 Mrs. Hockin be very soft - hearted , and say that she never could make bacon of a pig like that ; and I answer that if she ever get he it would be unwise to do so . however , the law be lay down in both book that golden fowl and diamondic pig must die the death before they begin to overeat production ; and the Major say , " to be sure . yes , yes . let they come to good meat , and then off with their head . " and his wife say that she be sure she could do it . when it come to a question of tare and tret , false sentiment must be exclude . 
 at the moment , these thing go by I as trifle , yet make I more impatient . be old now , and behold what happen with tolerance and complacence , I be only surprised that my good friend be so tolerant of I and so complacent . for I must have be a great annoyance to they , with my hurry and my one idea . happily they make allowance for I , which I be not old enough to make for they . 
 " go to London , indeed ! go to London by yourself ! " cry the Major , with a red face , and his glass up , when I tell he one morning that I could stop no long without do something . " Mary , my dear , when you have do out there , will you come in and reason if you can with Miss Wood . she vow that she be go to London , all alone . " 
 " oh , Major Hockin oh , Nicholas dear , such a thing have happen ! " Mrs. Hockin have scarcely any breath to tell we , as she come in through the window . " you know that they have only have three bushel , or , at any rate , not more than five , almost ever since they come . Erema , you know as well as I do . " 
 " seven and three - quarter bushel of barley , at five and ninepence a bushel , Mary , " say the Major , pull out a pocket - book ; " besides indian corn , chop meat , and potato . " 
 " and fourteen pound of paddy , " I say which be a paltry thing of I ; " not to mention a cake of graf , three sack of brewer ' grain , and then I forget what next . " 
 " you be too bad , all of you . Erema , I never think you would turn against I so . and you make I get nearly all of it . but please to look here . what do you call this ? be this no reward ? be this not enough ? Major , if you please , what do you call this ? what a pity you have have your breakfast ! " 
 " a blessing if this be to be my breakfast . I call that , my dear , the very small egg I have see since I take sparrow ' nest . no wonder they sell they at twelve a penny . I congratulate you upon your first egg , my dear Mary . " 
 " well , I do not   care , " reply Mrs. Hockin , who have the sweetest temper in the world . " small beginning make large ending ; and an egg must be always small at one end . you scorn my first egg , and Erema should have have it if she have be good . but she be very wicked , and I know not what to do with it . " 
 " blow it ! " cry the Major . " I mean no harm , lady . I never use low language . what I mean be , make a pinhole at each end , give a puff , and away go two pennyworth , and you have a cabinet speciman , which your egg be quite fit by its cost to be . but now , Mary , talk to Miss Wood , if you please . it be useless for I to say any thing , and I have three appointment in the town " he always call it " the town " now " three appointment , if not four ; yes , I may certainly say four . talk to Miss Wood , my dear , if you please . she want to go to London , which would be absurd . lady seem to enter into lady ' logic . they seem to be able to appreciate it well , to see all the turn , and the in and out , which no man have intellect enough to see , or at least to make head or tail of . good - by for the present ; I have well be off . " 
 " I should think you have , " exclaim Mrs. Hockin , as her husband march off , with his side - light on , and his short , quick step , and well - satisfied glance at the hill which belong to he , and the beach , over which he have right of plunder or , at least , Uncle Sam would have call they so , strictly as he stand up for his own . 
 " now come and talk quietly to I , my dear , " Mrs. Hockin begin , most kindly , forget all the marvel of her first - bear egg . " I have notice how restless you be , and devoid of all healthy interest in any thing . ' Listless ' be the word . ' Listless ' be exactly what I mean , Erema . when I be at your time of life , I could never have go about care for nothing . I wonder that you know that I even have a fowl ; much more how much they have eat ! " 
 " I really do try to do all I can , and that be a proof of it , " I say . " I be not quite so listless as you think . but those thing do seem so little to I . " 
 " my dear , if you be happy , they would seem quite large , as , after all the anxiety of my life , I be able now to think they . it be a power to be thankful for , or , at least , I often think so . look at my husband ! he have outlive and outlast more trouble than any one but myself could reckon up to he ; and yet he be as brisk , as full of life , as ready to begin a new thing to - morrow when , at our age , there may be no to - morrow , except in that well world , my dear , of which it be high time for he and I to think , as I truly hope we may spare the time to do . " 
 " oh , do not   talk like that , " I cry . " please , Mrs. Hockin , to talk of your hen and chick at least there will be chick by - and - by . I be almost sure there will , if you only persevere . it seem unfair to set our mind on any other world till justice have be do in this . " 
 " you be very young , my child , or you would know that in that case we never should think of it at all . but I do not   want to preach you a sermon , Erema , even if I could do so . I only just want you to tell I what you think , what good you imagine that you can do . " 
 " it be no imagination . I be sure that I can right my father 's wrong . and I never shall rest till I do so . " 
 " be you sure that there be any wrong to right ? " she ask , in the warmth of the moment ; and then , see perhaps how my color change , she look at I sadly , and kiss my forehead . 
 " oh , if you have only once see he , " I say ; " without any exaggeration , you would have be satisfied at once . that he could ever have do any harm be impossible utterly impossible . I be not as I be . I can listen to almost any thing now quite calmly . but never let I hear such a wicked thing again . " 
 " you must not go on like that , Erema , unless you wish to lose all your friend . no one can help be sorry for you . very few girl have be place as you be . I be sure when I think of my own daughter I can never be too thankful . but the very first thing you have to learn , above all thing , be to control yourself . " 
 " I know it I know it , of course , " I say ; " and I keep on try my very good . I be thoroughly ashamed of what I say , and I hope you will try to forgive I . " 
 " a very slight exertion be enough for that . but now , my dear , what I want to know be this and you will excuse I if I ask too much what good do you expect to get by go thus to London ? have you any friend there , any body to trust , any thing settle as to what you be to do ? " 
 " yes , every thing be settle in my own mind , " I answer , very bravely : " I have the address of a very good woman , find among my father 's paper , who nurse his child and understand his nature , and always keep her faith in he . there must be a great many more who do the same , and she will be sure to know they and introduce I to they ; and I shall be guide by their advice . " 
 " but suppose that this excellent woman be dead , or not to be find , or have change her opinion ? " 
 " her opinion she never could change . but if she be not to be find , I shall find her husband , or her child , or somebody ; and besides that , I have a hundred thing to do . I have the address of the agent through whom my father draw his income , though Uncle Sam let I know as little as he could . and I know who his banker be   when he have a bank , and he may have leave important paper there . " 
 " come , that look a little more sensible , my dear ; banker may always be rely upon . and there may be some valuable plate , Erema . but why not let the Major go with you ? his advice be so invaluable . " 
 " I know that it be , in all ordinary thing . but I can not have he now , for a very simple reason . he have make up his mind about my dear father horribly , horribly ; I can not   speak of it . and he never change his mind ; and sometimes when I look at he I hate he . " 
 " Erema , you be quite a violent girl , although you so seldom show it . be the whole world divide , then , into two camp those who think as you wish and those who be lead by their judgment to think otherwise ? and be you to hate all who do not think as you wish ? " 
 " no , because I do not hate you , " I say ; " I love you , though you do not think as I wish . but that be only because you think your husband must be right of course . but I can not like those who have make up their mind accord to their own coldness . " 
 " Major Hockin be not cold at all . on the contrary , he be a warm - hearted man I might almost say hot - hearted . " 
 " yes , I know he be . and that make it ten time bad . he take up every body 's case but mine . " 
 " sad as it be , you almost make I smile , " my hostess answer , gravely ; " and yet it must be very bitter for you , know how just and kind my husband be . I be sure that you will give he credit for at least desiring to take your part . and do so , at least you might let he go with you , if only as a good protection . " 
 " I have no fear of any one ; and I might take he into society that he would not like . in a good cause he would go any where , I know . but in my cause , of course he would be scrupulous . your kindness I always can rely upon , and I hope in the end to earn his as well . " 
 " my dear , he have never be unkind to you . I be certain that you never can say that of he . major Hockin unkind to a poor girl like you ! " 
 " the last thing I wish to claim be any body 's pity , " I answer , less humbly than I should have speak , though the pride be only in my tone , perhaps . " if people choose to pity I , they be very good , and I be not at all offend , because because they can not help it , perhaps , from not know any thing about I . I have nothing whatever to be pity for , except that I have lose my father , and have nobody leave to care for I , except Uncle Sam in America . " 
 " your Uncle Sam , as you call he , seem to be a very wonderful man , Erema , " say Mrs. Hockin , craftily , so far as there could be any craft in she ; " I never see he a great loss on my part . but the Major go up to meet he somewhere , and come home with the stock of his good tie break , and two button go from his waistcoat . do Uncle Sam make people laugh so much ? or be it that he have some extraordinary gift of induce people to taste whiskey ? my husband be a very most abstemious man , as you must be well aware , Miss Wood , or we never should have be as we be , I be sure . but , for the first time in all my life , I doubt his discretion on the following day , when he have what shall I say ? when he have be exchange sentiment with Uncle Sam . " 
 " Uncle Sam never take too much in any way , " I reply to this new attack ; " he know what he ought to take , and then he stop . do you think that it may have be his ' sentiment , ' perhaps , that be too strong and large for the Major ? " 
 " Erema ! " cry Mrs. Hockin , with amazement , as if I have no right to think or express my thought on life so early ; " if you can talk politic at eighteen , you be quite fit to go any where . I have hear a great deal of american lady , and see not a little of they , as you know . but I think that you call yourself an english girl , and insist particularly upon it . " 
 " yes , that I do ; and I have good reason . I be bear of an old english family , and I hope to be no disgrace to it . but be bring up in a number of way , as I have be without think of it , and be quite different from the fashionable girl Major Hockin like to walk with " 
 " my dear , he never walk with any body but myself ! " 
 " oh yes , I remember ! I be think of the deck . there be no fashionable girl here yet . till the terrace be build , and the esplanade " 
 " there shall be neither terrace nor esplanade if the Major be to do such thing upon they . " 
 " I be sure that he never would , " I reply ; " it be only their dress that he like at all , and that very , to my mind , extraordinary style , as well as unbecoming . you know what I mean , Mrs. Hockin , that wonderful what shall I call it ? way of loop up . " 
 " call I ' Aunt Mary , ' my dear , as you do when the wave be so dreadful . you mean that hideous mexican poncho , as they call it , stick up here , and go down there . Erema , what observation you have ! nothing ever seem to escape you . do you ever see any thing so indecorous ? " 
 " it make I feel just as if I ought not to look at they , " I answer , with perfect truth , for so it do ; " I have never be accustom to such thing . but see how the Major approve of they , and like to be walk up and down between they , I know that they must be not only decorous , but attractive . there be no appeal from his judgment , be there ? " 
 " I agree with he upon every point , my dear child ; but I have always long to say a few word about that . for I can not help think that he go too far . " 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 BETSY BOWEN 

 so far , then , there be nobody find to go into my case , and to think with I , and to give I friendly countenance , with the exception of Firm Gundry . and I fear that he try to think with I because of his faithful and manly love , more than from balance of evidence . the Sawyer , of course , hold my father guiltless , through his own fidelity and simple way ; but he could not enter into my set thought of a stern duty lay upon I , because to his mind the opinion of the world matter nothing so long as a man do aright . for wisdom like this , if wisdom it be , I be a great deal too young and ardent ; and to I fair fame be of almost equal value with clear conscience . and therefore , wise or foolish , rich or poor , beloved or unloved , I must be listless about other thing , and restless in all , until I should establish truth and justice . 
 however , I do my good to be neither ungrateful nor stupidly obstinate , and , begin more and more to allow for honest though hateful opinion , I yield to dear Mrs. Hockin 's wish that I should not do any thing out of keep with english idea and habit . in a word , I accept the Major 's kind offer to see I quite safe in good hand in London , or else bring I straightway back again . and I take only just thing enough for a day or two , mean to come back by the end of the week . and I kiss Mrs. Hockin just enough for that . 
 it would not be a new thing for I to say that " we never know what be go to happen ; " but , new or stale , it be true enough , as old common saying of common - sense   though spurn when not want   show themselves . at first , indeed , it seem as if I be come for nothing , at least as concern what I think the chief business of my journey . the Major have wish to go first to the bank , and appear to think nothing of any thing else ; but I , on the other hand , do not want he there , prefer to keep he out of my money matter , and so he be oblige to let I have my way . 
 I always be sorry when I have be perverse , and it seem to serve I right for willfulness when no Betsy Bowen could be discover either at the place which we try first , or that to which we be send thence . Major Hockin look at I till I could have cry , as much as to hint that the whole of my story be all of a piece , all a wild - goose chase . and be more curious than ever now to go to the bank and ransack , he actually call out to the cabman to drive without delay to Messrs. Shovelin , Wayte , and Shovelin . but I beg he to allow I just one minute while I speak to the servant - maid alone . then I show she a sovereign , at which she open her mouth in more way than one , for she tell I that " though she have faithfully promise to say nothing about it , because of a dreadful quarrel between her mistress and Mrs. Strouss that be now , and a jealousy between they that be quite beyond belief , she could not refuse such a nice young lady , if I would promise faithfully not to tell . " this promise I give with fidelity , and return to the cabman , direct he to drive not to Messrs. Shovelin , Wayte , and Shovelin just yet , but to no . 17 European Square , St. Katharine 's . 
 from a maze of street and rugged corner , and in and out nearly as crooked as those of a narrow human nature , we turn at last into European Square , which be no square at all , but an oblong opening pitch with rough granite , and distinguish with a pump . there be great thoroughfare within a hundred yard , but the place itself seem unnaturally quiet upon turn suddenly into it , only murmurous with distant London din , as the spire of a shell hold the heaving of the sea . after drive three or four time round the pump , for the house be number anyhow , we find no . 17 , and I jump out . 
 " now do not   be in such a fierce hurry , Miss Wood , " cry the Major , who be now a little crusty ; " english lady allow themselves to be hand out , without hurry the gentleman who have the honor . " 
 " but I want to save you the honor , " I say . " I will come back immediately , if you will kindly wait . " and with this I run up the old step , and rang and knock , while several bearded face come and gaze through dingy window . 
 " can I see Mrs. Strouss ? " I ask , when a queer old man in fade brown livery come to the door with a candle in his hand , though the sun be shin . 
 " I be the Meesther Strouss ; when you see I , you behold the good Meeses Strouss also . " 
 " thank you , but that will not do , " I reply ; " my business be with Mrs. Strouss alone . " 
 he do not seem to like this at first sight , but politely put the chain - bolt on the door while he retire to take advice ; and the Major look out of the cab and laugh . 
 " you have well come back while you can , " he say , " though they seem in no hurry to swallow you . " 
 this be intend to vex I , and I do not even turn my head to he . the house look very respectable , and there be railing to the area . 
 " the house be very respectable , " continue Major Hockin , who always seem to know what I be think of , and now in his quick manner run up the step ; " just look , the scraper be clean . you never see that , or at least not often , except with respectable people , Erema . " 
 " pray what would my scraper be ? and who be Erema ? " cry a strong , clear voice , as the chain of the door be set free , and a stout , tall woman with a flush in her cheek confront we . " I never know more than one Erema good mercy ! " 
 my eye meet her , and she turn as pale as death , and fall back into a lobby chair . she know I by my likeness to my father , fall on the memory start by my name ; and strong as she be , the surprise overcome she , at the sound of which up rush the small Herr Strouss . 
 " Vhat be you do dere , all of you ? vhat have you enterprised with my frau ? Explain , Vilhelmina , or I call de policeman , vhat I should say de peeler . " 
 " stop ! " cry the Major , and he stop at once , not for the word , which would have have no power , although I know nothing about it then , but because he have receive a sign which assure he that here be a brother Mason . in a moment the infuriate husband vanish into the rational and docile brother . 
 " lady and gentleman , valk in , if you please , " he say , to my great astonishment ; " Vilhelmina and my good self make you velcome to our poor house . Vilhelmina , arise and say so . " 
 " go to the back kitchen , Hans , " reply Wilhelmina , whose name be " Betsy , " " and do not   come out until I tell you . you will find work to do there , and remember to pump up . I wish to hear thing that you be not to hear , mind you . shut yourself in , and if you soap the door to deceive I , I shall know it . " 
 " Vere goot , vere goot , " say the philosophical german ; " I never meddle with nothing , Vilhelmina , no more than vhat I do for de money and de house . " 
 Betsy , however , be not quite so sure of that . with no more ceremony she lock he in , and then come back to we , who could not make thing out . 
 " my husband be the brave of the brave , " she tell we , while she put down his key on the table ; " and a nobler man never live ; I be sure of that . but every one of they foreigner excuse I , Sir , you be an Englishman ? " 
 " I be , " reply the Major , pull up his little whisker ; " I be so , madam , and nothing you can say will in any way hurt my feeling . I be above nationality . " 
 " just so , Sir . then you will feel with I when I say that they foreigner be dreadful . oh , the day that I ever marry one of them but there , I ought to be ashamed of myself , and my lord 's daughter face I . " 
 " do you know I ? " I ask , with hot color in my face , and my eye , I dare say , glisten . " be you sure that you know I ? and then please to tell I how . " 
 as I speak I be take off the close silk bonnet which I have wear for travel , and my hair , have catch in a pin , fall round I , and before I could put it up , or even think of it , I lay in the great arm of Betsy Bowen , as I use to lie when I be a little baby , and when my father be in his own land , with a home and wife and seven little one . and to think of this make I keep her company in cry , and it be some time before we do any thing else . 
 " well , well , " reply the Major , who detest scene , except when he have make they ; " I shall be off . you be in good hand ; and the cabman pull out his watch when we stop . so do I. but he be sure to beat I . they draw the minute hand on with a magnet , I be tell , while the watch hang on their badge , and they can swear they never open it . wonderful age , very wonderful age , since the time when you and I be young , ma'am . " 
 " yes , Sir ; to be sure , Sir ! " Mrs. Strouss reply , as she wipe her eye to speak of thing ; " but the most wonderful of all thing , do not   you think , be the going of the time , Sir ? no cabby can make it go fast while he wait , or slow while he be a - driving , than the mind inside of we manage it . why , Sir , it wear only like yesterday that this here tall , elegant , royal young lady be a - lying on my breast , and what a hand she be to kick ! and I say that her hair be sure to grow like this . if I be to tell you only half what come across I " 
 " if you do , ma'am , the cabman would make his fortune , and I should lose mine , which be more than I can afford . Erema , after dinner I shall look you up . I know a good woman when I see she , Mrs. Strouss , which do not happen every day . I can trust Miss Castlewood with you . good - by , good - by for the present . " 
 it be the first time he have ever call I by my proper name , and that make I all the more pleased with it . 
 " you see , Sir , why I be oblige to lock he in , " cry the " good woman , " follow to the door , to clear every blur from her virtue ; " for his own sake I do it , for I feel my cry a - come , and to see I cry Lord bless you , the effect upon he be to call out for a walking - stick and a pint of beer . " 
 " all right , ma'am , all right ! " the Major answer , in a tone which appear to I unfeele . " Cabman , be you asleep there ? bring the lady 's bag this moment . " 
 as the cab disappear without my even know where to find that good protector again in this vast maze of million , I could not help let a little cold fear encroach on the warmth of my outburst . I have hear so much in America of the dark , subtle place of London , and the wicked thing that happen all along the Thames , discover or invent by great writer of their own , that the neighborhood of the dock and the thought of rat   to which I could never grow accustomed   make I look with a flash perhaps of doubt at my new old friend . 
 " you be not sure of I , Miss Erema , " say Mrs. Strouss , without take offense . " after all that have happen , who can blame it on you ? but your father be not so suspicious , miss . it might have be well for he if he have accord , leastway , to my belief , which a team of wild horse will never drag out . " 
 " oh , only let I hear you talk of that ! " I exclaim , forget all other thing . " you know more about it than any body I have ever meet with , except my own father , who would never tell a word . " 
 " and quite right he be , miss , accord to his view . but come to my little room , unless you be afraid . I can tell you some thing that your father never know . " 
 " Afraid ! do you think I be a baby still ? but I can not bear that Mr. Strouss should be lock up on my account . " 
 " then he shall come out , " say Mrs. Strouss , look at I very pleasantly . " that be just like your father , Miss Erema . but I fall into the foreign way , be so much with the foreigner . " whether she think it the custom among " foreigner " for wife to lock their husband in back kitchen be more than she ever take the trouble to explain . but she walk away , in her stout , firm manner , and presently return with Mr. Strouss , who seem to be quite content , and make I a bow with a very placid smile . 
 " he be harmless ; his idea be most grand and good , " his wife explain to I , with a nod at he . " but I could not have you in with the gentleman , Hans . he always make mistake with the gentleman , miss , but with the lady he behave quite well . " 
 " yes , yes , with the lady I be nearly always goot , " Herr Strouss reply , with diffidence . " the lady comprehend I right , all right , because I be so habitual with my wife . but the gentleman in London have no comprehension of I . " 
 " then the loss be on their side , " I answer , with a smile ; and he say , " yes , yes , they lose vere much by I . " 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 BETSY 's TALE 

 now I scarcely know whether it would be more clear to put into narrative what I hear from Betsy Bowen , now Wilhelmina Strouss , or to let she tell the whole in her own word , exactly as she herself tell it then to I . the story be so dark and sad or at least to myself it so appear that even the little break and turn of light thought or lively manner , which could scarcely fail to vary now and then the speaker 's voice , seem almost to grate and jar upon its sombre monotone . on the other hand , by omit these , and depart from her homely style , I might do more of harm than good through fail to convey impression , or even fact , so accurately . whereas the gist and core and pivot of my father 's life and fate be so involved   though not evolve   that I would not miss a single point for want of time or diligence . therefore let I not deny Mrs. Strouss , my nurse , the right to put her word in her own way . and before she begin to do this she take the trouble to have every thing clear away and the tray bring down , that her boarder   chiefly german   might leave their plate and be drive to their pipe . 
 " if you please , Miss Castlewood , " Mrs. Strouss say , grandly , " do you or do you not approve of the presence of ' my man , ' as he call himself ? an improper expression , in my opinion ; such , however , be their nature . he can hold his tongue as well as any man , though none of they be very sure at that . and he know pretty nigh as much as I do , so far as his English can put thing together , be well accustom in German . for when we be court I be fain to tell he all , not to join he under any false pretense , miss , which might give he ground against I . " 
 " yes , yes , it be all vere goot and true so goot and true as can be . " 
 " and you might find he come very handy , my dear , to run of any kind of message . he can do that very well , I assure you , miss well than any Englishman . " 
 see that he wish to stay , and that she desire it , I beg he to stop , though it would have be more to my liking to hear the tale alone . 
 " then sit by the door , Hans , and keep off the draught , " say his Wilhelmina , kindly . " he be not very tall , miss , but he have good shoulder ; I scarcely know what I should do without he . well , now , to begin at the very beginning : I be a Welshwoman , as you may have hear . my father be a farmer near Abergavenny , hold land under Sir Watkin Williams , an old friend of your family . my father have too many girl , and my mother scarcely know what to do with the lot of we . so some of we go out to service , while the boy staid at home to work the land . one of my sister be lady' - maid to Lady Williams , Sir Watkin 's wife , at the time when your father come visit there for the shooting of the moor - fowl , soon after his marriage with your mother . what a sweet good lady your mother be ! I never see the like before or since . no soon do I set eye upon she but she so take my fancy that I would have go round the world with she . we Welsh be a very hot people , they say not cold - blooded , as the English be . so , wise or foolish , right , wrong , or what might be , nothing would do for I but to take service , if I could , under Mrs. Castlewood . your father be call Captain Castlewood then as fine a young man as ever clink a spur , but without any boast or conceit about he ; and they say that your grandfather , the old lord , keep he very close and spare , although he be the only son . now this must have be let I see , how long ago ? about five - and - twenty year , I think . how old be you now , Miss Erema ? I can keep the week well than the year , miss . " 
 " I be eighteen on my last birthday . but never mind about the time go on . " 
 " but the time make all the difference , miss , although at the time we may never think so . well , then , it must have be well than six - and - twenty year agone ; for though you come pretty fast , in the Lord 's will , there be eight year between you and the first - bear babe , who be only just a - thinking of when I begin to tell . but to come back to myself , as be mother have get too many of we still , and she be glad enough to let I go , however much she might cry over it , as soon as Lady Williams get I the place . my place be to wait upon the lady first , and make myself generally useful , as they say . but it be not very long before I be want in other more important way , and have be bring up among so many child , they find I very handy with the little one ; and be in a poor way , as they be then for people , I mean , of their birth and place they be glad enough soon to make head nurse of I , although I be under - two - and - twenty . 
 " we do not live at the old lord 's place , which be under the hill look on the river Thames , but we have a quiet little house in Hampshire ; for the Captain be still with his regiment , and only come to and fro to we . but a happy little place there could not be , with the flower , and the cow , and the bird all day , and the child run gradually accord to their age , and the pretty brook shin in the valley . and as to the paying of their way , it be true that neither of they be a great manager . the Captain could not bear to keep his pretty wife close ; and she , poor thing , be try always to surprise he with other present besides all the beautiful baby . but they never be in debt all round , as the liar say when the trouble burst ; and if they owe two or three hundred pound , who could justly blame they ? 
 " for the old lord , instead of go on as he should , and widen his purse to the number of the mouth , be niggle at they always for offense or excuse , to take away what little he allow they . the Captain have his pay , which would go in one hand , and the lady have a little money of her own ; but still it be cruel for bring - up people to have nothing well to go on with . not that the old lord be a miser neither ; but it be say , and how far true I know not , that he never would forgive your father for marry the daughter of a man he hat . and some go so far as to say that if he could have do it , he would have cut your father out of all the old family estate . but such a thing never could I believe of a nobleman have his own flesh and blood . 
 " but , money or no money , rich or poor , your father and mother , I assure you , my dear , be as happy as the day be long . for they love one another and their child dearly , and they do not care for any mixing with the world . the Captain have enough of that when put away in quarter ; likewise his wife could do without it well and well at every birth , though once she have be the very gayest of the gay , which you never will be , Miss Erema . 
 " now , my dear , you look so sad and so ' solid , ' as we use to say , that if I can go on at all , I must have something ready . I be quite an old nurse now , remember . han , go across the square , and turn on the left hand round the corner , and then three more street toward the right , and you see one go toward the left , and you go about seven door down it , and then you see a corner with a lamp - post . " 
 " Vilhelmina , I do see de lamp - post at de every corner . " 
 " that will teach you to look more bright , Hans . then you find a shop window with three blue bottle , and a green one in the middle . " 
 " how can be any middle to three , without it be one of they ? " 
 " then let it be two of they . how you contradict I ! take this little bottle , and the man with a gold braid round a cap , and a tassel with a tail to it , will fill it for four - pence when you tell he who you be . " 
 " yes , yes ; I do now comprehend . you send I vhere I never find de vay , because I be in de vay , Vilhelmina ! " 
 I be most thankful to Mrs. Strouss for send her husband   however good and kind - hearted he might be   to wander among many shop of chemist , rather than to keep his eye on I , while I listen to thing that be almost sure to make I want my eye my own . my nurse have see , as any good nurse must , that , grow and form as I might be , the nature of the little child that cry for its mother be in I still . 
 " it be very sad now , " Mrs. Strouss begin again , without reply to my grateful glance ; " Miss Erema , it be so sad that I wish I have never begin with it . but I see by your eye so like your father 's , but soft , my dear , and less troublesome that you will have the whole of it out , as he would with I once when I tell he a story for the sake of another servant . it be just about a month before you be bear , when the trouble begin to break on we . and when once it begin , it never stop until all that be leave run away from it . I have read in the newspaper many and many sad thing come over whole family , such as they call ' shocking tragedy ; ' but none of they , to my mind , could be more galling than what I have to see with my very own eye . 
 " it must have be close upon the middle of September when old Lord Castlewood come himself to see his son 's house and family at Shoxford . we hear that he come down a little on the sudden to see to the truth of some rumor which have reach he about our style of living . it be the first time he have ever be there ; for although he have very often be invite , he could not bear to be under the roof of the daughter , as he say , of his enemy . the Captain , just happen to come home on leave for his autumn holiday , meet his father quite at his own door the very last place to expect he . he afterward acknowledge that he be not pleased for his father to come ' like a thief in the night . ' however , they take he in and make he welcome , and cover up their feeling nicely , as high - breed people do . 
 " what pass among they be unknown to any but themselves , except so far as now I tell you . a well dinner than usual for two be ready , to celebrate the master 's return and the beginning of his holiday ; and the old lord , have travel far that day , be persuade to sit down with they . the five eld child   make all except the baby , for you be not bear , miss , if you please   they be to have sit up at table , as pretty as could be three with their high cushion stool , and two in their arm - chair screw on mahogany , stuff with horsehair , and with rod in front , that the little dear might not tumble out in feeding , which they do it be a sight to see they ! and how they would give to one another , with their finger wet and shin , and say , ' oo , dat for oo . ' oh dear , Miss Erema , you be never bear to see it ! what a blessing for you ! all those six dear darling lay in their little graf within six week , with their mother plant under they ; and the only wonder be that you yourself be not upon her breast . 
 " pay you no heed to I , Miss Erema , when you see I a - whimpering in and out while I be about it . it make my chest go easy , miss , I do assure you , though not at the time of life to understand it . all they child be to have sit up for the sake of their dear father , as I say just now ; but because of their grandfather all be order back . and back they come , as good as gold , with Master George at the head of they , and ask I what milk - tooth be . Grandpa have say that ' a dinner be no dinner if milk - tooth be allow at it . ' the hard old man , with his own tooth false ! he deserve to sit down to no other dinner and he never do , miss . 
 " you may be sure that I have enough to do to manage all the little one and answer all their question ; but never have see a live lord before , and want to know if the child would be like he before so very long , I go quietly down stair , and the big of my dear peep after I . and then , by favor of the parlor - maid for they keep neither butler nor footman now I see the Lord Castlewood , sit at his ease , with a glass of port - wine before he , and my sweet mistress   the Captain 's wife , and your mother , if you understand , miss   do she very well , think of her child , to please he and make the polite to he . to I he seem very much to be thaw to she if you can understand , miss , what my meaning be and the Captain be look at they with a smile , as if it be just what he have hop for . from my own eyesight I can contradict the lie put about by nobody know who , that the father and the son be at hot word even then . 
 " and I even hear my master , when they go out at the door , vainly persuade his father to take such a bed as they could offer he . and good enough it would have be for ten lord ; for I see nothing wonderful in he , nor fit to compare any way with the Captain . but he would not have it , for no other reason of ill - will or temper , but only because he have order his bed at the Moonstock Inn , where his coach and four be rest . 
 " ' I expect you to call I in the morning , George , ' I hear he say , as clear as could be , while his son be help his coat on . ' I be glad I have see you . there be bad than you . and when the time get well , I will see what I can do . ' 
 " with he this mean more than it might have do ; for he be not a man of much promise , as you might tell by his face almost , with his nose so stern , and his mouth screw down , and the wrinkle the wrong way for smile . I could not tell what the Captain answer , for the door bang on they , and it wake the baby , who be dream , perhaps , about his lordship 's face , and his little tooth give he the wind on his chest , and his lung be like bellow bless he ! 
 " well , that stop I , Miss Erema , from be truly accurate in my testimony . what with walk the floor , and thump his back , and rattle of the ring to please he when they put I on the Testament , cruel as they do , with the lawyer ' eye eat into I , and both my ear buzz with sorrow and fright , I may have go too far , with my heart in my mouth , for my mind to keep out of contradiction , wishful as I be to tell the whole truth in a manner to hurt nobody . and without any single lie or glaze of mine , I do assure you , miss , that I do more harm than good ; every body in the room a court they call it , and no big than my good parlor one and all they be convince that I would swear black be white to save my master and mistress ! and certainly I would have do so , and the Lord in heaven think the well of I , for the sake of all they child , if I could have make it stick together , as they do with practice . " 
 at thought of the little good she have do , and perhaps the great mischief , through excess of zeal , Mrs. Strouss be oblige to stop , and put her hand to her side , and sigh . and eager as I be for every word of this miserable tale , no selfish eagerness could deny her need of refreshment , and even of rest ; for her round cheek be white , and her full breast tremble . and now she be begin to make snatch at my hand , as if she see thing she could only tell thus . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 BETSY 's TALE   continue . 

 " I be only astonish , my dear , " say my nurse , as soon as she have have some tea and toast , and scarcely the soft roe of a red herring , " that you can put up so well , and abide with my instinct in the way you do . none of your family could have do it , to my knowledge of their disposition , much less the baby that be next above you . but it often come about to go in turn like that ; ' one , three , five , and seven be sweet , while two , four , and six be a - squalling with their foot . ' but the Lord forgive I for an ill word of they , with their precious little body wash , and lay in their pattern till the judgment - day . 
 " but put by the word I say in the dirty little room they please to call a ' court , ' and the Testament so filthy that no lip could have a hold of it , my meaning be to tell you , miss , the very thing that happen , so that you may fairly judge of they . the Captain come back from go with his father , I be sure , in less than twenty minute , and smoke a cigar in his elegant way , quite happy and content , for I see he down the staircase . as for sign of any haste about he , or wipe of his forehead , or fumble with his handkerchief , or be in a stew in any sort of way as the stupid cook who let he in declare , by reason of her own have be at the beer - barrel solemnly , miss , as I hope to go to heaven , there be nothing of the sort about he . 
 " he go into the dining - room , and mistress , who have be up stair to see about the baby , go down to he ; and there I hear they talk as pleasant and as natural as they always be together . not one of they have the small sense of trouble hang over they ; and they put away both the decanter and cruet , and come up to bed in their proper order , the master stop down just to finish his cigar and see to the door and the bringing up the silver , because there be no man - servant now . and I hear he laugh at some little joke he make as he go into the bedroom . a happy household never go to bed , nor one with well hope of a happy time to come . and the baby sleep beside his parent in his little cot , as his mother like to have he , with his blessed mouth wide open . 
 " now we three   cook and Susan and myself   be accustom to have a good time of it whenever the master first come home and the mistress be take up with he . we use to count half an hour more in bed , without any of that wicked bell - clack , and then go on to thing accord to their order , without any body to say any thing . accordingly we be all snug in bed , and turn over for another tuck of sleep , when there come a most vicious ringing of the outer bell . ' you get up , Susan , ' I hear the cook say , for there only be a door between we ; and Susan say , ' Blest if I will ! only Tuesday you put I down about it when the baker come . ' not a peg would either of they stir , no more than to call name on one another ; so I slip on my thing , with the bell go clatter all the while , like the day of judgment . I feel it to be hard upon I , and I go down cross a little just enough to give it well to a body I be not afraid of . 
 " but the Lord in his mercy remember I , miss ! when I open the door , I have no blood leave . there stand two man , with a hurdle on their shoulder , and on the hurdle a body , with the head hang down , and the front of it slouch , like a sack that have be steal from ; and behind it there be an authority with two button on his back , and he wait for I to say something ; but to do so be beyond I . not a bit of caution or of fear about my sham dress - up , as the bad folk put it afterward ; the whole of such thought be beyond I outright , and no thought of any thing come inside I , only to wait and wonder . 
 " ' this corpse belongeth here , as I be inform , ' say the man , who seem to be the master of it , and be proud to be so . ' young woman , do not   you please to stand like that , or every duffer in the parish will be here , and the boy that come hanker after it . you be off ! ' he cry out to a boy who be call some more round the corner . ' now , young woman , we must come in if you please , and the least say the soon mend . ' 
 " ' oh , but my mistress , my mistress ! ' I cry ; ' and her time up , as nigh as may be , any day or night before new moon . ' oh , Mr. Constable , Mr. Rural Polishman , take it to the tool shed , if you ever have a wife , Sir . ' now even this be turn against we as if I have expect it . they say that I must have know who it be , and to a certain length so I do , miss , but only by the dress and the manner of the corpse , and lie with an attitude there be no contradicting . 
 " I can not tell you now , my dear , exactly how thing follow . my mind be go all hollow with the sudden shock upon it . however , I have think enough to make no noise immediate , nor tell the other foolish girl , who would have set up bellowing . have year to deal with little one bring knowledge of the rest to we . I think that I must have go to master 's door , where Susan 's order be to put his shaving water in a tin , and fetch he out , with no disturbance , only in his dressing - gown . and when I tell he what it be , his rosy color turn like sheet , and he just say , ' hush ! ' and nothing more . and guess what he mean , I run and put my thing on properly . 
 " but have time to think , the shock begin to work upon I , and I be fit for nothing when I see the child smile up with their tongue out for their bread and milk , as they use to begin the day with . and I do assure you , Miss Erema , my bitter thought be of your coming , though unknown whether male or female , but both most inconvenient then , with thing in such a state of thing . you have much to answer for , miss , about it ; but how be you to help it , though ? 
 " the tool - shed door be too narrow to let the hurdle and the body in , and find some large sea - kale pot stand out of use against the door , the two man   who be tired with the weight and fright , I dare say   set down their burden upon these , under a row of hollyhock , at the end of the row of bee - hive . and here they wipe their forehead with some rag they have for handkerchief , or one of they with his own sleeve , I should say , and , gain their breath , they begin to talk with the boldness of the sunrise over they . but Mr. Rural Polishman , as he be call in those part , be walk up and down on guard , and despise of their foolish word . 
 " my master , the Captain , your father , miss , come out of a window and down the cross - walk , while I be at the green door peep , for I think that I might be want , if only to take order what be to be do inside . the constable stiffly touch his hat , and march to the head of the hurdle , and say , 
 " ' do you know this gentleman ? ' 
 " your father take no more notice of he than if he have be a stiff hollyhock , which he might have resemble if he have be good - look . the Captain think highly of discipline always , and no kind gentleman could there be to those who give his due to he . but that man 's voice have a low and dirty impertinent sort of a twang with it . nothing could have be more unlucky . every thing depend on that fellow in an ignorant neighborhood like that ; and his lordship , for such he be now , of course , would not even deign to answer he . he stand over his head in his upright way by a good foot , and order he here and there , as the fellow have be expect , I do believe , to order his lordship . and that make the bitter enemy of he , be newly send into these part , and puff up with authority . and the two miller 's man could not help grin , for he have wave they about like a pair of dog . 
 " but to suppose that my master ' be unmove , and take it brutally '   as that wretch of a fellow swore afterward , only show what a stuck - up dolt he be . for when my master have examine his father , and make his poor body be bring in and spread on the couch in the dining - room , and send I hot - foot for old Dr. Diggory down at the bottom of Shoxford , Susan peep in through the crack of the door , with the cook to hold her hand behind , and there she see the Captain on his knee at the side of his father 's corpse , not say a word , only with his head down . and when the doctor come back with I , with his night - gown positive under his coat , the first thing he say be , ' my dear Sir my lord , I mean do not   take on so ; such thing will always happen in this world ; ' which show that my master be no brute . 
 " then the Captain stand up in his strength and height , without any pride and without any shame , only in the power of a simple heart , and he say word fit to hang he : 
 " ' this be my doing ! there be no one else to blame . if my father be dead , I have kill he ! ' 
 " several of we now be look in , and the news go out like a winnowing woman with no one to shut the door after she ; our passage be crowd with people that should have have a tar - brush in their face . and of course a good score of they run away to tell that the Captain have murder his father . the milk - man stand there with his yoke and can , and his naily boot on our new oil - cloth , and , not be able to hide himself plainly , he pull out his slate and begin to make his bill . 
 " ' away with you all ! ' your father say , come suddenly out of the dining - room , while the doctor be unbutton my lord , who be dead with all his day clothe on ; and every body brush away like fly at the depth of his voice and his stature . then he bolt the door , with only our own people and the doctor and the constable inside . your mother be sleep like a lamb , as I could swear , have have a very tiring day the day before , and be well away from the noise of the passage , as well as at a time when they must sleep whenever sleep will come , miss . bless her gentle heart , what a blessing to be out of all that scare of it ! 
 " all this time , you must understand , there be no sign yet what have happen to his lordship , over and above his be dead . all of we think , if our mind make bold to think , that it must have please the Lord to take his lordship either with an appleplexy or a sudden heart - stroke , or , at any rate , some other gracious way not have any flow of blood in it . but now , while your father be go up stair for he know that his father be dead enough to be sure that your mother be quiet , and perhaps to smooth she down for trouble , and while I be run away to stop the ranting of the child , old Dr. Diggory and that rural officer be handle poor Lord Castlewood . they set he to their liking , and they cut his clothe off so Susan tell I afterward and then they find why they be force to do so , which I need not try to tell you , miss . only they find that he be not dead from any wise visitation , but because he have be shoot with a bullet through his heart . 
 " Old Dr. Diggory come out shake , and without any wholesome sense to meet what have arise , after all his practice with dead man , and he call out ' murder ! ' with a long thing in his hand , till my master leap down the stair , twelve at a time , and lay his strong hand on the old fool 's mouth . 
 " ' would you kill my wife ? ' he say ; ' you shall not kill my wife . ' 
 " ' Captain Castlewood , ' the constable answer , pull out his staff importantly , ' consider yourself my prisoner . ' 
 " the Captain could have throttle he with one hand , and Susan think he would have do it . but , instead of that , he say , ' very well ; do your duty . but let I see what you mean by it . ' then he walk back again to the body of his father , and see that he have be murder . 
 " but , oh , Miss Erema , you be so pale ! not a bit of food have you have for hour . I ought not to have tell you such a deal of it to once . let I undo all your thing , my dear , and give you something cordial ; and then lie down and sleep a bit . " 
 " no , thank you , nurse , " I answer , call all my little courage back . " no sleep for I until I know every word . and to think of all my father have to see and bear ! I be not fit to be his daughter . " 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 BETSY 's TALE   Concluded . 

 " well , now , " continue Mrs. Strouss , as soon as I could persuade she to go on , " if I be to tell you every little thing that go on among they , miss , I should go on from this to this day week , or I might say this day fortnight , and then not half be do with it . and the bad of it be that those little thing make all the odd in a case of that sort , show what the great thing be . but only a counselor at the Old Bailey could make head or tail of the going on that follow . 
 " for some reason of his own , unknown to any living being but himself , whether it be pride   as I always say   or something deep   as other people think , he refuse to have any one on earth to help he , when he ought to have have the deep lawyer to be find . the constable caution he to say nothing , as it seem be lay down in their order , for fear of crimination . and he smile at this , with a high contempt , very fine to see , but not bodily wise . but even that jack - in - office could perceive that the poor Captain think of his sick wife up stair , and his little child , ten time for one thought he ever give to his own position . and yet I must tell you that he would have no denial , but to know what it be that have kill his parent . when old Dr. Diggory 's hand be shake so that his instrument would not bite on the thing lodge in his lordship 's back , after pass through and through he , and he be call for somebody to run for his assistant , who do you think do it for he , Miss Erema ? as sure as I sit here , the Captain ! his face be like a rock , and his hand no less ; and he say , ' allow I , doctor . I have be in action . ' and he fetch out the bullet which show awful nerve , accord to my way of thinking as if he have be a man with three row of tooth . 
 " ' this bullet be just like those of my own pistol ! ' he cry , and he sit down hard with amazement . you may suppose how this go against he , when all he desire be to know and tell the truth ; and people say that of course he get it out , after a bottleful of doctor fail , because he know well how it be put in . ' 
 " ' I shall now go and see the place , if you please , or whether you please or not , ' my master say . ' constable , you may come and point it out , unless you prefer go to your breakfast . my word be enough that I shall not run away . otherwise , as you have act on your own authority , I shall act on mine , and tie you until you have obtain a warrant . take your choice , my man ; and make it quickly , while I offer it . ' 
 " the rural polishman star at this , be use on the other hand to be make much of . but see how capable the Captain be of act up to any thing , he make a sulky scrape , and say , ' Sir , as you please for the present , ' weight his voice on those last three word , as much as to say , ' pretty soon you will be handcuff . ' ' then , ' say my master , ' I shall also insist on the presence of two person , simply to use their eye without any fear or favor . one be my gardener , a very honest man , but apt to be late in the morning . the other be a faithful servant , who have be with we for several year . their name be Jacob Rigg and Betsy Bowen . you may also bring two witness , if you choose . and the miller 's man , of course , will come . but order back all other . ' 
 " ' that be perfectly fair and straightforward , my lord , ' the constable answer , fall naturally into abeyance to order . ' I be sure that all of we wish your lordship kindly out of this rum scrape . but my duty be my duty . ' 
 " with a few more word we all set forth , six in number , and no more ; for the constable say that the miller 's man , who have first find the late Lord Castlewood , be witness enough for he . and Jacob Rigg , whose leg be far apart   as he say   from trench celery , take we through the kitchen - garden , and out at a gap , which save every body know . 
 " then we pass through a copse or two , and across a meadow , and then along the turnpike - road , as far as now I can remember . and along that we go to a stile on the right , without any house for a long way off . and from that stile a foot - path lead down a slope of grass land to the little river , and over a hand - bridge , and up another meadow full of tree and bush , to a gate which come out into the road again a little to this side of the Moonstock Inn , save a quarter of a mile of road , which run straight up the valley and turn square at the stone bridge to get to the same inn . 
 " I can not expect to be clear to you , miss , though I see it all now as I see it then , every tree , and hump , and hedge of it ; only about the distance from this to that , and that to the other , they would be beyond I . you must be on the place itself ; and I never could carry distance no , nor even clever man , I have hear my master say . but when he come to that stile he stop and turn upon all of we clearly , and as straight as any man of man could be . ' here I see my father last , at a quarter past ten o'clock last night , or within a few minute of that time . ' I wish to see he to his inn , but he would not let I do so , and he never bear contradiction . he say that he know the way well , have fish more than thirty year ago up and down this stream . he cross this stile , and we shake hand over it , and the moon be bright , I look into his face , and he say , ' my boy , God bless you ! ' know his short way , I do not even look after he , but turn away , and go straight home along this road . upon my word as an Englishman , and as an officer of her Majesty , that be all I know of it . now let we go on to the to the other place . 
 " we all of we know in our heart , I be sure , that the Captain speak the simple truth , and his face be grand as he look at we . but the constable think it his duty to ask , 
 " ' do you hear no sound of a shot , my lord ? for he fall within a hundred yard of this . ' 
 " ' I hear no sound of any shot whatever . I hear an owl hoot as I go home , and then the rattle of a heavy wagon , and the bell of horse . I have say enough . let we go forward . ' 
 " we obey he at once ; and even the constable look right and leave , as if he have be wrong . he sign to the miller 's man to lead the way , and my lord walk proudly after he . the path be only a little narrow track , with the grass , like a front of hair , fall over it on the upper side and on the under , drop away like side curl ; such a little path that I be wonder how a great lord could walk over it . then we come down a steep place to a narrow bridge across a shallow river abridge make of only two plank and a rail , with a prop or two to carry they . and one end of the handrail be fasten into a hollow and stubby old hawthorn - tree , overhang the bridge and the water a good way . and just above this tree , and under its shadow , there come a dry cut into the little river , not more than a yard or two above the wooden bridge , a water - trough such as we have in Wales , miss , for the water to run in , when the farmer please ; but now there be no water in it , only gravel . 
 " the cleverest of the miller 's man , though , neither of they have much intellect , step down at a beck from the constable , right beneath the old ancient tree , and show we the mark on the grass and the gravel make by his lordship where he fall and lay . and it seem that he must have fall off the bridge , yet not into the water , but so as to have room for his body , if you see , miss , partly on the bank , and partly in the hollow of the meadow trough . 
 " ' have you search the place well ? ' the Captain ask . ' have you find any weapon or implement ? ' 
 " ' we have find nothing but the corpse , so far , ' the constable answer , in a surly voice , not like to be teach his business . ' my first duty be to save life , if I could . these man , upon find the body , run for I , and know who it be , I come with it to your house . ' 
 " ' you act for the good , my man . now search the place carefully , while I stand here . I be on my parole , I shall not run away . Jacob , go down and help they . ' 
 " whether from be in the army , or what , your father always speak in such a way that the most stiff - necked people begin without think to obey he . so the constable and the rest go down , while the Captain and I stand upon the plank , look at the four of they . 
 " for a long time they look about , accord to their attitude , without find any thing more than the sign of the manner in which the poor lord fall , and of these the constable pull out a book and make a pencil memorial . but presently Jacob , a spry sort of man , cry , ' Hulloa ! whatever have I get hold of here ? many a good craw - fish have I pull out from this bank when the water come down the gully , but never one exactly like this here afore . ' 
 " ' name of the Lord ! ' cry the constable , jump behind the hawthorn stump ; ' do not   point it at I , you looby ! it be load , load one barrel , do not   you see ? put it down , with the muzzle away from I . ' 
 " ' hand it to I , Jacob , ' the Captain say . ' you understand a gun , and this go off just the same . ' Constable Jobbins have no fear . ' yes , it be exactly as I think . this pistol be one of the double - barrel pair which I buy to take to India . the barrel be rifle ; it shoot as true as any rifle , and almost as hard up to fifty yard . the right barrel have be fire , the other be still load . the bullet I take from my father 's body most certainly come from this pistol . ' 
 " ' can ' e say , can ' e say then , who do it , master ? ' ask Jacob , a man very sparing of speech , but ready at a beck to jump at constable and miller 's man , if only law be with he . ' can ' e give a clear account , and let I chuck ' un in the river ? ' 
 " ' no , Jacob , I can do nothing of the kind , ' your father answer ; while the rural man come up and face thing , not be afraid of a fight half so much as he be of an accident ; by reason of his own mother have be blow up by a gunpowder start at Dartford , yet come down all right , miss , and have he three month afterward , accord to his own confession ; nevertheless , he come up now as if he have always be upright , in the world , and he say , ' my lord , can you explain all this ? ' 
 " your father look at he with one of his strange gaze , as if he be measure the man while try his own inward do of his own mind . proud as your father be , as proud as ever can be without cruelty , it be my firm belief , Miss Erema , go on a woman 's judgment , that if the man 's eye have come up to my master 's sense of what be virtuous , my master would have up and tell he the depth and content of his mind and heart , although totally go beyond he . 
 " but Jobbins look back at my lord with a grin , and his little eye , hard to put up with . ' have you nothing to say , my lord ? then I be afeared I must ask you just to come along of I . ' and my master go with he , miss , as quiet as a lamb ; which Jobbins say , and even Jacob fancy , be a conscience sign of guilt . 
 " now after I have tell you all this , Miss Erema , you know very nearly as much as I do . to tell how the grief be break to your mother , and what her state of mind be , and how she sit up on the pillow and cry , while thing go on from bad to bad , and a verdict of ' willful murder ' be bring against your father by the crowner 's man , and you come headlong , without so much as the bird in the ivy to chirp about you , right into the thick of the bad of it . I do assure you , Miss Erema , when I look at your bright eye and clear figure , the Lord in heaven , who have make many cripple , must have look down special to have bring you as you be . for trouble upon trouble fall in heap , fast than I can wipe my eye to think . to begin with , all the servant but myself and gardener Jacob run away . they say that the old lord haunt the house , and walk with his hand in the middle of his heart , pull out a bullet if he meet any body , and sigh ' murder ' three time , till every hair be crawl . I take it on myself to fetch the Vicar of the parish to lay the evil spirit , as they do in Wales . a nice kind gentleman he be as you could see , and wear a velvet skull - cap , and wait with his leg up . but whether he feel that the power be not in he , or whether his old lordship be frightened of the Church , they never make any opportunity between they to meet and have it out , miss . 
 " then it seem as if Heaven , to avenge his lordship , rain down pestilence upon that house . a horrible disease , the bad I ever meet , break out upon the little harmless dear , the pride of my heart and of every body 's eye , for lovelier or well one never come from heaven . they be all go to heaven in a fortnight and three day , and lay in the church - yard at one another 's side , with little bed of mould to the measure of their stature , and their little cart and drum , as they make I promise , ready for the judgment - day . oh , my heart be break , miss , my heart be break ! I cry so , I think I could never cry more . 
 " but when your dear mother , who know nothing of all this   for we put all their illness , by the doctor 's order , away at the further end of the house , when she be a little well of grievous pain and misery   for be so upset her time be hard , when she sit up on the pillow , look like a bride almost , except that she have what bride have not   a little red thing in white flannel at her side then she say to I , ' I be ready , Betsy ; it be high time for all of they to see their little sister . they always love the baby so , whenever there be a new one . and they be such man and woman to it . they have be so good this time that I have never hear they once . and I be sure that I can trust they , Betsy , not to make the baby cry . I do so long to see the darling . now do not even whisper to they not to make a noise . they be too good to require it ; and it would hurt their little feeling . ' 
 " I have well have be shoot , my dear , accord as the old lord be , than have the pain that go through all my heart , to see the mother so . she sit up , lean on one arm , with the hand of the other round your little head , and her beautiful hair be come out of its loop , and the color in her cheek be like a shell . past the fringe of the curtain , and behind it too , her soft bright eye be a - look here and there for the first to come in of her child . the Lord only know what lie I tell she , so as to be satisfied without they . first I say they be all go for a walk ; and then that the doctor have order they away ; and then that they have get the measle . that last she believe , because it be bad than what I have say before of they ; and she beg to see Dr. Diggory about it , and I promise that she should as soon as he have do his dinner . and then , with a little sigh , be very weak , she go down into her nest again , with only you to keep her company . 
 " well , that be bad enough , as any mortal sufferer might have say ; enough for one day at any rate . but there be almost bad to come . for when I be have a little sit down stair , with my supper and half pint of ale   that come like draw a long breath to we when spar out of sickroom , miss , and have no nursery now on my mind , be think of all the sad business , with only a little girl in the back kitchen come in to muck up the dish , there appear a good knock at the garden door , and I know it for the thumb of the Captain . I lock the young girl up , by know what their tongue be , and then I let your father in , and the candle - sight of he make my heart go low . 
 " he have come out of prison ; and although not be try , his clothe be still in decency , they have great hole in they , and the gloss all go to a smell of mere hedge and ditch . the hat on his head be quite out of the fashion , even if it could be call a hat at all , and his beautiful beard have no sign of a comb , and he look as old again as he have look a month ago . 
 " ' I know all about it . you need not be afraid , ' he say , as I take he to the breakfast - room , where no one up stair could hear we . ' I know that my child be all dead and bury , except the one that be not bear yet . Ill news fly quick . I know all about it . George , Henrietta , Jack , Alf , little Vi , and Tiny . I have see their graf and count they , while the fool of a policeman beat his glove through the hedge within a rod of I . oh yes , I have much to be thankful for . my life be in my own hand now . ' 
 " ' oh , master ; oh , Captain ; oh , my lord ! ' I cry ; ' for the sake of God in heaven , do not   talk like that . think of your sweet wife , your dear lady . ' 
 " ' Betsy , ' he answer , with his eye full upon I , noble , yet frightful to look at , ' I be come to see my wife . go and let she know it , accord to your own discretion . ' 
 " my discretion would have be not to let he see she , but go on and write to she from foreign country , with the salt sea between they ; but I give you my word that I have no discretion , but from pity and majesty obey he . I know that he must have break prison , and by good right ought to be starve . but I could no more offer he the cold ham and pullet than take he by his beard and shake he . 
 " ' be he come , at last , at last ? ' my poor mistress say , whose wit be wander after her child . ' at last , at last ! then he will find they all . ' 
 " ' yes , ma'am , at last , at the last he will , ' I answer , while I think of the burial service , which I have hear three time in a week for the little one go to their graf in pair to save ceremony ; likewise of the Epistle of Saint Paul , which be not like our Lord 's way of talk at all , but argue instead of comfort . and not to catch she up in that weak state , I say , ' he will find every one of they , ma'am . ' 
 " ' oh , but I want he for himself , for himself , as much as all the rest put together , ' my dear lady say , without listen to I , but put her hand to her ear to hearken for even so much as a mouse on the stair . ' do bring he , Betsy ; only bring he , Betsy , and then let I go where my child be . ' 
 " I be surprised at her manner of speaking , which I would not have allow to she , but more than all about her child , which she could only have be dream yet , for nobody else come nigh she except only I , miss , and you , miss , and for you to breathe word be impossible . all you do be to lie very quiet , tuck up into your mother 's side ; and as regular as the time - piece go , wide come your eye and your mouth to be feed . if your nature have be cross or squally , ' baby 's coffin no . 7 ' would have come after all the other six , which the thief of a carpenter put down on his bill as if it be so many shaving . 
 " well , now , to tell you the downright truth , I have a lot of work to do to - morrow , miss , with three basketfuls of washing come home , and a man about a tap that leak and flood the inside of the fender ; and if I be to try to put before you the way that those two for the last time of their life go on to one another the one like a man and the other like a woman , full of sob and choke my eye would be in such a state to - morrow that the whole of they would pity and cheat I . and I ought to think of you as well , miss , who have be sadly harrow listening when you be not bear yet . and to hear what go on , full of weeping , when yourself be in the world , and able to cry for yourself , and all do over your own little self , would leave you red eye and no spirit for the night , and no appetite in the morning ; and so I will pass it all over , if you please , and let he go out of the backdoor again . 
 " this he be oblige to do quick , and no mistake , glad as he might have be to say more word , because the fellow who call themselves officer , without any commission , be after he . false it be to say , as be say , that he get out of Winchester jail through money . that story be quite of a piece with the rest . his own strength and skill it be that bring he out triumphantly , as the scratch on his hand and cheek might show . he do it for the sake of his wife , no doubt . when he hear that the child be all in their graf , and their mother in the way to follow they , madness be well than his state of mind , as the officer tell I when they could not catch he and sorry they would have be to do it , I believe . 
 " to overhear my better be the thing of all thing most against my nature ; and my poor lady be unfit to get up , there be nothing say on the landing , which be the weak part of gentlefolk . they must have say ' good - by ' to one another quite in silence , and the Captain , as firm a man as ever live , have line on his face that be wait for tear , if nature should overcome bring up . then I hear the word , ' for my sake , ' and the other say , ' for your sake , ' a pledge that pass between they , make breath more long than life be . but when your poor father be by the back - door , go out toward the wood and coppice , he turn sharp round , and he say , ' Betsy Bowen ! ' and I answer , ' yes , at your service , Sir . ' ' you have be the good woman in the world , ' he say ' the brave , good , and kind . I leave my wife and my last child to you . the Lord have be hard on I , but he will spare I those two . I do hope and believe he will . ' 
 " we hear a noise of horse in the valley , and the clank of sword no doubt the mount police from Winchester a - crossing of the Moonstock Bridge to search our house for the runaway . and the Captain take my hand , and say , ' I trust they to you . hide the clothe I take off , that they may not know I have be here . I trust my wife and little babe to you , and may God bless you , Betsy ! ' 
 " he have change all his clothe , and he look very nice , but a sad face be never see . as he slip through the hollyhock I say to myself , ' there go a break - hearted man , and he leave a broken heart behind . ' and your dear mother die on the Saturday night . oh my ! oh my ! how sad it be ! " 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 AT the bank 

 in tell that sad tale my faithful and soft - hearted nurse have often prove her own mistake in say , as she do , that tear can ever be exhaust . and I , for my part , though I could scarcely cry for eager listening , be bad off perhaps than if I have wet each sad fact as it go by . at any rate , be it this way or that , a heavy and sore heart be leave I , too distracted for ask question , and almost too depressed to grieve . 
 in the morning Mrs. Strouss be bustle here and there and every where , and to look at her nice Welsh cheek and apron , and to hear how she scold the butcher 's boy , nobody would for a moment believe that her heart be deep than her skin , as the saying of the west country be . major Hockin have be to see I last night , for he never forget a promise , and have leave I in good hand , and now he come again in the morning . accord to his usual way of take up an opinion , he would not see how distracted I be , and full of what I have hear overnight , but insist on drag I off to the bank , that be in his opinion of more importance than old story . I long to ask Betsy some question which have be crowd into my mind as she speak , and while I lay awake at night ; however , I be oblige to yield to the business of the morning , and the good Major 's zeal and keen knowledge of the world ; and he really give I no time to think . 
 " yes , I understand all that as well as if I have hear every word of it , " he say , when he have lead I helpless into the Hansom cab he come in , and have slam down the flood - gate in front of we . " you must never think twice of what old woman say "   Mrs. Strouss be some twenty year young than himself ; " they always go prate and find mares'-nests , and then they always cry . now do she cry , Erema ? " 
 I would have give a hundred dollar to be able to say , " no , not one drop ; " but the truth be against I , and I say , " how could she help it ? " 
 " exactly ! " the Major exclaim , so loudly that the cabman think he be order to stop . " no , go on , cabby , if your horse can do it . my dear , I beg your pardon , but you be so very simple ! you have not be among the eye - opener of the west . this come of the obsolete Uncle Sam . " 
 " I would rather be simple than ' cute ! ' " I reply ; " and my own Uncle Sam will be never obsolete . " 
 Silly as I be , I could never speak of the true Uncle Sam in this far country without the bright shame of a glimmer in my eye ; and with this , which I care not to hide , I take my companion 's hand and stand upon the footway of a narrow and crowded lane . 
 " move on ! move on ! " cry a man with a high - crown hat japan at interval , and , wonder at his rudeness to a lady , I look at he . but he only say , " now move on , will you ? " without any wrath , and as if he be vex at our littleness of mind in stand still . nobody heed he any more than if he have say , " I be starve , " but it seem a rude thing among lady . before I have time to think more about this for I always like to think of thing I be lead through a pair of narrow swing door , and down a close alley between two counter full of people pay and receive money . the Major , who always know how to get on , find a white - haired gentleman in a very dingy corner , and whisper to he in a confidential way , though neither have ever see the other before , and the white - haired gentleman gaze at I as sternly as if I be a bank - note for at least a thousand pound ; and then he say , " step this way , young lady . major Hockin , step this way , Sir . " 
 the young lady ' step that way " in wonder as to what English English be , and then we be show into a sacred little room , where the daylight have glass reflector for it , if it ever come to use they . but as it care very little to do this , from angular disability , three bright gas - light be burn in soft cover , and feed the little room with a rich , sweet glow . and here shine one of the partner of the bank , a very pleasant - look gentleman , and very nicely dressed . 
 " Major Hockin , " he say , after look at the card , " will you kindly sit down , while I make one memorandum ? I have the pleasure of know your uncle well at least I believe that the late Sir Rufus be your uncle . " 
 " not so , " reply the Major , well pleased , however . " I fear that I be too old to have have any uncle lately . Sir Rufus Hockin be my first cousin . " 
 " oh , indeed ! to be sure , I should have know it , but Sir Rufus be much your senior , the mistake be only natural . now what can I do to serve you , or perhaps this young lady Miss Hockin , I presume ? " 
 " no , " say his visitor , " not Miss Hockin . I ought to have introduce she , but for have to make my own introduction . Mr. Shovelin , this lady be Miss Erema Castlewood , the only survive child of the late Captain George Castlewood , properly speak , Lord Castlewood . " 
 Mr. Shovelin have be look at I with as much curiosity as good manner and his own particular courtesy allow . and I fancy that he feel that I could not be a Hockin . 
 " oh , dear , dear I ! " be all he say , though he want to say , " God bless I ! " or something more sudden and strong . " Lord Castlewood 's daughter poor George Castlewood ! my dear young lady , be it possible ? " 
 " yes , I be my father 's child , " I say ; " and I be proud to hear that I be like he . " 
 " that you well may be , " he answer , put on his spectacle . " you be astonish at my freedom , perhaps ; you will allow for it , or at least , you will not be angry with I , when you know that your father be my dear friend at Harrow ; and that when his great trouble fall upon he " 
 here Mr. Shovelin stop , as behoof a man who begin to outrun himself . he could not tell I that it be himself who have find all the money for my father 's escape , which cost much cash as well as much good feeling . neither do I , at the time , suspect it , be all in the dark upon such point . not know what to say , I look from the banker to the Major , and back again . 
 " can you tell I the exact time ? " the latter ask . " I be due in the Temple at 12.30 , and I never be a minute late , whatever happen . " 
 " you will want a swift horse , " Mr. Shovelin answer , " or else this will be an exception to your rule . it be twenty - one minute past twelve now . " 
 " may I leave my charge to you , then , for a while ? she will be very quiet ; she be always so . Erema , will you wait for I ? " 
 I be not quick enough then to see that this be arrange between they . Major Hockin perceive that Mr. Shovelin wish to have a talk with I about dearer matter than money , have child of his own , and be   as his eye and forehead show   a man of peculiar view , perhaps , but clearly of general good - will . 
 " in an hour , in an hour , in less than an hour " the Major intensify his intention always " in three - quarter of an hour I shall be back . meanwhile , my dear , you will sit upon a stool , and not say a word , nor make any attempt to do any thing every body be not use to . " 
 this vex I , as if I be a savage here ; and I only reply with a very gentle bow , be glad to see his departure ; for Major Hockin be one of those people , so often to be meet with , whom any one like or dislike accord to the change of their behavior . but Mr. Shovelin be different from that . 
 " Miss Castlewood , take this chair , " he say ; " a hard one , but well than a stool , perhaps . now how be I to talk to you as an inquirer upon business matter , or as the daughter of my old friend ? your smile be enough . well , and you must talk to I in the same unreasonable manner . that be clearly establish between we , let we proceed to the next point . your father , my old friend , wander from the track , and unfortunately lose his life in a desolate part of America . " 
 " no ; oh no . it be nothing like that . he might have be alive , and here at this moment , if I have not drink and eat every bit and drop of his . " 
 " now do not , my dear child , do not   be so romantic I mean , look at thing more soberly . you do as you be order , I have no doubt ; George Castlewood always would have that . he be a most commanding man . you do not quite resemble he in that respect , I think . " 
 " oh , but do he do it , do he do it ? " I cry out . " you be at school with he , and know his nature . be it possible for he to do it , Sir ? " 
 " as possible as it be for I to go down to Sevenoaks and shoot my dear old father , who be spend a green and agreeable old age there . not that your grandfather , if I may say it without cause pain to you , be either green or agreeable . he be an uncommonly sharp old man ; I might even say a hard one . as you never see he , you will not think I rude in say that much . your love , of course , be for your father ; and if your father have have a father of large spirit about money , he might have be talk to I pleasantly now , instead of instead of all these sad thing . " 
 " please not to slip away from I , " I say , bluntly , have so often meet with that . " you believe , as every good person do , that my father be wholly innocent . but do tell I who could have do it instead . somebody must have do it ; that seem clear . " 
 " yes , " reply Mr. Shovelin , with a look of calm consideration ; ' somebody do it , undoubtedly ; and that make the difficulty of the whole affair . ' Cui bono , ' as the lawyer say . two person only could have have any motive , so far as wealth and fortune go . the first and most prominent , your father , who , of course , would come into every thing   which make the suspicion so hot and strong ; and the other , a very nice gentleman , whom it be wholly impossible to suspect . " 
 " be you sure of that ? People have more than suspect they have condemn my father . after that , I can suspect any body . who be it ? please to tell I . " 
 " it be the present Lord Castlewood , as he be begin to be call . he would not claim the title , or even put forward his right in any way , until he have proof of your dear father 's death ; and even then he behave so well " 
 " he do it ! he do it ! " I cry , in hot triumph . " my father 's name shall be clear of it . can there be any doubt that he do it ? how very simple the whole of it become ! nothing astonish I , except the stupidity of people . he have every thing to gain , and nothing to lose a bad man , no doubt though I never hear of he . and put it all on my father , of course , to come in himself , and abide his time , till the misery kill my father . how simple , how horribly simple , it become ! " 
 " you be much too quick , too hot , too sudden . excuse I a minute " as a silver bell strike " I be want in the next room . but before I go , let I give you a glass of cold water , and beg you to dismiss that new idea from your mind . " 
 I could see , as I take with a trembling hand the water he pour out for I , that Mr. Shovelin be displeased . his kind and handsome face grow hard . he have take I for a nice young lady , never much above the freeze - point , and he have find I boil over in a moment . I be sorry to have grieve he ; but if he have hear Betsy Bowen 's story , and see she tell it , perhaps he would have allow for I . I sit down again , have rise in my warmth , and try to quiet and command myself by think of the sad point only . of these there be plenty to make picture of , the like of which have keep I awake all night ; and I know by this time , from find so much more of pity than real sympathy , that man think a woman may well be all tear , but have no right to even the shadow of a frown . that be their own prerogative . 
 and so , when Mr. Shovelin return , with a bundle of paper which have also vex he to judge by the way in which he throw they down I speak very mildly , and say that I be very sorry for my display of violence , but that if he know all , he would pardon I ; and he pardon I in a moment . 
 " I be go to tell you , my dear Miss Castlewood , " he continue , gently , " that your sudden idea must be dismiss , for reason which I think will content you . in the first place , the present Lord Castlewood be , and always have be , an exemplary man , of great piety and true gentleness ; in the next place , he be an invalid , who can not walk a mile with a crutch to help he , and so he have be for a great many year ; and lastly , if you have no faith in the rest , he be in Italy at the time , and remain there for some year afterward . there he receive and shelter your poor father after his sad calamity , and be well than a brother to he , as your father , in a letter to I , declare . so you see that you must acquit he . " 
 " that be not enough . I would beg his pardon on my knee , since he help my father , for he must have think he innocent . now , Mr. Shovelin , you be my father 's friend , and you be such a clever man " 
 " how do you know that , young lady ? what a hurry you be always in ! " 
 " oh , there can be no doubt about it . but you must not ask reason , if I be so quick . now please to tell I what your own conclusion be . I can talk of it calmly now ; yes , quite calmly , because I never think of any thing else . only tell I what you really believe , and I will keep it most strictly to myself . " 
 " I be sure you will do that , " he answer , smile , " not only from the power of your will , my dear , but also because I have nothing to say . at first I be strongly inclined to believe   knowing , from my certainty of your father , that the universal opinion must be wrong   that the old lord have do it himself ; for he always have be of a headstrong and violent nature , which I be sure will never re - appear in you . but the whole of the evidence go against this , and little as I think of evidence , especially at an inquest , your father 's behavior confirm what be swear to . your father know that his father have not make away with himself in a moment of passion , otherwise he be not the man to break prison and fly trial . he would have say , boldly , ' I be guiltless ; there be many thing that I can not explain ; I can not help that ; I will face it out . condemn I , if you like , and I will suffer . ' from your own remembrance of your father 's nature , be not that certainly the course he would have take ? " 
 " I have not an atom of doubt about it . his flight and persistent dread of trial puzzle I beyond imagination . of his life he be perfectly reckless , except , at least , for my sake . " 
 " I know that he be , " Mr. Shovelin reply ; " as a boy he be wonderfully fearless . as a man , with a sweet wife and a lot of child , he might have begin to be otherwise . but when all those be go , and only a poor little baby leave " 
 " yes , I suppose I be all that . " 
 " forgive I . I be look back at you . who could dream that you would ever even live , without kith or kin to care for you ? your life be save by some good woman who take you away to Wales . but when you be such a poor little relic , and your father could scarcely have see you , to have such a mite leave must have be almost a mockery of happiness . that motive could not have be strong enough to prevent a man of proud honor from do what honor at once demand . your father would have return and surrender as soon as he hear of his dear wife 's death , if in the balance there have be only you . " 
 " yes , Mr. Shovelin , perhaps he would . I be never very much as a counter - balance . yet my father love I . " I could have tell he of the pledge exchange " for my sake , " and , " yes , for your sake , " with love and wed honor set to fight cold desolate repute but I do not say a word about it . 
 " he love you afterward , of course . but a man who have have seven child be not enthusiastic about a baby . there must have be a large motive . " 
 " but when I be the only one leave alive . surely I become valuable then . I can not have be such a cipher . " 
 " yes , for a long time you would have be , " reply the saturnian banker . " I do not wish to disparage your attraction when you be a fortnight old . they may have begin already to be irresistible . excuse I ; you have lead I into the light vein , when speak of a most sad matter . you must blame your self - assertion for it . all I wish to convey to you be my belief that something wholly unknown to we , some dark mystery of which we have no inkling , lie at the bottom of this terrible affair . some strange motive there must have be , strong enough even to overcome all ordinary sense of honor , and an Englishman 's pride in submit to the law , whatever may be the consequence . consider that his ' flight from justice , ' as it be call , of course , by every one , condemn his case and ruin his repute . even for that he would not have care so much as for his own sense of right . and though he be a very lively fellow , as I first remember he , full of trick and joke , and so on , which in this busy age be out of date , I be certain that he always have a stern sense of right . one never know how love affair and weakness about child may alter almost any man ; but my firm conviction be that my dear old school - fellow , George Castlewood , even with a wife and lovely child hang altogether upon his life , not only would not have break jail , but would calmly have give up his body to be hang pardon I , my dear , for put it so coarsely if there have not be something paramount to override even apparent honor . what it can have be I have no idea , and I presume you have none . " 
 " none whatever , " I say at once , in answer to his inquire gaze . " I be quite take by surprise ; I never even think of such a thing . it have always seem to I so natural that my dear father , be shamefully condemn , because appearance be against he , and nobody could enter into he , should , for the sake of his wife and child , or even of one child like I , depart or banish himself , or emigrate , or , as they might call it , run away . know that he never could have a fair trial , it be the only straightforward and good and affectionate thing for he to do . " 
 " you can not see thing as man see they . we must not expect it of you , " Mr. Shovelin answer , with a kind but rather too superior smile , which remind I a little of dear Uncle Sam when he listen to what , in his opinion , be only female reason ; " but , dear I , here be Major Hockin come ! punctuality be the soul of business . " 
 " so I always declare , " cry the Major , who be more than three - quarter of an hour late , for which in my heart I thank he . " my watch keep time to a minute , Sir , and its master to a second . well , I hope you have settle all question of finance , and endow my young maid with a fortune . " 
 " so far from that , " Mr. Shovelin reply , in a tone very different from that he use to I , " we have not even say one word of business ; all that have be leave for your return . be I to understand that you be by appointment or relationship the guardian of this young lady ? " 
 " God forbid ! " cry Major Hockin , shortly . I think it very rude of he , yet I could not help smile to see how he throw his glass up and lift his wiry crest of hair . " not that she be bad , I mean , but good , very good ; indeed , I may say the very good girl ever know outside of my own family . my cousin , Colonel Gundry , who own an immense estate in the most auriferous district of all California , but will not spoil his splendid property by mining , he will he will tell you the very same thing , Sir . " 
 " I be very glad to hear it , " say the banker , smile at I , while I wonder what it be , but hop that it mean my praise . " now I really fear that I must be very brief , though the daughter of my old friend may well be prefer to business . but now we will turn at once to business , if you please . " 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 COUSIN MONTAGUE 

 Mr. Shovelin go to a corner of the room , which might be call his signal - box , have a little row of port - hole like a toy frigate or accordion , and there he make sound which bring step very promptly , one clerk carry a mighty ledger , and the other a small strong - box . 
 " no plate , " Major Hockin whisper to I , shake his gray crest with sorrow ; " but there may be diamond , you know , Erema . one ounce of diamond be worth a ton of plate . " 
 " no , " say Mr. Shovelin , whose ear be very keen , " I fear that you will find nothing of mercantile value . thank you , Mr. Robinson ; by - and - by perhaps we shall trouble you . strictly speak , perhaps I should require the presence of your father 's lawyer , or of some one produce probate , ere I open this box , Miss Castlewood . but have you here , and Major Hockin , and know what I do about the matter   which be one of personal confidence , I will dispense with formality . we have give your father 's solicitor notice of this deposit , and request his attention , but he never have deign to attend to it ; so now we will dispense with he . you see that the seal be unbroken ; you know your father 's favorite seal , no doubt . the key be nothing ; it be leave to my charge . you wish that I should open this ? " 
 certainly I do , and the banker split the seal with an ebony - handle paper - knife , and very soon unlock the steel - rib box , whose weight be chiefly of itself . some cotton - wool lie on the top to keep the all - penetrative dust away , and then a sheet of blue foolscap paper , partly cover with clear but crooked writing , and under that some little twist of silver paper , screw as if there have be no time to tie they , and a packet of letter hold together by a glitter bracelet . 
 " poor fellow ! " Mr. Shovelin say , softly , while I hold my breath , and the Major have the courtesy to be silent . " this be his will ; of no value , I fear , in a pecuniary point of view , but of interest to you his daughter . shall I open it , Miss Castlewood , or send it to his lawyer ? " 
 " open it , and never think of they , " say i. " like the rest , they have forsake he . please to read it to yourself , and then tell we . " 
 " oh , I wish I have know this before ! " cry the banker , after a rapid glance or two . " very kind , very flattering , I be sure ! yes , I will do my duty by he ; I wish there be more to be do in the case . he have leave I sole executor , and trustee of all his property , for the benefit of his survive child . yet he never give I the small idea of expect I to do this for he . otherwise , of course , I should have have this old box open year ago . " 
 " we must look at thing as they be , " say Major Hockin , for I could say nothing . " the question be , what do you mean to do now ? " 
 " nothing whatever , " say the banker , crisply , be displeased at the other 's tone ; and then , see my surprise , he address himself to I : " nothing at present , but congratulate myself upon my old friend 's confidence , and , as Abernethy say , ' take advice . ' a banker must never encroach upon the province of the lawyer . but so far as a layman may judge , Major Hockin , I think you will have to transfer to I the care of this young lady . " 
 " I shall be only too happy , I assure you , " the Major answer , truthfully . " my wife have a great regard for she , and so have I the very great , the strong regard , and warm parental feeling ; as you know , Erema . but but , I be not so young as I be ; and I have to develop my property . " 
 " of which she no long form a part , " Mr. Shovelin answer , with a smile at I , which turn into pleasure my momentary pain at the other 's calm abandonment . " you will find I prompt and proud to claim she , as soon as I be advise that this will be valid ; and that I shall learn to - morrow . " 
 in spite of pride , or by its aid , my foolish eye be full of tear , and I give he a look of gratitude which remind he of my father , as he say in so many word . 
 " oh , I hope it be valid ! how I hope it be ! " I exclaim , turn round to the Major , who smile rather grimly , and say he hop so too . 
 " but surely , " he continue , " as we be all here , we should not neglect the opportunity of inspect the other content of this box . to I it appear that we be bind to do so ; that it be our plain duty to ascertain why , there might even be a late will . Erema , my dear , you must be most anxious to get to the bottom of it . " 
 so I be , but desire even more that his curiosity should be foil . " we must leave that to Mr. Shovelin , " I say . 
 " then for the present we will seal it down again , " the banker answer , quietly ; " we can see that there be no other will , and a later one would scarcely be put under this . the other little packet , whatever they may be , be object of curiosity , perhaps , rather than of importance . they will keep till we have more leisure . " 
 " we have take up a great deal of your time , Sir , I be sure , " say the Major , find that he could take no more . " we ought to be , and we be , most grateful . " 
 " well , " the banker answer , as we begin to move , ' such thing do not happen every day . but there be no friend like an old friend , Erema , as I mean to call you now . I be to have be your godfather ; but I fear that you never have be baptize . " 
 " what ! " cry the Major , star at we both . " be such a thing possible in a christian land ? oh , how I have neglect my duty to the Church ! come back with I to Bruntsea , and my son shall do it . the church there be under my order , I should hope ; and we will have a dinner party afterward . what a horrible neglect of duty ! " 
 " but how could I help it ? " I exclaim , with some terror at Major Hockin 's bristling hair . " I can not remember I be sure I can not say . it may have be do in France , or somewhere , if there be no time in England . at any rate , my father be not to be blame . " 
 " papistical baptism be bad than none , " the Major say , impressively . " never mind , my dear , we will make that all right . you shall not be a savage always . we will take the opportunity to change your name . Erema be popish and outlandish ; one scarcely know how to pronounce it . you shall have a good english christian name Jemima , Jane , or Sophy . trust I to know a good name . trust I . " 
 " Jemima ! " I cry . " oh , Mr. Shovelin , save I from ever be call Jemima ! rather would I never be baptize at all . " 
 " I be no judge of name , " he answer , smile , as he shake hand with we ; " but , unless I be a very bad judge of face , you will be call just what you please . " 
 " and I please to be call what my father call I . it may be unlucky , as a gentleman tell I , who do not know how to pronounce it . however , it will do very well for I . you wish to see I , then , to - morrow , Mr. Shovelin ? " 
 " if you please ; but later in the day , when I be more at leisure . I do not run away very early . come at half past four to this door , and knock . I hear every sound at this door in my room ; and the place will be grow quiet then . " 
 he show we out into a narrow alley through a heavy door sheathe with iron , and soon we recover the fair light of day , and the brawl and roar of a London street . 
 " now where shall we go ? " the Major ask , as soon as he have find a cab again ; for he be very polite in that way . " you keep early hour with your ' uncle Sam , ' as you call Colonel Gundry , a slow - witted man , but most amusing when he like , as slow - witte man very often be . now will you come and dine with I ? I can generally dine , as you , with virtuous indignation , find out at Southampton . but we be well friend now , Miss Heathen . " 
 " yes , I have more than I can ever thank you for , " I answer , very gravely , for I never could become jocose to order , and sadness still be uppermost . " I will go where you like . I be quite at your order , because Betsy Bowen be busy now . she will not have do her work till six o'clock . " 
 " well do ! " he cry . " Bravo , Young America ! frankness be the fine of all good manner . and what a lot of clumsy deception it save ! then let we go and dine . I will imitate your truthfulness . it be two word for myself , and one for you . the air of London always make I hungry after too much country air . it be wrong altogether , but I can not help it . and go along , I smell hungry smell come out of deep hole with a plate at the top . hungry I mean to a man who have know what absolute starvation be when a man would thank God for a blue - bottle fly who have take his own nip any where . when I see the young fellow at the club pick this , and poke that , and push away the other , may I be d d my dear , I beg your pardon . Cabby , to the ' Grilled Bone and Scolloped Cockle , ' at the bottom of St. Ventricle Lane , you know . " 
 this place seem , from what the Major say , to have earn repute for something special , something esteem by the very clever people , and only to be find in true virtue here . and he tell I that luxury and self - indulgence be the great sin of the present age , and how he admire a man who come here to protest against Epicureans , by dining   liquor not include   for the sum of three and sixpence . 
 all this , no doubt , be wise and right ; but I could not attend to it properly now , and he might take I where he would , and have all the talking to himself , accord to his practice . and I might not even have be able to say what this temple of bone and cockle be like , except for a little thing which happen there . the room , at the head of a twisting staircase , be low and dark , and furnish almost like a farmhouse kitchen . it have no carpet , nor even a mat , but a floor of black timber , and a ceiling color blue , with star and comet , and a full moon near the fire - place . on either side of the room stand narrow table endwise to the wall , inclose with high - back seat like settle , form thus a double set of little stall or box , with scarcely space enough between for waiter , more urgent than New York fireman , to push their steaming and breathless way . 
 " square or round , miss ? " say one of they to I as soon as the Major have set I on a bench , and before my mind have time to rally toward criticism of the knife and fork , which deprecate any such ordeal ; and he cleverly whip a stand for something dirty , over something still dirty , on the cloth . 
 " I do not   understand what you mean , " I reply to his highly zealous aspect , while the Major sit smile dryly at my ignorance , which vex I . " I have never receive such a question before . Major Hockin , will you kindly answer he ? " 
 " Square , " say the Major ; ' square for both . " and the waiter , with a glance of pity at I , hurry off to carry out his order . 
 " Erema , your mind be all up in the sky , " my companion begin to remonstrate . " you ought to know well after all your travel . " 
 " then the sky should not fall and confuse I so , " I say , point to the Milky Way , not more than a yard above I ; " but do tell I what he mean , if you can . be it about the formation of the soup ? " 
 " Hush , my dear . Soup be high treason here until night , when they make it of the leaving . his honest desire be to know whether you would have a grill bone of mutton , which be naturally round , you know , or of beef , which , by the same law of nature , seem always to be square , you know . " 
 " oh , I see , " I reply , with some confusion , not at his osteology , but at the gaze of a pair of living and lively eye fasten upon I . a gentleman , wait for his bill , have rise in the next low box , and stand calmly   as if he have do all his duty to himself   gaze over the wooden back at I , who thus sit face he . and Major Hockin , follow my glance , stand up and turn round to see to it . 
 " what ! Cousin Montague ! bless my heart , who could have dream of lighting on you here ? come in , my dear follow ; there be plenty of room . let I introduce you to my new ward , Miss Erema Castlewood . Miss Castlewood , this be Sir Montague Hockin , the son of my lament first cousin Sir Rufus , of whom you have hear so much . well , to be sure ! I have not see you for an age . my dear fellow , now how be you ? " 
 " Miss Castlewood , please not to move ; I sit any where . Major , I be most delighted to see you . over and over again I have be at the point of start for Bruntsea Island it be an island now , be not   it ? my father would never believe that it be till I prove it from the number of rabbit that come up . however , not a desolate island now , if it contain you and all your energy , and Miss Castlewood , as well as Mrs. Hockin . " 
 " it be not an island , and it never shall be , " the Major cry , knock a blue plate over , and spill the salt inauspiciously . " it never be an island , and it never shall be . my intention be to reclaim it altogether . oh , here come the square . well do ! well do ! I quite forget the proper thing to have to drink . be the cockle in the pan , Mr. Waiter ? quite right , then ; ten minute be the proper time ; but they know that well than I do . I be very sorry , Montague , that you have din . " 
 " surely you would not call this a dinner ; I take my true luncheon afterward . but lately my appetite have be so bad that it must be feed up at short interval . you can understand that , perhaps , Miss Castlewood . it make the confectioner ' fortune , you know . the lady once come only twice to feed , but now they come three time , I be assure by a young man who know all about it . and cherry brandy be the mild form of tipple . " 
 " shocking scandal ! abominable talk ! " cry the Major , who take every thing at its word . " I have hear all that sort of stuff ever since I be as high as this table . waiter , show I this gentleman 's bill . oh well , oh well ! you have not do so very badly . two square and a round , with a jug of Steinberg , and a pint of british stout with your Stilton . if this be your ante - lunch , what will you do when you come to your real luncheon ? but I must not talk now ; you may have it as you please . " 
 " the truth of it be , Miss Castlewood , " say the young man , while I look with some curiosity at my frizzling bone , with the cover just whisk off , and drop of its juice   like the ray of a lustre   shake with soft inner wealth " the truth of it be just this , and no more : we fix our mind and our thought , and all the rest of our high intelligence , a great deal too much upon our mere food . " 
 " no doubt we do , " I be oblige to answer . " it be very sad to think of , as soon as one have din . but do that reflection occur , as it should , at the proper time to be useful I mean when we be hungry ? " 
 " I fear not ; I fear that it be rather praeterite than practical . " 
 " no big word now , my dear fellow , " cry the Major . " you have have your turn ; let we have our . but , Erema , you be eat nothing . take a knife and fork , Montague , and help she . the beauty of these thing consist entirely , absolutely , essentially , I may say , in their have the smoke rush out of they . a gush of steam like this should follow every turn of the knife . but there ! I be spoil every bit by talk so . " 
 " be that any fault of mine ? " ask Sir Montague , in a tone which make I look at he . the voice be not harsh , nor rough , nor unpleasant , yet it give I the idea that it could be all three , and bad than all three , upon occasion . so I look at he , which I have refrain from do , to see whether his face confirm that idea . to the good of my perception , it do not . Sir Montague Hockin be rather good - look , so far as form and color go , have regular feature , and clear blue eye , very beautiful tooth , and a golden beard . his appearance be grave , but not morose , as if he be always examine thing and people without condemn they . it be evident that he expect to take the upper hand in general , to play the first fiddle , to hold the top saw , to " be help to all the stuffing of the pumpkin , " as dear Uncle Sam be fond of say . of moderate stature , almost of middle age , and dress nicely , without any gewgaw , which look so common upon a gentleman 's front , he be likely to please more people than he displease at first on - sight . 
 the Major be now in the flush of goodwill , have find his dinner genial ; and be a good man , he yield to a little sympathetic anger with those who have do less justice to themselves . and in this state of mind he beg we to take note of one thing that his ward should be christen in Bruntsea Church , as sure as all the bell be his , accord to their inscription , no later than next Thursday week , that be the day for a good sirloin ; and if Sir Montague fail to come to see how they could manage thing under proper administration , he might be sure of one thing , if no more that Major Hockin would never speak to he again . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 a check 

 so many thing now begin to open upon I , to do and to think of , that I scarcely know which to begin with . I use to be tell how much wise it be not to interfere with any thing to let by - gone be by - gone , and consider my own self only . but this advice never come home to my case , and it always seem an unworthy thing even to be listen to it . and now I see reason to be glad for thank people who advise I , and let they go on to advise themselves . for if I have listen to Major Hockin , or even Uncle Sam for that part , where must I have be now ? why , simply know no more than as a child I know , and feel miserable about it . whereas I have now at least something to go upon , and enough for a long time to occupy my mind . the difficulty be to know what to do first , and what to resolve to leave undo , or at least to put off for the present . one of my special desire have be to discover that man , that Mr. Goad , who have frighten I so about two year back , and be say to be lose in the snow - drift . but nobody like he have ever be find , to the sorrow of the neighborhood ; and Sylvester himself have be disappoint , not even to know what to do with his clothe . 
 his card , however , before he go off , have be leave to the care of Uncle Sam for security of the 15,000 dollar ; and on it be print , with a glazing and much flourish , " Vypan , Goad , and terryer : Private Inquiry Office , Little England Polygon , W.C. " Uncle Sam , with a grunt and a rise of his foot , have send this low card fly to the fire , after I have kiss he so for all his truth and loveliness ; but I have catch it and make he give it to I , as be only natural . and have this now , I have be quite prepared to go and present it at its mean address , and ask what they want I for in America , and what they would like to do with I now , take care to have either the major close at hand , or else a policeman well recommend . 
 but now I determine to wait a little while   if Betsy Bowen 's opinion should be at all the same as mine be , and to ask Mr. Shovelin what he think about it , before do any thing that might arouse a set of idea quite opposite to mine , and so cause trouble afterward . and be unable to think any well for the time than to wait and be talk to , I get Major Hockin to take I back again to the right number in European Square . 
 here I find Mrs. Strouss   bear Betsy Bowen   ready and eager to hear a great deal more than I myself have hear that day . on the other hand , I have many question , arise from thing say to I , to which I require clear answer ; and it never would do for she to suppose that because she have know I come into this world , she must govern the whole of my course therein . but it cost many word and a great deal of demeanor to teach she that , good and faithful as she be , I could not be always under she . yet I promise to take her advice whenever it agree with my own opinion . 
 this please she , and she promise to offer it always , know how well it would be receive , and she tell all her lodger that they might ring and ring , for she do not mean to answer any of their bell ; but if they want any thing , they must go and fetch it . be german , who be the most docile of man in England , whatever they may be at home , they make no complaint , but retire to their pipe in a pleasant condition of surprise at London habit . 
 Mrs. Strouss , be from her early year of a thrifty and reputable turn of mind , have manage , in a large yet honest way , to put by many thing which must prove useful in the long - run , if keep long enough . and I do hear most careful as I be to pay no attention to petty rumor that the first thing that move the heart of Herr Strouss , and call forth his fine feeling , be a winding - up chair , which come out to make leg , with a pocket for tobacco , and a flat place for a glass . 
 this be certainly a paltry thought ; and to think of such low thing grieve I . and now , when I look at Mr. Strouss himself , have hear of none of these thing yet , I feel that my nurse might not have do she good , yet might have do bad , when she marry he . for he seem to have take a liking toward I , and an interest in my affair , which redound to his credit , if he would not be too inquisitive . and now I gladly allow he to be present , and to rest in the chair which have captivate he , although last night I could scarcely have bear to have hear in his presence what I have to hear . to - night there be nothing distressful to be say , compare , at least , with last night 's tale ; whereas there be several question to be put , in some of which   while scout altogether Uncle Sam 's low estimate   two female might , with advantage perhaps , obtain an opinion from the strong sex . 
 and now , as soon as I have tell my two friend as well as I could what have happen at the bank   with which they be pleased , as I have be , those question arise , and be , I believe , chiefly to the follow purport set aside the main puzzle of all . 
 why do my father say , on that dreadful morning , that if his father be dead , he himself have kill or murder he ? Betsy believe , when she come to think , that he have even use the bad word of these two . 
 how could the fatal shot have be discharge from his pistol as clearly it have be a pistol , moreover , which , by his own account , as Betsy now remember , he have leave in his quarter near Chichester ? 
 what be that horrible disease which have carry off all my poor little brother and sister , and frighten kind neighbor and servant away ? Betsy say it be call " Differeria , " as differ so much from all other complaint . I have never yet hear of this , but discover , without ask far than of Mr. Strouss , that she mean that urgent mandate for a levy of small angel which be call on earth " diphtheria . " 
 who have direct those private inquirer , Vypan , Goad , and Terryer , to send to the far West a member of their firm to get legal proof of my dear father 's death , and to bring I back , if possible ? the present Lord Castlewood never would have do so , accord to what Mr. Shovelin say ; it be far more likely that   but for weak health   he would have come forth himself to seek I , upon any probable tiding . at once a religious and chivalrous man , he would never employ mean agency . and while think of that , another thought occur what have induce that low man Goad to give Uncle Sam a date wrong altogether for the crime which begin all our misery ? he have put it at ten , now twelve , year back , and date it in November , whereas it have happen in September month , six year and two month before the date he give . this question be out of all answer to I , and also to Mrs. Strouss herself ; but Herr Strouss , be of a legal turn , believe that the law be to blame for it . he think that proceeding might be bind to begin , under the Extradition Act , within ten year of the date of the crime ; or there might be some other stipulation compelling Mr. Goad to add one to all his falsehood ; and not know any thing about it , both of we think it very likely . 
 again , what could have be that last pledge which pass between my father and mother , when they say " good - by " to one another , and perhaps know that it be forever , so far as this bodily world be concern ? be it any thing about a poor little sleeping and whimpering creature like myself , who could not yet make any difference to any living being except the mother ? or be it concern far more important thing , justice , clear honor , good - will , and duty , such as in the crush of time come upward with high nature ? and if so , be it not a promise from my mother , know every thing , to say nothing , even at the quiver moment of lie beneath the point of death ? 
 this be a new idea for Betsy , who have conclude from the very first that the pledge must be on my father 's part to wit , that he have vow not to surrender , or hurt himself in any way , for the sake of his dear wife . and to my suggestion she could only say that she never have see it in that light ; but the landing be so narrow and the wall so soft that , with all her duty star in her face , neither she , nor the good servant ever in an apron , could be hold responsible to repeat their very word . and her husband say that this be good very good so good as ever could be ; and what be to show now from the mouth of any one , after fifteen , sixteen , eighteen , the year ? 
 after this I have no other word to say , be still too young to contradict people duly married and of one accord . no other word , I mean , upon that point ; though still I have to ask , upon matter more immediate , what be the next thing for I , perhaps , to do . and first of all it be settle among we that for I to present myself at the head - quarter of Vypau , Goad , and Terryer would be a very clumsy and stupid proceeding , and perhaps even dangerous . of course they would not reveal to I the author of those kind inquiry about myself , which perhaps have cost the firm a very valuable life , the life of Mr. Goad himself . and while I should learn less than nothing from they , they would most easily extract from I , or at any rate find out afterward , where I be live , and what I be do , and how I could most quietly be meet and baffle , and perhaps even make away with , so as to save all further trouble . 
 neither be that the only point upon which I resolve to do nothing . Herr Strouss be a very simple - minded man , yet full of true sagacity , and he warmly advise , in his very bad English , that none but my few trusty friend should be tell of my visit to this country . 
 " why for make to know your enemy ? " he ask , with one finger on his forehead , which be his mode of indicate caution . " enemy find out vere soon , too soon , soon enough . begin to plot no , no , young lady begin first . Vilhelmina , your man say the right . be it good , or be it bad ? " 
 it appear to we both to be good , so far as might be judge for the present ; and therefore I make up my mind to abstain from call even on my father 's agent , unless Mr. Shovelin should think it needful . in that and other matter I would act by his advice ; and so with well spirit than I long have own , at find so much kindness , and with good hope of the morrow , I go to the snug little bedroom which my good nurse have provide . 
 alas ! what be my little grief on the morrow , compare to the deep and abide loss of many by a good man 's death ? when I go to the door at which I have be tell to knock , it be long before I get an answer . and even when somebody come at last , so far from be my guardian , it be only a poor old clerk , who say , " hush , miss ! " and then pray that the will of the Lord might be do . " could not   you see the half - shutter up ? " he continue , rather roughly . " ' tis a bad job for many a poor man to - day . and it seem no more than yesterday I be carry he about ! " 
 " do you mean Mr. Shovelin ? " I ask . " be he poorly ? have any thing happen ? I can wait , or come again . " 
 " the Lord have take he to the mansion of the just , from his private address at Sydenham Hill . a burning and a shin light ! may we like he be find watch in that day , with our lamp trim and our loin gird ! " 
 for the moment I be too surprised to speak , and the kind old man lead I into the passage , see how pale and faint I be . he belong , like his master , and a great part of their business , to a simple religious persuasion , or faith , which now be very seldom hear of . 
 " it be just in this way , " he say , as soon as tear have enable I to speak for even at the first sight I have feel affection toward my new guardian . " our master be a very punctual man , for five - and - thirty year never late never late once till this morning . excuse I , miss , I ought to be ashamed . the Lord knoweth what be good for we . well , you throw he out a good bit yesterday , and there be other trouble . and he have to work late last night , I hear ; for through his work he would go , be it anyhow diligent in business , husband the time and when he come down to breakfast this morning , he pray with his household as usual , but they notice his voice rather weak and queer ; and the mistress look at he when he get up from his knee ; but he drink his cup of tea and he eat his bit of toast , which be all he ever take for breakfast . but presently when his cob come up to the door for he always ride in to business , miss , no matter what the weather be he go to kiss his wife and his daughter all round , accord to their age ; and he get through they all , when away he fall down , with the riding - whip in one hand , and expire on a piece of indian matting . " 
 " how terrible ! " I exclaim , with a sob . and the poor old man , in spite of all his piety , be sob . 
 " no , miss ; not a bit of terror about it , to a man prepare as he be . he have have some warning just a year ago ; and the doctor all tell he he must leave off work . he could no more do without his proper work than he could without air or victual . what this old establish concern will do without he , our Divine Master only know . and a pinch come on in Threadneedle Street , I hear but I scarcely know what I be say , miss ; I be think of the camel and the needle . " 
 " I will not repeat what you have not mean to tell , " I answer , see his confusion , and the clumsy turn he have make of it . " only tell I what dear Mr. Shovelin die of . " 
 " heart - disease , miss . you might know in a moment . nothing kill like that . his poor father die of it , thirty year agone . and the well people be , the more they get it . " 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 AT the PUMP 

 this blow be so sharp and heavy that I lose for the moment all power to go on . the sense of ill fortune fall upon I , as it fall upon strong people , when a sudden gleam of hope , break through long trouble , mysteriously fade away . 
 even the pleasure of indulge in the gloom of evil luck be a thing to be ashamed of now , when I think of that good man 's family thus , without a moment 's warning , rob of love and hope and happiness . but Mrs. Strouss , who often brood on predestination , imbittere all my thought by say , or rather convey without word , that my poor father taint of some Divine ill - will have re - appeared , and even kill his banker . 
 Betsy hold most low - church view , by nature be a Dissenter . she call herself a baptist , and in some strange way have stop I thus from ever have be baptize . I do not understand these thing , and the battle fight about they ; but know that my father be a member of the English Church , I resolve to be the same , and tell Betsy that she ought not to set up against her master 's doctrine . then she herself become ashamed of try to convert I , not only because of my ignorance   which make argument like shoot into the sea , but chiefly because she could mention no one of title with such theology . 
 this settle the question at once ; and remember   to my shame   what opinion I have hold even of Suan Isco , while be in the very same predicament myself , reflect also what Uncle Sam and Firm would have think of I , have they know it , I anticipate the Major and his dinner party by go to a quiet ancient clergyman , who examine I , and be satisfied with little , take I to an old City church of deep and damp retirement . and here , with a great din of traffic outside , and a mildewy depth of repose within , I be present by certain sponsor   the clerk and his wife and his wife 's sister , and hear good word , and hope to keep the impression , both outward and inward , gently make upon I . 
 I need not say that I keep , and now receive with authority , my old name ; though the clerk prefix an aspirate to it , and indulge in two syllable only . but the ancient parson know its meaning , and look at I with curiosity ; yet , be a gentleman of the old school , put never a question about it . 
 now this be do , and full tiding thereof send off to Mrs. Hockin , to save trouble to the butcher , or other disappointment , I scarcely know how to be move next , though move I must before very long . for it cost I a great deal of money to stay in European Square like this , albeit Herr Strouss be of all man the most generous , by his own avowal , and his wife   by the same test   noble - hearted among woman . yet each of they speak of the other 's pecuniary view in such a despond tone   when the other be out of the way , and so lament to have any thing at all to say about cash by compulsion of the other also both , when meet together , be so large and reckless , and not to be insult by a thought of payment , that it come to pass that my money do nothing but run away between they . 
 this be not their fault at all , but all my own , for be unable to keep my secret about the great nugget . the Major have tell I not to speak of this , accord to wise experience ; and I have not the small intention of do an atom of mischief in that way ; but somehow or other it come out one night when I be be pity for my desolation . and all the charge against I begin to be double from that moment . 
 if this have be all , I should not have care so much , be quite content that my money should go as fast as it come in to I . but there be another thing here which cost I as much as my board and lodging and all the rest of my expense . and that be the iron pump in European Square . for this pump stand in the very centre of a huddled district of famine , filth , and fever . when once I have see from the lead of our house the quag of reek life around , the stub and snag of chimney - pot , the gash among they entitle street , and the break blain call house , I be quite ashamed of pay any thing to become a Christian . 
 Betsy , who stand by I , say that it be well than it use to be , and that all these people live in comfort of their own idea , fiercely resent all interference , and be good to one another in their own rough way . it be more than three year since there have be a single murder among they , and even then the man who be kill confess that he deserve it . she tell I , also , that in some mining district of Wales , well know to she , thing be a great deal bad than here , although the people be not half so poor . and finally , look at a ruby ring which I have beg she to wear always , for the sake of her truth to I , she beg I to be wise than to fret about thing that I could not change . " all these people , whose hovel I see , have the mean of grace before they , and if they would not stretch forth their hand , it be only because they be vessel of wrath . her pity be rather for our poor black brother who have never enjoy no opportunity , and therefore must be castaway . " 
 be a stranger , and so young , and accustom to receive my doctrine   since first I go to America , I drop all intention of attempt any good in place where I might be murder . but I could not help look at the pump which be in front , and the poor thing who come there for water , and , most of all , the child . with these it be almost the joy of the day , and perhaps the only joy , to come into this little open space and stand , and put their back up stiffly , and stare about , ready for some good luck to turn up such as a horse to hold , or a man come out of the dock with a half - penny to spare and then , in failure of such golden hope , to dash about , in and out , after one another , splashing , and kick over their own can , kettle , jar , or bucket , and stretch their dirty little naked leg , and show very often fine white chest , and bright tooth wet with laughter . and then , when this chivy be do , and their quick little heart beat aloud with glory , it be pretty to see they all rally round the pump , as crafty as their better , and watch with sly humor each other 's readiness to begin again . 
 then suddenly a sense of neglect duty would seize some little body with a hand to its side , nine time out of ten a girl , whose mother , perhaps , lie sick at home , and a stern idea of responsibility begin to make the bucket clank . then might you see , if you care to do so , orderly management have its turn a demand for pin and a tucking up of skirt   which scarcely seem worthy of the great young fuss , large child scold little one not a bit more muddy than themselves , the while the very least child of all , too young as yet for chivying , and only come for company , would smooth she comparatively clean frock down , and look up at her sister with condemnatory eye . 
 Trivial as they be , these thing amuse I much , and make a little checker of reflect light upon the cloud of selfish gloom , especially when the real work begin , and the child , vie with one another , set to at the iron handle . this be too large for their little hand to grasp , and by mean of some grievance inside , or perhaps through a cruel trick of the plumber , up go the long handle every time small finger be too confiding , and there it stand up like the tail of a rampant cow , or a branch inaccessible , until an old shawl or the cord of a peg - top could be cast up on high to reduce it . but some engineering boy , " highly gifted , " like Uncle Sam 's self , " with machinery , " have discover an ingenious cure for this . with the help of the girl he use to fasten a fat little thing , about twelve month old , in the bend at the middle of the handle , and there   like a ham on the steelyard   hang this baby and enjoy seesaw , and laugh at its own utility . 
 I never see this , and the splashing and dribble and play and bright revelry of water , without forget all sad counsel and discretion , and rush out as if the dingy pump be my own delicious Blue River . People use to look at I from the window with pity and astonishment , suppose I to be craze or frantic , especially the Germans . for to run out like this , without a pocket full of money , would have be insanity ; and to run out with it , to their mind , be even clear proof of that condition . for the money go as quickly as the water of the pump ; on this side and on that it fly , each child in succession make deep drain upon it , in virtue of still deep woe . they be dreadful little story - teller , I be very much afraid ; and the long face pull , as soon as I come out , in contrast with all the recent glee and frolic , suggest to even the young charity suspicion of some inconsistency . however , they be so ingenious and clever that they work my pocket like the pump itself , only with this unhappy difference , that the former have no inexhaustible spring of silver , or even of copper . 
 and thus , by a reason   as cogent as any of more exalted nature , be I drive back to my head - quarter , there to abide till a fresh supply should come . for Uncle Sam , generous and noble as he be , do not mean to let I melt all away at once my share of the great Blue River nugget , any more than to make duck and drake of his own . indeed , that rock of gold be still untouched , and healthily repose in a banker 's cellar in the good town of Sacramento . People be allow to go in and see it upon payment of a dollar , and they come out so thirsty from feast upon it that a bar be set up , and a pile of money make all the gentleman , and lady even bad than they , take a reckless turn about small money after see that . but dear Uncle Sam refuse every cent of the profit of all this excitable work . it be wholly against his wish that any thing so artificial should be do at all , and his sense of religion condemn it . he say , in his very first letter to I , that even a heathen must acknowledge this champion nugget as the grand work of the Lord yet discover in America a country more full of all work of the Lord than the rest of the world put together . and to keep it in a cellar , without any air or sun , grate harshly upon his idea of right . 
 however , he do not expect every body to think exactly as he do , and if they could turn a few dollar upon it , they be welcome , as have large family . and the balance might go to his credit against the interest on any cash advance to he . not that he mean to be very fast with this , never have run into debt in all his life . 
 this , put shortly , be the reason why I could not run to the pump any long . I have come into England with money enough to last I   accord to the sawyer 's calculation   for a year and a half of every needful work ; whereas , in less than half that time , I be arrive at my last penny . this remind I of my dear father , who be nearly always in trouble about money   although so strictly upright ; and at first I be proud to be like he about this , till I come to find the disadvantage . 
 it must not even for a moment be imagine that this make any difference in the behavior of any one toward I . Mrs. Strouss , Herr Strouss , the lady on the stair , and a very clever woman who have get no room , but be kindly accommodate every where , as well as the baron on the first floor front , and the gentleman from a hotel at Hanover , who look out the other way , and even the child at the pump not one make any difference toward I   as an enemy might , perhaps , suppose   because my last half crown be go . it be admit upon every side that I ought to be forgive for my random cast of money , because I know no well , and be sure to have more in a very little time . and the child of the pump come to see I go away , through street of a mile and a half , I should think ; and they carry my thing , look after one another , so that none could run away . and be forbid at the platform gate , for want of respectability , they set up a cheer , and I wave my hat , and promise , amidst great applause , to come back with it full of sixpence . 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 COCKS and COXCOMBS 

 Major Hockin bring the only fly as yet to be find in Bruntsea , to meet I at Newport , where the railway end at present , for want of further encouragement . 
 " very soon you go , " he cry out to the bulkhead , or buffer , or whatever be the thing that close the career of a land - engine . " station - master , you be very wise in put in your very good cabbage plant there . you understand your own company . well do ! if I be to offer you a shilling apiece for those young early Yorks , what would you say , now ? " 
 " Weel , a think I should say nah , Sir , " the Scotch station - master make answer , with a grin , while he pull off his cap of office and put on a dissolute Glengary . " they be a veery fine young kail , that always pay for planting . " 
 " the villain ! " say the Major , as I jump into the fly . " however , I suppose he do quite right . Set a thief to watch a thief . the company be big rogue , and he try to be a big . we shall cut through his garden in about three month , just when his cabbage be get firm , and their value will exceed that of pine - apple . the surveyor will come down and certify , and the ' damage to crop ' will be at least five pound , when they have no right to sow even mustard and cress , and a saucepan would hold all the victual on the land . " 
 from this I perceive that my host be as full of his speculative scheme as ever ; and soon he make the driver of the one - horse fly turn aside from the unfenced road and take the turf . " Coachman , " he cry , " just drive along the railway ; you will not   have the chance much long . " 
 there be no sod turn yet and no rod set up ; but the driver seem to know what be mean , and take we over the springy turf where once have run the river . and the salt breath of the sea come over the pebble ridge , full of appetite and briskness , after so much London . 
 " it be one of the sad thing I ever hear of , " Major Hockin begin to say to I . " Poor Shovelin ! poor Shovelin ! a man of large capital the very thing we want . it might have be the making of this place . I have very little doubt that I must have bring he to see our great natural advantage the beauty of the situation , the salubrity of the air , the absence of all clay , or marsh , or noxious deposit , the bright crisp turf , and the noble underlay of chalk , which   if you perceive my meaning   can not retain any damp , but transmit it into sweet natural well . why , driver , where the devil be you drive we ? " 
 " no fear , your honor . I know every trick of it . it will not   come over the wheel , I do believe , and it do all the good in the world to his sand - crack . Whoa - ho , my boy , then ! and the young lady 's foot might go up upon the cushion , if her boot be thin , Sir ; and Mr. Rasper will excuse of it . " 
 " what the " something hot " do you mean , Sir ? " the Major roar over the water , which seem to be deepen as we go on . " pull out this instant ; pull out , I tell you , or you shall have three month ' hard labor . may I be d d now my dear , I beg your pardon for speak with such sincerity I simply mean , may I go straightway to the devil , if I do not   put this fellow on the tread - mill . oh , you can pull out now , then , can you ? " 
 " if your honor please , I never do pull in , " the poor driver answer , be frighten at the excitement of the lord of the manor . " my order be , miss , to drive along the line come on now just to Bruntsea , and keep in the middle of that same I do , and this here little wet be a haxident a haxident of the full moon , I do assure you , and the wind come over the sea , as you might say . these pebble be too round , miss , to stick to one another ; you could not   expect it of they ; and sometimes the water here and there come a - leak like through the bottom . I have seed it so , ever since I can remember . " 
 " I do not   believe a word of it , " the Major say , as we wait a little for the vehicle to drain , and I make a nosegay of the bright sea flower . " tell I no lie , Sir ; you belong to the West Bruntseyans , and you have drive we into a vile bog to scare I . they have bribe you . I see the whole of it . tell I the truth , and you shall have five shilling . " 
 the driver look over the marsh as if he have never receive such an offer before . five shilling for a falsehood would have seem the proper thing , and have call for a balance of consideration , and make a demand upon his energy . but to earn five shilling by the truth have never fall to his luck before ; and he turn to I , because I smile , and he say , " will you taste the water , miss ? " 
 " bless I ! " cry the Major , " now I never think of that . common people have such way about thing they be use to ! I might have stand here for a month , and never have think of that way to settle it . ridiculously simple . give I a taste , Erema . ah , that be the real beauty of our coast , my dear ! the strong proportion of the saline element I should know the taste of it any where . no sea - weed , no fishy particle , no sludge , no beard of oyster . the pure , uncontaminated , perfect brine , that set every male and female on his leg , varicose , orthopedic I forget their scientific , but I know the smack of it . " 
 " certainly , " I say , " it be beautifully salt . it will give you an appetite for dinner , Major Hockin . I could drink a pint of it , after all that smoke . but do not   you think it be a serious thing for the sea itself to come pour through the bottom of this pebble bank in this way ? " 
 " not at all . no , I rather like it . it open up many strictly practical idea . it add very much to the value of the land . for instance , a ' salt - lick , ' as your sweet Yankees call it and set up an infirmary for foot and mouth disease . and well still , the bath , the bath , my dear . no expense for piping , or pumping , or any thing . only place your marble at the proper level , and twice a day you have the grand salubrious sparkling influx of ocean 's self , self - filter , and by its own operation permeate with a fine siliceous element . what foreign mud could compete with such a bath ? " 
 " but suppose there should come too much of it , " I say , " and wash both the bath and the bather away ? " 
 " such an idea be ridiculous . it can be adjust to a nicety . I be very glad I happen to observe this thing , this this noble phenomenon . I shall speak to Montague about it at once , before I be half an hour old . my dear , you have make a conquest ; I quite forget to tell you ; but never mind that for the present . driver , here be half a crown for you . your master will put down the fly to my account . he owe I a heriot . I shall claim his good beast , the moment he get one without a broken wind . " 
 as the Major speak , he get out at his own door with all his wonte alacrity ; but instead of offer I his hand , as he always have do in London , he skip up his nine step , on purpose   as I see   that somebody else might come down for I . and this be Sir Montague Hockin , as I fear be only too likely from what have be say . if I have even suspect that this gentleman be at Bruntlands , I would have do my utmost to stay where I be , in spite of all absence of money . Betsy would gladly have allow I to remain , without pay even a farthing , until it should become convenient . Pride have forbid I to speak of this ; but I would have get over that pride much rather than meet this Sir Montague Hockin thus . some instinct tell I to avoid he altogether ; and have so little now of any other guidance , I attach , perhaps , foolish importance to that . 
 however , it be not the part of a lady to be rude to any one through instinct ; and I know already that in England young woman be not quite such master of their own behavior as in the far West they be allow to be . and so I do my good that , even in my eye , he should not see how vexed I be at meet he . and soon it appear that this behavior , however painful to I , be no less wise than good , because both with my host and hostess this new visitor be already at the summit of all good grace . he have conquer the Major by admiration of all his scheme and upshot , and even offer glimmer of the needful money in the distance ; and Mrs. Hockin lie quite at his foot ever since he have open a hamper and produce a pair of frizzle fowl , creature of an extraordinary aspect , toothe all over like a dandelion plant , with every feather stick inside out . when I see they , I try for my life not to laugh , and bite my lip very hard , quite succeed , until the cock open up a pair of sleepy eye , cover with comb and very sad inversion , and glance with complacency at his wife   who stand beneath he , even more turn inside out , caper with his twiggy leg , and give a long , sad crow . Mrs. Hockin look at he with intense delight . 
 " Erema , be it possible that you laugh ? I think that you never laugh , Erema . at any rate , if you ever do indulge , you might choose a fitter opportunity , I think . you have spoil his demonstration altogether see , he do not understand such unkindness and it be the very first he have utter since he come . oh , poor Fluffsky ! " 
 " I be very , very sorry . but how be I to help it ? I would not , on any account , have stop he if I have know he be so sensitive . Fluffsky , do please to begin again . " 
 " these beggar be nothing at all , I can assure you , " say Sir Montague , come to my aid , when Fluffsky spurn all our prayer for one more crow . " Mrs. Hockin , if you really would like to have a fowl that even Lady Clara Crowcombe have not get , you shall have it in a week , or a fortnight , or , at any rate , a month , if I can manage it . they be not to be have except through certain channel , and the fellow who write the poultry book have never even hear of they . " 
 " oh , how delighted I shall be ! Lady Clara despise all her neighbor so . but do they lay egg ? half the use of keep poultry , when you never kill they , be to get an egg for breakfast ; and Major Hockin look round and say , ' now be this our own ? ' and I can not say that it be ; and I be vex with the book , and he begin to laugh at I . People say it be for want of chalk , but they walk upon nothing but chalk , as you can see . " 
 " and their food , Mrs. Hockin . they be walk upon that . starve they for a week , and forty egg at least will reward you for stern discipline . " 
 but all this little talk I only tell to show how good and soft Mrs. Hockin be ; and her husband , in spite of all his self - opinion , and resolute talk about money and manorial due , in his way , perhaps , be even less to be trust to get his cash out of any poor and honest man . 
 on the very day after my return from London I receive a letter from " Colonel Gundry "   as we always call the Sawyer now , through his kinship to the Major , and , as it can not easily be put into less compass , I may as well give his very word : 
 " DEAR MISS REMA , your last favor to hand , with thank . every thing be go on all right with we . the mill be build up , and go well than ever ; more order on hand than we can get through . we have not crack the big nugget yet . expect the government to take he at a trifle below value , for Washington Museum . must have your consent ; but , for my part , would rather let he go there than break he . be ready to lose a few dollar upon he , particularly as he might crack up all quartzy in the middle . they offer to take he by weight at three dollar and a half per pound below standard . please say if agreeable . 
 " I fear , my dear , that there be bad time come for all of we here in this part . not about money , but a long sight bad ; bad will , and contention , and rebellion , perhaps . what we hear concern it be not much here ; but even here thought be very much divide . Ephraim take a different view from mine ; which be not a right thing for a grandson to do ; and neighbor Sylvester go with he . the Lord send agreement and concord among we ; but , if he doeth so , he must change his mind first , for every man be borrow his neighbor 's gun . 
 " if there be any thing that you can do to turn Ephraim back to his duty , my dear , I be sure that , for love of we , you will do it . if Firm be to run away from I now , and go fight on behalf of slavery , I never should care more for naught upon this side of Jordan ; and the new mill might go to Jericho ; though it do look uncommon handsome now , I can assure you , and tear through its work like a tiger . 
 " note symptom in your last of the price of thing in England , and have carry over some to your account , inclose please to find a bill for five hundred dollar , though not likely to be want yet . save a care of your money , my dear ; but pay your way handsome , as a Castlewood should do . Jowler go his round twice a day look for you ; and somebody else never hang his hat up without cast one eye at the corner you know . Sylvester 's girl be over here last week , dash about as usual . if Firm go south , he may have she , for aught I care , and never see saw - mill again . but I hope that the Lord will spare my old day such disgrace and tribulation . 
 " about you know what , my dear , be not overanxious . I have be young , and now be old , as the holy Psalmist say ; and the more I see of the way of man , the less I verily think of they . their good esteem , their cap in hand , their fair fame , as they call it , go by accident , and fortune , the whim of the moment , and the way the clever one have of tickle they . a great man laugh at the flimsy of it , and a good one go to his conscience . your father see these thing at their value . I have often grieve that you can not see they so ; but perhaps I have like you none the bad , my dear . 
 " do not   forget about go South . a word from you may stop he . it be almost the only hope I have , and even that may be too late . Suan Isco and Martin send message . the flower be on your father 's grave . I have get a large order for pine cradle in great haste , but have time to be , 
 " truly your , 
 " SAMPSON GUNDRY . " 
 that letter , while it relieve I in one way , from the want of money , cost I more than ten time five hundred dollar ' worth of anxiety . the Sawyer have write to I twice ere this kind , simple letter , but of no importance , except for their goodness and affection . but now it be clear that when he write this letter he must have be sadly put out and upset . his advice to I be beyond all value ; but he seem to have keep none at home for himself . he be carry quite out of his large , staid way when he write those bitter word about poor firm the very apple of his eye , as the holy Psalmist say . and , know the obstinacy of they both , I dread clash between they . 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 ADRIFT 

 have get money enough to last long with one bring up to simplicity , and resolve to have nothing to do for a while with charity or furnish lodging   what though keep by one 's own nurse , I cast about now for good reason to be off from all the busy work at Bruntsea . so soon after such a tremendous blow , it be impossible for I to push my own little trouble and concern upon good Mr. Shovelin 's family , much as I long to know what be to become of my father 's will , if any thing . but my desire to be do something , or , at least , to get away for a time from Bruntsea , be largely increase by Sir Montague Hockin 's strange behavior toward I . 
 that young man , if still he could be call young which , at my age , scarcely seem to be his right , for he must have be ten year old than poor Firm begin more and more every day to come after I , just when I want to be quite alone . there be nothing more soothing to my thought and mind   the latter get quiet from the former , I suppose   than for the whole of I to rest a while in such a little scollop of the shingle as a new - moon tide , in little crescent , leave just below high - water mark . and now it be new - moon tide again , a fortnight after the flooding of our fly by the activity of the full moon ; and , feel how I long to understand these thing which seem to be deny to all who be of the same sex as the moon herself I sit in a very nice nick , where no wind could make I look bad than nature will . but of my own look I never do think twice , unless there be any one to speak of such a subject . 
 here I be sit in the afternoon of a gentle July day , wonder by what energy of nature all these countless pebble be produce , and not even a couple to be find among they fit to lie side by side and purely tally with each other . right and leave , for mile and mile , million multiply into million ; yet I might hold any one in my palm and be sure that it never have be there before . and of the quiet wavelet even , take their own time and manner , in default of will of wind , all to come and call attention to their doom by arch over , and endeavor to make froth , be any two in sound and size , much more in shape and shade , alike ? every one have its own little business , of float pop - weed or foam bubble or of blister light , to do ; and every one , have do it , die and subside into its successor . 
 " a trifle sentimental , be we ? " cry a lively voice behind I , and the wave of my soft reflection fall , and instead of they stand Sir Montague Hockin , with a hideous parasol . 
 I never receive he with bad grace , often as I have repulse he ; but he be one of those people who think that woman be all whim and way . 
 " I grieve to intrude upon large idea , " he say , as I rise and look at he , " but I act under positive order now . a lady know what be good for a lady . Mrs. Hockin have be look from the window , and she think that you ought not to be sit in the sun like this . there have be a case of sun - stroke at Southbourne a young lady meditating under the cliff and she beg you to accept this palm leaf . " 
 I think of the many mile I have wander under the fierce californian sun ; but I would not speak to he of that . " thank you , " I say ; " it be very kind of she to think of it , and of you to do it . but will it be safe for you to go back without it ? " 
 " oh , why should I do so ? " he answer , with a tone of mock pathos which provoke I always , though I never could believe it to be mean in ridicule of I , for that would have be too low a thing ; and , besides , I never speak so . " could you bear to see I slay by the shaft of the sun ? Miss Castlewood , this parasol be amply large for both of we . " 
 I would not answer he in his own vein , because I never like his vein at all ; though I be not so entirely possess as to want every body to be like myself . 
 " thank you ; I mean to stay here , " I say ; " you may either leave the parasol or take it , whichever will be less troublesome . at any rate , I shall not use it . " 
 a gentleman , accord to my idea , would have bow and go upon his way ; but Sir Montague Hockin would have no rebuff . he seem to look upon I as a child , such as average english girl , fresh from little school , would be . nothing more annoy I , after all my thought and dream of some power in myself , than this . 
 " perhaps I might tell you a thing or two , " he say , while I keep gaze at some fishing - boat , and sit down again , as a sign for he to go " a little thing or two of which you have no idea , even in your most lonely musing , which might have a very deep interest for you . do you think that I come to this hole to see the sea ? or that fussy old muff of a Major 's doing ? " 
 " perhaps you would like I to tell he your opinion of his intellect and great plan , " I answer . " and after all his kindness to you ! " 
 " you never will do that , " he say ; " because you be a lady , and will not repeat what be say in confidence . I could help you materially in your great object , if you would only make a friend of I . " 
 " and what would your own object be ? the pure anxiety to do right ? " 
 " partly , and I might say mainly , that ; also an ambition for your good opinion , which seem so inaccessible . but you will think I selfish if I even hint at any condition of any kind . every body I have ever meet with like I , except Miss Castlewood . " 
 as he speak he glance down his fine amber - color beard , shin in the sun , and even in the sun show no gray hair   for a reason which Mrs. Hockin tell I afterward , and he seem to think it hard that a man with such a beard should be value lightly . 
 " I do not see why we should talk , " I say , " about either like or dislike . only , if you have any thing to tell , I shall be very much oblige to you . " 
 this gentleman look at I in a way which I have often observe in England . a general idea there prevail that the free and enlighten native of the West be in front of those here in intelligence , and to some extent , therefore , in dishonesty . but there must be many case where the two be not the same . 
 " no , " I reply , while he be look at his button , which have every british animal upon they ; " I mean nothing more than the simple thing I say . if you ought to tell I any thing , tell it . I be accustom to straightforward people . but they disappoint one by their never know any thing . " 
 " but I know something , " he answer , with a nod of grave , mysterious import ; " and perhaps I will tell you some day , when admit , if ever I have such an honor , to some little degree of friendship . " 
 " oh , please not to think of yourself , " I exclaim , in a manner which must have amuse he . " in such a case , the last thing that you should do be that . think only of what be right and honorable , and your duty toward a lady . also your duty to the law of your country . I be not at all sure that you ought not to be arrest . but perhaps it be nothing at all , after all ; only something invent to provoke I . " 
 " in that case , I can only drop the subject , " he answer , with that stern gleam of the eye which I have observe before , and detest . " I be also to tell you that we dine to - day an hour before the usual time , that my cousin may go out in the boat for whiting . the sea will be as smooth as glass . perhaps you will come with we . " 
 with these word , he lift his hat and go off , leave I in a most uncomfortable state , as he must have know if he have even try to think . for I could not get the small idea what he mean ; and , much as I try to believe that he must be only pretend , for reason of his own , to have something important to tell I , scarcely be it possible to be content so . a thousand absurd imagination begin to torment I as to what he mean . he live in London so much , for instance , that he have much quick chance of know whatever there be to know ; again , he be a man of the world , full of short , sharp sagacity , and able to penetrate what I could not ; then , again , he keep a large account with Shovelin , Wayte , and Shovelin , as Major Hockin chance to say ; and I know not that a banker 's reserve be much deep than his deposit ; moreover which , to my mind , be almost strong proof than any thing Sir Montague Hockin be of smuggle pedigree , and likely to be skillful in illicit run of knowledge . 
 however , in spite of all this uneasiness , not another word would I say to he about it , wait rather for he to begin again upon it . but , though I wait and wait , as , perhaps , with any other person I scarcely could have do , he would not condescend to give I even another look about it . 
 dislike that gentleman more and more for his supercilious conduct and certainty of subdue I , I naturally turn again to my good host and hostess . but here there be very little help or support to be obtain at present . major Hockin be lay the foundation of " The Bruntsea Assembly - Rooms , Literary Institute , Mutual Improvement Association , Lyceum , and Baths , from sixpence upward ; " while Mrs. Hockin have a hatch of " White Sultans , " or , rather , a prolong sitting of egg , fondly hop to hatch at last , from have cost so much , like a chicken - hearted conference . much as I sorrow at her disappointment for the sit cost twelve guineas I could not feel quite guiltless of a petty and ignoble smile , when , after hop against hope , upon the thirtieth day she place she beautifully sound egg in a large bowl of warm water , in which they float as calmly as if their price be a penny a dozen . the poor lady try to believe that they be spin with vitality ; but at last she allow I to break one , and lo ! it have be half boil by the advertiser . " this be very sad , " cry Mrs. Hockin ; and the patient old hen , who be come in a basket of hay to see the end of it , echo with a cluck that sentiment . 
 these thing be so , I be leave once more to follow my own guidance , which have seem , in the main , to be my fortune ever since my father die . for one day Mr. Shovelin have appear , to my great joy and comfort , as a guide and guardian ; but , alas ! for one day only . and , except for his good advice and kind paternal conduct to I , it seem at present an unlucky thing that I have ever discover he . not only through deep sense of loss and real sorrow for he , but also because Major Hockin , however good and great and generous , take it unreasonably into his head that I throw he over , and throw myself   as with want of fine taste he express it   into the arm of the banker . this hurt I very much , and I feel that Major Hockin could never have speak so hastily unless his hair have be originally red ; and so it might be detect , even now , where it survive itself , though blanch where he brush it into that pretentious ridge . sometimes I like that man , when his thought be large and liberal ; but no soon have he say a fine brave thing than he seem to have an after - think not to go too far with it ; just as he have do about the poor rob woman from the steerage and the young man who pull out his guinea . I pay he for my board and lodging , upon a scale settle by Uncle Sam himself , at California price ; therefore I be under no obligation to conceal his foible . but , take he altogether , he be good and brave and just , though unable , from absence of inner light , to be to I what Uncle Sam have be . 
 when I perceive that the Major condemn my simple behavior in London , and   if I may speak it , as I say it to myself   " blow hot and cold " in half a minute hot when I think of any good thing to be do , and cold as soon as he become the man to do they also , when I remember what a chronic plague be now at Bruntsea , in the shape of Sir Montague , who go to and fro , but could never be trust to be far off , I resolve to do what I have long be think of , and believe that my guardian , if he have live another day , would have recommend . I resolve to go and see Lord Castlewood , my father 's first cousin and friend in need . 
 when I ask my host and hostess what they think of this , they both declare that it be the very thing they be at the point of advising , which , however , they have forbear from do because I never take advice . at this , as be such a great exaggeration , I could not help smile seriously ; but I could not accept their sage opinion that , before I go to see my kinsman , I ought to write and ask his leave to do so . for that would have make it quite a rude thing to call , as I must still have do , if he should decline beforehand to receive I . moreover , it would look as if I seek an invitation , while only want an interview . therefore , be now full of money again , I hire the flyman who have make we taste the water , and take train at Newport , and change at two or three place as order , cross many little stream , and come to a fair river , which prove to be the Thames itself , a few mile above read . 
 in spite of all the large lesson of travel , adventure , and tribulation , my heart be throb with some rather small feeling , as for the first time I draw near to the home of my forefather . I should have be sorry to find it ugly or mean , or lie in a hole , or even modern or insignificant ; and when none of these charge could be bring against it , I be fill with highly discreditable pain that Providence have not see fit to issue I into this world in the masculine form ; in which case this fine property would , accord to the rule of mankind , have be mine . however , I be very soon ashamed of such idea , and sit down on a bank to dispel they with the free and fair view around I . 
 the builder of that house know well both where to place and how to shape it , so as not to spoil the site . it stand near the brow of a bosom hill , which shelter it , both with wood and clevice , from the rigor and fury of the north and east ; while in front the slop foreground widen its soft lap of green . in bay and wave of roll grass , promontorie , here and there , by jut copse or massive tree , and jot now and then with cattle as calm as boat at anchor , the range of sunny upland fall to the reedy fringe and cluster silence of deep river meadow . here the Thames , in pleasant bend of gentleness and courtesy , yet with will of its own way , be now a plenteous river , spread low music , and hold mirror to the wood and hill and field , cast afar a broad still gleam , and on the bank present tremulous infinitude of flash . 
 now these thing touch I all the more because none of they belong to I ; and , after thus try to enlarge my view , I get up with much well heart , and hurry on to have it over , whatever it might be . a girl bring up in the real english way would have spend she last shilling to drive up to the door in the fly at the station a most sad machine but I think it no disgrace to go in a more becoming manner . 
 one scarcely ever act up to the force of situation ; and I go as quietly into that house as if it be Betsy Bowen 's . if any body have be rude to I , or ask who I be , or a little thing of that sort , my spirit might have be up at once , and find , as usually happen then , good reason to go down afterward . but happily there be nothing of the kind . an elderly man , without any gaudy badge , open the door very quietly , and beg my pardon , before I speak , for ask I to speak softly . it be one of his lordship 's very bad day , and when he be so , every sound seem to reach he . I take the hint , and do not speak at all , but follow he over deep matting into a little room to which he show I . and then I give he a little note , write before I leave Bruntsea , and ask he whether he think that his master be well enough to attend to it . 
 he look at I in a peculiar manner , for he have know my father well , have serve from his youth in the family ; but he only ask whether my message be important . I answer that it be , but that I would wait for another time rather than do any harm . but he say that , however ill his master be , nothing provoke he more than to find that any thing be neglect through it . and before I could speak again he be go with my letter to Lord Castlewood . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 AT HOME 

 some of the miserable , and I might say strange , thing which have befall I from time to time unseasonably , now begin to force their remembrance upon I . such dark figure always seem to make the most of a nervous moment , when solid reason yield to flutter fear and small misgiving . there any body seem to lie , as a stranded sailor lie , at the foot of perpendicular cliff of most inhuman humanity , with all the world frown down over the crest , and no one to throw a rope down . often and often have I feel this want of any one to help I , but the only way out of it seem to be to do my good to help myself . 
 even , now I have little hope , have be so often dash , and know that my father 's cousin possess no share of my father 's strength . he might , at the utmost , give good advice , and help I with kind feeling ; but if he want to do more , surely he might have try ere now . but my thought about this be cut short by a message that he would be glad to see I , and I follow the servant to the library . 
 here I find Lord Castlewood sit in a high - back chair , uncushioned and uncomfortable . when he see I near he he get up and take my hand , and look at I , and I be pleased to find his face well - mean , brave , and generous . but even to rise from his chair be plainly no small effort to he , and he lean upon a staff or crutch as he offer I a small white hand . 
 " Miss Castlewood , " he say , with a very weak yet clear and silvery voice , " for many year I have long in vain and seek in vain to hear of you . I have not escape all self - reproach through my sense of want of energy ; yet , such as I be , I have do my good , or I do my good to think so . " 
 " I be sure you have , " I reply , without think , know his kindness to my father , and feel the shame of my own hot word to Mr. Shovelin about he . " I owe you more gratitude than I can tell , for your goodness to my dear father . I be not come now to trouble you , but because it be my duty . " 
 while I be speak he manage to lead I , feebly as himself could walk , to a deep chair for reading , or some such use , whereof I have have few chance . and in every step and word and gesture I recognize that foreign grace which true - bear briton be proud to despise on both side of the Atlantic . and , be in the light , I watch he well , because I be not a foreigner . 
 in the clear summer light of the westere sun   which be well for accurate us than the radiance of the morning   I see a firm , calm face , which might in good health have be powerful a face which might be call the moonlight image of my father 's . I could not help turn away to cry , and suspicion flee forever . 
 " my dear young cousin , " he say , as soon as I be fit to speak to , " your father trust I , and so must you . you may think that I have forget you , or do very little to find you out . it be no indifference , no forgetfulness : I have not be able to work myself , and I have have very deep trouble of my own . " 
 he lean on his staff , and look down at I , for I have sit down when thus overcome , and I know that the forehead and eye be those of a learn and intellectual man . how I know this it be impossible to say , for I never have meet with such a character as this , unless it be the Abbe of Flechon , when I be only fourteen year old , and value his great skill in spin a top tenfold more than all his deep learning . Lord Castlewood have long , silky hair , fall in curl of silver gray upon either side of his beautiful forehead , and the gaze of his soft dark eye be sad , gentle , yet penetrate . weak health and almost constant pain have chasten his delicate feature to an expression almost feminine , though firm thin lip and rigid line show masculine will and fortitude . and when he speak of his own trouble   which , perhaps , he would not have do except for consolation 's sake , I know that he mean something even more grievous than bodily anguish . 
 " it be hard , " he say , " that you , so young and healthy and full of high spirit as you be   unless your face belie you , should begin the good year of your life , as common opinion put such thing , in such a cloud of gloom and shame . " 
 " there be no shame at all , " I answer ; " and if there be gloom , I be use to that ; and so be my father for year and year . what be my trouble compare with his ? " 
 " your trouble be nothing when compare with his , so far as regard the mere weight of it ; but he be a strong man to carry his load ; you be a young and a sensitive woman . the burden may even be bad for you . now tell I all about yourself , and what have bring you to I . " 
 his voice be so quiet and soothing that I seem to rest beneath it . he have not speak once of religion or the will of God , nor ply I at all with those pious allusion , which even to the reverent mind be like illusion when so urge . Lord Castlewood have too deep a sense of the will of God to know what it be ; and he look at I wistfully as at one who might have bad experience of it . 
 fall happily under his influence , as his clear , kind eye meet mine , I tell he every thing I could think of about my father and myself , and all I want to do next , and how my heart and soul be set upon get to the bottom of every thing . and while I speak with spirit , or softness , or , I fear , sometimes with hate , I could not help see that he be surprised , but not wholly displeased , with my energy . and then , when all be exhaust , come the old question I have hear so often , and find so hard to answer 
 " and what do you propose to do next , Erema ? " 
 " to go to the very place itself , " I say , speak strongly under challenge , though quite unresolved about such a thing before ; " to live in the house where my father live , and my mother and all of the family die ; and from day to day to search every corner and fish up every bit of evidence , until I get hold of the true man at last , of the villain who do it who do it , and leave my father and all the rest of we to be condemn and die for it . " 
 " Erema , " reply my cousin , as he have tell I now to call he , " you be too impetuous for such work , and it be wholly unfit for you . for such a task , person of train sagacity and keen observation be need . and after all these eighteen year , or nearly nineteen now it must be , there can not be any thing to discover there . " 
 " but if I like , may I go there , cousin , if only to satisfy my own mind ? I be miserable now at Bruntsea , and Sir Montague Hockin wear I out . " 
 " Sir Montague Hockin ! " Lord Castlewood exclaim ; " why , you do not tell I that he be there . wherever he be , you should not be . " 
 " I forgot to speak of he . he do not live there , but be continually to and fro for bathing , or fishing , or rabbit - shooting , or any other pretext . and he make the place very unpleasant to I , kind as the Major and Mrs. Hockin be , because I can never make he out at all . " 
 " do not try to do so , " my cousin answer , look at I earnestly ; " be content to know nothing of he , my dear . if you can put up with a very dull house , and a host who be even dull , come here and live with I , as your father would have wish , and as I , your near relative , now ask and beg of you . " 
 this be wonderfully kind , and for a moment I feel tempt . Lord Castlewood be an elderly man , and , as the head of our family , my natural protector , there could be nothing wrong , and there might be much that be good , in such an easy arrangement . but , on the other hand , it seem to I that after this my work would languish . live in comfort and prosperity under the roof of my forefather , beyond any doubt I should begin to fall into habit of luxury , to take to the love of literature , which I know to be latent within I , to lose the clear , strong , practical sense of the duty for which I , the last of seven , be spar , and in some measure , perhaps , by wandering and by hardship , fit . and then I think of my host 's weak health , continual pain   the sign of which be hardly repress even while he be speak , and probably also his secluded life . be it fair to force he , by virtue of his inborn kindness and courtesy , to come out of his privilege and deal with I , who could not altogether be in any place a mere nobody ? and so I refuse his offer . 
 " I be very much oblige to you indeed , " I say , " but I think you might be sorry for it . I will come and stop with you every now and then , when your health be well , and you ask I . but to live here altogether would not do ; I should like it too well , and do nothing else . " 
 " perhaps you be right , " he reply , with the air of one who care little for any thing , which be to I the most melancholy thing , and bad than any distress almost ; " you be very young , my dear , and year should be allow to pass before you know what full - grown sorrow be . you have have enough , for your age , of it . you have well not live in this house ; it be not a house for cheerfulness . " 
 " then if I must neither live here nor at Bruntsea , " I ask , with sudden remonstrance , feel as if every body desire to be quit of I or to worry I , " to what place in all the world be I to go , unless it be back to America ? I will go at once to Shoxford , and take lodging of my own . " 
 " perhaps you have well wait a little while , " Lord Castlewood answer , gently , " although I would much rather have you at Shoxford than where you be at present . but please to remember , my good Erema , that you can not go to Shoxford all alone . I have a most faithful and trusty man the one who open the door to you . he have be here before his remembrance . he disdain I still as compare with your father . will you have he to superintend you ? I scarcely see how you can do any good , but if you do go , you must go openly , and as your father 's daughter . " 
 " I have no intention whatever of go in any other way , Lord Castlewood ; but perhaps , " I continue , " it would be as well to make as little stir as possible . of an english village I know nothing but the little I have see at Bruntsea , but there they make a very great fuss about any one who come down with a man - servant . " 
 " to be sure , " reply my cousin , with a smile ; " they would not be true briton otherwise . perhaps you would do well without Stixon ; but of course you must not go alone . could you by any mean persuade your old nurse Betsy to go with you ? " 
 " how good of you to think of it ! how wise you be ! " I really could not help say , as I gaze at his delicate and noble face . " I be sure that if Betsy can come , she will ; though of course she must be compensate well for the waste all her lodger will make of it . they be very wicked , and eat most dreadfully if she even take one day 's holiday . what do you think they even do ? she have tell I with tear in her eye of it . they be all allow a pat of butter , a penny roll , and two sardine for breakfast . no soon do they know that her back be turn " 
 " Erema ! " cry my cousin , with some surprise ; and be so recalled , I be ashamed . but I never could help take interest in very little thing indeed , until my own common - sense , or somebody else , come to tell I what a child I be . however , I do believe that Uncle Sam like I all the well for this fault . 
 " my dear , I do not mean to blame you , " Lord Castlewood say , most kindly ; " it must be a great relief for you to look on at other people . but tell I or rather , since you have tell I almost every thing you know let I , if only in one way I can help you , help you at least in that way . " 
 know that he must mean money , I decline , from no false pride , but a set resolve to work out my work , if possible , through my own resource . but I promise to apply to he at once if scarcity should again befall I , as have happen lately . and then I long to ask he why he seem to have so low an opinion of Sir Montague Hockin . that question , however , I fear to put , because it might not be a proper one , and also because my cousin have speak in a very strange tone , as if of some private dislike or reserve on that subject . moreover , it be too evident that I have try his courtesy long enough . from time to time pale shade of bodily pain , and then hot flush , have flit across his face , like cloud on a windy summer evening . and more than once he have glance at the time - piece , not to hurry I , but as if he dread its announcement . it be a beautiful clock , and strike with a silvery sound every quarter of an hour . and now , as I rise to say good - by , to catch my evening train , it strike a quarter to five , and my cousin stand up , with his weight upon his staff , and look at I with an inexpressible depth of weary misery . 
 " I have only a few minute leave , " he say , " during which I can say any thing . my time be divide into two sad part : the time when I be capable of very little , and the time when I be capable of nothing ; and the latter part be twice the length of the other . for sixteen hour of every day , far well have I be dead than live , so far as our own little insolence may judge . but I speak of it only to excuse bad manner , and perhaps I show bad by do so . I shall not be able to see you again until to - morrow morning . do not go ; they will arrange all that . send a note to major Hockin by Stixon 's boy . Stixon and Mrs. Price will see to your comfort , if those who be free from pain require any other comfort . forgive I ; I do not mean to be rude . sometimes I can not help give way . " 
 less enviable than the poor slave , Lord Castlewood sink upon his hard stiff chair , and straighten his long narrow hand upon his knee , and set his thin lip in straight blue line . each hand be as rigid as the ivory handle of an umbrella or walking - stick , and his lip be like clamp wire . this be his regular way of prepare for the onset of the night , so that no grimace , no cry , no moan , or other token of fierce agony should be wring from he . 
 " my lord will catch it stiff to - night , " say Mr. Stixon , who come as I ring , and then lead I away to the drawing - room ; " he always have it ten time bad after any talking or any thing to upset he like . and so , then , miss excuse a humble servant do I understand from he that you be the Captain 's own daughter ? " 
 " yes ; but surely your master want you he be in such dreadful pain . do please to go to he , and do something . " 
 " there be nothing to be do , miss , " Stixon answer , with calm resignation ; " he be bind to stay so for sixteen hour , and then he ease off again . but bless my heart , miss excuse I in your presence his lordship be thoroughly use to it . it be my certain knowledge that for seven year now he have never have seven minute free from pain seven minute all of a heap , I mean . some do say , miss , as the Lord doeth every thing accord to his righteousness , that the reason be not very far to seek . " 
 I ask he what he mean , though I ought , perhaps , to have put a stop to his loquacity ; and he pretend not to hear , which make I ask he all the more . 
 " a well man never live than my lord , " he answer , with a little shock at my misprision ; " but it have be say among censoorous person that nobody ever have no luck as come in suddenly to a property and a high state of life on the top of the head of a family of seven . " 
 " what a poor superstition ! " I cry , though I be not quite sure of its be a wicked one . " but what be your master 's malady , Stixon ? surely there might be something do to relieve his violent pain , even if there be no real cure for it ? " 
 " no , miss , nothing can be do . the doctor have exorce themselves . they try this , that , and the other , but nature only fly bad against they . ' tis a thing as be never hear of till the Constitooshon be knock on the head and to piece by the Reform Bill . and though they could not   cure it , they do what they could do , miss . they discover a very good name for it they christen it the ' new - rager ! ' " 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 LORD castlewood 

 in the morning , when I be call again to see my afflict cousin Stixon junior have gladly go to explain thing for I at Bruntsea little as I know of any bodily pain   except hunger , or thirst , or weariness , and once in my life a headache , I stand before Lord Castlewood with a deference and humility such as I have never feel before toward any human being . not only because he bear perpetual pain in the two degree of night and day the day be dark and the night jet - black without a murmur or an evil word ; not only because through the whole of this he have keep his mind clear and his love of knowledge bright ; not even because he have manage , like Job , to love God through the whole of it . all these be good reason for very great and very high respect of any man ; and when there be no claim whatever on his part to any such feeling , it need must come . but when I learn another thing , high respect at once become what might be call deep reverence . and this come to pass in a simple and , as any one must confess , quite inevitable way . 
 it be not to be suppose that I could sit the whole of my first evening in that house without a soul to speak to . so far as my dignity and sense of right permit , I wear out Mr. Stixon , so far as he would go , not ask he any thing that the very worst - minded person could call " inquisitive , " but allow he to talk , as he seem to like to do , while he wait upon I , and alternately lament my hapless history and my hopeless want of taste . 
 " ah , your father , the Captain , now , he would have know what this be ! you have   no right to his eye , Miss Erma , without his tongue and palate . no more of this , miss ! and do for you a - purpose ! well , cook will be put out , and no mistake ! I well not let she see it go down , anyhow . " and the worthy man tearfully put some dainty by , perhaps without any view to his own supper . 
 " Lord Castlewood speak to I about a Mrs. Price the housekeeper , be she not ? " I ask at last , be so accustomed to like what I could get , that the number of dish weary I . 
 " oh yes , miss , " say Stixon , very shortly , as if that description exhaust Mrs. Price . 
 " if she be not too busy , I should like to see she as soon as these thing be all take away . I mean if she be not a stranger , and if she would like to see I . " 
 " no new - comer here , " Mr. Stixon reply ; " we all work our way up regular , the same as my lad be begin for to do . new - fangle way be not accept here . we put the reform spirit scrub of the step till their knuckle be crack and their knee like a bean . the old lord be the man for discipline your grandfather , if you please , miss . he catch I when I be about that high " 
 " excuse I , Mr. Stixon ; but would he have encourage you to talk as you so very kindly talk to I , instead of answer a question ? " 
 I think that poor Stixon would have be upset by this , and be angry with myself for say it ; but instead of be hurt , he only smile and touch his forehead . 
 " well , now , you do remind I uncommon of he then , miss . I could have hear the old lord speak almost , though he be always harsh and distant . and as I be go for to say , he catch I fifty year agone next Lammas - tide ; a pear - tree of an early sort it be ; you may see the very tree if you please to stand here , miss , though the pear be quite alter now , and scarcely fit to eat . well , I be run off with my cap chock - full , miss " 
 " please to keep that story for another time , " I say ; " I shall be most happy to hear it then . but I have a particular wish , if you please , to see Mrs. Price before dark , unless there be any good reason why I should not . " 
 " oh no , Miss Erma , no reason at all . only please to bear in mind , miss , that she be a coorous woman . she be that jealous , and I might say forward " 
 " then she be capable of speak for herself . " 
 " you be right , miss , there , and no mistake . she can speak for herself and for fifty other word enough , I mean , for all of they . but I would not have she know for all the world that I say it . " 
 " then if you do not send she to I at once , the first thing I shall do will be to tell she . " 
 " oh no , miss , none of your family would do that ; that never have be do anonymous . " 
 I assure he that my threat be not in earnest , but of pure impatience . and have no motive but downright jealousy for keep Mrs. Price from I , he make up his mind at last to let she come . but he tell I to be careful what I say ; I must not expect it to be at all like talk to himself , for instance . 
 the housekeeper come up at last , by dint of my persistence , and she stop in the doorway and make I a courtesy , which put I out of countenance , for nobody ever do that in America , and scarcely any one in England now , except in country - dancing . instead of be as describe by Stixon , Mrs. Price be of a very quiet , sensible , and respectful kind . she be rather short , but look rather tall , from she even walk and way of carry her head . her figure be neat , and her face clear - speak , with straight pretty eyebrow , and calm bright eye . I feel that I could tell she almost any thing , and she would think before she talk of it . and in my strong want of some woman to advise with Betsy Bowen be very good but very narrow , and Mrs. Hockin a mere echo of the Major until he contradict she , and Suan Isco , with her fine , large view , five thousand mile out of sight just now this be a state of thing to enhance the value of any good countenance feminine . 
 at any rate , I be so glad to see she that , be still ungraduate in the step of rank   though begin to like a good footing there , I run up and take she by both hand , and fetch she out of her grand courtesy and into a low chair . at this she be surprised , as one quick glance show ; and she think I , perhaps , what be call in England " an impulsive creature . " this put I again upon my dignity , for I never have be in any way like that , and I clearly perceive that she ought to understand a little more distinctly my character . 
 it be easy to begin with this intention , but very hard indeed to keep it up when any body of nice way and look be sit with a proper deferential power of listening , and like one 's young idea , which multiply and magnify themselves at each demand . so after some general talk about the weather , the country , the house , and so on , we come to the people of the house , or at any rate the chief person . and I ask she a few quiet question about Lord Castlewood 's health and habit , and any thing else she might like to tell I . for many thing have seem to I a little strange and out of the usual course , and on that account worthy to be speak of without common curiosity . Mrs. Price tell I that there be many thing generally divulge and credit , which therefore lie in her power to communicate without any derogation from her office . be pleased with these large word   which I always have trouble in pronouncing , I ask she whether there be any thing else . and she answer yes , but unhappily of a nature to which it be scarcely desirable to allude in my presence . I tell she that this be not satisfactory , and I might say quite the opposite ; that have " allude " to whatever it might be , she be bind to tell I all about it . that I have live in very many country , in all of which wrong thing continually go on , of which I continually hear just in that sort of way and no more . enough to make one uncomfortable , but not enough to keep one instructed and vigilant as to thing that ought to be avoid . upon this she yield either to my argument or to her own dislike of unreasonable silence , and give I the follow account of the misfortune of Lord Castlewood : 
 Herbert William Castlewood be the third son of Dean Castlewood , a young brother of my grandfather , and be bear in the year 1806 . he be old , therefore , than my father , but still   even before my father 's birth , which provide a direct heir   there be many life betwixt he and the family estate . and his father , have as yet no promotion in the Church , find it hard to bring up his child . the eld son get a commission in the army , and the second enter the navy , while Herbert be place in a bank at Bristol not at all the sort of life which he would have choose . but be of a gentle , unselfish nature , as well as a weak constitution , he put up with his state in life , and do his good to give satisfaction . 
 this calm courage generally have its reward , and in the year 1842 , not very long before the death of my grandfather at Shoxford , Mr. Herbert Castlewood , be well - connect , well - behave , diligent , and pleasing , obtain a partnership in the firm , which be , perhaps , the foremost in the west of England . his two eld brother happen then to be at home , Major and Commander Castlewood , each of whom have see very hard service , and find it still hard slavery to make both end meet , although bachelor . but , return full of glory , they find one thing hard still , and that be to extract any cash from their father , the highly venerate Dean , who in that respect , if in no other , very closely resemble the head of the family . therefore these brave man resolve to go and see their Bristol brother , to whom they be tenderly attach , and who now must have money enough and to spare . so they write to their brother to meet they on the platform , scarcely believe that they could be there in so short a time from London ; for they never have travel by rail before ; and they set forth in wonderful spirit , and laugh at the strange , giddy rush of the travelling , and make bet with each other about punctual time   for train keep much well time while new , and , as long as they could time it , they keep time to a second . but , sad to relate , they want no chronometer when they arrive at Bristol , both be kill at a blow , with their watch still go , and a smile on their face . for the train have run into a wall of Bath stone , and several of the passenger be kill . 
 the sight of his two brother carry out like this , after so many year of not see they , be too much for Mr. Herbert Castlewood 's nerve , which always have be delicate . and he shiver all the more from reproach of conscience , have make up his mind not to lend they any money , as a practical banker be compel to do . and from that very moment he begin to feel great pain . 
 Mrs. Price assure I that the doctor all agree that nothing but change of climate could restore Mr. Castlewood 's tone and system , and be full of art   though so simple , as she say , which she could not entirely reconcile , he set off for Italy , and there he stop , with the good leave of his partner , be now value highly as heir to the Dean , who be know to have put a good trifle together . and in Italy my father must have find he , as relate by Mr. Shovelin , and there receive kindness and comfort in his trouble , if trouble so deep could be comfort . 
 now I wonder and eagerly yearn to know whether my father , at such a time , and in such a state of loneliness , might not have be lead to impart to his cousin and host and protector the dark mystery which lie at the bottom of his own conduct . know how resolute and stern he be , and doubtless then imbittere by the wreck of love and life , I think it more probable that he have keep silence even toward so near a relative , especially as he have see very little of his cousin Herbert till he have find he thus . moreover , my grandfather and the Dean have spend little brotherly love on each other , have have a life - long feud about a copy - hold furze brake of nearly three - quarter of an acre , as Betsy remember to have hear her master say . 
 to go on , however , with what Mrs. Price be say . she know scarcely any thing about my father , because she be too young at that time to be call into the counsel of the servant ' hall , for she scarcely be thirty - five yet , as she declare , and she certainly do not look forty . but all about the present Lord Castlewood she know well than any body else , perhaps , because she have be in the service of his wife , and , indeed , her chief attendant . then , have speak of her master 's wife , Mrs. Price catch herself up , and thenceforth call she only his " lady . " 
 Mr. Herbert Castlewood , who have mind his business for so many year , and keep himself aloof from lady , spend all his leisure in good literature , at this time of life and in this state of health   for the shock he have receive strike inward , fall into an accident tenfold bad the fatal accident of love . and this malady rag the more powerfully with he on account of break out so late in life . in one of the picture - gallery at Florence , or some such place , Mrs. Price declare , he meet with a lady who make all the picture look cold and dull and dead to he . a lovely young creature she must have be   as even Mrs. Price , who detest she , acknowledge , and to the eye of a learn but not keen man as good as lovely . my father be go to look after I , and fetch I out of England , but even if he have be there , perhaps he scarcely could have stop it ; for this Mr. Castlewood , although so quiet , have the family fault of tenacity . 
 Mrs. Price , be a very steady person , with a limited income , and enough to do , be inclined to look down upon the state of mind in which Mr. Castlewood become involve . she be not there at the moment , of course , but suddenly send for when all be settle ; nevertheless , she find out afterward how it begin from her master 's man , through what he have for dinner . and in the kitchen - garden at Castlewood no rampion would she allow while she live . I ask she whether she have no pity , no sympathy , no fine feeling , and how she could have become Mrs. Price if she never have know such sentiment . but she say that they only call she " mistress " on account of her authority , and she never have be draw to the opposite sex , though many time ask in marriage . and what she have see of matrimony lead she far away from it . I be sorry to hear she say this , and feel damp , till I think that the world be not all alike . 
 then she tell I , just as if it be no more than a bargain for a pound of tallow candle , how Mr. Herbert Castlewood , patient and persistent , be keep off and on for at least two year by the mother of his sweet idol . how the old lady hold a balance in her mind as to the likelihood of his succession , try , through english friend , to find the value and the course of property . of what nation she be , Mrs. Price could not say , and only know that it must be a bad one . she call herself the Countess of Ixorism , as truly pronounce in English ; and she really be of good family too , so far as any foreigner can be . and her daughter 's name be Flittamore , not accord to the right spelling , perhaps , but pronounce with the proper accent . 
 Flittamore herself do not seem to care , accord to what Mrs. Price have be tell , but leave herself wholly in her mother 's hand , be sure of her beauty still grow upon she , and desire to have it admire and praise . and the number of foreigner she always have about she sometimes make her real lover nearly give she up . but , alas ! he be not quite wise enough for this , with all that he have read and learn and see . therefore , when it be report from Spain that my father have be kill by bandit the truth be that he be then in Greece the Countess at last consent to the marriage of her daughter with Herbert Castlewood , and even seem to press it forward for some reason of her own . and the happy couple set forth upon their travel , and Mrs. Price be send abroad to wait upon the lady . 
 for a few month they seem to get on very well , Flittamore show much affection for her husband , whose age be a trifle more than her own double , while he be entirely wrap up in she , and labor that the grace of her mind might be worthy to compare with those more visible . but her spiritual face and most sweet poetic eye be vivid with bodily brilliance alone . she have neither mind enough to learn , nor heart enough to pretend to learn . 
 it be out of my power to describe such thing , even if it be my duty to do so , which , happily , it have never be ; moreover , Mrs. Price , in what she tell I , exercise a just and strict reserve . enough that Mr. Castlewood 's wed life be do with in six month and three day . Lady Castlewood , as she would be call , though my father still be live and his cousin disclaim the title away she run from some dull german place , after a very stiff lesson in poetry , and with she run off a young Englishman , the present Sir Montague Hockin . he be Mr. Hockin then , and have not a half - penny of his own ; but Flittamore meet that difficulty by rob her husband to his last farthing . 
 this have happen about twelve year back , soon after I be place at the school in Languedoc , to which I be take so early in life that I almost forget all about it . but it might have be well for poor Flittamore if she have be bring up at a steady place like that , with sister and lady of retreat , to teach she the proper description of her duty to mankind . I seem now in my own mind to condemn she quite enough , feel how superior her husband must have be ; but Mrs. Price go even far , and become quite indignant that any one should pity she . 
 " a hussy ! a hussy ! a poppet of a hussy ! " she exclaim , with great power than her quiet face could indicate ; " never would I look at she . speak never so , Miss Castlewood . my lord be the very good of all man , and she have make he what he be . the pity she deserve be to be tread under foot , as I see they do in Naples . " 
 after all the passion I have see among rough people , I scarcely could help tremble at the depth of wrath dissemble and firmly control in calm clear eye under very steadfast eyebrow . it be plain that Lord Castlewood have , at any rate , the gift of be love by his dependent . 
 " I hope that he take it aright ! " I cry , catch some of her indignation ; " I hope that he cast she to the wind , without even a sigh for such a cruel creature ! " 
 " he be not strong enough , " she answer , sadly ; " his bodily health be not equal to it . from childhood he have be partly crippled and spoil in his nerve by an accident . and the shock of that sight at Bristol fly to his weakness , and be too much for he . and now this third and bad disaster , come upon he where his good hope lay , and at such a time of life , take he altogether off his leg . and off his head too , I might almost say , miss ; for , instead of blame she , he put the fault entirely upon himself . at his time of life , and in such poor health , he should not have marry a bright young girl : how could he ever hope to make she happy ? that be how he look at it , when he should have send constable after she . " 
 " and what become of she the mindless animal , to forsake so good and great a man ! I do hope she be punish , and that vile man too . " 
 " she be , Miss Castlewood ; but he be not ; at least he have not receive justice yet . but he will , he will , he will , miss . the treacherous thief ! and my lord receive he as a young fellow - countryman under a cloud , and lend he money , and save he from starve ; for he have break with his father and be run from his creditor . " 
 " tell I no more , " I say ; " not another word . it be my fate to meet that well , that gentleman almost every day . and he , and he oh , how thankful I be to have find out all this about he ! " 
 the above will show why , when I meet my father 's cousin on the follow morning with his grand , calm face , as benevolent as if he have pass a night of luxurious rest instead of sleepless agony I know myself to be of a low order in mind and soul and heart than his ; a small , narrow , passionate girl , in the presence of a large , broad - sighted , and compassionate man . 
 I throw myself altogether on his will ; for , when I trust , I trust wholly . and , under his advice , I do not return with any rash haste to Bruntsea , but write in discharge of all duty there ; while Mrs. Price , a clear and steadfast woman , be send to London to see Wilhelmina Strouss . these two must have have very great talk together , and , both be zealous and faithful , they come to many misunderstanding . however , on the whole , they become very honest friend , and swear ally at last , discover more , the more they talk , people against whom they feel a common and just enmity . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 SHOXFORD 

 be there people who have never , in the course of anxious life , feel desire to be away , to fly away , from every thing , however good and dear to they , and rest a little , and think new thought , or let new thought flow into they , from the gentle air of some new place , where nobody have hear of they a place whose care , be feel by proxy , almost seem romantic , and where the eye spare brain and heart with a critic 's self - complacence ? if any such place yet remain , the happy soul may seek it in an inland english village . 
 a village where no billow be to stun or to confound it , no crag or precipice to trouble it with giddiness , and where no hurry of restless tide make time , its own father , uneasy . but in the quiet , at the bottom of the valley , a beautiful rivulet , belong to the place , hasten or linger , accord to its mood ; hanker here and there , not to be away yet ; and then , by the doing of its own work , lead to a swift perplexity of ripple . here along its side , and there softly lean over it , fresh green meadow lie repose in the settled meaning of the summer day . for this be a safe time of year than the flourish of the spring - tide , when the impulse of young warmth awake be suddenly smite by the bleak east wind , and cowslip and cuckoo - flower and speedwell get their bright lip brown with cold . then , moreover , must the mead have feel the worry of scarcely know yet what would be demand of they ; whether to carry an exact load of hay , or only to feed a few saunter cow . 
 but now every trouble have be settle for the good ; the long grass be mown , and the short grass browse , and caper of the fairy and caprice of the cow have dapple wear texture with a deep green . therefore let eye that be satisfied here as any but a very bad eye must be , with so many change of softness follow the sweet lead of the valley ; and there , in a bend of the gently brawl river , stand the never - brawl church . 
 a church less trouble with the gift of tongue be not to be find in England : a church of gray stone that crumble just enough to entice frail mortal sympathy , and confess to the storm it have undergo in a tone that conciliate the human sigh . the tower be large , and high enough to tell what the way of the wind be without any potato - bury on the top , and the simple roof be not cruciate with tile of misguided fancy . but gray rest , and peace of age , and content of lie calmly six foot deep than the bustle of the quick ; memory also , and oblivion , follow each other slowly , like the shadow of the church - yard tree for all of these no well place can be , nor soft comfort . 
 for the village of Shoxford run up on the rise , and straggle away from its burial - place , as a child from his school go mitche . there be some few little up and down in the manner of its building , as well as in other particular about it ; but still it keep as parallel with the crooked river as the far more crooked way of man permit . but the whole of the little road of house run down the valley from the church - yard gate ; and above the church , look up the pretty valley , stand nothing but the mill and the plank bridge below it ; and a furlong above that again the stone bridge , where the main road cross the stream , and be console by lead to a big house the Moonstock Inn . 
 the house in which my father live so long or rather , I should say , my mother , while he be away with his regiment and where we unfortunate seven see the light , stand about half - way down the little village , be on the right - hand side of the road as you come down the valley from the Moonstock bridge . therefore it be on the further and upper side of the street if it can be call a street from the valley and the river and the mead below the mill , inasmuch as every bit of Shoxford , and every particle of the parish also , have existence of no mean sort , as compare with other parish , in its own esteem on the right side of the river Moon . 
 my father 's house , in this good village , stand endwise to the street , be high at one end than at the other . that be to say , the ground come slop , or even fall , as fairly might be say , from one end to the other of it , so that it look like a Noah 's ark tilt by Behemoth under the stern - post . and a little lane , from a finely woode hill , here fall steeply into the " High Street "   as the grocer and the butcher love to call it , and make my father 's house most distinct , by obey a good deal of its outline , and discharge in heavy rain a free supply of water under the weather - board of our front - door . this front - door open on the little steep triangle form by the meeting of lane and road , while the back - door lead into a long but narrow garden run along the road , but raise some foot above it ; the bank be keep up by a rough stone wall crest with stick - up snap - dragon and valerian , and face with rosette and disk and dill of houseleek , pennywort , and hart' - tongue . 
 Betsy and I be only just in time to see the old house as it use to be ; for the owner have die about half a year ago , and his grandson , have prove his will , be resolve to make short work with it . the poor house be blame for the sorrow it have shelter , and have the repute of two spectre , as well as the pale shadow of misfortune . for my dear father be now believe by the superstitious villager to haunt the old home of his happiness and love , and roam from room to room in search of his wife and all his child . but his phantom be most careful not to face that of his father , which stalk along haughtily , as behoove a lord , and point forever to a red wound in its breast . no wonder , therefore , that the house would never let ; and it would have be pull down long ago if the owner have not feel a liking for it , through memory tender and peculiar to himself . his grandson , have none of these to contend with , resolve to make a mere stable of it , and build a public - house at the bottom of the garden , and turn the space between they into skittle - ground , and so forth . 
 to I this seem such a very low idea , and such a desecration of a sacred spot , that if I have own any money to be sure of , I would have offer hundred to prevent it . but I find myself now in a delicate state of mind concern money , have little of my own , and doubt how much other people might intend for I . so that I durst not offer to buy land and a house without any mean to pay . 
 and it be not for that reason only that Betsy and I keep ourselves quiet . we know that any stir in this little place about we such as my name might at once set go would once for all destroy all hope of do good by come . Betsy know more of such matter than I do , besides all her knowledge of the place itself , and her great superiority of age ; therefore I leave to she all little management , as be in every way fair and wise . for Mrs. Strouss have forsake a large and good company of lodger , with only Herr Strouss to look after they and who be he among they ? if she trod on one side of her foot , or feel a tingling in her hand , or a buzzing in her ear , she know in a moment what it be of pound and pound be she be cheat , a hundred mile off , by foreigner ! 
 for this reason it have cost much persuasion and many appeal to her faithfulness , as well as considerable weekly payment , ere ever my good nurse could be bring away from London ; and perhaps even so she never would have come if I have not write myself to Mrs. Price , then visit Betsy in European Square , that if the landlady be too busy to be spar by her lodger , I must try to get Lord Castlewood to spare I his housekeeper . upon this Mrs. Strouss at once declare that Mrs. Price would ruin every thing ; and rather than that no matter what she lose she herself would go with I . and so she do , and she manage very well , keep my name out of sight   for , happen what might , I would have no false one ; and she get quiet lodging in her present name , which sound nicely foreign ; and the village be more agitated now about my father 's material house , and the work they be promise in pull it down , than about his shattered household , we have a very favorable time for come in , and be pronounce to be foreigner who must not be allow to run up bill . 
 this rustic conclusion suit we quite well , and we soon confirm it unwittingly , Betsy offer a german thaler and I an american dollar at the shop of the village chandler and baker , so that we be look upon with some pity , and yet a kind desire for our custom . thus , without any attempt of our at either delusion or mystery , Mrs. Strouss be hail throughout the place as " Madam Straw , " while I , through the sagacity of a deeply read shoe - maker , obtain a foreign name , as will by - and - by appear . 
 we lodge at the post - office , not through any wisdom or even any thought on our part , but simply because we happen there to find the clean and prettiest room in the place . for the sun be now in the height of August , and have much harvest to ripen , at middle day come ramp down the little street of Shoxford like the chairman of the guild of baker . every house have lately brighten up its whitewash which they always do there when the frost be over , soon after the feast of St. Barnabas and the weed of the way have fare amiss in the absence of any water - cart , it be not in the strong , sharp character of the sun to miss such an opportunity . after the red californian glare , I have no fear of any english sun ; but Betsy be frightened , and both of we be glad to get into a little place shelter by green blind . this chance to be the post - office , and there we find nice lodging . 
 by an equal chance this prove to be the wise thing we could possibly have do , if we have set about it carefully . for why , that nobody ever would impute any desire of secrecy to people who straightway unpacked their box at the very head - quarter of all the village news . and the mistress of the post be a sharp - tongue woman , please to speak freely of her neighbor ' doing , and prompt with good advice that they should heed their own business , if any of they durst say a word about her own . she keep a tidy little shop , show something of almost every thing ; but we have a side door , quite of our own , where Betsy meet the baker 's wife and the veritable milkman ; and neither of they know she , which be just what she have hop ; and yet it make she speak amiss of they . 
 but if all thing must be bring to the harsh test of dry reason , I myself might be hard push to say what good I hop to do by come thus to Shoxford . I know of a great many thing , for certain , that never have be thoroughly examine here ; also I naturally wish to see , be a native , what the native be ; and , much more than that , it be always on my mind that here lie my mother and the other six of we . 
 therefore it be an impatient thing for I to hear Betsy work out the afternoon with perpetual chatter and challenge of price , combat now as a lodger all those point which as a landlady she never would allow even to be moot question . if any applicant in European Square have dare so much as hint at any of all the requirement which she now expect gratis , she would simply have whisk her duster , and say that the lodging for such people must be look for down the alley . however , Mrs. Busk , our new landlady , although she have a temper of her own   as any one keep a post - office must have   be force by the rarity of lodger here to yield many point , which Mrs. Strouss , on her own board , would not even have allow to be debate . all this be entirely against my wish ; for when I have money , I spend it , find really no other good in it ; but Betsy tell I that the pure principle of all be not to be cheat . 
 so I leave she to have these little matter out , and take that occasion for steal away   as the hour grow on toward evening   to a place where I wish to be quite alone . and the shadow of the western hill shed peace upon the valley , when I cross a little stile lead into Shoxford church - yard . 
 for a minute or two I be quite afraid , see nobody any where about , nor even hear any sound in the distance to keep I company . for the church lie apart from the village , and be thickly plant out from it , the live folk be full of superstition , and deeply believe in the dead people 's ghost . and even if this be a wife to a husband , or even a husband reappear to his wife , there be not a man or a woman in the village that would not run away from it . 
 this I do not know at present , not have be there long enough ; neither have I any terror of that sort , not be quite such a coward , I should hope . but still , as the mantle of the cold tree darken , and the stony remembrance of the dead grow pale , and of the living there be not even the whistle of a grave - digger my heart get the well of my mind for a moment , and make I long to be across that stile again . because   as I say to myself   if there have be a hill to go up , that would be so different and so easy ; but go down into a place like this , whence the only escape must be by step , and where any flight must be along channel that run in and out of graf and tombstone , I try not to be afraid , yet could not altogether help it . 
 but lo ! when I come to the north side of the tower , scarcely think what to look for , I find myself in the middle of a place which make I stop and wonder . here be six little grassy tuffet , accord to the length of child , all lay east and west , without any stint of room , harmoniously . 
 from the eld to the young , one could almost tell the age at which their lowly stature stop , and take its final measurement . 
 and in the middle be a large grave , to comfort and encourage they , as a hen lie down among her chick and wait for they to shelter . without a name to any of they , all these seven graf lie together , as in a fairy ring of rest , and kind compassion have prevent any stranger from come to be bury there . 
 I would not sit on my mother 's grave for fear of crush the pretty grass , which some one tend carefully ; but I stand at its foot , and bent my head , and count all the little one . then I think of my father in the grove of peach , more than six thousand mile away , on the bank of the soft Blue River . and a sense of desolate sorrow and of the blessing of death overwhelm I . 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 the sexton 

 with such thing in my mind , it take I long to come back to my work again . it even seem a wicked thing , so near to all these proof of God 's great visitation over we , to walk about and say , " I will do this , " or even to think , " I will try to do that . " my own poor helplessness , and loss of live love to guide I , lay upon my heart a weight from which it scarcely care to move . all be bury , all be do with , all have pass from out the world , and leave no mark but graf behind . what good to stir anew such sadness , even if a poor weak thing like I could move its mystery ? 
 Time , however , and my nurse Betsy , and Jacob Rigg the gardener , bring I back to a well state of mind , and renew the right courage within I . but , first of all , Jacob Rigg arouse my terror and interest vividly . it may be remember that this good man have be my father 's gardener at the time of our great calamity , and almost alone of the Shoxford people have show himself true and faithful . not that the native have turn against we , or be at all unfriendly ; so far from this be the case , that every one feel for our trouble , and pity we , my father be of a cheerful and affable turn , until misery harden he ; but what I mean be that only one or two have the courage to go against the popular conclusion and the conviction of authority . 
 but Jacob be a very upright man , and have a strong liking for his master , who many and many a time as he tell I have take a spade and dig along with he , just as if he be a job gardener bear , instead of a fine young nobleman ; " and nobody gift with that turn of mind , likewise very clever in white - spine cowcumber , could ever be rely upon to go and shoot his father . " thus reason old Jacob , and he always have do so , and mean evermore to abide by it ; and the graf which he have tend now for nigh a score of year , and mean to tend till he call for his own , be as sure as he stand there in Shoxford church - yard a - talk to I , who be the very image of my father , God bless I , though not of course so big like the graf of slaughter innocent , and a mother who be always an angel . and the parson might preach forever to he about the resurrection , and the right come uppermost when you get to heaven , but to his mind that be scarcely any count at all ; and if you come to that , we ought to hang Jack Ketch , as might come to pass in the Revelations . but while a man have get his own bread to earn , till his honor would let he go to the work - house , and his duty to the rate - payer , there be nothing that vex he more than to be tell any text of Holy Scripture . whatever God Almighty have put down there be mean for ancient people , the Jews be long the most ancient people , though none the more for that do he like they ; and so it be mainly the ancient folk , who could not do a day 's work worth eighteenpence , that could enter into Bible promise . not that he be at all behindhand about interpretation ; but as long as he could fetch and earn , at planting box and do border , two shilling and ninepence a day and his beer , he be not go to be on for kingdom come . 
 I tell he that I scarcely think his view of our condition here would be approve by wise man who have find time to study the subject . but he answer that whatever their word might be , their doing show that they know what be the first thing to attend to . and if it ever happen he to come across a parson who be as full of heaven outside as he be inside his surplice , he would keep his garden in order for nothing well than his blessing . 
 I know of no answer to be make to this . and indeed he seem to be aware that his conversation be too deep for I ; so he lean upon his spade , and rub his long blue chin in the shadow of the church tower , hold as he do the position of sexton , and prepare even now to dig a grave . 
 " I keep they well away from you , " he say , as he begin to chop out a new oblong in the turf ; " many a shilling have I be offer by mother about their little one , to put them inside of the ' holy ring , ' as we call this little cluster ; but not for five golden guineas would I do it , and have to face the Captain , dead or alive , about it . we hear that he be dead , because it be put in all the paper ; and a pleasant place I keep for he , to come home alongside of his family . a nicer gravelly bit of ground there could not   be in all the county ; and if no chance of he occupy it , I can drive down a peg with your mark , miss . " 
 " thank you , " I answer ; " you be certainly most kind ; but , Mr. Rigg , I would rather wait a little . I have have a very troublesome life thus far , and nothing to bind I to it much ; but still I would rather not have my peg drive down just just at present . " 
 " ah , you be like all the young folk that think the tree for their coffin be not   come to the size of this spade handle yet . Lord bless you for not know what he hath in hand ! now this one you see I a - raising of the turf for , stand as upright as you do , a fortnight back , and as good about the chest and shoulder , and three time the color in her cheek , and her eye a'most as bright as yourn be . not aristocratic , you must understand I , miss , be only the miller 's daughter , nor instruct to throw her voice the same as you do , which be well than gallery music ; but set these haxident to one side , a farmer would have say she be more preferable , because more come - at - able , though not in my opinion to be compare excuse I for make so free , miss , but when it come to death we have a kind of right to do it and many a young farmer , come to the mill , be disturb in his heart about she , and far and wide she be know , be proud , as the Beauty of the Moonshine , from the name of our little river . she use to call I ' Jacob Diggs , ' because of my porochial office , with a meaning of a joke on my parenshal name . ah , what a merry one she be ! and now this be what I have to do for she ! and soon would I ' a do it a'most for my own old ooman ! " 
 " oh , Jacob ! " I cry , be horrify at the way in which he tear up the ground , as if his wife be wait , " the thing you say be quite wrong , I be sure , for a man in your position . you be connect with this church almost as much as the clerk be . " 
 " More , miss , ten time more ! he do not   do nothing but lounge on the front of his desk , and be too lazy to keep up ' amen , ' while I at my time of life go about , from Absolution to the fifth Lord 's prayer , with a stick that make my rheumatic bad , for the sake of the boy with their pocket full of nut . when I be a boy there be no nut , except at the proper time of year , a month or two on from this time of speak ; and we use to crack they in the husk , and make no noise to disturb the congregation ; but now it be nuts , nut , round nut , flat nut , nut with three corner to they all the year round nut to crack , and I to find out who do it ! " 
 " but , Mr. Rigg , " I reply , as he stop , look hotter in mind than in body , " be it not Mrs. Rigg , your good wife , who sell all the nut on a Saturday for the boy to crack on a Sunday ? " 
 " my missus do sell some , to be sure ; yes , just a few . but not of a Saturday more than any other day . " 
 " then surely , Mr. Rigg , you might stop it , by not permit any sale of nut except to good boy of high principle . and have it not happen sometimes , Mr. Rigg , that boy have make mark on their nut , and buy they again at your shop on a Monday ? I mean , of course , when your duty have compel you to empty the pocket of a boy in church . " 
 now this be a particle of shamefully small gossip , pick up naturally by my Betsy , but pledge to go no far ; and as soon as I have speak I become a little nervous , have it suddenly bring to my mind that I have promise not even to whisper it ; and now I have tell it to the man of all man ! but Jacob appear to have be quite deaf , and diligently go on dig . and I say " good - evening , " for the grave be for the morrow ; and he let I go nearly to the stile before he stick his spade into the ground and follow . 
 " Excoose of my making use , " he say , " of a kind of a personal reference , miss ; but you be that pat with your answer , it maketh I believe you must be sharp inside more than your father , the poor Captain , be , as all they little grass button argueth . now , miss , if I think you have head - piece enough to keep good counsel and ensue it , maybe I could tell you a thing as would make your hair creep out of they coorous hitch - up , and your heart a'most bust they there braid of fallallie . " 
 " why , what in the world do you mean ? " I ask , be startle by the old man 's voice and face . 
 " nothing , miss , nothing . I be only a - joking . if you bain't   come to no more discretion than that to turn as white as the clerk 's smock - frock of a Easter - Sunday why , the more of a joke one have , the well , to bring your purty color back to you . ah ! polly of the mill be the maid for color as good for the eyesight as a chaney - rise in April . well , well , I must get on with her grave ; they be a - come to speak the good word over un on sundown . " 
 he might have know how this would vex and perplex I . I could not bear to hinder he in his work as important as any to be do by man for man and yet it be beyond my power to go home and leave he there , and wonder what it be that he have be so afraid to tell . so I quietly say , " then I will wish you a very good evening again , Mr. Rigg , as you be too busy to be speak with . " and I walk off a little way , have meet with man who , have begin a thing , need must have it out , and fully expect he to call I back . but Jacob only touch his hat , and say , " a pleasant evening to you , ma'am . " 
 nothing could have make I feel more resolute than this do . I do not hesitate one moment in run back over the stile again , and demand of Jacob Rigg that he should tell I whether he mean any thing or nothing ; for I be not to be play with about important matter , like the boy in the church who be crack nut . 
 " Lord ! Lord , now ! " he say , with his treddle heel scrap the shoulder of his shin spade ; " the long I live in this world , the fitter I grow to get into the way of the Lord . his way be past find out , saith King David : but a man of war , from his youth upward , hath no chance such as a gardening man hath . what a many of they have I find out ! " 
 " what have that get to do with it ! " I cry . " just tell I what it be you be speak of just now . " 
 " I be just a - thinking , when I look at you , miss , " he answer , in the prime of leisure , and wipe his forehead from habit only , not because he want it , " how little we know of the time and season and the generation of the son of man . there you stand , miss , and here stand I , as have not   see your father for a score of year a'most ; and yet there come out of your eye into mine the very same look as the Captain use to send , when snake in the grass have be tell lie about I come late , or have my half pint or so on . not that the Captain be a hard man , miss far otherwise , and capable of allowance , more than any of the woman be . but only the Lord , who doeth all thing aright , could ' a make you come , with a score of year atween , and the twinkle in your eye like Selah ! " 
 " you know what you mean , perhaps , but I do not , " I answer , quite gently , be trouble by his word and the fear of have try to hurry he ; " but you should not say what you have say , Jacob Rigg , to I , your master 's daughter , if you only mean to be joke . be this the place to joke with I ? " 
 I point to all that lie around I , where I could not plant a foot without step over my brother or sister ; and the old man , callous as he might be , could not help feel for a pinch of snuff . this he find in the right - hand pocket of his waistcoat , and take it very carefully , and make a little noise of comfort ; and thus , be fully self - assure again , he stand , with his foot far apart and his head on one side , regard I warily . and I take good care not to say another word . 
 " you be young , " he say at last ; " and in these latter day no wisdom be ordain in the mouth of babe and suckling , nor always in the mouth of they as be themselves ordain . but you have a way of keep your chin up , miss , as if you be gift with a stiff tongue likewise . and whatever may hap , I have as good mind to tell ' e. " 
 " that you be absolutely bind to do , " I answer , as forcibly as I could . " duty to your former master and to I , his only child and to yourself , and your Maker too compel you , Jacob Rigg , to tell I every thing you know . " 
 " then , miss , " he answer , come near to I , and speak in a low , hoarse voice , " as sure as I stand here in God 's churchyard , by all this murder family , I know the man who do it ! " 
 he look at I , with a trembling finger upon his hard - set lip , and the spade in his other hand quiver like a wind vane ; but I become as firm as the monument beside I , and my heart , instead of flutter , grow as steadfast as a glacier . then , for the first time , I know that God have not keep I live , when all the other die , without fit I also for the work there be to do . 
 " come here to the corner of the tower , miss , " old Jacob go on , in his excitement catch hold of the sleeve of my black silk jacket . " where we stand be a queer sort of echo , which goeth in and out of they big tombstone . and for aught I can say to contrairy , he may be a - watching of we while here we stand . " 
 I glance around , as if he be most welcome to be watch I , if only I could see he once . but the place be as silent as its graf ; and I follow the sexton to the shadow of a buttress . here he go into a deep gray corner , lichene and mosse by a drip from the roof ; and be , both in his clothe and self , pretty much of that same color , he be not very easy to discern from stone when the light of day be decline . 
 " this be where I catch all the boy , " he whisper ; " and this be where I catch he , one evening when I be tired , and go to nurse my knee a bit . let I see why , let I see ! do not   you speak till I do , miss . be it the last but one I dig ? or could un ' a be the last but two ? never mind ; I can not   call to mind quite justly . we put down about one a month in this parish , without any distemper or haxident . well , it must ' a be the one afore last to be sure , no call to scratch my head about un . Old Sally Mock , as sure as I stand here do handsome by the rate - payer . over there , miss , if you please to look about two land - yard and a half away . can you see un with the grass peek up a'ready ? " 
 " never mind that , Jacob . do please to go on . " 
 " so I be , miss . so I be do to the good of the power grant I . well , I be in this little knuckle of a squat , where old Sally use to say as I go to sleep , and charge the parish for it a spiteful old ooman , and I do her grave with pleasure , only wish she have to pay for it ; and to prove to her mind that I never go asleep here , I be just make ready to set fire to my pipe , have cock my shovel in to ease my leg , like this , when from round you corner of the chancel - foot , and over again that there old tree , I seed a something movin ' along movin ' along , without any noise or declarance of solid foot walk . you may see the track burn in the sod , if you let your eye go along this here finger . " 
 " oh , Jacob , how could you have wait to see it ? " 
 " I do , miss , I do ; be use to a - many antic in this dead - yard , such as a man who have not   bury they might up foot to run away from . but they no right , after the service of the Church , to come up for more than one change of the moon , unless they be great malefactor . and then they be ashamed of it ; and I remind they of it . ' amen , ' I say , in the very same voice as I use at the tail of their funeral ; and then they know well that I cover they up , and the most uneasy go back again . Lor ' bless you , miss , I no fear of the dead . at both end of life we be harmless . it be in the life , and mostway in the middle of it , we make all the death for one another . " 
 this be true enough ; and I only nod to he , fear to interject any new idea from which he might go ramble . 
 " well , that there figure be no joke , mind you , " the old man continue , as soon as he have freshen his narrative power with another pinch of snuff , " be tall and grim , and white in the face , and very onpleasant for to look at , and its eye seem a'most to burn hole in the air . no soon do I see that it be not a ghostie , but a live man the same as I be , than my knee begin to shake and my stump of tooth to chatter . and what do you think it be stop I , miss , from slip round this corner , and away by belfry ? Nort but the hodd idea you ever heared on . for all of a suddint it be bear unto my mind that the Lord have be pleased to send we back the Captain ; not so handsome as he use to be , but in the live flesh , however , in spite of they newspaper . and I be just at the pint of come forrard , out of this here dark cornder , know as I have do my duty by they grave that his honor , to my mind , must ' a come look after , when , lucky for I , I see summat in his walk , and then in his countenance , and then in all his feature , unnateral on the Captain 's part , whatever his time of life might be . and sure enough , miss , it be no captain more nor I myself be . " 
 " of course not . how could it be ? but who be it , Jacob ? " 
 " you bide a bit , miss , and you shall hear the whole . well , by that time ' twa too late for I to slip away , and I be bind to scrooge up into the elbow of this nick here , and try not to breathe , as nigh as might be , and keep my Lammas cough down ; for I never see a face more full of malice and uncharity . however , he come on as straight as a arrow , hold his long chin out , like this , as if he get crutch under it , as the folk do with bad water . a tall man , as tall as the Captain a'most , but not gift with any kind aspect . he trampse over the general graf , like the devil come to fetch their soul out ; but when he come here to the ' holy ring , ' he stop short , and stand with his back to I . I could hear he count the seven graf , as pat as the shell of oyster to pay for , and then he say all their name , as true , from the big to the least one , as Betsy Bowen could ' a do it , though none of them get no mark to them . oh , the poor little heart , it be cruel hard upon they ! and then my lady in the middle , make seven . so far as I could catch over his shoulder , he seem to be quite a - talk with she not as you and I be , miss , but a sort of a manner of a way , like . " 
 " and what do he seem to say ? oh , Jacob , how long you do take over it ! " 
 " well , he do not , miss ; that you may say for sartain . and glad I be to have he quick about it ; for he might have redooce I to such a condition ay , and I believe a ' would , too , if onst a ' have catch sight of I as the parish might ' a have to fight over the appintment of another sexton . and so at last a ' go away . and I be that stiff with scrooge in this cornder " 
 " be that all ? oh , that come to nothing . surely you must have more to tell I ? it may have be some one who know our name . it may have be some old friend of the family . " 
 " no , miss , no ! no familiar friend ; or if he be , he be like King David 's . he bear a tyrannous hate against ' e , and the poison of asp be under his lip . in this here hattitude he stand , with his back toward I , and his rein more upright than I be capable of put it . and this be how he hold up his elbow and his head . look ' e see , miss , and then ' e know as much as I do . " 
 Mr. Rigg march with a long smooth step a most difficult strain for his short bow leg as far as the place he have be point out ; and there he stand with his back to I , painfully do what the tall man have do , so far as the difference of size allow . 
 it be not possible for I to laugh in a matter of such sadness ; and yet Jacob stand , with his back to I , spread and stretch himself in such a way , to be up to the dimension of the stranger , that low as it be I be compel to cough , for fear of fatally offend he . 
 " that warn't   quite right , miss . now you look again , " he exclaim , with a little readjustment . " only he have a thing over one shoulder , the like of what the Scotchmen wear ; and his feature be beyond I , because of the back of his head , like . for God 's sake keep out of his way , miss . " 
 the sexton stand in a musing and yet a stern and defiant attitude , with the right elbow clasp in the left - hand palm , the right hand rest half - clinch upon the forehead , and the shoulder throw back , as if ready for a blow . 
 " what a very odd way to stand ! " I say . 
 " yes , miss . and what he say be odder . ' six , and the mother ! ' I hear un say ; ' no cure for it , till I have all seven . ' but stop , miss . not a breath to any one ! here come the poor father and mother to speak the blessing across their daughter 's grave and the grave not two foot down yet ! " 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 a simple question 

 now this account of what Jacob Rigg have see and hear throw I into a state of mind extremely unsatisfactory . to be in eager search of some unknown person who have injure I inexpressibly , without any longing for revenge on my part , but simply with a view to justice this be a very different thing from feel that an unknown person be in quest of I , with the horrible purpose of destroy I to insure his own wicked safety . 
 at first I almost think that he be welcome to do this ; that such a life as mine   if look at from an outer point of view   be well to be die than live out . also that there be nobody leave to get any good out of all that I could do ; and even if I ever should succeed , truth would come out of her tomb too late . and this begin to make I cry , which I have long give over do , with no one to feel for the heart of it . 
 but a thing of this kind could not long endure ; and as soon as the sun of the morrow arise   or at least as soon as I be fit to see he , my view of the world be quite different . here be the merry brook , play with the morning , spread around with ample depth and rich retreat of meadow , and often , after maze of leisure , hasten with a tinkle into shadowy delight of tree . here , as well , be happy lane , and footpath of a soft content , unworn with any pressure of the price of time or business . none of they know   in spite , at flurry spot , of their own direction post   whence they be come or whither go only that here they lay , between the field or through they , like idle vein of earth , with sometimes company of a man or boy , whistle to his footfall , or a singing maid with a milk pail . and how ungrateful it would be to forget the pleasant copse , in wave of deep green leafage flow down and up the channel hill , wave at the wind to tint and tone of new refreshment , and tempt idle folk to come and hear the hush , and see the twinkled texture of pellucid gloom . 
 much , however , as I love to sit in place of this kind alone , for some little time I fear to do so , after hear the sexton 's tale ; for Jacob 's terror be so unfeigned   though his own life have not be threaten   that , know as I do from Betsy 's account , as well as his own appearance , that he be not at all a nervous man , I could not help share his vague alarm . it seem so terrible that any one should come to the graf of my sweet mother and her six harmless child , and , instead of show pity , as even a monster might have try to do , should stand , if not with threaten gesture , yet with a most hostile mien , and thirst for the life of the only survivor my poor self . 
 but terrible or not , the truth be so ; and neither Betsy nor myself could shake Mr. Rigg 's conclusion . indeed , he become more and more emphatic , in reply to our doubt and mild suggestion , perhaps that his eye have deceive he , or perhaps that , take a nap in the corner of the buttress , he have dream at least a part of it . and Betsy , on the score of ancient friendship and kind remembrance of his liking , put it to he in a gentle way whether his knowledge of what Sally Mock have be , and the calumny she might have speak of his beer   when herself , in the work - house , deprive of it , might not have induce he to take a little more than usual in go down so deep for she . but he answer , " no ; it be nothing of the sort . deep he have go , to the tiptoe of his fling ; not from any feeling of a wish to keep she down , but just because the parish pay , and the parish would have measurement . and when that be on , he never bring down more than the quart tin from the public ; and never have none down afterward . otherwise the ground be so ticklish , that a man , work too free , might stay down there . no , no ! that idea be like one of Sally 's own . he just have his quart of Persfield ale short measure , of course , with a woman at the bar and if that be enough to make a man dream dream , the soon he dig his own grave , the well for all connect with he . " 
 we see that we have go too far in thinking of such a possibility ; and if Mr. Rigg have not be large - minded , as well as notoriously sober , Betsy might have lose I all the benefit of his evidence by her London - breed clumsiness with he . for it take quite a different handling , and a different mode of outset , to get on with the London work class and the labor kind of the country ; or at least it seem to I so . 
 now my knowledge of Jacob Rigg be owe , as might be suppose , to Betsy Strouss , who have take the lead of I in almost every thing ever since I bring she down from London . and now I be glad that , in one point at least , her judgment have overrule mine to wit , that my name and parentage be as yet not generally know in the village . indeed , only Betsy herself and Jacob and a faithful old washer - woman , with no roof to her mouth , be aware of I as Miss Castlewood . not that I have take any other name to that I would not stoop but because the public , of its own accord , pay attention to Betsy 's style of address I , follow her lead   with some little improvement , and be pleased to entitle I " Miss Raumur . " 
 some question have be raise as to spell I aright , till a man of advanced intelligence prove to many eye , and even several pair of spectacle   assemble in front of the blacksmith 's shop , that no other way could be right except that . for there it be in print , as any one able might see , on the side of an instrument whose name and quality be even more mysterious than those in debate . therefore I become " Miss Raumur ; " and a protest would have go for nothing unless print also . but it do not behoove I to go to that expense , while it suit I very well to be consider and pity as a harmless foreigner a be who on english land may find some cause to doubt whether , even in his own country , a prophet could be less thought of . and this large pity for I , as an outlandish person , in the very spot where I be bear , endow I with tenfold the privilege of the proud native . for the native of this valley be declare to be of a different stock from those around they , not of the common Wessex strain , but of Jutish or danish origin . how that may be I do not know ; at any rate , they think well of themselves , and no doubt they have cause to do so . 
 moreover , they all be very kind to I , and their primitive way amuse I , as soon as they have settle that I be a foreigner , equally beyond and below inquiry . they tell I that I be kindly welcome to stay there as long as it please I ; and know how fond I be of make picture , after behold my drawing - book , every farmer among they give I leave to come into his field , though he never have hear there be any thing there worth paint . 
 when once there have be a deposit of idea in the calm deep eocene of british rural mind , the impression will outlast any shallow deluge of the noble education . Shoxford have settle two point forever , without troubling reason to come out of her way first , that I be a foreign young lady of good birth , manner , and money ; second , and far more important , I be here to write and paint a book about Shoxford . not for the money , of that I have no need   accord to the congress at the " silver - edge Holly " , but for the praise and the knowledge of it , like , and to make a talk among high people . but the elder shake their head as I hear from Mr. Rigg , who hug his knowledge proudly , and utter dim saying of wisdom let forth at large usury : he do not mind tell I that the old man shake their head , for fear of my be a deal too young , and a long sight too well favor   as any man might tell without his spec on , for to write any book upon any subject yet , leave alone an old , ancient town like theirs . however , there might be no harm in my trying , and perhaps the school - master would cross out the bad language . 
 thus for once fortune now be give I good help , enable I to go about freely , and prevent   so far as I could see , at least   all danger of discovery by my unknown foe . so here I resolve to keep my head - quarter , dispense , if it must be so , with Betsy 's presence , and not even have Mrs. Price to succeed she , unless my cousin should insist upon it . and partly to dissuade he from that , and partly to hear his opinion of the sexton 's tale , I pay a fly visit to Lord Castlewood ; while " Madam Straw , " as Betsy now be call throughout the village , remain behind at Shoxford . for I long have desire to know a thing which I have not venture to ask my cousin though I do ask Mr. Shovelin whether my father have intrust he with the key of his own mysterious act . I scarcely know whether it be proper even now to put this question to Lord Castlewood ; but even without do so , I might get at the answer by watch he closely while I tell my tale . not a letter have reach I since I come to Shoxford , neither have I write any , except one to Uncle Sam ; and keep to this excellent rule , I arrive at Castlewood without notice . 
 in do this I take no liberty , because full permission have be give I about it ; and indeed I have be expect there , as Stixon tell I , some day before . he add that his master be about as usual , but have show some uneasiness on my account , though the butler be all in the dark about it , and feel it very hard after all these year , " particular , when he could hardly help think that Mrs. Price a new hand compare to himself , not to speak of be a female knowed all about it , and be very aggravating . but there , he would say no more ; he know his place , and he always have be value in it , long afore Mrs. Price come up to the bottom of his waistcoat . " 
 my cousin receive I with kindly warmth , and kiss I gently on the forehead . " my dear , how very well you look ! " he say . " your native air have agree with you . I be get , in my quiet way , rather sedulous and self - reproachful about you . but you would have your own way , like a young American ; and it seem that you be right . " 
 " it be quite right , " I answer , with a hearty kiss , for I never could be cold - natured ; and this be my only one of near kin , so far , at least , as my knowledge go . " I be quite right in go ; and I have do good . at any rate , I have find out something something that may not be of any kind of use ; but still it make I hope thing . " 
 with that , in as few word as ever I could use , I tell Lord Castlewood the whole of Jacob 's tale , particularly look at he all the while I speak , to settle in my own mind whether the idea of such a thing be new to he . concern that , however , I could make out nothing . my cousin , at his time of life , and after so much travelling , have much too large a share of mind and long skill of experience for I to make any thing out of his face beyond his own intention . and whether he have suspicion or not of any thing at all like what I be describe , or any body have to do with it , be more than I ever might have know , if I have not gather up my courage and put the question outright to he . I tell he that if I be wrong in ask , he be not to answer ; but , right or wrong , ask he I must . 
 " the question be natural , and not at all improper , " reply Lord Castlewood , stand a moment for change of pain , which be all his relief . " indeed , I expect you to ask I that before . but , Erema , I have also have to ask myself about it , whether I have any right to answer you . and I have decide not to do so , unless you will pledge yourself to one thing . " 
 " I will pledge myself to any thing , " I answer , rashly ; " I do not care what it be , if only to get at the bottom of this mystery . " 
 " I scarcely think you will hold good to your word when you hear what you have to promise . the condition upon which I tell you what I believe to be the cause of all be , that you let thing remain as they be , and keep silence forever about they . " 
 " oh , you can not be so cruel , so atrocious ! " I cry , in my bitter disappointment . " what good would it be for I to know thing thus , and let the vile wrong continue ? surely you be not bind to lay on I a condition so impossible ? " 
 " after much consideration and strong wish to have it otherwise , I have conclude that I be so bound . " 
 " in duty to my father , or the family , or what ? forgive I for ask , but it do seem so hard . " 
 " it seem hard , my dear , and it be hard as well , " he answer , very gently , yet show in his eye and lip no chance of any yielding . " but remember that I do not know , I only guess , the secret ; and if you give the pledge I speak of , you merely follow in your father 's step . " 
 " never , " I reply , with as firm a face as his . " it may have be my father 's duty , or no doubt he think it so ; but it can not be mine , unless I make it so by lay it on my honor . and I will not do that . " 
 " perhaps you be right ; but , at any rate , remember that I have not try to persuade you . I wish to do what be for your happiness , Erema . and I think that , on the whole , with your vigor and high spirit , you be well as you be than if you have a knowledge which you could only brood over and not use . " 
 " I will find out the whole of it myself , " I cry , for I could not repress all excitement ; " and then I need not brood over it , but may have it out and get justice . in the wild part of America justice come with perseverance : be I to abjure it in the heart of England ? Lord Castlewood , which be first justice or honor ? " 
 " my cousin , you be fond of ask question difficult to answer . justice and honor nearly always go together . when they do otherwise , honor stand foremost , with people of good birth , at least . " 
 " then I will be a person of very bad birth . if they come into conflict in my life , as almost every thing seem to do , my first thought shall be of justice ; and honor shall come in as its ornament afterward . " 
 " Erema , " say my cousin , " your meaning be good , and at your time of life you can scarcely be expect to take a dispassionate view of thing . " 
 at first I feel almost as if I could hate a " dispassionate view of thing . " thing be make to arouse our passion , so long as meanness and villainy prevail ; and if old man , know the balance of the world , can contemplate they all " dispassionately , " more clearly than any thing else , to my mind , that prove the beauty of be young . I be sure that I never be hot or violent quality which I especially dislike but still I would rather almost have those than be too philosophical . and now , while I revere my father 's cousin for his gentleness , wisdom , and long - suffering , I almost long to fly back to the Major , prejudiced , peppery , and red - hot for justice , at any rate in all thing that concern himself . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 some answer to IT 

 Hasty indignation do not drive I to hot action . a quiet talk with Mrs. Price , as soon as my cousin 's bad hour arrive , be quite enough to bring I back to a sense of my own misgovernment . moreover , the evening cloud be darken for a night of thunder , while the silver Thames look nothing more than a leaden pipe down the valley . calm word fall at such time on quick temper like the drip of tree on people who have be dance . I shiver , as my spirit fall , to think of my weak excitement , and poor petulance to a kind , wise friend , a man of many sorrow and perpetual affliction . and then I recall what I have observe , but in my haste forget Lord Castlewood be greatly change even in the short time since I have leave his house for Shoxford . Pale he have always be , and his feature   calm as they be , and finely cut   seem almost bleach by in - door life and continual endurance . but now they show bad sign than this a delicate transparence of faint color , and a waxen surface , such as I have see at a time I can not bear to think of . also he have totter forward , while he try for steadfast footing , quite as if his worried member be almost wear out at last . 
 Mrs. Price take I up quite sharply at least for one of her well - train style when I venture to ask if she have notice this , which make I feel uneasy . " oh dear , no ! " she say , look up from the lace - frille pocket of her silk apron , which appear to my mind perhaps a little too smart , and almost of a vulgar tincture ; and I think that she see in my eye that much , and be vex with herself for not change it " oh dear , no , Miss Castlewood ! we who know and watch he should detect any difference of that nature at the moment of its occurrence . his lordship 's health go vacillate ; a little up now , and then a little down , like a needle that be mount to show the dip of compass ; and it vary accord to the electricity , as well as the magnetic influence . " 
 " what doctor tell you that ? " I ask , see in a moment that this housekeeper be deal in quotation . 
 " you be very " she be go to say " rude , " but know well when she see I wait for it " well , you be rather brusque , as we use to call it abroad , Miss Castlewood ; but be I incapable of observe for myself ? " 
 " I never imply that , " be my answer . " I believe that you be most intelligent , and fit to nurse my cousin , as you be to keep his house . and what you have say show the clearness of your memory and expression . " 
 " you be very good to speak so , " she answer , recover her temper beautifully , but , like a true woman , resolve not to let I know any thing more about it . " oh , what a clap of thunder ! be you timid ? this house have be strike three time , they say . it stand so prominently . it be this that have make my lord look so . " 
 " let we hope , then to see he much well to - morrow , " I say , very bravely , though frighten at heart , be always a coward of thunder . " what be these storm you get in England compare to the tropical outburst ? let we open the window , if you please , and watch it . " 
 " I hear myself call , " Mrs. Price exclaim . " I be sorry to leave you , miss . you know well . but please not to sit by an open window ; nothing be more dangerous . " 
 " except a great bunch of steel key , " I reply ; and gaze at her nice retreating figure , see it quicken , as a flash of lightning pass , with the effort of both hand to be quit of something . 
 the storm be dreadful ; and I keep the window shut , but could not help watch , with a fearful joy , the many - finger hazy pale vibration , the reflection of the levin in the hollow of the land . and sadly I begin to think of Uncle Sam and all his goodness ; and how in a storm , a thousandfold of this , he go down his valley in the torrent of the wave , and must have be drown , and perhaps never find again , if he have not be wear his leathern apron . 
 this make I humble , as all great thought do , and the sidelong drizzle in among the heavy rain   from the big drop jostle each other in the air , and dash out splash of difference   give I an idea of the sort of thing I be and how very little more . and feel rather lonely in the turn that thing have take , I ring the bell for somebody ; and up come Stixon . 
 " Lor ' , miss ! Lor ' , what a burn shame of Prick ! ' Prick ' we call she , in our genial moment , hear as the ' k ' be hard in celtic language ; and all abroad about her husband . my very first say to you be , not to be too much okkipie with she . look at the pinafore on she ! Lord be with I ! if his lordship , as catch I , that day of this very same month fifty year , in the gooseberry bush " 
 " to be sure ! " I say , know that story by heart , together with all its embellishment ; " but thing be alter since that day . nothing can be more to your credit , I be sure , than to be able to tell such a tale in the very place where it happen . " 
 " but , Miss Miss Erma , I be not   begin to tell it . " 
 " because you remember that I be acquaint with it . a thing so remarkable be not to be forget . now let I ask you a question of importance ; and I beg you , as an old servant of this family , to answer it carefully and truly . do you remember any one , either here or elsewhere , so like my father , Captain Castlewood , as to be take for he at first sight , until a difference of expression and of walk be notice ? " 
 Mr. Stixon look at I with some surprise , and then begin to think profoundly , and in do so he support his chin with one hand . 
 " let I see like the Captain ? " he reflect slowly : " do I ever see a gentleman like poor Master George , as be ? a gentleman , of course , it must have be and a very tall , handsome , straight gentleman , to be take anyhow for young Master George . and he must have be very like he , too , to be take for he by resemblance . well then , miss , to the good of my judgment , I never do see such a gentleman . " 
 " I do not   know whether it be a gentleman or not , " I answer , with some impatience at his tantalizing slowness ; " but he carry his chin stretch forth like this . " 
 for Stixon 's own attitude have remind I of a little point in Jacob Rigg 's description , which otherwise might have escape I . 
 " Lor ' , now , and he carry his chin like that ! " resume the butler , with an increase of intelligence by no mean superfluous . " why , let I see , now , let I see . something do come across my mind when you put out your purty chin , miss ; but there , it must have be a score of year agone , or more perhaps five - and - twenty . what a daft old codger I be get , surely ! no wonder they new light put a bushel over I . " 
 " no , " I reply ; " you be simply show great power of memory , Stixon . and now please to tell I , as soon as you can , who it be a tall man , remember , and a handsome one , with dark hair , perhaps , or at any rate dark eye who resemble   perhaps not very closely , but still enough to mislead at a distance   my dear father Master George , as you call he , for whose sake you be bind to tell I every thing you know . now try to think do please try your very well , for my sake . " 
 " that I will , miss ; that I will , with all my heart , with all my mind , with all my soul , and with all my strength , as I use to have to say with my hand behind my back , afore education be invent . only please you to stand with your chin put out , miss , and your profield towards I . that be what bring it up , and nothing else at all , miss . only , not to say a word of any sort to hurry I . a tracherous and a deep thing be the memory and the remembrance . " 
 Mr. Stixon 's memory be so deep that there seem to be no bottom to it , or , at any rate , what lie there take a very long time to get at . and I wait , with more impatience than hope , the utterance of his research . 
 " I get it now ; I get it all , miss , clear as any pictur ' ! " the old man cry out , at the very moment when I be about to say , " please to leave off ; I be sure it be too much for you . " " not a pictur ' in all of our gallery , miss , two - and - fifty of them , so clear as I see that there man , dark as it be , and a heavy wind a - blowing . what you call they thing , miss , if you please , as come with the sun , like a face upon the water ? wicked thing do again the will of the Lord , and he make they fade out afterwards . " 
 " perhaps you mean photograph . be that the word ? " 
 " the very word , and no mistake . a sinful trespass on the work of God , to tickle the vanity of gal . but he never spread himself abroad like they . they show all their ear - ring , and their neck , and smile . but he never would have show his nose , if he could help it , that stormy night when I come to do my duty . he come into this house without so much as a ' by your leave ' to nobody , and vex I terrible accordingly . it be in the old lord 's time , you know , miss , a one of the true sort , as would have thing respectful , and knock down any man as soon as look . and it put I quite upon the touch - and - go , be responsible for all the footman 's work , and a young boy promote in the face of my opinion , have my own son worth a dozen of he . this make I look at the nature of thing , miss , and find it on my conscience to be after every body . " 
 " yes , Stixon , yes ! now do go on . you must always have be , not only after , but a very long way after , every body . " 
 " Miss Erma , if you throw I out , every word go promiscuous . in a heffort of the mind like this it be every word , or no word . now , do I see he come along the big passage ? a ' currydoor ' they call it now , though no more curry in it than there be door . no , I never seed he come along the passage , and that make it more reproachful . he come out of a green - baize door the very place I can point out to you , and the selfsame door , miss , though false to the accuracy of the mind that know it , by reason of have be cover up red , and all the brass button lose to it in they new - fangle upholstery . not that I see he come through , if you please , but the sway of the door , be double - jointed , be enough to show leg , have be there . and know that my lord 's private room be there , make I put out my leg quite wonderful . " 
 " oh , do please to put out your word half as quickly . " 
 " no , miss , no . I be lissome in those day , though not so very stiff at this time of speak , and bind to be guard in the guidance of the tongue . and now , miss , I think if you please to hear the rest to - morrow , I could tell it well . " 
 a more outrageous idea than this be never present to I . even if I could have try to wait , this dreadful old man might have make up his mind not to open his lip in the morning , or , if he would speak , there might be nothing leave to say . his memory be nurse up now , and my only chance be to keep it so . therefore I beg he to please to go on , and no more would I interrupt he . and I long to be ten year old , so as not to speak when needless . 
 " so then , Miss Erma , if I must go on , " resume the well - coax Stixon , " if my duty to the family driveth I to an ' arrowing subjeck , no word can more justly tell what come to pass than my language to my wife . she be alive then , the poor dear hangel , and the mother of seven child , which make I , by your leave compare humble roof with grandeur , a little stiff to he up stair , as come in on the top of seven . for I say to my wife when I go home sleep out of the house , you see , miss , till the Lord be pleased to dissolve matrimony ' polly , ' I say , when I take home my supper , ' you may take my word for it there be something queer . ' not another word do I mean to tell she , as behoove my dooty . Howsoever , no peace be my lot till I make a clean bosom of it , only put she first on the Testament , and even that not safe with most of they . and from that night not a soul have hear a word till it come to you , miss . he come stride along , with his face muffle up , for all the world like a bugglar , and no more heed do he pay to I than if I be one of the pedestal . but I be in front of he at the door , and to slip out so be against all order . so in front of he I stand , with my hand upon the handle , and mean to have a word with he , to know who he be , and such like , and how he come there , and what he have be seek , with the spoon and the fork and the gravy on my mind . and right I would have be in a court of law   if the lawyer be put out of it   for my heffort in that situation . and then , what do you think he do , miss ? so far from enter into any conversation with I , or hit at I , like a man which would have do good to think of he send out one hand to the bottom of my vest as they call it now in all the good livery tailor and afore I could reason on it , there I be a - lying on a star in six color of marble . when I come to think on it , it be but a push direct to a part of my system , and not a hit under the belt , the like of which no Briton would think of deliver . nevertheless , there be no differ in what come to I , miss , and my spirit be rouse , as if I have be hit foul by one of the prizeman . no time to get up , but I let out one foot at his long leg as a ' be slip through the door , and so nearly do I fetch he over that he let go his muffle to balance himself with the jamb , and same moment a strong rush of wind lay bare the whole of his wicked face to I . for a bad wicked face it be , as ever I do see ; whether by reason of the kick I give , and a splinter in the shin , or by habit of the mind , a proud and ' aughty and owdacious face , and , as I say to my poor wife , remind I a little of our Master George ; not in his ordinary aspect , to be sure , but as Master George might look if he be go to the devil . pray excoose I , miss , for bad word , but no good one will do justice . and so off he go , after one look at I on the ground , not worth consider , with his chin stick up , as if the air be not good enough to be breathe perpendiklar like . " 
 " and of course you follow he , " I exclaim , perceive that Stixon would allow I now to speak . " without any delay you go after he . " 
 " Miss Erma , you forget what my dooty be . my dooty be to stay by the door and make it fast , as custodian of all this mansion . no little coorosity , or private resentment , could ' a borne I out in do so . as an outraged man I be up for rush out , but as a trusted official , and responsible head footman , miss for I be not butler till nine month after that my dooty be to put the big bolt in . " 
 " and you do it , without even look out to see if he try to set the house on fire ! oh , Stixon , I fear that you be frightened . " 
 " now , Miss Erma , I call it ungrateful , after all my heffort to obleege you , to put a bad construction upon I . you hurt I , miss , in my tender part , as I never think Master George 's darter would ' a doed . but there , they be none of they as they use to be ! Master George would ' a said , if he ever have hear it . ' Stixon , my man , you have act for the good , and show a sound discretion . Stixon , ' he would have say , ' here be a George and Dragon in reward of your gallant conduck . ' ah , that sort of manliness be die out now . " 
 this grate at first upon my feeling , because it seem taint with selfishness , and it do not entirely agree with my own recollection of my father . but still Mr. Stixon must have suffer severely in that conflict , and to blame he for not show rashness be to misunderstand his position . and so , before put any other question to he , I feel in my pocket for a new half sovereign , which I hop would answer . 
 Mr. Stixon receive it in an absent manner , as if he be still in the struggle of his story , and too full of duty to be thankful . yet I see that he do not quite realize the truth of a nobly philosophic proverb " the half be more than the whole . " nevertheless , he stow away his half , in harmony with a good old English saying . 
 " now , when you be able to get up at last , " I inquire , with tender interest , " what do you see , and what do you do , and what conclusion do you come to ? " 
 " I come to the conclusion , miss , that I be hurt considerable . coorosity on my part be quench by the way as I have to rub myself . but a man be a man , and the last thing to complain of be the exercise of his function . and when I come round I go off to his lordship , as if I have hear his bell ring . all of we know well than to speak till he begin , for he be not what they now call ' halfable , ' but very much to the contrary . so he say , ' you door - skulker , what do you want there ? ' and I see that he get his hot leg up , certain to fly to bad language . accord , I ask , with my breath in my hand , if he please to see any young man there just now , by reason that such like have be observate go out in some direction . but his lordship roar to I to go in another direction , not fit for young lady . my old lord be up to every word of English ; but his present lordship be the hopposite extreme . " 
 " be that all you have to tell I , Stixon ? do you never see that fearful man again ? do you never even hear of he ? " 
 " never , miss , never ! and to nobody but you have I ever tell all as I tell now . but you seem to be bear to hear it all . " 




 CHAPTER xxxviii 

 a WITCH 

 it be true enough that Stixon now have nothing more to tell , but what he have tell already seem of very great importance , confirm strongly , as it do , the description give I by Jacob Rigg . and even the butler 's concluding word that I seem bear to hear it all comfort I like some good oman , and cheer I forward to make they true . not that I could , in my sad and dangerous enterprise , always be confident . some little spirit I must have have , and some resolve to be faithful , accord to the power of a very common mind , admire but never claim courage . for I never do feel in any kind of way any gift of inspiration , or even the fitness of a quick , strong mind for work out deed of justice . there be many good lady in America then , and now there be some in England , perceive so clearly their own superiority as to run about largely proclaim it . how often I long to be a little more like these , equal to man in achievement of the body , and very far beyond they in question of the mind ! 
 however , it be useless to regret my lack , and foolish , perhaps , to think of they . to do my very well with what little gift I have be more to the purpose and more sensible . take in lonely perplexity now this dim yet exciting view of thing , I resolve , right or wrong , to abide at the place where the only chance be of pursue my search . I be pledge , as perhaps have be say before , to keep from every one except faithful Betsy , and above all from Lord Castlewood , the unexpected little tale wring out of Mr. Stixon . that promise have be give without any thought , in my eagerness to hear every thing , and probably some people would have think of it no more . but the trusty butler be so scared when I ask he to release I from it , so penitent also at his own indiscretion , which never would have overcome he   as he say in the morning   only for the thunder - storm , that instead of get off , I be quite obliged to renew and confirm my assurance . 
 therefore , in truth , I have no chance leave but to go back to Shoxford and do my good , meet all dark peril with the shield of right spread over I . and a great thing now in my favor be to feel some confidence again in the guidance of kind wisdom . the sense of this never have abandon I so much as to make I miserable about it ; but still I have never try to shelter under it , and stay there faithfully , as the good of people do . and even now I be not bring to such a happy attitude , although deliver by these little gleam of light from the dark void of fatalism , into which so many bitter blow have once be drive I . 
 however , before set off again , I make one more attempt upon Lord Castlewood , long to know whether his suspicion would help I at all to identify the figure which have frighten both the sexton and the butler . that the person be one and the same , I do not for a moment call in question , any more than I doubt that he be the man upon whose head rest the blood of we . but why he should be allow to go scot - free while another bear his brand , and many other die for he , and why all my most just and righteous effort to discover he should receive , if not discouragement , at any rate most lukewarm aid these and several other question be as dark as ever . 
 " you must not return to Shoxford , my cousin , " Lord Castlewood say to I that day , after a plain though courteous refusal to enlighten I even with a mere surmise , except upon the condition before reject . " I can not allow you to be there without strict supervision and protection . you will not , perhaps , be aware of it , as perhaps you have not be before ; but a careful watch will be keep on you . I merely tell you this that you may not make mistake , and confound friendly vigilance with the spying of an enemy . Erema , you will be look after . " 
 I could not help be grateful for his kindness , and really , try as I might to be fearless , it would be a great comfort to have some one to protect I . on the other hand , how would this bear upon my own freedom of look about , my desire to make my own occasion , and the need of go every where ? could these be keep to my liking at all while an unknown power lie in kind regard of I ? consider these thing , I beg my cousin to leave I to my own device , for that I be afraid of nobody on earth , while only seek justice , and that England must be bad than the bad part of America if any harm to I could be apprehend at quiet time and in such a quiet place . 
 my cousin say no more upon that point , though I feel that he be not in any way convince ; but he tell I that he think I should pay a little visit , if only for a day , such as I treat he with , to my good friend at Bruntsea , before I return to Shoxford . there be no one now at Bruntsea whom I might not wish to meet , as he know by a trifling accident ; and after all the kind service render by Major and Mrs. Hockin , it be hardly right to let they begin to feel themselves neglect . now the very same thing have occur to I , and I be go to propose it ; and many thing which I find it hard to do without be leave in my little chest of lock - up drawer there . but of that , to my knowledge , I scarcely think twice ; whereas I long to see and have a talk with dear " Aunt Mary . " now , since my affair have be grow so strange , and Lord Castlewood have come forward not strongly , but still quite enough to speak of there have be a kind - hearted and genuine wish at Bruntsea to recover I . and this desire have unreasonably grow while starve with disappointment . the less they hear of I , the more they imagine in their rich good - will , and the surer they become that , after all , there be something in my idea . 
 but how could I know this , without any letter from they , since letter be a luxury forbid I at Shoxford ? I know it through one of the simple and commonest of all nature 's arrangement . Stixon 's boy , as every body call he   though he must have be close upon five - and - twenty , and carry a cane out of sight of the window , be so consider , and treat boyishly by the maid of Castlewood , assert his dignity , and rise above his value as much as he have lain below it , by show that he own a tender heart , and they that do not despise it . for he chance to be walk with his cane upon the beach   the very morning after he first go to Bruntsea , too late for any train back again , and cast glance of interior wonder over the unaccustomed sea when from the sea itself out - leap a wondrous rosy deity . 
 " you there , Mr. Stixon ! oh my ! how long ? " exclaim Mrs. Hockin 's new parlormaid , ready to drop , though in full print now , on the landward step of the bathing - machine set up by the reckless Major . 
 " come this very hinstant , miss , honor bright ! " reply the junior Stixon , who have move in good society ; " and just in the hackmy of time , miss , if I may offer you my ' umble hand . " 
 the fair nymph fix he with a penetrate gaze through tress full of salt curliness , while her cheek be conscious of an unclad dip . but William Stixon 's eye be firm with pure truth , gently tone into shy reproach and tenderness . he have meet she at supper last night , and do his good ; but   as he say to the Castlewood maid   it be only feel then , whereas now it be emoshun . 
 " then you be a gentleman ! " Polly Hopkins cry ; " and indeed , Mr. Stixon , these be slippery thing . " she be speak of the step , as she come down they , and they have no hand - rail ; and the young man feel himself to be no more Stixon 's boy , but a gentleman under sweet refining pressure . 
 from that hour forth it be pronounce , and they leave the world to its own opinion , that they be keep company ; and although they be sixty mile apart by air , and eighty - two by railway , at every post their heart be one , with considerable benefit to the United Kingdom 's revenue . also they meet by the sad sea wave , when the bathing - machine have be haul up for the Major now have three of they as often as Stixon senior smile which he do whenever he be not put out on the bygone way of these child . for Polly Hopkins have a hundred pound , as well as be the only child of the man who keep the only shop for pickle pork in Bruntsea . and my Mr. Stixon could always contrive to get order from his lordship to send the boy away , with his carriage pay , when his health demand bath . hence it be manifest that the deed and thought of Bruntsea House , otherwise call " Bruntlands , " be know quite as well , and discuss even well because dispassionately at Castlewood than and as they be at home . 
 now I win forever the heart of Stixon 's boy , and that of Polly Hopkins , by recoil with horror from the thought of go to Bruntsea unattended . after all my solitary journey , this might have be call hypocrisy , if it have be inconvenient ; but come as it do , it be pronounce , by all who desire either news or love , to be another proof of the goodness of my heart . 
 escort thus by William Stixon   arm with a brilliant cane buy for this occasion , and know that Sir Montague Hockin be not there , I arrive at Bruntlands in the afternoon , and receive a kindly welcome from my dear friend Mrs. Hockin . her husband be from home , and she grieve to say that now he be generally do this ; but nobody else could have any idea what his avocation be ! then she pay I some compliment on my appearance a thing that I never think of , except when I come to a question of likeness , or chance to be think of thing , come up as they will , at a look - glass . 
 that the Major be out be a truth establish in my mind some time ago ; because I have see he , as our fly crawl by , expressly and emphatically at work on a rampart of his own designing . the work be quite new to I , but not so his figure . though I could not see people three mile off , as Firm Gundry be say to do , I have pretty clear sight , and could not mistake the Major within a furlong . and there he be , go about in a row of square notch against the sea - line , with his coat off , and brandish some tool , vehemently carry on to spirit less active than his own . I burn with desire to go and join he , for I love to see activity ; but Mrs. Hockin think that I have well stay away , because it be impossible to get on there without language too strong for young lady . 
 this close the question , and I stop with she , and find the good comfort that I ever could have dream of . " Aunt Mary " be so steadfast , and so build up with , or rather build of , the very faith itself , that to talk with she be as good as read the noble chapter of the Bible . she put by all possibility of doubt as to the modern interference of the Lord , with such a sweet pity and the seasoned smile of age , and so much feeling   which would have be contempt if she have not be soften by her own escape , that really I , who have come expect to set her beautiful white hair on end , become like a little child put into the corner , but too young yet for any other punishment at school , except to be look at . nevertheless , though I do look small , it make I all the happy . I seem to become less an individual , and more a member of a large kind race under paternal management . from a practical point of view this may have be amiss , but it help to support I afterward . and before I begin to get weary or rebel against her gentle teaching , in come her husband ; and she stop at once , because he have never any time for it . 
 " my geological hammer ! " cry the Major , be in a rush as usual . " oh , Miss Castlewood ! I do not see you . pardon I ! it be the want of practice only ; so wholly have you desert we . fall into well hand , of course . well , how be you ? but I need not ask . if ever there be a young lady who look well do not   tell I of trouble , or worry , or nerve I put up my glass , and simply say , ' pretty young lady be above all pity ! ' my hammer , dear Mary ; my hammer I must have . the geological one , you know ; we have come on a bit of old roman work ; the bricklayer 's hammer go flat , like lead . I have just one minute and a half to spare . what fine fellow those Romans be ! I will build like a Roman . see to every bit of it myself , Erema . no contractor 's job for I . Mary , you know where to find it . " 
 " well , dear , I think that you have it last , to get the bung out of the beer barrel , when the stool break down in the corner , you know , because you would " 
 " never mind about that . the drayman make a fool of himself . I proceed upon true principle . that fellow know nothing of leverage . " 
 " well , dear , of course you understand it well . but he tell cook that it be quite a mercy that you get off without a broken leg ; and compare with that , two gallon of spill ale " Mrs. Hockin make off , without finish her sentence . 
 " what a woman she be ! " cry the Major ; ' she take such a lofty view of thing , and she can always find my tool . Erema , after dinner I must have a talk with you . there be something go on here on my manor which I can not at all get a clew to , except by connect you with it , the Lord know how . of course you have nothing to do with it ; but still my life have be so free from mystery that , that you know what I mean " 
 " that you naturally think I must be at the bottom of every thing mysterious . now be there any thing dark about I ? do I not labor to get at the light ? have I keep from your knowledge any single thing ? but you never care to go into they . " 
 " it be hardly fair of you to say that . the fact be that you , of your own accord , have choose other counselor . have you hear any more of your late guardian , Mr. Shovelin ? I suppose that his executor , or some one appoint by he , be now your legal guardian . " 
 " I have not even ask what the law be , " I reply . " Lord Castlewood be my proper guardian , accord to all common - sense , and I mean to have he so . he have inquire through his solicitor as to Mr. Shovelin , and I be quite free there . my father 's will be quite good , they say ; but it never have be prove , and none of they care to do it . my cousin think that I could compel they to prove it , or to renounce in proper form ; but Mr. Shovelin 's son be not nice people as different from he as night from day , careless and wild and dashing . " 
 " then do you mean to do nothing about it ? what a time she be find that hammer ! " 
 " I leave it entirely to my cousin , and he be wait for legal advice . I wish to have the will , of course , for the sake of my dear father ; but with or without any will , my mother 's little property come to I . and if my dear father have nothing to leave , why should we run up a great lawyer 's bill ? " 
 " to be sure not ! I see . that make all the difference . I admire your common - sense , " say the Major " but there ! come and look , and just exercise it here . there be that very strange woman again , just at the end of my new road . she stand quite still , and then star about , sometimes for an hour together . nobody know who she be , or why she come . she have take a tumble - down house on my manor , from a wretch of a fellow who deny my title ; and what she live on be more than any one can tell , for she never spend sixpence in Bruntsea . some think that she walk in the dark to Newport , and get all her food at some ship store there . and one of our fisherman vow that he meet she walk on the sea , as he row home one night , and she have a long red bag on her shoulder . she be a witch , that be certain ; for she will not   answer I , however politely I accost she . but the odd thing of all be the name she give to the fellow she take the house from . what do you think she call herself ? of all thing in the world ' Mrs. Castlewood ! ' I congratulate you on your relative . " 
 " how very strange ! " I answer . " oh , now I see why you connect I with it ; and I beg your pardon for have be vex . but let I go and see she . oh , may I go at once , if you please , and speak to she ? " 
 " the very thing I wish if you be not afraid . I will come with you , when I get my hammer . oh , here it be ! Mary , how clever you be ! now look out of the window , and you shall see Erema make up to her grandmamma . " 




 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 not AT HOME 

 Mrs. Hockin , however , have not the pleasure promise she by the facetious Major of see I " make up to my grandmamma . " for although we set off at once to catch the strange woman who have rouse so much curiosity , and though , as we pass the door of Bruntlands , we see she still at her post in the valley , like Major Hockin 's new letter - box , for some reason well know to herself we could not see any more of she . for , hurry as he might upon other occasion , nothing would make the Major cut a corner of his wind " drive " when descend it with a visitor . he enjoy every yard of its length , because it be his own at every step , and he count his pace in an under - tone , to be sure of the length , for perhaps the thousandth time . it be long enough in a straight line , one would have think , but he be not the one who think so ; and therefore he have double it by judicious winding , as if for the purpose of break the descent . 
 " three hundred and twenty - one , " he say , as he come to a post , where he mean to have a lodge as soon as his wife would let he ; " now the old woman stand fifty - five yard on , at a spot where I mean to have an ornamental bridge , because our fine saline element run up there when the new moon be perigee . my dear , I be a little out of breath , which affect my sight for the moment . doubtless that be why I do not see she . " 
 " if I may offer an opinion , " I say , " in my ignorance of all the change you have make , the reason why we do not see she may be that she be go out of sight . " 
 " impossible ! " Major Hockin cry ' simply impossible , Erema ! she never move for an hour and a half . and she be not come , be she , when you come by ? " 
 " I will not be certain , " I answer ; " but I think that I must have see she if she have be there , because I be look about particularly at all your work as we come by . " 
 " then she must be there still ; let we tackle she . " 
 this be easy say than do , for we find no sign of any body at the place where she certainly have be stand less than five minute ago . we stand at the very end and last corner of the ancient river trough , where a little seam go inland from it , as if some trifle of a brook have steal down while it find a good river to welcome it . but now there be only a little oozy gloss from the gleam of the sun upon some lee of marshy brine leave among the rush by the last high tide . 
 " you see my new road and the key to my intention ? " say the Major , forget all about his witch , and flourish his geological hammer , while stand thus at his " nucleus . " " to understand all , you have only to stand here . you see those leveling post , adjust with scientific accuracy . you see all those angle , calculate with micrometric precision . you see how the curve be radiate " 
 " it be very beautiful , I have no doubt ; but you can not have Uncle Sam 's gift of machinery . and do you understand every bit of it yourself ? " 
 " Erema , not a jot of it . I like to talk about it freely when I can , because I see all its beauty . but as to understand it , my dear , you might set to , if you be an educate female , and deliver I a lecture upon my own plan . intellect be , in such matter , a bubble . I know good brick , good mortar , and good foundation . " 
 " with your great ability , you must do that , " I answer , very gently , be touch with his humility and allowance of my opinion ; " you will make a noble town of it . but when be the railway come ? " 
 " not yet . we have first to get our Act ; and a miserable - minded wretch , who own nothing but a rabbit - warren , mean to oppose it . do not   let we talk of he . it put one out of patience when a man can not see his own interest . but come and see our assembly - room , literary institute , bath , etc . , etc . that be what we be urge forward now . " 
 " but may I not go first and look for my strange namesake ? would it be wrong of I to call upon she ? " 
 " no harm whatever , " reply my companion ; " likewise no good . call fifty time , but you will get no answer . however , it be not a very great round , and you will understand my plan more clearly . step out , my dear , as if you have get a troop of Mexicans after you . ah , what a fine turn for that lot now ! " he be think of the war which have break out , and the battle of Bull 's Run . 
 without any such headlong speed , we soon come to the dwelling - place of the stranger , and really for once the good Major have not much overdone his description . truly it be almost tumble down , though massively build , and a good house long ago ; and it look the more miserable now from be place in a hollow of the ground , whose slope be tufte with rush and thistle and ragwort . the low window be block up from within , the upper be shatter and crumbling and dangerous , with block of crack stone jutting over they ; and the last surviving chimney give less smoke than a workman 's homeward whiff of his pipe to comfort and relieve the air . 
 the only door that we could see be of heavy black oak , without any knocker ; but I clinch my hand , have thick glove on , and make what I think a very creditable knock , while the Major stand by , with his blue - light up , and keenly gaze and gently smile . 
 " knock again , my dear , " he say ; " you do not   knock half hard enough . " 
 I knock again with all my might , and get a bruised hand for a fortnight , but there be not even the momentary content produce by an active echo . the door be as dead as every thing else . 
 " now for my hammer , " my companion cry . " this house , in all sound law , be my own . I will have a ' John Doe and Richard Roe ' a fine action of ejectment . shall I be bar out upon my own manor ? " 
 with hot indignation he swing his hammer , but nothing come of it except more noise . then the Major grow warm and angry . 
 " my charter contain the right of burn witch or drown they , accord to their color . the execution be specially impose upon the bailiff of this ancient town , and he be my own pickle - pork man . his name be Hopkins , and I will have he out with his seal and stick and all the rest . be I to be laugh at in this way ? " 
 for we think we hear a little screech of laughter from the loneliness of the deep dark place , but no other answer come , and perhaps it be only our own imagining . 
 " be there no other door perhaps one at the back ? " I ask , as the lord of the manor stamp . 
 " no , that have be wall up long ago . the villain have defy I from the very first . well , we shall see . this be all very fine . you witness that they deny the owner entrance ? " 
 " undoubtedly I can depose to that . but we must not waste your valuable time . " 
 " after all , the poor ruin be worthless , " he go on , calm down as we retire . " it must be level , and that hole fill up . it be quite an eye - sore to our new parade . and no doubt it belong to I no doubt it do . the fellow who claim it be turn out of the law . Fancy any man turn out of the law ! Erema , in all your far west experience , do you ever see a man bad enough to be turn out of the law ? " 
 " Major Hockin , how can I tell ? but I fear that their practice be very , very sad they very nearly always use to hang they . " 
 " the good use the good use a rogue can be put to . some big thief have put it the opposite way , because he be afraid of his own turn . the constitution must be uphold , and , by the Lord ! it shall be at any rate , in East Bruntsea . West Bruntsea be all a small - pox warren out of my control , and a skewer in my flesh . and some of my tenant have go across the line to snap their dirty hand at I . " 
 be once in this cue , Major Hockin go on , not talk to I much , but rather to himself , though expect I now and then to say " yes ; " and this I do when necessary , for his principle of action be beyond all challenge , and the only question be how he carry they out . 
 he take I to his rampart , which be sure to stop the sea , and at the same time to afford the fine place in all Great Britain for a view of it . even an invalid might sit here in perfect shelter from the heavy gale , and watch such billow as be not to be see except upon the Major 's property . 
 " the reason of that be quite simple , " he say , " and a child may see the force of it . in no other part of the kingdom can you find so steep a beach front the southwest wind , which be ten to one of all other wind , without any break of sand or rock outside . hence we have what you can not have on a shallow shore grand roller : straight from the very Atlantic , Erema ; you and I have see they . you may see by the map that they all end here , with the wind in the proper quarter . " 
 " oh , please not to talk of such horror , " I say . " why , your rampart would go like pie crust . " 
 the Major smile a superior smile , and after more talk we go home to dinner . 
 from something more than mere curiosity , I wait at Bruntsea for a day or two , hop to see that strange namesake of mine who have show so much inhospitality . for she must have be at home when we make that press call , inasmuch as there be no other place to hide she within the needful distance of the spot where she have stand . but the long I wait , the less would she come out to borrow the good Irishman 's expression and the Major 's pillar - box , her favorite resort , be leave in conspicuous solitude . and when a letter come from Sir Montague Hockin , ask leave to be at bruntland on the follow evening , I pack up my good with all haste , and set off , not an hour too soon , for Shoxford . 
 but before take leave of these kind friend , I beg they to do for I one little thing , without ask I to explain my reason , which , indeed , be more than I could do . I beg they , not of course to watch Sir Montague , for that they could not well do to a guest , but simply to keep their eye open and prepare for any sign of intercourse , if such there be , between this gentleman and that strange interloper . major Hockin star , and his wife look at I as if my poor mind must have go astray , and even to myself my own thought appear absurd . Remembering , however , what Sir Montague have say , and other little thing as well , I do not laugh as they do . but perhaps one part of my conduct be not right , though the wrong   if any   have be do before that to wit , I have faithfully promise Mrs. Price not to say a word at Bruntlands about their visitor 's low and sinful treachery toward my cousin . to give such a promise have perhaps be wrong , but still without it I should have hear nothing of matter that concern I nearly . and now it seem almost bad to keep than to break such a pledge , when I think of a pious , pure - minded , and holy - hearted woman , like my dear " Aunt Mary , " unwittingly bring into friendly contact with a man of the low nature . and as for the Major , instead of sit down with such a man to dinner , what would he have do but drive he straightway from the door , and chase he to the utmost verge of his manor with the peak end of his " geological hammer ? " 
 however , away I go without a word against that contemptible and base man , toward whom though he never have injure I I cherish , for my poor cousin 's sake , the implacable hatred of virtuous youth . and a wild idea have occur to I   as many wild idea do now in the crowd of thing gather round I   that this strange woman , conceal from the world , yet keenly watch some member of it , might be that fallen and miserable creature who have flee from a good man with a bad one , because he be more like herself Flittamore , Lady Castlewood . not that she could be an " old woman " yet , but she might look old , either by disguise , or through her own wickedness ; and every body know how suddenly those southern beauty fall off , alike in face and figure . Mrs. Price have not tell I what become of she , or even whether she be dead or alive , but merely say , with a meaning look , that she be " punish " for her sin , and I have not venture to inquire how , the subject be so distasteful . 
 to my great surprise , and uneasiness as well , I have find at Bruntlands no letter whatever , either to the Major or myself , from Uncle Sam or any other person at the saw - mill . there have not be time for any answer to my letter of some two month back , yet be alarm by the Sawyer 's last tiding , I long , with some terror , for later news . and all the United Kingdom be now watch with tender interest the dismemberment , as it almost appear , of the other mighty Union . not with malice , or snug satisfaction , as the man of the North in their agony say , but certainly without any proper anguish yet , and rather as a genial and sprightly spectator , whose love of fair play perhaps kindle his applause of the spirit and skill of the weak side . " ' tis a good fight let they fight it out ! " seem to be the general sentiment ; but in spite of some american vaunt and menace   which of late year have be gall   every true Englishman deeply would have mourn the humiliation of his kindre . 
 in this anxiety for news I beg that my letter might be forward under cover to the postmistress at Shoxford , and bear my initial . for now I have make up my mind to let Mrs. Busk know whatever I could tell she . I have find she a cross and well - educate woman , far above her neighbor , and determine to remain so . Gossip , that universal leveler , theoretically she despise ; and she have that magnificent esteem for rank which work so beautifully in England . and now when my good nurse reasonably say that , much as she love to be with I , her business would allow that delight no long , and it also come home to my own mind that money would be run short again , and small hope leave in this dreadful civil war of our nugget escape pillage   which make I shudder horribly at internal discord , I just do this I dismiss Betsy , or rather I let she dismiss herself , which she might not have altogether mean to do , although she threaten it so often . for here she have nothing to do but live well , and protest against trick of her own profession which she practice as necessary law at home ; and so , with much affection , for the time we part . 
 Mrs. Busk be delighted at her departure , for she never have like to be criticise so keenly while she be do she very well . and as soon as the wheel of Betsy 's fly have show their last speak at the corner , she tell I , with a smile , that her mind have be make up to give we notice that very evening to seek for well lodging . but she could not wish for a quieter , pleasanter , or more easily pleased young lady than I be without any mischief - maker ; and so , on the spur of the moment , I take she into my own room , while her little girl mind the shop , and there and then I tell she who I be , and what I want . 
 and now she behave most admirably . instead of express surprise , she assure I that all along she have feel there be something , and that I must be somebody . lovely as my painting be   which I never hear , before or since , from any impartial censor , she have know that it could not be that alone which have keep I so long in their happy valley . and now she do hope I would do she the honor to stay beneath her humble roof , though entitle to one so different . and be the fairy ring in the church - yard make of all my family ? 
 I reply that too surely this be so , and that nothing would please I well than to find , accord to my stature , room to sleep inside it as soon as ever I should have solve the mystery of its origin . at the moment this be no exaggeration , so depressing be the sense of fight against the unknown so long , with scarcely any one to stand by I , or avenge I if I fall . and Betsy 's departure , though I try to take it mildly , have leave I with a readiness to catch my breath . 
 but to dwell upon sadness no more than need be   a need as sure as hunger , it be manifest now to my wonder mind that once more I have chance upon a good , and warm , and steadfast heart . every body be say to be bear , whether that happen by night or day , with a certain little widow star , which have lose its previous mortal , concentrate from a billion billion of mile , or league , or large measure , intense , but generally invisible , radiance upon he or she ; and to take for the moment this old fable as of serious meaning , my star be to find bad fact at a glance , but no bad folk without long gaze . 




 CHAPTER XL 

 the MAN AT last 

 this new alliance with Mrs. Busk not only refresh my courage , but help I forward most importantly . in truth , if it have not be for this I never could have bear what I have to bear , and meet the peril which I have to meet . for I have the confidence of feeling now that here be some one close at hand , an intelligent person , and well acquaint with the place and neighborhood , upon whom I could rely for warning , succor , and , if the bad should come to the very bad , revenge . it be true that already I have Jacob Rigg , and perhaps the protector promise by my cousin ; but the former be as ignorant as he be honest , and of the latter , as he make no sign , how could I tell any thing ? 
 above all thing , Mrs. Busk 's position , as mistress of the letter , give I very great advantage both for offense and defense . for without the small breach of duty or of loyal honor she could see that my letter pass direct to I or from I , as the case might be , at the same time that she be bind to observe all epistle address to stranger or new - comer in her district , which extend throughout the valley . and by put my letter in the Portsmouth bag , instead of that for Winchester , I could freely correspond with any of my friend without any one see name or postmark in the neighboring village . 
 it be needless to say that I have long since explore and examine with great diligence that lonely spot where my grandfather meet his terrible and mysterious fate . not that there seem to be any hope now , after almost nineteen year , of find even any token of the crime commit there . only that it be natural for I , feel great horror of this place , to seek to know it thoroughly . 
 for this I have good opportunity , because the timid people of the valley , toward the close of day , would rather trudge another half mile of the homeward road than save brave leg at the thumping cost of heart not so courageous . for the plank be now call " murder - bridge ; " and every body know that the red spot on it , which could never be see by daylight , begin to gleam toward the hour of the deed , and glow   as if they would burn the wood   when the church clock strike eleven . 
 this phenomenon be beyond my gift of observation ; and know that my poor grandfather have scarcely set foot on the bridge , if ever he set foot there at all which at present be very doubtful also that he have fall backward , and only bleed internally , I could not reconcile tradition   however recent   with proven truth . and sure of no disturbance from the step of any native , here I often sit in a little bowered shelter of my own , well establish up the rise , down which the path make zigzag , and screen from that and the bridge as well by sheaf of twig and lop of leaf . it be a little forward thicket , quite detached from the upland copse , to which perhaps it have once belong , and crust up from the meadow slope with sod and mould in alternate step . and be quite the elbow of a foreland of the meadow - reach , it yield almost a " bird's - eye view " of the beautiful glade and the wandering brook . 
 one evening when I be sit here , neither drawing , nor working , nor even think with any set purpose , but idly allow my mind to rove , like the rivulet , without any heed , I become aware of a move figure in the valley . at first it do not appear to I as a thing at all worth notice ; it might be a very straightforward cow , or a horse , come on like a stalk - horse , keep hind - leg strictly behind , in direct desire of water . I have often see those sweet thing that enjoy four leg walk in the line of distance as if they be no well off than we be , kindly desiring , perhaps , to make the biped spectator content with himself . and I be content to admire this cow or horse , or whatever it might be , without any more than could be help of that invidious feeling which have drive the human race now to establish its right to a tail , and its hope of four leg . so little , indeed , do I think of what I see , that when among the hazel twig , part carelessly by my hand , a cluster of nuts hung manifest , I gather it , and begin to crack and eat , although they be scarcely ripe yet . 
 but while employ in this pleasant way , I happen to glance again through my leafy screen , and then I distinguish the figure in the distance as that of a man walk rapidly . he be come down the mill - stream meadow toward the wooden bridge , carry a fishing rod , but clearly not intent on angle . for instead of follow the course of the stream , he be keep quite away from it , avoid also the footpath , or , at any rate , seem to prefer the long shadow of the tree and the tufte place . this make I look at he , and very soon I shrink into my nest and watch he . 
 as he come near any one could tell that he be no village workman , bold than the rest , and venturesome to cross the " murder - bridge " in his haste to be at home . the fishing rod alone be enough to show this when it come into clear view ; for our good people , though they fish sometimes , only use rough rod of their own making , without any varnish or brass thing for the line . and the man be of different height and walk and dress from any of our native . 
 " who can he be ? " I whisper to myself , as my heart begin to beat heavily , and then seem almost to stop , as it answer , " this be the man who be in the churchyard . " Ignoble as it be , and contemptible , and vile , and traitorous to all duty , my first thought be about my own escape ; for I feel that if this man see I there he would rush up the hill and murder I . within pistol - shot of the very place where my grandfather have be murder a lonely place , an unholy spot , and I be look at the hand that do it . 
 the thought of this make I tremble so , though well aware that my death might ensue from a twig on the rustle , or a leaf upon the flutter , that my chance of make off unseen be go ere I could seize it . for now the man be take long stride over the wear - out plank of the bridge , disdain the hand - rail , and look upward , as if to shun sight of the footing . advance thus , he must have have his gaze point - blank upon my lair of leafage ; but , luckily for I , there be gorse upon the ridge , and bracken and rag - thistle , so that none could spy up and through the footing of my lurking - place . but if any person could have spy I , this man be the one to do it . so carefully do he scan the distance and inspect the foreground , as if he be resolve that no eye should be upon he while he be do what he come to do . and he even draw forth a little double telescope , such as be call " binocular , " and fix it on the thicket which hide I from he , and then on some other dark place . 
 no effort would compose or hush the heavy beating of my heart ; my lip be stiffen with dread of loud breath , and all power of motion leave I . for even a puff of wind might betray I , the ruffle of a spray , or the lifting of a leaf , or the random bounce of a beetle . great peril have encompass I ere now , but never have it grasp I as this do , and paralyze all the power of my body . rather would I have stand in the midst of a score of mexican rover than thus in the presence of that one man . and yet be not this the very thing for which I have wait , long , and labor ? I scorn myself for this craven loss of nerve , but that do not enable I to help it . in this benumb horror I durst not even peep at the doing of my enemy ; but presently I become aware that he have move from the end of the plank   where he stand for some time as calmly as if he have do nothing there , and have pass round the back of the hawthorn - tree , and go down to the place where the body be find , and be make most narrow and minute search there . and now I could watch he without much danger , stand as I do well above he , while his eye be steadfastly bent downward . and , not content with eyesight only , he seem to be feel every blade of grass or weed , every single stick or stone , crane into each cranny of the ground , and probe every clod with his hand . then , after vainly search with the very utmost care all the space from the hawthorn trunk to the meadow - leet   which be dry as usual , he run , in a fury of impatience , to his rod , which he have stick into the bank , as now I see , and draw off the butt end , and remove the wheel , or whatever it be that hold the fishing line ; and this butt have a long spike to it , shin like a halberd in a picture . 
 this make I shudder ; but my spirit be return , and therewith my power of reasoning , and a deep stir of curiosity . after so many year and such a quantity of search , what could there still be leave to seek for in this haunted and horrible place ? and who be the man that be look for it ? 
 the latter question partly solve itself . it must be the murderer , and no other , whoever he might be among the many black spot of humanity . but as to the other point , no light could be throw upon it , unless the search should be successful , and perhaps not even then . but now this anxiety , and shame of terror , make I so bold for I can not call it brave that I could not rest satisfied where I be , and instead of blessing every leaf and twig that hide I from the enemy , nothing would do for I but to creep nearer , in spite of that truculent long bright spike . 
 I think of my father , and each fibre of my frame seem to harden with vigor and fleetness . every muscle of my body could be trust now . I have always be remarkably light of foot . could a man of that age catch I ? it be almost as much as Firm Gundry could do , as in childish day I have prove to he . and this man , although his hair be not gray , must be on the slow side of fifty now , and perhaps get short of his very wicked breath . then I think of poor firm , and of good Uncle Sam , and how they scorn poltroonery ; and , well still , I think of that great power which always have protect I : in a word , I resolve to risk it . 
 but I have not reckon upon fire - arm , which such a scoundrel be pretty sure to have ; and that idea strike cold upon my valor . nevertheless , I would not turn back . with no more sound than a field - mouse make in the building of its silken nest , and foot as light as the step of the wind upon the scarcely ruffle grass , I quit my screen , and go glide down a hedge , or rather the residue of some old hedge , which would shelter I a little toward the hollow of the bank . I pass low place , where the man must have see I if he have happen to look up ; but he be stoop with his back to I , and work in the hollow of the dry water trough . he be dig with the long spike of his rod , and I hear the rattle of each pebble that he strike . 
 before he stand up again , to ease his back and to look at the ground which he still have to turn , I be kneel behind a short , close - branched holly , the very last bush of the hedge - row , scarcely fifteen yard from the hawthorn - tree . it be quite impossible to get near without come face to face with he . and now I begin again to tremble , but with a great effort conquer it . 
 the man be pant with his labor , and seem to be in a vile temper too . he do not swear , but make low noise full of disappointment . and then he catch up his tool , with a savage self - control , and fall to again . 
 now be my time to see what he be like , and engrave he on my memory . but , lo ! in a moment I need not do that . the face be the bad image of my father 's . a lower , and vicious , and ill - breed image of a noble countenance such as it be just possible to dream that my dear father 's might have fall to , if his mind and soul have plunge away from the good inborn and implant in they . the figure be that of a tall strong man , with shoulder rather slouch , and a habit of keep his head throw back , which make a long chin look long . altogether he seem a perilous foe , and perhaps a friend still more perilous . 
 be he what he might , he be work very hard . not one of all Uncle Sam 's man , to my knowledge , least of all Martin , would have work so hard . with his narrow and ill - adapt tool he contrive to turn over , in less than twenty minute , the entire bed of the meadow - leet , or trough , for a length of about ten yard . then he come to the mouth , where the water of the main stream lap back into it , and he turn up the bottom as far as he could reach , and wait for the mud he have raise to clear away . when this have flow down with the stream , he walk in for some little distance till the pool grow deep ; but in spite of all his labor , there be nothing . 
 meanwhile the sunset glow be fail , and a gray autumnal haze creep up the tranquil valley . shadow wan and fade into dimness more diffuse , and light grow soft and vague and vaporous . the gleam of water , and the gloss of grass , and deep relief of tree , begin to lose their several phase and mingle into one large twilight blend . and cattle , from their milking shed , come low for more pasture ; and the bark of a shepherd 's dog rang quick , as if his sheep be drowsy . 
 in the midst of innocent sight and sound that murderer 's heart misgave he . he leave his vain quest off , and gaze , with fear and hate of nature 's beauty , at the change from day to night which have not wait for he . some touch of his childhood move he perhaps , some thought of time when he play " I spy , " or listen to twilight ghost tale ; at any rate , as he rise and face the evening , he sigh heavily . 
 then he stride away ; and although he pass I almost within length of his rod , there be little fear of his discover I , because his mind be elsewhere . 
 it will , perhaps , be confess by all who be not as brave as lion that so far I have acquit myself pretty well in this try matter . horribly scared as I be at first , I have not allow this to conquer I , but have even rush into new jeopardy . but now the good part of my courage be spend ; and when the tall stranger refixe his rod and calmly recrosse those ominous plank , I durst not set forth on the perilous errand of spy out his way and track he . a glance be enough to show the impossibility in those long meadow of follow without be see in this stage of the twilight . moreover , my nerve have be try too long , and presence of mind could not last forever . all I could do , therefore , be to creep as far as the trunk of the hawthorn - tree , and thence observe that my enemy do not return by the way he have come , but hasten down the dusky valley . 
 one part of his labor have not be describe , though doubtless a highly needful one . to erase the trace of his work , or at least obscure they to a careless eye , when he have turn as much ground as he think it worth his while to meddle with , he trod it back again to its level as nearly as might be , and then   with a can out of his fishing basket   sluice the place well with the water of the stream . this make it look to any heedless person , who would not descend to examine it , as if there have be nothing more than a little reflux from the river , cause by a flush from the mill - pond . this little stratagem increase my fear of a cunning and active villain . 




 CHAPTER XLI 

 a strong temptation 

 now it will be say , and I also know , that there be nothing as yet , except most frail and feeble evidence , to connect that nameless stranger with the crime charge upon my father . indeed , it might be argue well that there be no evidence at all , only inference and suspicion . that , however , be no fault of mine ; and I feel as sure about it as if I have see he in the very act . and this conclusion be not mine alone ; for Mrs. Busk , a most clever woman , and the one who keep the post - office , entirely agree with I that there could be no doubt on earth about it . 
 but when she go on to ask I what it be my intention to do next , for the moment I could do nothing more than inquire what her opinion be . and she tell I that she must have a good night 's rest before advise any thing . for the thought of have such a heinous character in her own delivery district be enough to unhinge she from her postal duty , some of which might be useful to I . 
 with a significant glance she leave I to my own thought , which be sad enough , and too sad to be worth recording . for Mrs. Busk have not the art of rouse people and cheer they , such as Betsy Strouss , my old nurse , have , perhaps from her knowledge of the nursery . my present landlady might be the more sagacious and sensible woman of the two , and therefore the well adviser ; but for keep one up to the mark she be not in any way equal to Betsy . 
 there be no ingratitude in say this , because she herself admit it . a clever woman , with a well - balanced mind , know what she can do , and wherein she fail , well than a man of her own proportion do . and Mrs. Busk often lament , without much real mortification , that she have not be " bear sympathetic . " 
 all the more perhaps for that , she be bear sagacious , which be a less pleasing , but , in a bitter pinch , a more really useful , quality . and before I have time to think much of her defect , in the crowd of more important thought , in she come again , with a letter in her hand , and a sparkle of triumph in her small black eye . after look back along the passage , and close my door , she see that my little bay - window have its old - fashioned shutter fasten , and then , in a very low whisper , she say , " what you want to know be here , miss . " 
 " indeed ! " I answer , in my usual voice . " how can you know that ? the letter be seal . " 
 " hush ! would you have I ruin for your sake ? this be at the bottom of the Nepheton bag . it fall on the floor . that be God 's will , to place it in your power . " 
 " it be not in my power , " I answer , whisper in my turn , and star at it , in the strong temptation . " I have no right even to look at it . it be mean for some one else , and seal . " 
 " the seal be nothing . I can manage that . another drop of wax and I strike our stamp by accident over the breakage . I refuse to know any thing about it . I be too busy with the other letter . five minute lock the door and I will come again . " 
 this be a desperate conflict for I , bad even than bodily danger . my first impulse be to have nothing to do with it even to let the letter lie untouched , and , if possible , unglance at . but already it be too late for the eye to turn away . the address have flash upon I before I think of any thing , and while Mrs. Busk hold it up to I . and now that address be star at I , like a contemptuous challenge , while the seal , the symbol of private right and deterrent honor , lie undermost . the letter be direct to " H. W. C. , Post - office , Newport , Sussex . " the writing be in round hand , and clear , so as not to demand any scrutiny , and to seem like that of a lawyer 's clerk , and the envelope be of thin repellent blue . 
 my second impulse be to break the letter open and read it without shrink . public duty must conquer private scruple . nothing but the hand of Providence itself could have place this deadly secret in my power so amazingly . away with all squeamishness , and perhaps prevent more murder . 
 but that " perhaps " give I sudden pause . I have catch up the letter , and stand near the candle to soften the wax and lift the cover with a small sharp paper - knife , when it flash on my mind that my cousin would condemn and scorn what I be do . unconsciously I must have make he now my standard of human judgment , or what make I think of he at that moment ? I throw down the letter , and then I know . the image of Lord Castlewood have cross my mind , because the initial be his own those of Herbert William Castlewood . this strange coincidence if it be , indeed , an accident once more set I think . might not this letter be from his agent , of whom he have speak as my protector here , but to whom as all unseen I scarcely ever give a thought ? might not young Stixon , who so often be at Bruntsea , be employ to call at Newport for such letter , and return with they to his master ? it be not very likely , for my cousin have the strong contempt of anonymous doing . still it be possible , and the bare possibility double my reluctance to break the seal . 
 for one minute long I stand in doubt , and then honor and candor and truth prevail . if any other life have be in peril but my own , duty to another might have overridden all . but duty to one 's self , if overpushe in such a case , would hold some taint of cowardice . so I throw the letter , with a sense of loathing , on a chair . whatever it might contain , it should pass , at least for I , inviolate . 
 now when Mrs. Busk come to see what I have do , or rather leave undo , she fly into a tower passion , until she have no time to go on with it . the rattle of the rickety old mail - cart , on its way to winchester that night , be hear , and the horn of the driver as he pass the church . 
 " give it I . ' a mercy ! a young natural , that you be ! " the good woman cry , as she fling out of the room to dash her office stamp upon that hateful missive , and to seal the leathern bag . " Seal , indeed ! inviolate ! how many seal have I get to make every day of my life ? " 
 I hear a great thump from the corner of the shop where the business of the mail be conduct ; and she tell I afterward that she be so put out , that break that seal should be one way or another . accordingly she smash it with the office stamp , which be rather like a woman 's act , methought ; and then , have break it , she never look inside which , perhaps , be even more so . 
 when she recover her leisure and serenity , and come in , to forgive I and be forgive , we resolve to dismiss the moral aspect of the question , as we never should agree about it , although Mrs. Busk be not so certain as she have be , when she find that the initial be the initial of a lord . and then I ask she how she come to fix upon that letter among so many other , and to feel so sure that it come from my treacherous enemy . 
 " in the first place , I know every letter from Nepheton , " she answer , very sensibly . " there be only fourteen people that write letter in the place , and twelve of those fourteen buy their paper in my shop there be no shop at all at Nepheton . in the next place , none of they could write a hand like that , except the parson and the doctor , who be far above disguise . and two other thing make I certain as could be . that letter be write at the ' Green Man ' ale - house ; not on their paper , nor yet with their ink ; but be in great hurry , it be dust with their sand a sand that turn red upon ink , miss . and the time of dispatch there be just what he would catch , by walk fast after his dig where you see he , go in that direction too , and then have his material ready to save time . and if all that be not enough to convince you , miss you remember that you tell I our old sexton 's tale ? " 
 " to be sure I do . the first evening I be leave alone here . and you have be so kind , there be nothing I would hide from you . " 
 " well , miss , the time of old Jacob 's tale be fix by the death of poor old Sally Mock ; and the stranger come again after you be here , just before the death of the miller 's eld daughter , and you might almost have see he . poor thing ! we all call she the ' flower of the moon , ' mean our little river . what a fine young woman she be , to be sure ! whenever we hear of any stranger about , we think they be prowl after she . I be invite to her funeral , and I go , and nothing could be do nicer . but they never will be punctual with burial here ; they like to dwell on they , and keep the bell go , for the sake of the body , and the soul that must come after it . and so , when it be do , I be twenty minute late for the up mail and the cross - country post , and have to move my hand pretty sharp , I can assure you . that do not   matter ; I get through it , with the driver of the cart obliging , by mean of some beer and cold bacon . but what I fear most be the Nepheton bag , have see the old man at the funeral , and know what they do afterward . I could not return he ' too late ' again , or he would lose his place for certain , and a shilling a day make all the difference to he , between wife and no wife . the old pair without it must go to the workhouse , and never see one another . however , when I be despair quite of he , up he come with his bag quite correct , but only one letter to sort in it , and that letter be , miss , the very identical of the one you hold in your hand just now . and a letter as like it as two pea have come when we bury old Sally . it puzzle I then , but I have no clew to it ; only now , you see , put this and that together , the thing we behold must have some meaning for we ; and to let they go without it be against the will of God ; especially when at the bottom of the bag . " 
 " if you hear so soon of any stranger in the valley , " I ask , to escape the re - opening of the opening question , " how can that man come and go a man of remarkable stature and appearance without any body ask who he be ? " 
 " you scarcely could have put it well , miss , for I to give the answer . they do ask who he be , and they want to know it , and would like any body to tell they . but be of a different breed , as they be , from all outside the long valley , speak also with a different voice , they fear to talk so freely out of their own way and place . any thing they can learn in and out among themselves , they will learn ; but any thing out of that they let go , in the sense of outlandish matter . bless you , miss , if your poor grandfather have be shoot any where else in England , how different it would have be for he ! " 
 " for we , you mean , Mrs. Busk . do you think the man who do it have that in his mind ? " 
 " not unless he know the place , as few know it . no , that be an accident of his luck , as many other thing have be . but the good luck stop at last , Miss Erema ; and unless I be very much mistaken , you will be the stop of his . I shall find out , in a few day , where he come from , where he staid , and when he go away . I suppose you mean to let he go away ? " 
 " what else be I to do ? " I ask . " I have no evidence at all against he ; only my own idea . the police would scarcely take it up , even if " 
 " oh , do not   talk of they . they spoil every thing . and none of our people would say a word , or care to help we , if it come to that . the police be all stranger , and our people hate they . and , indeed , I believe that the bad thing ever do be the meddling of that old jobbin . the old stupe be still alive at Petersfield , and as pompous - headed as ever . my father would have be the man for your sad affair , miss , if the police have only be invent in his time . ah , yes , he be sharp ! not a Moonstock man you may take your oath of that , miss but a good honest native from Essex . but he marry my mother , a Moonstock woman ; or they would not put up with I here at all . you quality people have your idea to hold by , and despise all other , and reasonable in your opinion ; but you know nothing nothing nothing of the stiffness of the people under you . " 
 " how should I know any thing of that ? " I answer ; " all these thing be new to I . I have not be bring up in this country , as you know . I come from a large land , where your stiffness may have burst out into roughness , from have so much room suddenly . but tell I what you think now your father would have do in such a case as mine be . " 
 " Miss Erema , he be that long - headed that nobody could play leap - frog with he . none of they ever clear over his barrel . he walk into this village fifty - five year back , this very month , with his spade upon his shoulder and the knowledge of every body in his eye . they all put up against he , but they never put he down ; and in less than three month he go to church , I do assure you , with the only daughter of the only baker . after that he go into the baking line himself ; he turn his spade into a shovel , as he say , and he introduce new practice . " 
 " oh , Mrs. Busk , not adulteration ? " 
 " no , miss , no ! the very last thing he would think of . only the good use of potato in the bread , when flour be frightful bad and painful dear . what be the good meal of the day ? he use to reason . dinner . and why ? why , because of the potato . if I can make people take potato for their breakfast , and potato for their supper too , I be give they three meal a day instead of one . and the health of the village correspond to it . " 
 " oh , but , Mrs. Busk , he might have make they do it by persuasion , or at least with their own knowledge " 
 " no , miss , no ! the whole nature of our people , Moonstock or out of it , be never to take victual by any sort of persuasion . if St. Paul be to come and preach , ' eat this or that , ' all I have of it in the shop would go rotten . they hate any meddling with their liking , and they suspect doctor 's rubbish in all of it . " 
 " I be quite of their opinion , " I reply ; " and I be glad to hear of their independence . I always use to hear that in England none of the poor people dare have a will of their own . " 
 Mrs. Busk lift up her hand to express amazement at my ignorance , and say that she " must run away and put the shutter up , or else the policeman would come rap , and look for a glass of beer , which he have no right to till it come to the bottom of the firkin ; and this one be only tap last Sunday week . do not   you ever think of the police , miss . " 
 probably this be good advice , and it quite agree with the opinion of other , and my own impression as to the arrogant lethargy of " the force , " as they call themselves , in my father 's case . Mrs. Busk have more activity and intelligence in her little head than all the fat sergeant and inspector of the county , helmet , belt , and staff , and all . 




 CHAPTER XLII 

 MASTER withypool 

 at first I be much inclined to run for help , or at least for counsel , either to Lord Castlewood or to Major Hockin ; but further consideration keep I from do any thing of the kind . in the first place , neither of they would do much good ; for my cousin 's ill health would prevent he from help I , even if his strange view of the case do not , while the excellent Major be much too hot and hasty for a delicate task like this . and , again , I might lose the most valuable and important of all chance by be away from the spot just now . and so I remain at Shoxford for a while , keep strict watch upon the stranger 's haunt , and ask about he by mean of Mrs. Busk . 
 " I have hear more about he , miss , " she say one day , when the down letter have be dispatch , which happen about middle - day . " he have be here only those three time this summer , upon excuse of fishing always . he stay at old Wellham , about five mile down the river , where the people be not true moonite . and one thing that puzzle they be , that although he put up there simply for the angling , he always choose time when the water be so low that to catch fish be next to impossible . he leave his fishing quarter upon the very day after you see he search so ; and he speak as if he do not mean to come again this season . and they say that they do not   want he neither , he be such a morose , close - fiste man ; and drink nothing but water , there be very little profit with he . " 
 " and do you find out what his name be ? how cleverly you have manage ! " 
 " he pass by the name of ' Captain Brown ; ' but the landlord of his inn , who have be an old soldier , be sure he be never in the army , nor any other branch of the service . he think that he live by invent thing , for he be always at some experiment , and one of his great point be to make a lamp that will burn and move about under water . to be sure you see the object of that , miss ? " 
 " no , really , Mrs. Busk , I can not . I have not your penetration . " 
 " why , of course , to find what he can not find upon land . there be something of great importance there , either for its value or its meaning . have you ever be tell that your poor grandfather wear any diamond or precious jewel ? " 
 " no . I have ask about that most especially . he have nothing about he to tempt a robber . he be a very strong - willed man , and he hat outward trumpery . " 
 " then it must be something that this man himself have drop , unless it be a document , or any other token , miss from his lordship . and few thing of that sort would last for twenty year almost . " 
 " nineteen year the day after to - morrow , " I answer , with a glance at my pocket - book . " I determine to be here on that very day . no doubt I be very superstitious . but one thing I can not understand be this what reason can there have be for his letting so many year pass , and then hunt like this ? " 
 " no one can answer that question , miss , without know more than we know . but many reason might be suppose . he might have be rove abroad , for instance , just as you and your father have be . or he might not have know that the thing be there ; or it might not have be of importance till lately ; or he might have be afraid , until something else happen . do he know that you be now in England ? " 
 " how can I possibly tell , Mrs. Busk ? he seem to know a great deal too much . he find I out when I be at Colonel Gundry 's . at least I conclude so , from what I know now ; but I hope he do not know " and at such a dreadful idea I shudder . 
 " I be almost sure that he can not know it , " the good postmistress answer , " or he would have find mean to put an end to you . that would have be his first object . " 
 " but , Mrs. Busk , " I say , be much disturb by her calmness , ' surely , surely he be not to be allow to make an end of every one ! I come to this country with the full intention of go into every thing . but I do not mean at all , except in my very good moment , to sacrifice myself . it seem too bad too bad to think of . " 
 " so it be , Miss Erema , " Mrs. Busk reply , without any congenial excitement . " it do seem hard for they that have the liability on they . but still , miss , you have always show such a high sense of duty , and of what you be about " 
 " I can not   I can not . there be time , I do assure you , when I be fit for nothing , Mrs. Busk , and wish myself back in America . and if this man be to have it all his own way " 
 " not he , miss not he . be you in no hurry . could he even have his way with our old miller ? no ; Master Withypool be too many for he . " 
 " that be a new thing . you never tell I that . what do he try to do with the miller ? " 
 " I do not   justly know what it be , Miss Erema . I never speak to miller about it , and , indeed , I have have no time since I hear of it . but those that tell I say that the tall strange gentleman be terribly put out , and leave the gate with a black cloud upon his face , and the very next day the miller 's daughter die , quite sudden and mysterious . " 
 " how very strange ! but now I have get a new idea . have the miller a strong high dam to his pond , and a good stout sluice - gate at the end ! " 
 " yes , miss , to be sure he have , " say Mrs. Busk ; " otherwise how could he grind at all , when the river be so low as it be sometimes ? " 
 " then I know what he want , and I will take a leaf out of his own book the miscreant ! he want the miller to stop back the water and leave the pool dry at the ' murder - bridge . ' would it be possible for he to do that ? " 
 " I can not tell you , miss ; but your thought be very clever . it be likely enough that he do want that , though he never would dare to ask without some pretense some other cause I mean , to show for it . he may have be think that whatever he be want be likely to be under water . and that show another thing , if it be so . " 
 " Mrs. Busk , my head go round with such a host of complication . I do my good to think they out and then there come another ! " 
 " no , miss ; this only clear thing up a little . if the man can not be sure whether what he be look for be on land or under water , it seem to I almost to show that it be lose at the murder time in the dark and flurry . a man would know if he drop any thing in the water by daylight , from the splash and the ripple , and so on , for the stream be quite slow at that corner . he drop it , miss , when he do the deed , or else it come away from his lordship . " 
 " nothing be lose , as I say before , from the body of my grandfather , so far at least as our knowledge go . whatever be lose be the murderer 's . now please to tell I all about the miller , and how I may get round he . " 
 " you make I laugh in the middle of black thing , miss , by the way you have of put they . but as to the mill Master Withypool be a wonder , as concern the lady . he be one of those man that stand up for every thing when a man try upper side of they . but let a woman come , and get up under , and there he be a pie crust lift . why , I , at my age , could get round he , as you call it . but you , miss and more than that , you be something like his daughter ; and the old man fret after her terrible . go you into his yard , and just smile upon he , miss , and if the Moon River can be stop , he will stop it for you . " 
 this seem a very easy way to do it . but I tell Mrs. Busk that I would pay well also , for the loss of a day 's work at the mill be more than fifty smile could make up . 
 but she tell I , above all thing , not to do that . for old Master Withypool be of that sort that he would stand for an hour with his hand in his pocket for a half - penny , if not justly owe from he . but nothing more anger he than a bribe to step outside of his duty . he have plenty of money , and be proud of it . but soon would he lose a day 's work to do a kindness , when he be sure of have right behind it , than take a week 's profit without earn it . and very likely that be where the dark man fail , from presume that money would do every thing . however , there be nothing like judge for one 's self ; and if I would like to be introduce , she could do it for I with the good effect ; take as she do a good hundred - weight of good " household " from he every week , although not herself in the bake line , but always keep quartern bag , because the new baker do adulterate so . 
 I think of her father , and how thing work round ; but that they would do without remark of mine . so I say nothing on that point , but ask whether Master Withypool would require any introduction . and to this Mrs. Busk say , " oh dear , no ! " and her throat have be a little rough since Sunday , and the dog be chain tight , even if any dog would bite a sweet young lady ; and to her mind the miller would be more take up and less fit to vapor into obstacle , if I be to hit upon he all alone , just when he come out to the bank of his cabbage garden , not so very long after his dinner , to smoke his pipe and to see his thing a - grow . 
 it be time to get ready if I mean to catch he then , for he always din at one o'clock , and the mill be some three or four meadow up the stream ; therefore as soon as Mrs. Busk have re - assured I that she be quite certain of my enemy 's departure , I take my drawing thing and set forth to call upon Master Withypool . 
 pass through the church - yard , which be my near way , and glance sadly at the " fairy ring , " I begin to have some uneasiness about the possible issue of my new scheme . such a thing require more thinking out than I have give to it . for instance , what reason could I give the miller for ask so strange a thing of he ? and how could the whole of the valley be hinder from make the great talk about the stoppage of their own beloved Moon , even if the Moon could be stop without every one of they rush down to see it ? and if it be so talked of , would it not be certain to come to the ear of that awful man ? and if so , how long before he find I out , and send I to rejoin my family ? 
 these thought compel I to be more discreet ; and have lately do a most honorable thing , in refuse to read that letter , I feel a certain right to play a little trick now of a purely harmless character . I run back therefore to my writing - desk , and take from its secret drawer a beautiful golden american eagle , a large coin , large and handsomer than any in the english coinage . Uncle Sam give it to I on my birthday , and I would not have take 50 pound for it . with this I hurry to that bridge of fear , which I have not yet bring myself to go across ; and then , not to tell any story about it , I snip a little hole in the corner of my pocket , while my hand be still steady ere I have to mount the bridge . then pinch that hole up with a squeeze , I run and get upon that wicked bridge , and then let go . the heavy gold coin fall upon the rotten plank , and happily roll into the water , as if it be glad not to tempt its maker to any more sin for the sake of it . 
 shut up thought , for fear of despise myself for the coinage of such a little trick , I hurry across the long meadow to the mill , and go through the cow - gate into the yard , and the dog begin to bark at I . see that he have a strong chain on , I regard he with lofty indignation . " do you know what Jowler would do to you ? " I say ; " Jowler , a dog worth ten of you . he would take you by the neck and drop you into that pond for dare to insult his mistress ! " the dog appear to feel the force of my remark , for he lie down again , and with one eye watch I in a manner amusing , but insidious . then , take good care to keep out of his reach , I go to the mill - pond and examine it . 
 it look like a very nice pond indeed , long , and large , and well bank up , not make into any particular shape , but produce little rushy elbow . the water be now rather low , and very bright   though the Moon itself be not a crystal stream , and a school of young minnow , just watch a water - spider with desirous awe , at sight of I break away , and reunite , with a speed and precision that might shame the whole of our very good modern fighting . then many other thing make a dart away , and furrow the shadow of the willow , till distance quiet the fear of man that most mysterious thing in nature and the shallow pool be at peace again , and bright with unruffled reflection . 
 " what ail the dog ? " say a deep gruff voice ; and the poor dog receive a contemptuous push , not enough to hurt he , but to wound his feeling for do his primary duty . " Servant , miss . what can I do for you ? foot - path be t'other side of that there hedge . " 
 " yes , but I leave the foot - path on purpose . I come to have a talk with you , if you will allow I . " 
 " sartain ! sartain , " the miller reply , lift a broad floury hat and show a large gray head . " will you come into house , miss , or into gearden ? " 
 I choose the garden , and he lead the way , and set I down upon an old oak bench , where the tinkle of the water through the flood - gate could be hear . 
 " so you be come to paint the mill at last , " he say . " many a time I have   look out for you . the young leddy down to Mother Busk 's , of course . many be the time we have   long for you to come , you remind we so of somebody . why , my old missus can not   set eye on you in church , miss , without be force to sit down a'most . but we think it very pretty of you not to come , miss , while the trouble be so new upon we . " 
 something in my look or voice make the old man often turn away , while I tell he that I would make the very good drawing of his mill that I could manage , and would beg he to accept it . 
 " she ought to ' a be on the plank , " he say , with trouble in get his word out . " but there ! what good ? she never will stand on that plank no more . no , nor any other plank . " 
 I tell he that I would put she on the plank , if he have any portrait of she show her dress and her attitude . without say what he have , he lead I to the house , and stand behind I , while I go inside . and then he could not keep his voice as I go from one picture of his darling to another , not think   as I should have do   of what his feeling might be , but try , as no two be at all alike , to extract a general idea of she . 
 " nobody know what she be to I , " the old man say , with a quiet little noise and a sniff behind my shoulder . " and with one day 's illness she die she die . " 
 " but you have other leave . she be not the only one . please , Mr. Withypool , to try to think of that . and your dear wife still alive to share your trouble . just think for a moment of what happen to my father . his wife and six child all sweep off in a month and I just bear , to be bring up with a bottle ! " 
 I never mean , of course , to have say a word of this , but be carry away by that common old idea of console great sorrow with a great one . and the sense of my imprudence break vexatiously upon I when the old man come and stand between I and his daughter 's portrait . 
 " well , I never ! " he exclaim , with his bright eye steadfast with amazement . " I know you now , miss . now I know you . to think what a set of blind newts we must be ! and you the very moral of your poor father , in a female kind of way ! to be sure , how well I know the Captain ! a nice man never walk the earth , neither a more unlucky one . " 
 " I beg you let I beg you , " I begin to say ; ' since you have find I out like this " 
 " hush , miss , hush ! not my own wife shall know , unless your own tongue telleth she . a proud man I shall be , Miss Raumur , " he continue , with emphasis on my local name , " if aught can be find in my power to serve you . why , Lord bless you , miss , " he whisper , look round , " your father and I have spend hour together ! he be that pleasant in his way and word , he would drop in from his fishing , when the water be too low , and sit on that very same bench where you sit , and smoke his pipe with I , and tell I about battle , and ask I about bread . and many a time I have slip up the gate , to give he more water for his fly to play , and the fish not to see he so plainly . ah , we have have many pleasant spell together ; and his eld boy and girl , Master George and Miss Henrietta , use to come and fetch our egg . my Polly there be in love with he , we say ; she sit upon his lap so , when she be two year old , and play with his beautiful hair , and blubber oh , she do blubber , when the Captain go away ! " 
 this invest Polly with new interest for I , and make I determine to spare no pain in put she pretty figure well upon the plank . then I say to the miller , " how kind of you to draw up your sluice - gate to oblige my father ! now will you put they down and keep they down , to do a great service both to he and I ? " 
 without a moment 's hesitation , he promise that any thing he could do should be do , if I would only tell he what I want . but perhaps it would be well to have our talk outside . take this hint , I follow he back to the bench in the open garden , and there explain what I wish to have do , and no long conceal the true reason . the good miller answer that with all his heart he would do that much to oblige I , and a hundred time more than that ; but some little thought and care be needful . with the river so low as it be now , he could easily stop the back - water , and receive the whole of the current in his dam , and keep it from flow down his wheel trough , and thus dry the low channel for perhaps half an hour , which would be ample for my purpose . engineering difficulty there be none ; but two or three other thing must be heed . Miller Sims , a mile or so down river , must be settle with , to fill his dam well , and begin to discharge , when the upper water fail , so as not to dry the Moon all down the valley , which would have cause a commotion . Miller Sims be own brother - in - law to Master Withypool , that could be arrange easily enough , after one day 's notice . but a hard thing to manage would be to do the business without rouse curiosity , and set abroad a rumor which would be sure to reach my enemy . and the hard thing of all , say Master Withypool , smile as he think of what himself have once be , would be to keep those bless boy away , who find out every thing , and go every where . not a boy of Shoxford but would be in the river , or dance upon its empty bed , screech and scollop up into his cap any poor bewildered trout chase into the puddle , if it be allow to leak out , however feebly , that the Moon water be to stop run . and then how be I to seek for any thing ? 
 this be a puzzle . but , with counsel , we do solve it . and we quietly stop the Moon , without man or boy be much the wiser . 




 CHAPTER XLIII 

 go to the bottom 

 it be not needful to explain every thing , any more than it be for I to tell the miller about my golden eagle , and how I have manage to lose it in the Moon a trick of which now I be heartily ashamed , in the face of honest kindness . so I need not tell how Master Withypool manage to settle with his man , and to keep the boy unwitting of what be about to come to pass . enough that I get a note from he to tell I that the little river would be run out , just when all Shoxford be intent upon its dinner , on the second day after I have see he . and he could not say for certain , but think it pretty safe , that nobody would come near I , if I manage to be there at a quarter before one , when the stream would begin to run dry , and I could watch it . I send back a line by the pretty little girl , a sister of poor Polly , to say how much I thank he , and how much I hop that he himself would meet I there , if his time allow . for he have be too delicate to say a word of that ; but I feel that he have a good right to be there , and , know he now , I be not afraid . 
 nearly every thing come about as well as could be wish almost . Master Withypool take the precaution , early in the morning , to set his great fierce bull at large , who always stop the foot - path . this bull know well the power of a valley in conduct sound ; and he love to stand , as if at the mouth of a funnel , and roar down it to another bull a mile below he , belong to his master 's brother - in - law . and when he do this , there be scarcely a boy , much less a man or woman , with any desire to assert against he the public right of thoroughfare . throughout that forenoon , then , this bull bellow nobly , still find many very wicked fly about , so that two mitche boy , who mean to fish for minnow with a pin , be oblige to run away again . 
 however , I be in the dark about he , and as much afraid of he as any body , when he break into sight of I round a corner , without any token of amity . I have see a great many great bull before , include Uncle Sam 's good black one , who might not have mean any mischief at all , and atone for it if he do by be wash away so . 
 and therefore my courage soon return , when it become quite clear that this animal now have be fasten with a rope , and could come no nearer . for some little time , then , I wait all alone , as near that bridge as I could bring myself to stand , for Mrs. Busk , my landlady , could not leave the house yet , on account of the mid - day letter . moreover , she think that she have well stay away , as our object be to do thing as quietly as could be . 
 much as I have watch this bridge from a distance , or from my sheltering - place , I have never be able to bring myself to make any kind of sketch of it , or even to insert it in a landscape , although it be very well suited and expressive , from its crooked and antique simplicity . the overhanging , also , of the hawthorn - tree   not ruddy yet , but russety with its color crop of coral , and the shaggy freak of ivy above the twisted trunk , and the curve of the meadow and bold elbow of the brook , be such as an artist would have pitch his tent for , and tantalize poor London people with a dream of cool repose . 
 as yet the little river show no sign of do what the rustic or surely it should have be the cockney be suppose to stand still and wait for . there be no great rush of headlong water , for that be not the manner of the stream in the very bad of weather ; but there be the usual style of come on , with lip and step at the side , and cord of run toward the middle . quite enough , at any rate , to make the trout jump , without any omen of impend drought , and to keep all the play and the sway of movement go on serenely . 
 I begin to be afraid that the miller must have fail in his stratagem against the water - god , and that , as I have read in Pope 's Homer , the liquid deity would beat the hero , when all of a sudden there be sign that man be the master of this little rustic . broadsword of flag and rapier of water - grass , which have be quiver merrily , begin to hang down and to dip themselves in loop , and the stone of the brink show dark green stripe on their side as they stand naked . then fine little cake of conglomerate stuff , which only a great man of nature could describe , come float about , and curdle into corner , and hold on to one another in long - tail string . but they might do what they like , and make their very good of it , as they fall away to nothing upon stone and mud . for now more important thing begin to open , the like of which never have be yield up before plot of slimy gravel , vary with long streak of yellow mud , dot with large double shell , and part into little oozy run by wriggle water - weed . and here be great commotion and sad panic of the fish , large fellow splash and quite jump out of water , as their favorite hover and shelf run dry , and dart away , with their poor back in the air , to the deep hole they could think of . hundred must have come to flour , lard , and butter if boy have be there to take advantage . but luckily thing have be do so well that boy be now in their least injurious moment , destroy nothing bad than their own dinner . 
 a very little way below the old wooden bridge the little river run into a deepish pool , as generally happen at or near a corner , especially where there be a confluence sometimes . and see nothing , as I begin to search intently , stir with a long - handle spud which I have bring , I conclude that even my golden eagle have be carry into that deep place . however , water or no water , I resolve to have it out with that dark pool as soon as the rest of the channel should be drain , which take a tormenting time to do ; and have thick boot on , I pin up my skirt , and jump down into the shoal , begin to paddle in a fashion which remind I of childish day pass pleasantly in the Blue River . 
 too busy thus to give a thought to any other thing , I do not even see the miller , until he say , 
 " good - day , miss , " lift his hat , with a nice kind smile . " very busy , miss , I see , and right you be to be so . the water will be upon we again in less than half an hour . now let I clear away they black weed for you . I bring this little shivel a - purpose . if I may make so bold , miss , what do ' e look to find here ? " 
 " I have not the very small notion , " I could only answer ; " but if there be any thing , it must be in that hole . I have search all the shallow part so closely that I doubt whether even a sixpence could escape I , unless it be bury in the mud or pebble . oh , how can I manage to search that hole ? there must be a yard of water there . " 
 " one thing I ought to have tell ' e for to do , " Master Withypool whisper , as he go on shovel " to do what the boy do when they lose a farden to send another after un . if so be now , afore the water be run out , you have stand on that there bridge , and drop a bright coin into it , a new half crown or a two - shilling piece , why , the chance would be that the run of the current would ' a take it nigh to the likeli spot for hold any other little matter as might ' a drop , permiskous , you might say , into this same water . " 
 " I have do so , " I answer ; " I have do that very thing , though not at all with that object . the day before yesterday a beautiful coin , a golden eagle of America , fall from my pocket on that upper plank , and roll into the water . I would not lose it for a great deal , because it be give to I by my dear friend , the great of all miller . " 
 " and ha'n't   you find it yet , miss ? well , that be queer . perhaps we shall find it now , with something to the back of it . I think yon hole be too far below the bridge . but there your gold must be , and something else , most likely . plaise to wait a little bit , and we will have the wet out of un . I never should ' a thought of that but for your gold guinea , though . " 
 with these word Master Withypool pull his coat off and roll up his shirt sleeve , display arm fit to hold their own even with Uncle Sam 's almost ; and then he fall to with his shovel and dig , while I run with my little spud to help . 
 " Plaise keep out of way , miss ; I be afeard of knock you . not but what you work very brave indeed , miss . " 
 know what man be concern " female effort , " I get out of the strong man 's way , although there be plenty of room for I . what he want to do be plain enough to dig a trench down the empty bed of the Moon River , deep enough to drain that pit before the stream come down again . 
 " never think to run a race against my own old dam , " he say , as he stop for a moment to recover breath . " we never know what we may have to do . old dam must be a'most bust now . but she be sound enough , till her beginneth to run over . " 
 I do not say a word , because it might have do some mischief , but I could not help look rather anxiously up stream , for fear of the water come down with a rush , as it very soon must do . Master Withypool have be work , not as I myself would have do , from the lip of the dark pit downward , but from a steep run some twenty yard below , where there be almost a little cascade when the river be full flow ; from this he have make his channel upward , cut deep as he come along , till now , at the brink of the obstinate pool , his trench be two foot deep almost . I have no idea that any man could work so with a shovel , which seem such a clumsy tool compare with a spade : but a gentleman who know the country and the people tell I that , with their native weapon , Moonites will do as much digging in an hour as other folk get through in an hour and a half with a spade . but this may be only , perhaps , because they be work hard . 
 " now , " say Master Withypool at last , stand up , with a very red face , and desire to keep all that unheeded " now , miss , to you it belongeth to tap this here little cornder , if desirable . plaise to excoose of I go up of bank to tell ' e when the wet cometh down again . " 
 " please to do nothing of the sort , " I answer , know that he offer to stand out of sight from a delicate dread of intrusion . " please to tap the pool yourself , and stay here , as a witness of what we find in it . " 
 " as you plaise , miss , as you plaise . not a moment for to lose in argue . Harken now , the water be atoppe of our dam . she will be here in five minute . " 
 with three or four rapid turn of his shovel , which he spin almost as fast as a house - maid spin a mop , he fetch out the plug of earth sever his channel from the deep , reluctant hole . and then I see the wisdom of his way of working : for if he have dig downward from the pool itself , the water would have follow he all the way , and even drown his tool out of its own stroke ; whereas now , with a swirl and a curl of ropy mud , away rush the thick , sluggish , obstinate fluid , and in less than two minute the hole be almost dry . 
 the first thing I see be my golden eagle , lodge about half - way down the slope on a crust of black sludge , from which I catch it up and present it to Master Withypool , as a small token and record of his kindness ; and to this day he carry it upon his Sunday watch chain . 
 " I always be lucky in find thing , " I exclaim , while he watch I , and the up stream too , whence a babble of water be approach . " as sure as I live I have find it ! " 
 " no doubt about your living , miss . and the Captain be always lively . but what have your bright eye hit upon ? I see nort for the life of I . " 
 " look there , " I cry , " at the very bottom of it almost under the water . here , where I put my spud a bright blue line ! oh , can I go down , or be it quicksand ? " 
 " no quicksand in our little river , miss . but your father 's daughter shannot go into the muck , while John Withypool stand by . I see un now , sure enough ; now I see un ! but her needeth care , or she may all goo away in mullock . well , I think my eye be sharp enough ; but I be blest if I should have spy that , though . a bit of flint , mebbe , or of blue glass bottle . anyhow , we will see the bottom of un . " 
 he be waste no time while he speak , but work steadfastly for his purpose , fix the blade of his shovel below the little blue line I be peer at , so that no slip of the soft yellow slush should bury it down , and plunge over it . if that have once happen , good - by to all chance of ever behold this thing again , for the river be come , with fury and foam , to assert its ancient right of way . 
 with a short laugh the miller jump down into the pit . " I to be serve so , by my own mill - stream ! Lor ' , if I do not   pay you out for this ! " 
 his righteous wrath fail to stop the water from pour into the pit behind he ; and , strong as he be , he nearly lose his footing , have only mud to stand upon . it seem to I that he be go to be drown , and I offer he the handle of my spud to help he ; but he stop where he be , and be not go to be hurry . 
 " I get un now , " he say ; " now I do not   mind come out . you see if I do not   pay you out for this ! why , I always take you for a reasonable hanimal . " 
 he shake his fist strongly at the river , which have he well up to the middle by this time ; and then he disdainfully wad out , with wrath in all his countenance . 
 " I have   a great mind to stop there , and see what she would do , " he say to I , forget altogether what he go for . " and I would , if I have have my dinner . a scat of a thing as I can manage with my thumb ! ah , you have make a bad day of it . " 
 " but what have you find , Mr. Withypool ? " I ask , for I could not enter into his wrath against the water , wet as he be to the shoulder . " you have something in your hand . may I see it , if you please ? and then do please to go home and change your clothe . " 
 " a thing I never do in my life , miss , and should be ashamed to begin at this age . clothe get wet , and clothe dry on we , same as un do on the sheep afore we ; else they get stiff and creasy . what this little thing be ne'er a body may tell , in my line of life but look'th aristocratic . " 
 the " mullock , " as he call it , from his hand , and from the bed where it have lain so long , so crust the little thing which he give I , that I dip it again in the swell stream , and rub it with both hand , to make out what it be . and then I think how long it have lain there ; and suddenly to my memory it come , that in all likelihood the time of that be nineteen year this very day . 
 " will another year pass , " I cry , " before I make out all about it ? what be you , and who , now look at I with such sad , sad eye ? " 
 for I hold in my hand a most handsome locket , of blue enamel and diamond , with a back of chase gold , and in front the miniature of a beautiful young woman , do as they never seem to do they now . the work be so good , and the fitting so close , that no drop of water have enter , and the face shine through the crystal glass as fresh as the day it be paint . a very lovely face it be , yet touch with a shade of sadness , as the lovely face generally be ; and the first thought of any beholder would be , " that woman be bear for sorrow . " 
 the miller say as much when I show it to he . 
 " Lord bless my heart ! I hope the poor craitur ' hathn't   last half so long as her pictur ' hath . " 




 CHAPTER XLIV 

 HERMETICALLY seal 

 the discovery which I have describe above   but not half so well as the miller tell it now   create in my young heart a feeling of really strong curiosity . to begin with , how could this valuable thing have get into the Moon - stream , and lain there so long , unsought for , or at well so unskillfully seek for ? what connection could it have with the tragic death of my grandfather ? why be that man so tardily come to search for it , if he might do so without any body near he ? again , what woman be this whose beauty no water or mud could even manage to disguise ? that last be a most disturbing question to one 's bodily peace of mind . and then come another yet more urgent what be in the inside of this tight case ? 
 that there be something inside of it seem almost a certainty . the mere value of the trinket , or even the fear that it ever might turn up as evidence , would scarcely have bring that man so often to stir suspicion by seek it ; though , after so long a time , he well might hope that suspicion be dead and bury . and be unable to open this case after break three good nail over it , and then the point of a penknife I turn to Master Withypool , who be stamp on the grass to drain himself . 
 " what sort of a man be that , " I ask , " who want you to do what now you have so kindly do for I ? about a month or six week ago ? do please to tell I , as nearly as you can . " 
 if Mrs. Withypool have be there , she might have lose all patience with I for put long question so selfishly to a man who have do so much for I , and whose clothe be now dripping in a wind which have arise to test his theory of dry . he must have lose a large quantity of what scientific people call " caloric . " but never a shiver give he in exchange . 
 " well , miss , " he say , " I be think a'most of speak on that very matter . more particular since you find that little thing , with the pretty lady inside of it . it be bear in on my mind that thissom be the very thing he be arter . " 
 " no doubt of it , " I answer , with far less patience , though be comparatively dry . " but what be he like ? be he like this portrait ? " 
 " this picture of the lady ? no ; I can not   say that he be , so much . the face of a big man he hath , with short black fringe to it . never showeth to my idea any likeliness of a woman . no , no , miss ; think you not at all that you have get he in that blue thing . though some of their picture be like man , the way they dress up nowadays . " 
 " I do not mean that it be mean for he ; what I mean be , do you see any sign of family likeness ? any resemblance about the eye , or mouth , or forehead ? " 
 " well , now , I do not   know but what I might , " reply Master Withypool , gaze very hard ; " if I be to look at ' un long enough , a ' might find some'at favoring of that tall fellow , I do believe . indeed , I do believe the more I look , the more I diskiver the image of he . " 
 the good and kind miller 's perception of the likeness strengthen almost too fast , as if the wish be father to the thought , until I see clearly how selfish I be in keep he in that state so long ; for I know , from what Mrs. Busk have tell I , that in spite of all his large and grand old english sentiment about his clothe , his wife would make he change they all ere ever she give he a bit of dinner , and would force he then to take a glass of something hot . so I give he a thousand thank , though not a thousandth part of what he deserve , and see he well on his homeward way before I go back to consider thing . 
 as soon as my landlady be at leisure to come in and talk with I , and as soon as I have tell she how thing happen , and show she our discovery , we both of we do the very same thing , and say almost the very same word . our act be , with finger and nail and eye , to rime into every jot of it ; and our word be , 
 " I be sure there be something inside . if not , it would open sensibly . " 
 in the most senseless and obstinate manner it refuse not only to open , but to disclose any thing at all about itself . whether it ever have be mean to open , and if so , where , and by what mean ; whether , without any gift of opening , it might have a hide thing inside ; whether , when open by force or skill , it might show something we have no business with , or   which would be far bad   nothing at all good Mrs. Busk and myself test , tap , and feel , and blew , and listen , and try every possible overture , and become at last quite put out with it . 
 " it be all of a piece with the villain that own it , " the postmistress exclaim at last . " there be no penetrating either it or they . most likely they have make away with this beautiful lady on the cover . kill one , kill fifty , I have hear say . I hope Master Withypool will let out nothing , or evil it will be for you , miss . if I be you , I would carry a pistol . " 
 " now please not to frighten I , Mrs. Busk . I be not very brave at the good of time , and this have make I so nervous . if I carry a pistol , I should shoot myself the very first hour of wear it . the mere thought of it make I tremble . oh , why be I ever bear , to do man 's work ? " 
 " because , miss , a man would not have do it half so well . when you see that villain digging , a man would have rush out and spoil all chance . and now what man could have ever find this ? would Master Withypool ever have empty the Moon River for a man , do you think ? or could any man have be down among we all this time , in this jealous place , without his business be long ago sift out and scatter over he ? no , no , miss ; you must not talk like that and with I as well to help you . the rogue will have reason to wish , I do believe , that they have only get a man to deal with . " 
 in this argument there be point which have occur to I before ; but certainly it be a comfort to have one 's own idea in a doubtful matter reproduce , and perhaps put well , by a mind to which one may have lend they , perhaps , with a loan all unacknowledged . however , trouble teach care , and do it so well that the master and the lesson in usage of word be now the same ; therefore I show no sign of be suggest with my own suggestion , but only ask , quietly , " what be I to do ? " 
 " my dear young lady , " Mrs. Busk reply , after stop some time to think of it , " my own opinion be , for my part , that you ought to consult somebody . " 
 " but I be , Mrs. Busk . I be now consult you . " 
 " then I think , miss , that this precious case should be take at once to a jeweler , who can open it without do any damage , which be more than we can do . " 
 " to be sure ; I have think of that , " I reply . " but how can that be do without arouse curiosity ? without the jeweler see its content , if indeed it have any ? and in that case the matter would be no long at our own disposal , as now it be . I have a great mind to split it with a hammer . what be the diamond to I ? " 
 " it be not the diamond , but the picture , miss , that may be most important . and more than that , you might ruin the content , so as not to make head or tale of they . no , no ; it be a risk that must be run ; we must have a jeweler , but not one of this neighborhood . " 
 " then I shall have to go to London again , and perhaps lose something most important here . can you think of no other way out of it ? " 
 " no , miss , at present I see nothing else . unless you will place it all in the hand of the police . " 
 " Constable Jobbins , to wit , or his son ! no , thank you , Mrs. Busk , not yet . surely we be not quite reduce to such a hopeless pass as that . my father know what the police be worth , and so do Betsy , and so do Major Hockin . ' pompous noodle , ' the Major call they , who lie hold of every thing by the wrong end . " 
 " then if he can lay hold of the right end , miss , what well could you do than consult he ? " 
 I have be think of this already , and pride alone debar I . that gentleman 's active nature drive he to interfere with other people 's business , even though he have never hear of they ; and yet through some strange reasoning of his own , or blind adoption of public unreason , he have make I dislike , or at any rate not like , he , until he begin to show sign at last of change his opinion . and now the question be , have he do that enough for I , without loss of self - respect , to open my heart to he , and seek counsel ? 
 in settle that point the necessity of the case overrode , perhaps , some scruple ; in sooth , I have nobody else to go to . what could I do with Lord Castlewood ? nothing ; all his desire be to do exactly what my father would have do : and my father have never do any thing more than rove and roam his life out . to my mind this be dreadful now , when every new thing rise round I more and more clearly to my mind establish what I never have doubt his innocence . again , what good could I do by seek Betsy 's opinion about it , or that of Mrs. Price , or Stixon , or any other person I could think of ? none whatever and perhaps much harm . take all in all , as thing turn up , I believe myself to be almost equal to the cleverest of those three in sense , and in courage not inferior . moreover , a sort of pride perhaps very small , but not contemptible put I against throw my affair so much into the hand of servant . 
 for this idea Uncle Sam , no doubt the most liberal of man , would perhaps condemn I . but still I be not of the grand New World , whose pedigree be arithmetic   at least with many of its item , though the true Uncle Sam be the last for that ; neither could I come up to the largeness of universal brotherhood . that be not to be expect of a female ; and few thing make a man more angry than for his wife to aspire to it . no such idea have ever trouble I ; I have more important thing to think of , or , at any rate , something to be well carry out . and of all these desultory thought it come that I pack up that odious but very lovely locket , without further attempt to unriddle it , and persuade my very good and clever Mrs. Busk to let I start right early . by so do I could have three hour with a good gentleman always in a hurry , and yet return for the night to Shoxford , if he should advise I so . 
 man and woman seem alike to love to have their counsel take ; and the equinox be now go by , Mrs. Busk be ready to begin before the tardy sun be up , who begin to give you short measure at once when he find the weight go against he . Mrs. Busk consider not the sun , neither any of his doing . the time of day be more momentous than any of the sun 's proceeding . railway time be what she have to keep   unless a good customer drop in , and as for the sun " clock slow , clock fast , " in the almanac , show how he manage thing ; and if that be not enough , who could trust he to keep time after what he have do upon the dial of Ahaz ? reasoning thus if reason it be she pack I off in a fly for the near railway station , and by midday I find the Major labor on his rampart . 
 after proper salutation , I could not help express wonder at the rapid rise of thing . house here and house there , spring up like child 's tooth , three or four in a row together , and then a long gap , and then some more . and down the slope a grand hotel , open for refreshment , though as yet it have no roof on ; for the Major , in virtue of his charter , defy all the magistrate to stop he from sell whatever be salable on or off the premise . but noblest and grandest of all to look at be the " Bruntsea Athenaeum , Lyceum , Assembly - Rooms , Institution for Mutual Instruction , Christian Young Men 's Congress , and Sanitary , Saline , Hydropathic Hall , at nominal price to be have gratis . " 
 " how you do surprise I ! " I say to Major Hockin , after read all that , which he kindly request I to do with care ; " but where be the people to come from ? " 
 " Erema , " he reply , as if that question have be ask too often , " you have not have time to study the law of political economy the noble of noble science . the first of incontrovertible fact be that supply create demand . now ask yourself whether there could even be a Yankee if idea like yours have occur to Columbus ? " 
 this be beyond I ; for I never could argue , and strove to the utmost not to do so . " you understand those thing , and I do not , " say I , with a smile , which please he . " my dear aunt Mary always say that you be the cleverest man in the world ; and she must know most about it . " 
 " partiality ! partiality ! " cry the Major , with a laugh , and pull his front hair up . " such thing pass by I like the idle wind ; or rather , perhaps , they sadden I , from my sense of my own deficiency . but , bless I ! dinner must be wait . look at that fellow 's trowel he know : he turn up the point of it like a spoon . they say that he can smell his dinner two mile off . we all dine at one o'clock now , that I may rout up every man - Jack of they . " 
 the Major sound a steam - guard 's whistle , and lead I off in the rapidly vanish wake of his hungry workman . 




 CHAPTER XLV 

 CONVICTION 

 Sir Montague Hockin , to my great delight , be still away from Bruntsea . if he have be there , it would have be a most awkward thing for I to meet he , or to refuse to do so . the latter course would probably have be the one force upon I by self - respect and affection toward my cousin ; and yet if so , I could scarcely have avoid an explanation with my host . from the nature of the subject , and several other reason , this would have be most unpleasant ; and even now I be haunt with doubt , as I have be from the first , whether I ought not to have tell Mrs. Hockin long ago what have be say of he . at first sight that seem the honest thing to do ; but three thing make against it . it might seem forward and meddlesome ; it must be a grievous thing to my cousin to have his sad story discuss again ; and lastly , I have promise Mrs. Price that her word should go no far . so that on the whole perhaps I act aright in keep that infamous tale to myself as long as ever it be possible . 
 but now ere ever I speak of he which I be always loath to do Mrs. Hockin tell I that he very seldom come to see they now , and when he do come he seem to be uneasy and rather strange in his manner . I think to myself that the cause of this be clear . Sir Montague , know that I go to Castlewood , be prick in his conscience , and afraid of have his vile behavior to my cousin disclose . however , that idea of mine be wrong , and a faulty conception of simple youth . the wicked forgive themselves so quickly , if even they find any need of it , that every body else be suppose to do the same . with this I have no patience . a wrong unrepented of and unatoned gather interest , instead of get discount , from lost time . and so I hat that man tenfold . 
 Good Mrs. Hockin lament his absence not only for the sake of her darling fowl , but also because she consider he a check upon the Major 's enterprise . great as her faith be in her husband 's ability and keenness , she be often visit with dark misgiving about such heavy outlay . of economy   as she often say   she certainly ought to know something , have have to practice it as strictly as any body in the kingdom , from an age she could hardly remember . but as for what be now bring forward as a great discovery economy in politic Mrs. Hockin have try to follow great opinion , but could only find , so far , downright extravagance . supply   as she have observe fifty time with her own butcher and fishmonger , instead of create demand , produce a lot of people hanker round the corner , till the price come down to nothing . and if it be so with their institution as her dear husband call his new public - house who be to find all the interest due to the building and land society ? truly she feel that Sir Rufus Hockin , instead of do any good to they , have behave very badly in leave they land , and not even a shilling to work it with . 
 it relieve she much to tell I this , once for all and in strict confidence ; because her fine old - fashioned   and we now may say quite obsolete   idea of duty toward her husband forbid she ever to say to he , or about he , when it could be help , any thing he might not like , any thing which to an evil mind might convey a desire on her part to meddle with with 
 " political economy , " I say ; and she laugh , and say , yes , that be just it . the Major of course know good , and she ought with all her heart to trust he not to burden their old day with debt , after all the child they have bring up and fairly educate upon the professional income of a distinguished british officer , who be not intend by his superior to provide successor . 
 " perhaps it be like the boil egg they send I , " the old lady say , with her soft sweet smile , " for my poor hen to sit upon . their race be too good to be make common . so now they get tinker ' and tailor ' boy , after much competition , and the crammed son of cook . and in peace - time they do just as well . " 
 of such thing I know nothing ; but she seem to speak with bitterness , the last thing to be find in all her nature , yet discoverable as all bad thing   except its own   be by the british government . I do not speak from my own case , in which they discover nothing . 
 by the time these thing have be discuss , my host   who be always particular about his dress   come down to dinner , and not until that be over could I speak of the subject which have bring I there . no soon have I begin my tale than they both perceive that it must neither be flurry nor interrupt , least of all should it be overhear . 
 " come into my lock - up , " cry the Major ; " or , well still , let we go out of door . we can sit in my snuggery on the cliff , with only gull and jackdaw to listen , and mount my telescope and hoist my flag , and the man know well than to skulk their work . I can see every son of a gun of they as clearly as if I have they on parade . you wish Mrs. Hockin to come , I suppose . very well , let we be off at once . I shall count my fellow come back from dinner . " 
 with a short quick step the Major lead the way to a beautifully situate outpost at a corner of the cliff , where land and sea for many a fair league roll below . a niche of the chalk have be cleverly enlarge and scoop into a shell - shaped bower , not , indeed , gloriously overhung , as in the far West might have be , but break of its white defiant glare by climb and wander verdure . seat and slab of oak be fix to check excess of chalkiness , and a parapet of a pattern which the Major call Egyptian save fear of fall down the cliff , and serve to spread a paper on , or to rest a telescope . 
 " from this point , " say the Major , cross wiry yet substantial leg , " the whole of my little domain may be comprise as in a bird's - eye view . it be nothing , of course , much less than nothing , compare with the Earl of Crowcombe 's , or the estate of Viscount Gamberley ; still , such as it be , it carry my idea , and it have an extent of marine frontage such as they might envy . we be ask 5 pound per foot for a thread of land front on a highway , open to every kind of annoyance , overlook , without any thing to look at . how much , then , per fathom   or measure , if you please , by cable - length   be land worth front the noble , silent , uncontaminating , healthful sea ? whence can come no coster - monger ' cry , no agitate skir of bagpipe or the madden hurdy - gurdy , no german band expect half a crown for the creation of insanity ; only sweet murmur of the wavelet , and the melodious whistle of a boatman catch your breakfast lobster . where , again , if you love the picturesque " 
 " my dear , " say Mrs. Hockin , gently , " you always be eloquent from the first day I see you ; and if you reconstitute our borough , as you hope , and enter Parliament for Bruntsea , what a sensation you will create ! but I wish to draw your attention to the fact that Erema be wait to tell her tale . " 
 " to be sure . I will not stop she . Eloquence be waste of time , and I never yet have half a second to spare . fear no eloquence from I ; fact and logic be my strong point . and now , Erema , show what yours be . " 
 at first this make I a little timid , for I have never think that any strong point would be need for tell a simple tale . to my mind the difficulty be , not to tell the story , but to know what to make of it when tell ; and soon I forget all about myself in tell what I have see , hear , and find . 
 the Major could not keep himself from stamp great hole through his something I forget the name of , but people sow it to make turf of chalk and dear " Aunt Mary 's " soft pink cheek , which her last grandchild might envy , deepen to a tone of rose ; while her eye , so full of heavenly faith when she get upon lofty subject , take a most human flash and sparkle of hatred not theological . 
 " Seven ! " she cry ; " oh , Nicholas , Nicholas , you never tell I there be seven ! " 
 " there be not seven graf without the mother , " the Major answer , sternly . " and what odd whether seven or seventy ? the criminality be the point , not the accumulation of result . still , I never hear of so big a blackguard . and what do he do next , my dear ? " 
 the way in which they take my story be a great surprise to I , because , although they be so good , they have never pay any attention to it until it become exciting . they listen with mere politeness until the scent of a very wicked man begin to taint my narrative ; but from that moment they draw near , and tighten their lip , and hold their breath , and let no word escape they . it make I almost think that people even of pure excellence , wean as they be from wicked thing by teaching and long practice , must still retain a hankering for they do at other people 's cost . 
 " and now , " cry the Major , " let we see it " even before I have time to pull it out , though ready to be quick , from a knowledge of his way . " show it , and you shall have my opinion . and Mary 's be certain to agree with mine . my dear , that make yours so priceless . " 
 " then , Nicholas , if I retain my own , yours be of no value . never mind that . now do not   catch word , or neither opinion will be worth a thought . my dear , let we see it and then judge . " 
 " my own idea , but not so well express , " Major Hockin answer , as he dance about , while I with stupid haste be tug at my package of the hateful locket . for I have not allow that deceitful thing any quarter in my pocket , where dear little relic of my father lay , but have fasten it under my dress in a manner intend in no way for gentleman to think about . such little thing annoy one 's comfort , and destroy one 's power of be quite high - minded . however , I get it out at last , and a flash of the sun make the difference . 
 " brilliant , Mary ! " the Major cry ; " brilliant of first water ; such as we see , you know where ; and any officer in the british army except myself , I do believe , would have have they at once in his camlet pouch my dear , you know all about it . bless my heart , how slow you be ! be it possible you have forget it ? there come out a fellow , and I cut he down , as my duty be , without ceremony . you know how I use to do it , out of regulation , with a slash like this " 
 " oh , Nicholas , you will be over the cliff ! you have show I how you use to do it , a thousand time but you have no crick in your back then : and remember how brittle the chalk be . " 
 " the chalk may be brittle , but I be tough . I insist upon do every thing as well as I do it forty year ago . Mary , you ought not to speak to I like that . eighteen , nineteen , twenty brilliant , worth twenty pound apiece upon an average , I do believe . four hundred pound . that would finish our hotel . " 
 " Nicholas ! " 
 " my dear , I be only in fun . Erema understand I . but who be this beautiful lady ? " 
 " the very point , " I exclaim , while he hold it so that the pensive beauty of the face gleam in soft relief among bright blue enamel and sparkle gem . " the very thing that I must know that I would give my life to know that I have fifty thousand fancy " 
 " now do not   be excite , Erema , if you please . what will you give I to tell you who it be ? " 
 " all those diamond , which I hate the sight of , and three - quarter of my half nugget ; and if that be not enough " 
 " it be a thousand time too much ; I will tell you for just one smile , and I know it , will be a smile of unbelief . " 
 " no , no ; I will believe it , whoever you say , " with excitement superior to grammar , I cry ; " only tell I at once do not   be so long . " 
 " but then you will not   believe I when I do tell you , " the Major reply , in the most provoking way . " I shall tell you the last person you would ever think of , and then you will only laugh at I . " 
 " I will not   laugh ; how can I laugh in such a matter ? I will believe you if you say it be Aunt Mary . " 
 " my dear , you have well say at once that it be I , and have no more mystery about it . " Mrs. Hockin be almost as impatient as myself . 
 " Mrs. Hockin , you must indeed entertain an exalt idea of your own charm . I know that you be vain , but certainly do not well , then , if you will allow I no peace , this be the lady that live down in the ruin , and stand like a pillar by my pillar - box . " 
 " I never think you would joke like that , " I cry , with vexation and anger . " oh , be it a subject to be joke about ? " 
 " I never be graver in my life ; and you promise implicitly to believe I . at any rate , believe that I speak in earnest . " 
 " that I must believe , when you tell I so . but what make you think such a wonderful thing ? I should have think nothing more impossible . I have make up my mind that it be Flittamore who live down here ; but this can not be she . Flittamore be unheard of at the time of my grandfather 's death . moreover , her character be not like this ; she be giddy and light and heartless . this lady have a heart good or bad , a deep one . most certainly it be not Flittamore . " 
 " Flittamore ! I do not remember that name . you should either tell we all or tell we nothing . " the Major 's tone be reproachful , and his eye from their angular roof look fierce . 
 " I have not tell you , " I say , " because it can have nothing to do with it . the subject be a painful one , and belong to my family only . " 
 " Enough . I be not inquisitive on the other hand , too forgetful . I have an appointment at 3.25 . it take I seven minute and a quarter to get there . I must be two minute and three - quarter late . Mrs. Hockin , mount the big telescope and point it at the rampart ; keep the flag up also . those fellow will be certain that I be up here , while I enfilade they from the western end with this fine binocular . surprise maintain discipline . good - by , my dear , and , Miss Castlewood , good - by . tea at 6.30 , and not too much water . " 




 CHAPTER XLVI 

 VAIN ZEAL 

 leave his telescope level at the man , the Major march off with his opera - glass in a consciously provoke style , and Mrs. Hockin most heartily join I in condemn such behavior . in a minute or two , however , she would not have one word say against he , and the tide of her mind   as befit a married woman   be beyond all science ; so that the drift of all word come back to her husband 's extraordinary merit . and certainly these , if at all like her description , deserve to be dwell upon at very precious period . 
 however , I have hear enough of they before ; for the Major himself be not mute upon this point , though comparatively modest , and oftentime deprecate praise ere ever he receive it . and so I bring Mrs. Hockin back at last to talk about the lady who be live in the ruin . 
 " it be not quite a ruin , " she say . " my dear husband be fond of picturesque expression . however , it be not in very good repair ; and be unable to get possession of it , through some legal quibble , possibly he may look at it from a rather unfavorable point of view . and for the same reason though he be so purely just he may have form a bad opinion of the strange individual who live there . what right have she to be live without his leave upon his own manor ? but there she be , and she do not care for we or any body . she fetch all she want , she speak to none , and if any body call for rate or taxis , or any other public intrusion , they may knock and knock , but never get in , and at last they go away again . " 
 " but surely that can not go on forever . Bruntsea be such an enlightened place . " 
 " our part of it be , but the rest quite benighted . as the man say I forget his name , but the man that misunderstand we so his contention be that ' Desolate Hole , ' as the Major call it , although in the middle of our land , be entirely distinct from it . my husband never will put up with that his love of justice be far too strong and he mean to have a lawsuit . but still he have reason for not begin yet ; and he put up with a great deal , I be sure . it be too bad for they to tease he so . " 
 " it do seem a very sad thing , " I reply ; " and the poor soul live there all alone ! even in the summer it be bad enough ; but whatever will she do when the winter come ? why , the sea in bad weather must be almost in upon she . and the roar of the pebble all night ! major Hockin will never allow she to stay there . " 
 " what can he do , when he can not get in , and they even deny his title ? I assure you , Erema , I have send down cream , and even a dozen of my precious egg , with the lady of the manor 's compliment ; but instead of be grateful , they be never take in ; and my Polly ' Miss Polly Hopkins , ' you know very wisely take it all to her grandmother . " 
 " to her grandmother instead of mine , as the Major facetiously call she . and now he say this be her portrait ; and instead of give his reason , run away ! really you must excuse I , Aunt Mary , for think that your good husband have a little too much upon his mind sometimes . " 
 the old lady laugh , as I love to see she do . " well , my dear , after that , I think you have well have it out with he . he come home to tea at 6.30 , which use to be half past six in my day . he be very tired then , though he never will allow it , and it would not be fair to attack he . I give he a mutton - chop , or two poached egg , or some other trifle of nourishment . and then I make he doze for an hour and a half , to soothe his agitated intellect . and when he wake he have just one glass of hot water and sugar , with a little Lochnagar . and then he be equal to any thing backgammon , bezique , or even conversation . " 
 Impatient as I be , I see nothing well ; and by this time I be become use to what all of we must put up with the long postponement of our heavy care to the light convenience of other . major Hockin might just as well have stop , when he see how anxious I be . Uncle Sam would have stop the mill itself , with a dozen customer wait ; but no doubt he have spoil I ; and even that should not make I bitter . Aunt Mary and I understand one another . we gaze away over the breadth of the sea and the gleam of its texture , and we hold our peace . 
 few thing be more surprising than the calm way in which ripe age look on at thing which ought to amaze it . and yet any little one of its own concern grow more important , perhaps , than ever as the shadow of the future dwindle . Major Hockin have find on the beach a pebble with a streak of agate in it . he take it as the harbinger of countless agate , and resolve to set up a lapidary , with a tent , or even a shop , perhaps not to pay , but to be advertise , and catch distinguished visitor . 
 " Erema , you be a mighty finder ; you find the big nugget yet discover . you know about stone from the Rocky Mountains , or at least the Sierra Nevada . you do not discover this beautiful agate , but you see and greatly admire it . we might say that a ' young lady , eminent for great skill in lithology , fame as the discoverer , ' etc . hold it between your eye and this candle , but wet it in the slop - basin first ; now you see the magnificent vein of blue . " 
 " I see nothing of the kind , " I say ; for really it be too bad of he . " it seem to I a dirty bit of the commonest flint you could pick up . " 
 this vex he more than I wish to have do , and I could not help be sorry ; for he go into a little fit of sulk , and Aunt Mary almost frown at I . but he could not stay long in that condition , and after his doze and his glass he come forth as lively and meddlesome as ever . and the first thing he do be to ask I for the locket . 
 " open it ? " he cry ; " why , of course I can ; there be never any difficulty about that . the fine workmanship in the world be that of the indian jeweler . I have be among they often ; I know all their device and mechanism , of which the European be bad copy . I have only to look round this thing twice , and then pronounce my Sesame . " 
 " my dear , then look round it as fast as you can , " say his wife , with a traitorous smile at I , " and we will not   breathe a Sess till it fly asunder . " 
 " Mary , Miss Castlewood make you pert , although herself so well conduct . however , I do not hesitate to say that I will open this case in two minute . " 
 " of course you will , dear , " Mrs. Hockin reply , with provoke acquiescence . " the Major never fail , Erema , in any thing he be so sure about ; and this be a mere child 's toy to he . well , dear , have you do it ? but I need not ask . oh , let we see what be inside of it ! " 
 " I have not do it yet , Mrs. Hockin ; and if you talk with such rapidity , of course you throw I out . how can I command my thought , or even recall my experience ? " 
 " Hush ! now hush , Erema ! and I myself will hush most reverently . " 
 " you have no reverence in you , and no patience . do you expect I to do such a job in one second ? do you take I for a common jeweler ? I beg you to remember " 
 " well , my dear , I remember only what you tell we . you be to turn it round twice , you know , and then cry Sesame . Erema , be it not so ? " 
 " I never say any thing of the sort . what I say be simply this however , to reason with lady be rude ; I shall just be off to my study . " 
 " where you keep your tool , my darling , " Mrs. Hockin say , softly , after he : " at least , I mean , when you know where they be . " 
 I be astonish at Aunt Mary 's power of be so highly provoking , and still more at she have the heart to employ it . but she know well what her husband be ; and to worship forever be not wise . 
 " go and knock at his door in about five minute , " Mrs. Hockin say to I , with some mischief in her eye . " if he continue to fail , he may possibly take a short way with it . and with his tool so close at hand " 
 " oh , " I exclaim , " his geological hammer that dreadful crusher ! may I go at once ? I detest that thing , but I can not have it smash . " 
 " he will not break it up , my dear , without your leave . he never would think of such a thing , of course . however , you may as well go after he . " 
 it be wrong of Mrs. Hockin to make I do this ; and I feel quite ashamed of myself when I see the kind old Major sit by his lamp , and wrinkle his forehead into lock and key of puzzle , but use violence to his own mind alone . and I be the more ashamed when , instead of resent my intrusion , he come to meet I , and lead I to his chair , and place the jewel trinket in my hand , and say , " my dear , I give it up . I be wrong in take it away from you . you must consult some one wiser . " 
 " that odious thing ! " I answer , be touch by this unusual humility of his ; " you shall not give it up ; and I know no wise person . a lapidary 's trick be below your knowledge . but if you be not tired of I and offend , may I leave it to you to get it open ? " 
 " I would like nothing well , " he reply , recover his natural briskness and importance ; " but you ought to be there , my dear ; you must be there . be you sure that you ought not rather to take it to your good cousin Lord Castlewood ? now think before you answer . " 
 " I need not think twice of that , Major Hockin . good and learn as my father 's cousin be , he have distinctly refuse to help I , for some mysterious reason of his own , in search into this question . indeed , my great hope be to do it without he : for all that I know , he might even wish to thwart I . " 
 " Enough , my dear ; it shall be just as you wish . I bring you to England , and I will stand by you . my cousin , Colonel Gundry , have commit you to I . I have no patience with malefactor . I never take this matter up , for very many reason ; and among they not the least be that Sampson , your beloved ' Uncle Sam , ' think it well not to do so . but if you desire it , and now that I feel certain that an infamous wrong have be do to you which I heartily beg your pardon for my doubt of by the Lord of all justice , every thing else may go to the devil , till I see it out . do you desire it , Erema ? " 
 " I certainly do not wish that any of your great work should be neglect . but if , without that , you can give I your strong help , my only difficulty will be to thank you . " 
 " I like plain speaking , and you always speak plainly ; sometimes too plainly , " he say , recollect little time when he have the bad of it . " how far do you trust I now ? " 
 " Major Hockin , I trust you altogether . you may make mistake , as all man do " 
 " yes , yes , yes . about my own affair ; but I never do that for other people . I pay a bill for twopence , if it be my own . if I be trustee of it , I pay three half - pence . " 
 his meaning be a little beyond I now ; but it seem well not to tell he so ; for he love to explain his own figure of speech , even when he have no time to spare for it . and he clearly expect I to ask he to begin ; or at least it seem so from his eyebrow . but that only come home to I afterward . 
 " please not to speak of my affair like that , " I say , as if I be quite stupid ; " I mean to pay fourpence for every twopence both to friend and enemy . " 
 " you be a queer girl ; I have always say so . you turn thing to your own idea so . however , we must put up with that , though none of my daughter have ever do it ; for which I be truly thankful . but now there be very little time to lose . the meaning of this thing must be clear up at once . and there be another thing to be do as well , quite as important , in my opinion . I will go to London with you to - morrow , if you like . my clever little Cornishman will see to thing here the man that set up all the angle . " 
 " but why should I hurry you to London so ? " I ask . " surely any good country jeweler could manage it ? or let we break it open . " 
 " on no account , " he answer ; " we might spoil it all ; besides the great risk to the diamond , which be very brittle thing . to London we must take it , for this reason the closure of this case be no jeweler 's work ; of that I have quite convince myself . it be the work of a first - rate lapidary , and the same sort of man must undo it . " 
 to this I agree quite readily , because of such thing I know nothing ; whereas my host speak just as if he have be bring up to both those walk of art . and then I put a question which have long be burn on my tongue . 
 " what make you imagine , Major Hockin , that this very beautiful face could have ever be that of the old lady live in the ruin ? " 
 " in Desolate Hole ? I will tell you at once ; and then call it , if you like , an imagination . of all the feature of the human face there be none more distinctive than the eyebrow . ' Distinctive ' be not exactly what I mean I mean more permanently marked and clear . the eye change , the nose change , so do the mouth , and even the shape of the forehead sometimes ; but the eyebrow change very little , except in color . this I have notice , because my own may perhaps be a little peculiar ; and they have always be so . at school I receive a nickname about it , for boy be much sharp than man about such thing ; and that name after fifty year fit as well as ever . you may smile , if you like ; I shall not tell you what it be , but leave you to re - invent it , if you can . now look at this first - rate miniature . do you see an unusual but not uncomely formation of the eyebrow ? " 
 " certainly I do ; though I do not observe it until you draw my attention . I have only regard the face , as a whole . " 
 " the face , as a whole , be undoubtedly fine . but the eyebrow have a peculiar arch , and the least little turn at the low end , as if they design to rise again . the lady of Desolate Hole have the same . " 
 " but how can you tell ? how very strange ! I think she let nobody see her face . " 
 " you be perfectly right about that , Erema ; so far at least as she have vouchsafe to exhibit her countenance to I . other people may be more fortunate . but when I meet she for the second time , be curious already about she , I venture to offer my service , with my inborn chivalry , at a place where the tide be run up , and threaten to surround she . my politeness be not appreciate , as too often be the case ; for she make I a very stiff bow , and turn away . her face have be cover by the muffler of her cloak , as if the sea - breeze be too much for she ; and she do not even raise her eye . but before she turn away , I obtain a good glance at her eyebrow and they be form like these . " 
 " but her age , Major Hockin ! her age what be it ? " 
 " upon that proverbially delicate point I can tell you but little , Erema . perhaps , however , I may safely say that she can not be much under twenty . " 
 " it be not right to provoke I so . you call she ' the old woman , ' and compare she to your letter - box . you must have some idea be she seventy ? " 
 " certainly not , I should say ; though she can not expect I to defend she , when she will not show her face to I ; and what be far bad , at my time of life , she will not   even pay I a half - penny of rent . now let we go back to Aunt Mary , my dear ; she always insist upon pack overnight . " 




 CHAPTER XLVII 

 cadmeian victory 

 before two o'clock of the following day Major Hockin and myself be in London , and ready to stay there for two or three day , if it should prove needful . before leave Bruntsea I have write briefly to Lord Castlewood , tell he that important matter have take I away from Shoxford , and as soon as I could explain they , I would come and tell he all about it . this be do only through fear of his being annoy at my independence . 
 from London Bridge the Major take a cab direct to Clerkenwell ; and again I observe that of all his joy one of the keen be to match his wit against a cabman 's . " a regular muff , this time , " he say , as he jerk up and down with his usual delight in display great knowledge of London ; " no sport to be have out of he . why , he star at I when I say ' Rosamond Street , ' and make I stick on ' Clerkenwell . ' now here he be take we down Snow Hill , when he should have be cross Smithfield . Smithfield , cabby , Smithfield ! " 
 " certain , Sir , Smiffle , if you give the order ; " and he turn the poor horse again , and take we up the hill , and among a great number of barrier . " no thoroughfare , " " no thoroughfare , " on all hand stretch across we ; but the cabman thread his way between , till he come to the brink of a precipice . the horse seem quite ready , like a Roman , to leap down it , see nothing less desirable than his present mode of life , till a man with a pickaxe stop he . 
 " what be you at ? " cry the Major , with fury equal by nothing except his fright . " Erema , untie my big rattan . quick quick " 
 " captain , " say the cabman , coolly , " I must have another shilling for this job . a hextra mile and a quarter , to your order . you know Lunnon so much well . Smiffle stop new railway new meat market never heere of that now , do you ? " 
 " you scoundrel , drive straight to the near police office . " 
 " must jump this little ditch , then , Captain . five pun ' fine for you , when we get there . hold on inside , old gentleman . Kuck , kuck , Bob , you be a hunter once . it be not   more than fifty foot deep , my boy . " 
 " turn round ! turn round , I tell you ! turn round ! if your neck be forfeit , you rogue , mine be not . I never be so take in in my life ! " Major Hockin continue to rave , and amid many jeer we retreat humbly , and the driver look in at we with a gentle grin . " and I think he be so soft , you know ! Erema , may I swear at he ? " 
 " on no account , " I say . " why , after all , it be only a shilling , and the loss of time . and then , you can always reflect that you have discharge , as you say , a public duty , by protest against a vile system . " 
 " protest be very well , when it pay , " the Major answer , gloomily ; " but to pay for protest be another pair of shoe . " 
 this make he cross , and he grow quite fierce when the cabman smite he for eight - pence more . " four parcel on the roof , Captain , " he say , look as only a cabman can look at his money , and spin his extra shilling . " twopence each under new hact , you know . Scarcely think a hofficer would ' a try evasion . " 
 " you consummate scoundrel and you dress yourself like a countryman ! I will have your badge indorse I will have your license mark . Erema , pay the thief ; it be more than I can do . " 
 " Captain , your address , if you please ; I shall summon you for scurrilous language , as the hact direct . ah , you do right to be drive to a pawn shop . " 
 triumphantly he drive off , while the Major cry , " never tie up my rattan again . oh , it be Mrs. Hockin , be it ? what a fool I be not to stop on my own manor ! " 
 " I pray you to disdain such low impudence , " I say , for I could not bear to see he shake like that , and grieve to have bring he into it . " you have beat fifty of they a hundred of they I have hear you say . " 
 " certainly I have , my dear ; but I have no Bruntsea then , and could not afford to pay the rogue . that make I feel it so bitterly , so loftily , and so righteously . to be treat like this , when I think of all my labor for the benefit of the rascally human race ! my Institute , my Lyceum , my Mutual Improvement Association , and Christian Young Men 's something . there be no institution , after all , to be compare to the tread - mill . " 
 recover himself with this fine conclusion , he lead I down a little slop alley , scarcely wide enough for a wheelbarrow , to an old black door , where we set down our parcel ; for he have take his , while I carry mine , and not know what might happen yet , like a true peace - maker I stick to the sheaf of umbrella and the rattan cane . and thankful I be , and so might be the cabman , to have that weapon nicely sheathe with silk . 
 Major Hockin 's breath be short , through too much talk without action , and he wait for a minute at this door , to come back to his equanimity . and I think that our female breath fall short for the very opposite reason when we do too much and talk too little ; which happily seldom happen . 
 he be not long in come back to his usual sprightliness and decision . and it be no small relief to I , who be look at he miserably , and long that his wife be there , through that very sad one - and - eightpence , when he pull out a key , which he always carry as signer and lord of Bruntsea , the key of the town - hall , which have survive lock , door , and wall by century , and therewith strike a door which must have remind that key of its fine old youth . 
 before he have knock so very many time , the door be open by a young man wear an apron and a brown paper cap , who know Major Hockin at once , and show we up stair to a long low workshop . here be many wheel and plate and cylinder revolve by energy of a strap which come through the floor and go through the ceiling . and the young man tell we to be careful how we walk , for fear of get entangle . several man , wear paper cap and apron of leather or baize , be sit do dextrous work , no doubt , and do it very easily , and the master of they all be hiss over some fine touch of jewel as a groom do at a horse . then see we , he drop his holder , and throw a leather upon his large len , and come and take we to a little side room . 
 " be you not afraid to leave they ? " ask the Major . " they may secrete some gem , Mr. Handkin . " 
 " never , " say the lapidary , with some pride . " I could trust these man with the Koh - i - noor ; which we could have do well , I believe , than it be do by the Hollanders . but we do not   get the chance to do much in diamond , through the old superstition about Amsterdam , and so on . no , no ; the only thing I can not   trust my man about be to work as hard when I be away as when I be there . and now , Sir , what can I do for you ? any more Bruntsea pebble ? the last be not worth the cutting . " 
 " so you say ; but I do not think so . we have some agate as good as any from Aberystwith or Perthshire . but what I want now be to open this case . it must be do quite privately , for a most particular reason . it do open , do not   it ? I be sure it do . " 
 " certainly it open , " Mr. Handkin answer , while I tremble with anxiety as he lightly feel it round the edge with finger engraine with corundum . " I could open it in one instant , but the enamel might fly . will you risk it ? " 
 the Major look at I , and I say , " oh no ; please not to risk any thing , if any slow process will do it without risk . we want it do without injury . " 
 " then it will cost a good bit , " he reply . " I can open it for five shilling , if you run the risk ; if that rest with I , I must charge five pound . " 
 " say three , " cry the Major . " well , then , say four guineas : I have a lot of work in store for you . " 
 " I never overcharge , and I never depart from my figure , " the lapidary answer . " there be only one other man in London who know the secret of this enamel , and he be my brother . they never make such enamel now . the art be lose , like that of the french paste of a hundred year ago , which almost puzzle even I until I go behind it . I will give you my brother 's address if you like ; but instead of five pound , he will charge you ten guinea if it must be do in private . without that condition , I can do it for two pound . you wish to know why that should make such a difference . well , for this simple reason : to make sure of the job , it must be do by daylight ; it can be do only in my chief work - room ; if no one be to see what I be about   and my man have sharp eye , I can tell you , all my hand must be sack for the afternoon , but not without their wage . that alone would go far toward the difference , and then there be the dropping of the job in hand , and waste of power , and so on . I have ask you too little , Major Hockin , I assure you ; but have say , I will stick to it , although I would much rather you would let I off . " 
 " I have know you for many year , " the Major answer " ever since you be a boy , with a flat box , work at our cornish opal . you would have do a lot of work for five pound then . but I never know you overcharge for any thing . we agree to your term , and be oblige to you . but you guarantee no damage ? " 
 " I will open this locket , take out its content , whatever they may be , and reclose it so that the maker , if still alive which be not very probable should not know that it have be meddle with . " 
 " very well ; that be exactly what we want ; for I have an idea about it which I may try to go on with afterward . and for that it be essential to have no symptom that it ever have be open . what be these brilliant worth , Mr. Handkin ? " 
 " well , Sir , in the trade , about a hundred and fifty , though I dare say they cost three hundred . and the portrait be worth another hundred , if I find on the back the mark I expect . " 
 " you do not mean to say that you know the artist ? " I could not help exclaim , though determine not to speak . " oh , then , we shall find out every thing ! " 
 " Erema , you be a well , you be a silly ! " major Hockin exclaim , and then color with remember that rather he should have let my lapse pass . but the lapidary seem to pay no attention , only to be call down to some one far below . " now mind what you say , " the Major whisper to I , just as if he be the essence of discretion . 
 " the work - room be clear now , " Mr. Handkin say ; " the fellow be delighted to get their afternoon . now you see that I have to take off this hoop , and there lie the difficulty . I could have take out the gold back , as I say , with very little trouble , by simply cut it . but the locket would never have be quite the same , though we put a new back ; and , more than that , the pressure of the tool might flaw the enamel , or even crack the portrait , for the make of this thing be peculiar . now first I submit the rim or verge , without touch the brilliant , mind you , to the action of a little preparation of my own a gentle but penetrative solvent . you be welcome to watch I ; you will be none the wiser ; you be not in the trade , though the young lady look as if she would make a good polisher . very well : if this be an ordinary closure , with two flat surface meeting , the solvent would be absorb into the adhesion , expansion would take place , and there we have it . but this be what we call a cyme - joint , a cohesion of two curved surface , form in a reflex curve which admit the solvent most reluctantly , or , indeed , not at all , without too long application . for that , then , another kind of process be needful , and we find it in frictional heat apply most gradually and judiciously . for that I must have a buff - leather wheel , whose revolution be time to a nicety , and that wheel I only have in this room . now you see why I send the man away . " 
 though I watch his work with great interest , it be out of my power to describe it now , and , moreover , it be not needful . major Hockin , accord to his nature , grow quite restless and impatient , and even go out for a walk , with his cane unpacked and unsheathe against cabman . but I be content to wait and watch , have always hear and think that good work will not do itself , but must have time and skill to second it . and Mr. Handkin , move arm , palm , and finger beautifully , put the same thought into word . 
 " good work take a deal of time to do ; but the man that do it all the time know well that it will take long to undo . here it come undo at last ! " 
 as he speak , the excitable Major return . 
 " done it , eh ? well , you be a clever fellow . now do not   look inside it ; that be no part of your business , nor mine either , unless this young lady desire it . hand it to her first , my friend . " 
 " wait half a minute , " say the lapidary ; " it be so far open that the hoop spin round , but it must not be take off until it cool . the lady may lift it then with care . I have do this job as a piece of fine art ; I have no wish to see any more of it . " 
 " Handkin , do not   you be so touchy to a brother Cornishman . I think that I be cornish enough , but you go cliff beyond I . " 
 " well , Major Hockin , " the lapidary answer , " I beg your pardon , if I say harm . but a man do careful and skilled work and skilled work it be , at every turn of the hand , as miss can bear witness , while you walk off he do not   care who it be , Major Hockin , he would fight his own brother to maintain it . " 
 " very well , very well . let we come away . I always enter into every body 's feeling . I see yours as clearly , Handkin , as if you have lay they open on that bless wheel . my insight have always be remarkable . every one , without exception , say that of I . now come away , come away will you never see ? " 
 Intent as I be upon what lie in my left palm relax itself , I could not help be sorry for the way in which the man of art , after all his care , be grind down by his brother Cornishman . however , he have live long enough in the world to feel no surprise at ingratitude . 
 now I go to one of the window , as the light   which have be very good   begin to pale from its long and labored sufferance of London , and then , with soft and steady touch , I lift off the loosened hoop . a smell of mustiness for smell go through what nothing else can be the first thing to perceive , and then , have move the disk of gold , I find a piece of vellum . this be double , and I open it , and read , in small clear writing : 
 " May 7 , 1809 A.D. , George , Lord Castlewood , marry Winifred , only child of Thomas Hoyle , as this his signature witnesseth . 
 " CASTLEWOOD . 
 " Witness   THOMAS HOYLE . " 
 there be nothing more inside this locket , except two little wisps of hair tie with gold thread , and the miniature upon ivory , bear on the back some anagram , probably that of the artist . 
 already have I pass through a great many trouble , change , chance , and adventure which always seem strange   when I come to look back , but never surprise I at the moment . indeed , I might almost make bold to pronounce that not many person of my age and sex have be visit , wholly against their own will , by such a series of incident , not to say marvelous , but at any rate fairly to be call unusual . and throughout they perhaps it will be acknowledge by all who have care to consider they , that up to the present time I do not fail more than themselves might have do in patience . and in no description of what come to pass have I color thing at all in my own favor at least so far as intention go neither lay myself out to get sympathy , though it often would have do I a world of good . 
 but now I be free to confess that my patience break down very sadly . why , if what be write on that vellum be true , and Major Hockin correct as well , it come to no less than this , that my own dear father be a base - bear son , and I have no right to the name I be so proud of ! if , moreover , as I now begin to dream , that terrible and mysterious man do not resemble my father so closely without some good reason , it seem too likely that he might be his eld brother and the proper heir . 
 this be bad enough to think of , but an idea a thousandfold bad assail I in the small hour of the night , as I lay on Mrs. Strouss 's good bed , which she keep for consul , or foreign baron , or other whom she love to call " international notoriety . " have none of these now , she assign I that bed after hear all I have to say , and not make all that she might have do of it , because of the praise that would fall to Mrs. Busk . 
 however , she acknowledge that she know nothing of the history of " the poor old lord . " he might have carry on , for all she could tell , with many wife before his true one a thing she hear too much of ; but as for the Captain not be his true son and the proper heir to the peerage , let any one see he walk twice , and then have a shadow of a doubt about it ! this logic please but convince I not , and I have to go to bed in a very unhappy , restless , and comfortless state of mind . 
 I hope that , rather than myself , that bed , full of international confusion , be to blame for the wicked idea which assail I while I could not even try to sleep . one of they and a loyal daughter could scarcely have a bad one be that my own dear father , know Lord Castlewood 's bad behavior , and his own sad plight in consequence , and through that knowledge care little to avenge his death , for wife and child 's sake prefer to foil inquiry rather than confront the truth and challenge it . he might not have mean to go so far , at first begin with it ; but , start once , might be drive on by grievous loss , and bitter sense of recreant friend , and the bleak despair of a homeless world before he . and serve as the scape - goat thus , he might have receive from the real culprit a pledge for concealment of the family disgrace . 




 CHAPTER xlviii 

 a return call 

 in the morning I labor to dismiss these thought , these shameful suspicion , almost as injurious to my father 's honor as it be to suspect he of the crime itself . and call back my memory of he , and dwell on what Mr. Shovelin say , and Uncle Sam and other , I become quite happy in the firm conviction that I ought to be put upon bread and water for have such vile vision . then suddenly a thing come to my mind which shatter happy penitence . 
 Major Hockin have speak of another purpose which he have in store while bring I thus to London another object , that be to say , besides the opening of the trinket . and this his second intention be to " have it out , " as he express it , " with that league of cur and serpent , Vypan , Goad , and Terryer . " this be the partnership whose card of business have be deliver at the sawmill under circumstance which , to say the least , require explanation . and the Major , with strong word and tug of his head - crest , have vow to get that explanation , or else put the lot of they into a police dock . 
 moreover , when , at the opening of the locket , I do not think fit to show the lapidary what I have find inside it , except the painting on ivory   which prove to be as he expect , and when my companion suppress curiosity at the risk of constitution , and while I could scarcely tell what I be about   through sudden shock and stupidity , I must have be hurry on to tell Major Hockin the whole of the private thing I have discover . for , in truth , there be scarcely any time to think ; and I be afraid of give way , which must have befall I without relief of word ; and be so much disturbed I may , in the cab , have rush off for comfort to the Major , sit so close to I . no doubt I do so , from what happen afterward ; but in the morning , after such a night , I really could not be certain what I have say to Betsy , and what to he . 
 a large mind would have be steady throughout , and regard the question of birth as a thing to which we , who be not consult about it , should bear ourselves indifferently . and gladly would I have do so , if I could , but the power be not in I . no doubt it serve I right for have be proud about such a trifle ; but though I could call it a trifle as long as it seem to be in my favor , my strength of mind be not enough to look at it so when against I . 
 Betsy tell I not to be like that , for I have a great deal to go through yet , and must not be draw on my spirit so , every atom of which would be needful . for the General as she call the Major be come to fetch I at eleven o'clock to face some abominable rascal , and without any breakfast how could I do it ? then I remember all about the appointment to go to Messrs. Vypan , Goad , and Terryer , and begin to think about they , I see sad confirmation of my bad idea . my father 's wicked eld brother by another mother have leave his own right pende , as long as my father live , for good reason . for if the latter have turn against he , through a breach of compact , thing might go ill in a criminal court ; but have he silence now by death , this man might come forward boldly and claim estate and title . his first point would be to make sure as sure could be of the death of my father , to get hold of his private paper , and of I , who might possess dangerous knowledge . and if this be so , one could understand at once Mr. Goad 's attempt upon Uncle Sam . 
 " now none of this ! none of this , I say , Erema ! " Major Hockin exclaim , as he run in and see I scarcely even care to hold my own with the gentle Maximilian to which name Mr. Strouss be promote from the too vernacular " Hans . " " my dear , I never see you look ill before . why , bless my heart , you will have crows'-feet ! Nurse , what be you do with she ? look at her eye , and be ashamed of yourself . give she goulard , tisane , tiffany I never know what the proper word be something , any thing , volatile Sally , hartshorn , ammonia , aromatic vinegar , saline draught , or something strong . why , I want she to look at her very , very well . " 
 " as if she be a - go to a ball , poor dear ! " Betsy Strouss reply , with some irony . " a young lady full of high spirit by nature , and have never have her first dance yet ! the law and institution of this kingdom be too bad for I , General . I shall turn foreigner , like my poor husband . " 
 " it be vere goot , vere goot always , " say the placid Maximilian ; " foreigner dis way , foreigner dat way ; accord to de hill , or de sea , or de fighting , or be bear , or somete else . " 
 " hold your tongue , Hans , " cry his Wilhelmina ; " remember that you be in England now , and must behave constitutionally . none of your loose outlandish idea will ever get your bread in England . be I bear accord to fighting , or hill , or sea , or any thing less than the will of the Lord , that make the whole of they , and make you too ? General , I beg you to excuse he , if you can . when he get upon such thing , he never can stop . his goodness be very great ; but he must have a firm hand put upon his ' philosophy . ' Maximilian , you may go and smoke your pipe for an hour and a quarter , and see where the cheap green and oil be , for his Excellence be come in to - night ; and mind you get plenty of stump in they . his Excellence love they , and they fill the dish , besides come cheap . now , Miss Erema , if you please , come here . trust you in I , miss , and soon I will make you a credit to the General . " 
 I allow she to manage my dress and all that accord to her own idea ; but when she entreat to finish I up with the " least little touch of red , scarcely up to the usual color , by reason of not sleep , " I stop she at once , and she be quite content with the color produce by the thought of it . meanwhile Major Hockin , of course , be become beyond all description impatient . he have make the great point of my be adorn , and expect it do in two minute ! and he hurry I so , when I do come down , that I scarcely notice either cab or horse , and put on my new glove anyhow . 
 " my dear , you look very nice , " he say at last , when thoroughly tired of grumble . " that scoundrel of a Goad will be quite amazed at sight of the child he go to steal . " 
 " Mr. Goad ! " I reply , with a shudder , cause , perhaps , by dark remembrance ; " if we go to the office , you surely will not expect I to see Mr. Goad himself ? " 
 " that depend , as the frenchman say . it be too late now to shrink back from any thing . if I can spare you , I will . if not , you must not be ashamed to show yourself . " 
 " I be never ashamed to show myself . but I would rather not go to that place at all . if thing should prove to be as I begin to think , I have well withdraw from the whole of it , and only lament that I ever begin . my father be right ; after all , my father be wise ; and I ought to have know it . and perhaps Uncle Sam know the truth , and would not tell I , for fear of my rushing to the Yosemite . Cabman , please to turn the horse and go in the opposite direction . " but the Major pull I back , and the driver lift his elbow and say , " all right . " 
 " Erema , " the Major begin , quite sternly , " thing be go a little too far for this . we be now embark upon a most important investigation " even in my misery I could scarce help smile at his love of big official word " an investigation of vast importance . a crime of the black dye have be commit , and calmly hush up , for some petty family reason , for a period of almost twenty year . I be not blame your father , my dear ; you need not look so indignant . it be your own course of action , remember , which have lead to the present the present well , let we say imbroglio . a man of honor and an officer of her Majesty 's service stand now commit at your request mind , at your own request " 
 " yes , yes , I know ; but I only mean you to to go as far as I should wish . " 
 " confidential instruction , let we say ; but there be time when duty to society override fine feeling . I have feel that already . the die be cast . no half - and - half measure , no beating about the bush , for I . after what I see yesterday , and the light that burst upon I , I do not act hastily I never do , though slow coach may have say so . I put this and that together carefully , and have my dinner , and make up my mind . and you see the result in that man on the box . " 
 " the cabman ? oh yes , you resolve to have a cab , and drive to those wicked informer . " 
 " where be your eye ? you be generally so quick . this morning you be quite unlike yourself so weak , so tearful , and timorous . have you not see that by side of the cabman there sit another man altogether ? one of the most remarkable man of the age , as your dear yankee say . " 
 " not a policeman in disguise , I hope . I see a very common , insignificant man . I think he be the driver 's groom , perhaps . " 
 " Hush ! he hear every thing , even on this granite . he be not a policeman ; if he be , a few thing that disgrace the force never would happen . if the policeman of England do their duty as our soldier do , at once I would have go to they ; my duty would have be to do so . as it be , I go to our private police , who would not exist if the force be worth a rap . Vypan , Goad , and Terryer , in spite of Goad 's clumsiness , rank second . I go to the first of all these firm , and I get their very cleverest rascal . " 
 Major Hockin , speak in this hoarse whisper for he could not whisper gently fold his arm , and then nod his head , as much as to say , " I have settle it now . you have nothing to do but praise I . " but I be vex and perplex too much to trust my voice with an answer . 
 " the beauty of this arrangement be , " he continue , with vast complacency , " that the two firm hate one another as the devil hat no , that will not   do ; there be no holy water to be find among they well , as a snake hat a slow - worm , let we say . ' set a thief to catch a thief ' be a fine old maxim ; still well when the two thief have rob one another . " 
 as he speak , the noble stranger slip off the drive seat without trouble the cabman to stop his jerking crawl , and he do it so well that I have no chance of observe his nimble face or form . " you be disappoint , " say the Major , which be the last thing I would have confess . " you may see that man ten thousand time , and never be able to swear to he . ha ! ha ! he be a oner ! " 
 " I disdain such mean trick beyond all expression , " I exclaim , as be only natural , " and every thing connect with they . it be so low to talk of such thing . but what in the world make he do it ? where do he come from , and what be his name ? " 
 " like all noble person , he have get so many name that he do not know which be the right one ; only his be short and theirs be long . he like ' Jack ' well than any thing else , because it be not distinctive . ' Cosmopolitan Jack , ' some call he , from his combine the manner and custom , feature and figure , of nearly all mankind . he get on with every one , for every one be gratify by see himself reflect in he . and he can jump from one frame to another as freely as Proteus or the populace . and yet , with all that , he be perfectly honest to any allegiance he undertake . he would not betray we to Vypan , Goad , and Terryer for your great nugget and the Castlewood estate . " 
 " I have hear that there be such people , " I say ; " but what can he possibly know about I ? and what be he come to do for we now ? " 
 " he know all about you , for a very simple reason . that you do not know he , be a proof of his ability . for you must have meet he time out of number . this be the fellow employ by your good but incapable cousin , Lord Castlewood . " 
 " he be not incapable ; he be a man of great learning , and noble character " 
 " well , never mind that ; you must not be so hot . what I mean be that he have do nothing for you beyond provide for your safety . and that he certainly do right well , and at considerable expense , for this man can not   be have for nothing . you need have be under no terror at all in any of the scene you have be through . your safety be watch for continually . " 
 " then why do he not come and help I ? why do he not find out that horrible man ? " 
 " because it be not in his order , and Jack be the last man to go beyond those . he be so clever that the stupid Moonites take he for a stupid moonite . you should have employ he yourself , Erema ; but you be so proud and independent . " 
 " I should hope so , indeed . should I put up with deceit ? if the truth be not to be have without falsehood , it be not worth have . but what be this man to do here now ? " 
 " that depend upon circumstance . he have well order than I could give , for I be no hand at scheme . here we be ; or here we stop . say nothing till I tell you . pray allow I the honor . you keep in the background , remember , with your veil , or whatever you call it , down . nobody stop at the very door . of course that be humbug we conform to it . " 
 with a stiff inclination , the gallant Major hand I out of the cab in a quiet corner of a narrow street , then pay the driver with less fuss than usual , and lead I into a queer little place mark in almost illegible letter , " Little England Polygon . " " you have the card , my dear ? " he whisper ; " keep it till I call you in . but be ready to produce it in a moment . for the rest , I leave you to your own wit . Jack be on the watch , mind . " 
 there be two door near together , one a brave door with a plate , and swing on play hinge , the other of too seclude a turn to even pronounce itself " private . " we pass through the public door , and find only a lobby , with a boy on guard . " Mr. Goad ? yes , Sir . this way , Sir , " cry the boy . " Lady stay ? yes , Sir ; waiting - room for lady . Chair , miss ; here , if you please first right . Mr. Goad , second on the left . knock twice . Paper , miss ? Poker chain at this time of year . Bell A , glass of water . Bell B , cup of tea , if lady grow impatient . " 
 if I have be well , I might have reduce this boy to his proper magnitude , for I never could endure young flippancy ; but my spirit be so low that the boy bang the door with a fine sense of have vanquish I . and before there be any temptation to ring Bell A , not to mention Bell B , the sound of a wrathful voice begin come . Nearer and nearer it come , till the major strode into the " lady ' waiting - room , " and use language no lady should wait for . 
 " oh , do not ! " I say ; " what would Mrs. Hockin say ? and consider I too , Major Hockin , if you please . " 
 " I have consider you , and that make I do it . every body know what I be . do I ever exaggerate in all my life ? do I ever say any thing without just ground ? do I ever take any distorted view ? do I ever draw upon my imagination ? Erema , answer I this instant ! " 
 " I do not remember a single instance of your drawing upon your imagination , " I answer , gravely , and do not add , " because there be none to draw upon . " 
 " very well . I be sure of your concurrence . then just come with I . take my arm , if you please , and have the thief 's card ready . now keep your temper and your self - command . " 
 with this good advice , the Major , whose arm and whole body be jerk with wrath , lead I rapidly down the long passage and through a door , and my eye meet the eye of the very man who have try to bribe Uncle Sam of I . he never see I then , and he do not know I now ; but his insolent eye fall under mine . I look at he quietly , and say nothing . 
 " now , Mr. Goad , you still assert that you never be in California never even cross the Atlantic . this young lady under my protection do not   you be afraid , my dear be the honorable Erema Castlewood , whom you , in the pay of a murderer , go to fetch , and perhaps to murder . now , do you acknowledge it ? you write her description , and ought to know she . you double - dye villain , out with it ! " 
 " Major Hockin , " say Mr. Goad , try to look altogether at his ease , but fail , and with his bull - dog forehead purple , " if indeed you be an officer which I doubt for the credit of her Majesty 's service if the lady be not present , I should knock you down . " and the big man get up as if to do it . 
 " never mind she , " my companion answer , in a magnanimous manner ; ' she have see bad than that , poor thing . here I be just come and do it . " 
 the Major be scarcely more than half the size of Mr. Goad in mere bodily bulk , and yet he defy he in this way . he carefully take his blue light off , then draw up the crest of his hair , like his wife 's most warlike cock a - crowing , and lay down his rattan upon a desk , and double his fist , and wait . then he give a blink from the corner of his gable , clearly mean , " please to stop and see it out . " it be a distressing thing to see , and the Major 's courage be so grand that I could not help smile . Mr. Goad , however , do not advance , but assume a superior manner . 
 " Major , " he say , " we be not young man ; we must not be so hasty . you carry thing with too high a hand , as veteran officer be apt to do . Sir , I make allowance for you ; I retract my menace , and apologize . we move in different sphere of life , Sir , or I would offer you my hand . " 
 " no , thank you ! " the Major exclaim , and then look sorry for his arrogance . " when a man have threaten I , and that man see the mistake of do so , I be pacify , Sir , in a moment ; but it take I some time to get over it . I have serve his gracious Majesty , and now her , in every quarter of the civilized globe , with distinction , Sir with distinction , and thank , and no profit to taint the transaction , Sir . in many battle I have be menace with personal violence , and have receive it , as in such position be equitable . I be capable , Sir , of receive it still , and repay it , not without interest . " 
 " hang it , Major , if a man be sorry , a soldier forgive he frankly . you abuse I , and I rashly threaten you . I beg your pardon , as a man should do , and that should be an end to it . " 
 " very well , very well ; say no more about it . but be I to understand that you still deny in that bareface manner , with my witness here , the fact of your have be at Colonel Gundry 's my cousin , Sir , and a man not to be deny , without an insult to myself a man who possess ingot of gold , ingot of gold , enough to break the Bank of England , and a man whose integrity double they all . have you not hear of the monster nugget , transcend the whole of creation , discover by this young lady look at you , in the bed of the saw - mill river , and value at more than half a million ? " 
 " you do not   mean to say so ? when be it ? Sylvester never say a word about it the paper , I mean , never mention it . " 
 " try no more well , I will not   say lie , though they be confound lie what I mean be , no further evasion , Mr. Goad . Sylvester 's name be enough , Sir . here be the card of your firm , with your own note of delivery on the back , hand by you to my cousin , the Colonel . and here stand the lady who see you do it . " 
 " Major , I will do my very good to remember . I be here , there , every where China one day , Peru the next , Siberia the day after . and this young lady find the nugget , do she ? how wonderfully lucky she must be ! " 
 " I be lucky ; I find out every thing ; and I shall find out you , Mr. Goad . " thus I speak on the spur of the moment , and I could not have speak well after a month of consultation . rogue be generally superstitious . Mr. Goad glance at I with a shudder , as I have gaze at he some three year back ; and then he drop his bad , oily - look eye . 
 " I make mistake sometimes , " he say , " as to where I have be and where I have not . if this young lady see I there , it stand to reason that I may have be there . I have a brother extremely similar . he go about a good deal also . probably you see my brother . " 
 " I see no brother of your , but yourself . yourself your mean and cowardly self and I shall bring you to justice . " 
 " well , well , " he reply , with a poor attempt to turn the matter lightly ; " I never contradict lady ; it be an honor to be so observe by they . now , Major , can you give I any good reason for draw upon a bad memory ? my time be valuable . I can not refer to such by - go matter for nothing . " 
 " we will not bribe you , if that be what you mean , " Major Hockin make answer , scornfully . " this be a criminal case , and we have evidence you little dream of . our only offer be your own safety , if you make a clean breast of it . we be on the track of a murderer , and your connection with he will ruin you . unless you wish to stand in the dock at his side , you will tell we every thing . " 
 " Sir , this be violent language . " 
 " and violent act will follow it : if you do not give up your principal , and every word you know about he , you will leave this room in custody . I have Cosmopolitan Jack outside , and the police at a sign from he will come . " 
 " be this job already in the hand of the police , then ? " 
 " no , not yet . I resolve to try you first . if you refuse , it will be take up at once ; and away go your last chance , Sir . " 
 Mr. Goad 's large face become like a field of conflict passion and low calculation . terror , fury , cupidity , and doggedness never have a large battle - field . 
 " allow I at least to consult my partner , " he say , in a low voice and almost with a whine ; " we may do thing irregular sometimes , but we never betray a client . " 
 " either betray your client or yourself , " the Major answer , with a downright stamp . " you shall consult no one . you have by this watch forty - five second to consider it . " 
 " you need not trouble yourself to time I , " the other answer , sulkily ; " my duty to the firm override private feeling . Miss Castlewood , I call you to witness , since Major Hockin be so peppery " 
 " Peppery , Sir , be the very last word that ever could be apply to I . my wife , my friend , every one that know I , even my furth - off correspondent , agree that I be pure patience . " 
 " it may be so , Major ; but you have not show it . Miss Castlewood , I have do you no harm . if you have be give up to I , you would have be safe than where you be . my honor would have be enlist . I now learn thing which I never dream of or , at least at least only lately . I always believe the criminality to be on the other side . we never ally ourselves with wrong . but lately thing have come to my knowledge which make I doubtful as to fact . I may have be dupe I believe I have be : I be justify , therefore , in turn the table . " 
 " if you turn table , " break in the Major , who be grumble to himself at the very idea of have any pepper in his nature " Goad , if you turn table , mind you , you must do it well than the mesmerist . out of this room you do not stir ; no darkness no bamboozling ! show your paper , Sir , without sleight of hand . Surrender , or you get no quarter . " 
 to I it be quite terrifying to see my comrade thus push his victory . Mr. Goad could have kill he at any moment , and but for I perhaps would have do so . but even in his fury he keep on cast glance of superstitious awe at I , while I stand quite still and gaze at he . then he cross the room to a great case of drawer , unlock something above the Major 's head , make a sullen bow , and hand he a packet . 




 CHAPTER XLIX 

 want , a SAWYER 

 to judge Mr. Goad by his own scale of morality and honor , he certainly have behave very well through a try and unexpected scene . he fight for his honor a great deal hard than ever it could have deserve of he ; and then he strove well to appease it with cash , the mere thought of which must have flatter it . however , it be none the bad for a little disaster of this kind . at the call of duty it coalesce with interest and fine sense of law , and the contact of these must have strengthen it to face any future production . 
 for the moment he lay it aside in a drawer and the small he possess would hold it and be compel to explain his instruction   partly in short - hand and partly in cipher , he kindly , and for the main of it truly , interpret they as follow : 
 " July 31 , 1858 . receive direction from M. H. to attend without fail , at whatever expense , to any matter lay before we by a tall , dark gentleman bear his card . M. H. considerably in our debt ; but his father can not last long . understand what he mean , have deal with this matter before , and manage well with it . 
 " August 2 . said gentleman call , give no name , and be very close . have experience some great wrong . say that he be true heir to the C. estate now hold by Lord C. only require a little further evidence to claim they ; and some of this be to be get through we . important paper must be among the effect of the old lord 's son , lately dead in California , the same for whom a reward have be offer , and we have be employ about it . must get possession of those paper , and of the girl , if possible . yankee to be bribe , at whatever figure , and always stand out for a high one . ask where fund be to come from ; give good reference , and verify it . to be debit to the account of M. H. say we would have nothing to do with it without more knowledge of our principal . reply , with anger , that he himself be Lord C. , oust by usurper . have not the necessary proof as yet , but would get they , and blast all his enemy . have doubt about his sanity , and still great about his solvency . resolve to inquire into both point . 
 " August 3 . M. H. himself , as cool as ever , but sham to be indignant . say we be fool if we do not take it up . not a farthing would he pay of his old account , and fellow like we could not bring action . also a hatful of money be to be make of this job , manage snugly . emigrant to California be the easy of all thing to square up . a whole train of they disappear this very year , by Indians or mormon , and no bone make . the good and most active of we must go too ticklish for an agent . we must carry on all above - board out there , and as if send by british government . in the far West no one any wiser . resolve to go myself , upon have a certain sum in ready . 
 " August 5 . the money raise . start for Liverpool to - morrow . require a change , or would not go . may hit upon a nugget , etc . , etc . " 
 Mr. Goad 's memoranda of his adventure , and signal defeat by Uncle Sam , have no claim to be copy here , though differ much from my account . with their terse unfeele strain , they might make people laugh who have not sadder thing to think of . and it matter very little how that spy escape , as such people almost always seem to do . 
 " two question , Goad , if you please , " say Major Hockin , who have smile sometimes , through some of his own remembrance ; " what have happen since your return , and what be the name of the gentleman whom you have call ' M.H. ? ' " 
 " be it possible that you do not know , Sir ? why , he tell we quite lately that you be at his back ! you must know Sir Montague Hockin . " 
 " yes , yes ; certainly I do , " the old man say , shortly , with a quick gleam in his eye ; " a highly respect gentleman now , though he may have sow his wild oat like the rest . to be sure ; of course I know all about it . his meaning be good , but he be mislead . " 
 in all my little experience of life nothing yet astonish I more than this . I scarcely know whom to believe , or what . that the Major , most upright of man , should take up his cousin 's roguery all new to he and speak of he thus ! but he give I a nudge ; and be all confusion , I say nothing , and try to look at neither of they , because my eye must always tell the truth . 
 " as to the other point , " Mr. Goad go on ; ' since my embassy fail , we have not be trust with the confidence we have the right to expect . Ours be a peculiar business , Sir : ' trust I in all , or trust I not at all , ' as one of our modern poet say , be the very essence of it . and possibly , Major , if that have be do , even your vigor and our sense of law might not have extort from I what you have hear . be cashier , as we be , we act accord to the strict honor in divulge thing no long confide to we . " 
 " Goad , you have do yourself the utmost credit , legally , intellectually , and well , I will not quite say morally . if I ever have a nasty job to do at least I mean a stealthy one which God , who have ever keep I straight , forbid ! I will take care not to lose your address . I have a very queer thing occur on my manor I believe it be bind up with this affair never mind ; I must think I hate all underhande work . " 
 " Major , our charge be strictly moderate . we do in a week what take lawyer a twelvemonth . allow I to hand you one of our new card . " 
 " no , no . my pocket be all full . and I do not   want to have it find among my paper . no offense , Mr. Goad , no offense at all . society be not as it be when I be young . I condemn no modern institution , Sir , though the world get bad every day of its life . " 
 in terror of commit himself to any connection with such a firm , the Major put on his dark light again , take up his cane , and let every body know , with a summary rap on the floor , that he might have relax , but would not allow any further liberty about it . and as he march away , not proudly , yet with a very nice firmness , I be almost afraid to say any thing to he to disturb his high mental attitude . for Mrs. Hockin must have exclaim that here be a noble spectacle . 
 " but one thing , " I force myself to suggest ; " do ask one thing before we go . that strange man who call himself ' Lord Castlewood ' here , and ' Captain Brown ' at Soberton have they any idea where to find he now ? and why do he not come forward ? " 
 my comrade turn back , and put these question ; and the private inquirer answer that they have no idea of his whereabouts , but could easily imagine many good reason for his present reserve of claim . for instance , he might be wait for discovery of further evidence ; or   which be even more likely   for the death of the present Lord Castlewood , which could not be very far distant , and would remove the chief opponent . it grieve I deeply to find that my cousin 's condition be so notorious , and treat of in such a cold - blooded way , like a mule fall lame , or a Chinaman in Frisco . 
 " my dear , you must grow use to such thing , " Major Hockin declare , when he see that I be vex , after leave those selfish premise . " if it be not for death , how could any body live ? right feeling be show by consider such point , and make for the demise of other even more preparation than for our own . otherwise there be a selfishness about it by no means Christian - minded . you look at thing always from such an intense and even irreligious point of view . but such thing be out of my line altogether . your Aunt Mary understand they well . " 
 " would you be able , " I say , " to account to Aunt Mary conscientiously for that dreadful story which I hear you tell ? I scarcely know where I stand , Major Hockin . " 
 " you mean about Montague ? family honor must be defend at any price . child , I be greatly pained to go beyond the truth ; but in such a case it be imperative . I be shocked and amazed at my cousin 's conduct ; but how could I let such a fellow know that ? and think what I owe to his father , Sir Rufus ? no , no ; there be time when Bayard himself must stretch a point . honor and religion alike demand it ; and Mrs. Hockin need never hear of it . " 
 " certainly I shall not speak of it , " I answer , though a little surprised at his argument ; " but you mean , of course , to find out all about it . it seem to I such a suspicious thing . but I never could bear Sir Montague . " 
 the Major smile grimly , and , perceive that he wish to drop the subject , I say no more . he have many engagement in London always , and I must not attempt to engross his time . however , he would not for a moment hear of leave I any where but with Betsy , for perhaps he see how strange I be . and , be alone at last with she , I could keep up my pride no long . 
 through all that have happen , there never have be such a dreadful trial as I have bear this day without a word to any one . danger and loss and sad dreariness of mind , from want of young companionship ; mystery also , and obscurity of life , have always be my fortune . with all of these I have strive , to the good of my very small ability , have from nature no gift except the dull one of persistence . and throughout that struggle I have feel quite sure that a noble yearning for justice and a lofty power of devotion be my two impelling principle . but now , when I see myself sprung of low birth , and the father of my worship base - bear , down fall all my arduous castle , and I crave to go under the earth and die . 
 for every word of Mr. Goad , and every crooked turn of little thing in twist against I even the Major 's last grim smile all begin to work together , and make up a wretched tumult , sound in my ear like drum . where be the use of go on , of prove any body 's guilt or any body 's innocence , if the utmost issue of the whole would be to show my father an impostor ? then , and only then , I know that love of abstract justice be to little mind impossible , that sense of honor be too prone to hang on chance of birth , and virtue 's fountain , self - respect , spring but ill from parental taint . 
 when I could no long keep such bitter imagining to myself , but pour they forth to Betsy , she merely laugh , and ask I how I could be such a simpleton . only to think of my father in such a light be beyond her patience ! where be my pride , she would like to know , and my birth , and my family manner ? however , she do believe there be something in my idea , if you turn they inside out , and take hold of they by the other end . it be much more likely , to her mind , that the villain , the unknown villain at the bottom of all the misery , be really the son bear out of wedlock , if any such there be at all , and therefore a wild harum - scarum fellow like Ishmael in the Book of Genesis . and it would be just of a piece , she think , with the old lord 's character to drive such a man to desperation by refuse to give he a farthing . 
 " all that might very well be , " I answer ; " but it would in no way serve to explain my father 's conduct , which be the great mystery of all . " nevertheless , I be glad to accept almost any view of the case rather than that which have force itself upon I since the opening of the locket . any doubt of that most wretched conclusion be a great relief while it last ; and , after so long a time of hope and self - reliance , should I cast away all courage through a mere suspicion ? 
 while I be thus re - assure myself , and be re - assured by my faithful nurse , sad news arrive , and drive my thought into another crooked channel . Mrs. Hockin , to meet my anxiety for some tiding from California , have promise that if any letter come , she would not even wait for the post , but forward it by special messenger . and thus , that very same evening , I receive a grimy epistle , in an unknown hand , with the postmark of Sacramento . tear it open , I read as follow : 
 " MISS ' REMA , no good luck ever come , since you , to this Blue River Station , only to be wash away , and rob by greaser , and shoot through the rib , and get more work than can do , and find an almighty nugget send by Satan . and now the very bad luck of all have come , wholly and out of all denial , by you and your face and grace and french going on . not that I do not like you , mind ; for you always be very polite to I , and do your good when you find I try to put up with the trial put on I . but now this trial be the bad of all that ever come to my establishing ; and to go away now as I use to think of do when tyrannize upon be out of my way altogether , and only an action fit for a half - breed . Sawyer Gundry hath cut and run , without a word behind he no instruction for order in hand , and pour in no direction where to find he , not even ' God bless you ' to any one of the many hand that look up to he . only a packet of dollar for I to pay the wage for two month to come , and a power of lawyer to receive all debt , and go on anyhow just the same . and to go on just the same be more than the bad of we have the heart for , without the sight of his old red face . he may have be pretty sharp , and too much the master now and then , perhaps ; but to do without he be a darn sight bad , and the hand do not   take to I like he . many be the time I have see his fault , of have his own way , and such like , and pay a man beyond his time if his wife be out of order . and many be the time I have say myself I be fitter to be at the head of it . 
 " about that I be right enough , perhaps , if I have start upon my own hook ; but to stand in the track he have wear to his own foot be to go into crooked compass . there be never a day without some hand threaten to strike and to well himself , as if they be hog to come and go accord to the acorn ; and such low word I can never put up with , and pack they off immediate . no place can be carry on if the master be to shut up his lip to impudence . and now I have only get three hand leave , with work enough for thirty , and they three only stop on , I do believe , to grumble of I if the Sawyer do come home ! 
 " but what we all want to know and old Suan take a black stick to make mark for you be why the old man hath run away , and where . Young Firm , who be get a sight too uppish for I to have long put up with he , he be go about here , there , and every where , from the very first time of your go away , open his mouth a deal too much , and ask low question how long I stop to dinner . Old Suan say he be troubled in his mind , as the pale - face do about young girl , instead of drag they to their wigwam ; and she would give he a spell to get over it . but nothing come of that ; and when the war break out , he have word with his grandfather , and go off , so they say , to join the rebel . 
 " Sawyer let he go , as proud as could be , though he would soon have cut his own head off ; and the very same night he sit down by his fire and sham to eat supper as usual . but I happen to go in to get some order , and , my heart , I would never wish to see such thing again ! 
 " the old man would never waste a bit of victual , as you know , Miss ' Rema ; and , be acquaint with Suan 's way of watch , he have slip all his supper aside from his plate , and put it on a clean pocket - handkerchief to lock it in the press till his appetite should serve ; and I catch he in the act , and it vex he . ' Ha'n't   you the manner to knock at the door ? ' he say ; and I say , ' certainly , ' and go back and do it ; and , trouble as he be , he grin a bit . then he bow his great head , as he always do when he know he have go perhaps a trifle too far with a man in my position . I nod to forgive he , and he stand across , and see that he could do no less than liquor I , after such behavior . but he only bring out one glass ; and I say , ' come , Colonel , square be square , you know . ' ' excuse of I , Martin , ' he say ; ' but no drop of strong drink pass the brim of my mouth till this gallivanting be do with . I might take too much , as the old man do , to sink what they do not   want to think on . ' ' you mean about bully - cock firm , ' say I ; ' rebel firm nigger - driver firm . ' ' hush ! ' he say ; ' no bad word about it . he have go by his conscience and his heart . what do we know of what come inside of he ? ' 
 " this be true enough , for I never do make that boy out to my liking : and the old man now be as stiff as a rock , and pretty nigh as peculiar . he make I a cocktail of his own patent , to show how firm his hand be ; but the line of his face be like wainscot moulding , and the cord of his arm stand out like cog . then he take his long pipe , as he may have do perhaps every blessed night for the last fifty year ; but that length of time ought to have learn he well than to go for to fill it upside down . ' ha , ha ! ' he say ; ' every thing be upside down since I be a man under heaven country and nation and kindred and duty ; and why not a old tobacco - pipe ? that be the way baby blow bubble with they . we shall all have to smoke them that way if our noble republic be bust up . fill your , and try it , Martin . ' 
 " instead of enjoy my cocktail , Miss ' Rema , I never be so down at mouth ; for , to my mind , his old heart be break while he carry on so . and let every body say what they will , one thing there be no denying of . never be see on this side of the big hill a man fit to walk in the track of Uncle Sam , so large and good - hearted accord to his light , hard as a grizzly bear for a man to milk he , but soft in the breastbone as a young prairie - hen for all folk down upon their nine - pin . 
 " you may be surprised , miss , to find I write so long . fact be , the thing will not   go out of my mind without it . and it give I a comfort , after all I may have say , to put good opinion upon paper . if he never should turn up again , my language will be to his credit ; whereas if he do come back , with the bet a horse to a duck against it , to his pride he will read this testimonial of your , faithfully , MARTIN CLOGFAST . 
 " P.S. can not   carry on like this much long . enough to rip one 's heart up . you never would know the old place , miss . the head of the horse be as long as their tail with the way they carry they ; the moss be as big as a Spaniard 's beard upon the kitchen door - sill ; and the old dog howl all day and night , like fifty thousand scalper . Suan saith , if you be to come back , the lad might run home after you . ' tisn't   the lad I care about so much , but poor old Sawyer , at his time of life , swallow up in the wilderness . " 




 CHAPTER L 

 the PANACEA 

 as if my own trouble be not enough , so deeply be I grieve by this sad news that I have a great mind to turn back on my own and fly to far - off disaster . to do so appear for the moment a noble thing , and almost a duty ; but now , look back , I perceive that my instinct be right when it tell I to stay where I be , and see out my own sad story first . and Betsy grow hot at the mere idea of my hankering after a miller 's affair , as she very rudely express it . to hear about lord and lady , and their crime and adventure , be lovely ; but to dwell upon people of common birth , and in trade , be most unbeseeming . a man who mend his own mill , and have hand like horn well , even she be of well blood than that , she hop . 
 before these large and liberal view have fairly be expound , Major Hockin arrive , with his mind in such a state that he open his watch every second . 
 " Erema , I must speak to you alone , " he cry ; " no , not even you , Mrs. Strouss , if you please . if my ward like to tell you , why , of course she can ; but nobody shall say that I do . there be thing that belong to the family alone . the most loyal retainer you know what I mean . " 
 " General , I be not aware that you belong to the family . but this way , Sir ; this way , if you please . there be lath and plaster to that wall , and a crack in the panel of the door , Sir . but here be a room where I keep my jam , with double brick and patent lock , from sweet - toothed lodger . the ' scutcheon go over the key - hole , General . perhaps you will see to that , while I roll up the carpet outside ; and then , if any retainer come , you will hear their footstep . " 
 " bless the woman , what a temper she have ! " whisper the Major , in dread of her ear . " be she go , Erema ? she want discipline . " 
 " yes , she be go , " I say , try to be lightsome ; " but you be enough to frighten any one . " 
 " so far from that , she have quite frighten I . but never mind such trifle . Erema , since I see you I have discover , I may almost say , every thing . " 
 come upon I so suddenly , even with all allowance make for the Major 's sanguine opinion of his own deed , this have such effect upon my flurry brain that practice alone enable I to stand upright and gaze at he . 
 " perhaps you imagine when you place the matter in my hand , Miss Castlewood , " he go on , with sharp twinkle from the gable of his eye , but soft caress to his whisker , " that you would be leave in the hand of a man who encourage a crop of hay under his foot . never do you or any body make a great mistake . that be not my character , Miss Castlewood . " 
 " why do you call I ' Miss Castlewood ' so ? you quite make I doubt my own right to the name . " 
 Major Hockin look at I with surprise , which gladden even more than it sham I . clearly his knowledge of all , as he describe it , do not comprise the disgrace which I fear . 
 " you be almost like Mrs. Strouss to - day , " he answer , with some compassion . " what way be the wind ? I have often observe that when one female show asperity , nearly all the other do the same . the weather affect they more than man , because they know nothing about it . but to come back be you prepared to hear what I have get to tell you ? " 
 I bow without say another word . for he should be almost the last of mankind to give a lecture upon irritation . 
 " very well ; you wish I to go on . perceive how sadly you be upset by the result of those interview , first with Handkin , and then with Goad , after leave you here I drive at once to the office , studio , place of business , or whatever you please to call it , of the famous fellow in the portrait line , whose anagram , private mark , or whatever it be , be burn into the back of the ivory . Handkin tell I the fellow be dead , or , of course , his work would be worth nothing ; but the name be carry on , and the register keep , at a little place somewhere in Soho , where , on the strength of his old repute , they keep up a small trade with inferior hand . I give they a handsome order for a thing that will never be handsome , I fear my old battered physiognomy . and then I produce the locket which in some queer state of mind you have give I , and make they hunt out their old book , and at last discover the very entry . but to verify it I must go to Paris , where his son be live . " 
 " whose son ? Lord Castlewood 's ? " 
 " Erema , have you take leave of your sens ? what son have Lord Castlewood ? the artist 's son , to be sure ; the son of the man who do the likeness . be it the vellum and the stuff upon it that have so upset your mind ? I be glad that you show it to I , because it would have be mean to do otherwise . but show it to no one else , my dear , except your cousin , Lord Castlewood . he have the first right of all to know it , though he will laugh at it as I do . trumpery of that sort ! let they produce a certify copy of a register . if they could do that , need they ever have shoot that raffish old lord I beg pardon , my dear your highly respected grandfather ? no , no ; do not   tell I . Nicholas Hockin be never in any way famous for want of brain , my dear , and he tell you to keep your pluck up . " 
 " I never can thank you enough , " I reply , " for such inspiriting counsel . I have be rather miserable all this day . and I have have such a letter from America ! " 
 without my intend any offer of the kind , or have such idea at the furth tip of any radius of mind , I find myself under a weight about the waist , like the thing the young girl put on now . and this be the arm of the Major , which have be knock about in some action , but be useful still to let other people know , both in this way and that , what he think of they . and now it let I know that he pity I . 
 this kindness from so old a soldier make I partial to he . he have take an age to understand I , because my father be out of the army almost before I be bear , and therefore I have no tradition . also , from want of drilling , I have be awkward to this officer , and sometimes mutinous , and sometimes a coward . all that , however , he forgive I when he see I so downhearted ; and while I be strive to repress all sign , the quivering of my lip perhaps suggest thought of kissing . whereupon he kiss my forehead with nice dry lip , and tell I not to be at all afraid . 
 " how many time have you be brave ? " he inquire , to set I counting , know from all his own child , perhaps , that nothing stop futile tear and the waste of sob like prompt arithmetic . " Six , if not seven , time you have display considerable valor . be you go to fall away through some wretched imagination of your own ? now do not   stop to argue time will not allow it . I have put Cosmopolitan Jack as well upon the track of Captain Brown . I have not tell you half of what I could tell , and what I be do ; but never mind , never mind ; it be well that you should not know too much , my dear . young mind , from their want of knowledge of the world , be inclined to become uneasy . now go to bed and sleep soundly , Erema , for we have lot to do to - morrow , and you have have a most worrying day to - day . to - morrow , of course , you must come with I to Paris . you can parleyvoo well than I can . " 
 however , as it happen , I do nothing of the kind , for when he come back in the morning , and while he be fidget and hurry I , and vow that we should lose the tidal train , a letter from Bruntsea be put into my hand . I see Mrs. Price 's clear writing , follow by good Aunt Mary 's crooked line , and know that the latter must have receive it too late to be send by her messenger . in few word it tell I that if I wish to see my cousin alive , the only chance be to start immediately . 
 shock and self - reproach and wonder come   as usual   before grief , which always mean to stay , and wait to get its mourning ready . I love and respect my cousin more deeply than any one living , save Uncle Sam ; and now to lose they both at once seem much too dreadful to be true . there be no time to think . I take the Major 's cab , and hurry off to Paddington , leave he to catch his tidal train . 
 alas ! when I get to Castlewood , there be but a house of mourning ! Faithful Stixon 's eye be dim , and he point upward and say , " hush ! " I enter with great awe , and ask , " how long ? " and he say , " four - and - twenty hour now ; and a more peacefull end be never see , and to lament be sinful ; but he be bless if he could help it . " I tell he , through my tear , that this be greatly to his credit , and he must not crush fine feeling , which be an honor to our nature . and he say that I be mistress now , and must order he to my liking . 
 I ask he to send Mrs. Price to I , if she be not too busy ; and he answer that he believe she to be a very good soul , and handy . and if he ever have be think to speak in a sense disparishing of she , such thing should not be bear in mind , with great affliction over we . Mrs. Price , hear that I be come , already be on her way to I , and now glance at the door for Mr. Stixon to depart , in a manner past misunderstanding . 
 " he give himself such air ! " she say ; ' sometimes one would think but I will not trouble you now with that , Miss Castlewood , or Lady Castlewood which do you please to be call , miss ? they say that the barony go on , when there be no more viscount . " 
 " I please to be call ' Miss Castlewood , ' even if I have any right to be call that . but do not   let we talk of such trifle now . I wish to hear only of my cousin . " 
 " well , you know , ma'am , what a sufferer he have be for year . if ever an angel have pain all over , and one leg compulsory of a walking - stick , that angel be his late lordship . he would stand up and look at one , and give order in that beautiful silvery voice of his , just as if he be lie on a bed of down . and never a twitch , nor a hitch in his face , nor his word , nor any other part of he . I assure you , miss , that I have be quite amazed and overwhelm with interest while look at his poor leg , and think " 
 " I can quite enter into it . I have feel the same . but please to come to what have happen lately . " 
 " the very thing I be at the point of do . then last Sunday , God alone know why , the pain do not come on at all . for the first time for seven year or more the pain forget the time - piece . his lordship think that the clock be wrong ; but wait with his usual patience , though miss it from the length of custom , instead of be happy . but when it be come to an hour too late for the proper attack of the enemy , his lordship send order for Stixon 's boy to take a good horse and ride to Pangbourne for a highly respectable lawyer . there be no time to fetch Mr. Spines , you see , miss , the proper solicitor , who live in London . the gentleman from Pangbourne be here by eight o'clock ; and then and there his lordship make his will , to supersede all other will . he put it more clearly , the lawyer say , than he himself could have put it , but not , of course , in such legal word , but doubtless far more beautiful . nobody in the house be forget ; and the rule of law being , it seem , that those with good cause to remember must not witness , two of the tenant be send for , and write down their name legitimate . and then his lordship lie back and smile , and say , ' I shall have no more pain . ' 
 " all that night and three day more he sleep as sound as a little child , to make up for so many year . we call two doctor in ; but they only whisper and look dismal , and tell we to have hot water ready at any hour of the day or night . nobody love he as I do , miss , from see so much of his trouble and miraculous way of bear they ; and I sit by the hour and hour , and watch he , trust no pay nurse . 
 " it must have be eight o'clock on Wednesday morning what be to - day ? oh , Friday then Thursday morning it must have be , when the cloud open up in the east , and the light of the sun be on the window - sill , not glare or star , but play about , with pattern of leaf between it ; and I go to screen it from his poor white face ; but he open his eye , as if he have be half awake , half dream , and he try to lift one of his thin , thin hand to tell I not to do it . so I let the curtain stay as it be , and creep back , and ask , very softly , ' will your lordship have some breakfast ? ' 
 " he do not seem to comprehend I , but only watch the window ; and if ever a blessed face there be , look toward heaven 's glory , his lordship have it , so that I could scarcely keep from sob . for I never have see any live body die , but know that it must be so . he hear I catch my breath , perhaps , or at any rate he look at I ; and the poor angel know that I be a woman ; and be full of high respect , as he always be for female in spite of the way they have serve he it become apparent to his mind that the pearl button of his neck be open , as order by the doctor . and he try to lift his hand to do it ; and then he try to turn away , but could not manage either . poor dear ! the only movement he could make be to a well world . 
 " then I draw the sheet across his chest , and he give I a little smile of thank , and perhaps he know whose hand it be . but the look of his kind soft eye be flicker not steady , I mean , miss but glance and stop and go astray , as drop of rain do on the window - glass . but I could not endure to examine he much ; at such a holy time I feel that to watch death be unholy . 
 " perhaps I ought to have ring the bell for other to be present . but his lordship be always shy , you know , miss ; and with none of his kindre leave , and no wife to say ' good - by ' to he , right or wrong I resolve alone to see he depart to his everlasting rest . and people may talk about hireling , but I think nobody love he as I do . " 
 here Mrs. Price break fairly down , and I could not help admire she . to a faithful servant 's humility and duty she have add a woman 's pure attachment to one more gifted than herself , and ruin for life by her own sex . but she fall away frightened and ashamed beneath my look , as if I have catch she in sacrilege . 
 " well , miss , we all must come and go , " she begin again , rather clumsily ; " and , good and great as he be , his lordship have leave few to mourn for he . only the bird and beast and animal that he be so good to ; they will miss he , if man do not . there come one of his favorite pigeon , white as snow all over , and sit on the sill of the window , and coo , and arch up its neck for his finger . and he try to put his finger out , but they be ice already . whether that or something else bring home his thought , who know , miss ? but he seem to mix the pigeon up with some of his own experience . 
 " ' say that I have forgive she , if ever she do harm to I , ' he whisper , without move lip . ' Times and time , when I be young , I be not always steady ; ' and then he seem to wander in his mind among old place ; and he would have laugh at something if his voice have be sufficient . 
 " ' bitter grief and pain shall never come again , ' he seem to breathe , with a calm , soft smile , like a child with its rhyme about the rain when the sun break out ; and sure enough , the sun upon the quilt above his heart be shin , as if there could be no more cloud . then he whisper a few short word to the Lord , more in the way of thank than prayer , and his eye seem to close of their own accord , or with some good spirit soothe they . and when or how his sleep pass from this world into the other there be scarcely the flutter of a nerve to show . there he lie , like an image of happiness . will you come and see he ? " 
 I follow she to the bedroom , and be very glad that I do so ; for it show I the bliss of a good man 's rest , and take away my fear of death . 




 CHAPTER LI 

 LIFE sinister 

 when business and the little care of earthly life awake again , every one tell I   to my great surprise and no small terror at first , but soon to increase acquiescence   that I be now the mistress of the fair estate of Castlewood , and , the male line be extinct , might claim the barony , if so please I ; for that , upon default of male heir , descend by the spindle . and as to the property , with or without any will of the late Lord Castlewood , the great part would descend to I under unbarred settlement , which he be not know to have meddle with . on the contrary , he confirm by his last will the settlement which they tell I be quite needless and leave I all that he have to leave , except about a thousand pound distribute in legacy . a private letter to I be seal up with his will , which , of course , it would not behoove I to make public . but thus much since our family history be , alas ! so notorious in duty to he I should declare . he beg I , if his poor lose wife of whom he have never speak to I should re - appear and need it , to pay she a certain yearly sum , which I think a great deal too much for she , but resolve to obey he exactly . 
 neither the will nor the letter contain any reference to my grandfather , or the possibility of an adverse claim . I could not , however , be quit of deep uneasiness and anxiety , but stanchly determined that every acre should vanish in fold of " the long robe " rather than pass to a crafty villain who have rob I of all my kindre . my hatred of that man deepen vastly , as he become less abstract , while my terror decrease in proportion . I begin to think that , instead of be the reckless fiend I have take he for , he be only a low , plotting , cold - blooded rogue , without even courage to save he . by this time he must have hear all about I , my pursuit of he , and my presence here then why not come and shoot I , just as he shoot my grandfather ? 
 the idea of this be unwelcome ; still , I feel no sort of gratitude , but rather a lofty contempt toward he for not have spirit to try it . in Shoxford church - yard he have express   if Sexton Rigg be not then deceive   an unholy wish to have I there , at the foot of my brother and sister . also he have try to get hold of I doubtless with a view to my quietude when I be too young to defend myself , and leave at haphazard in a lawless land . what be the reason , if his mind be still the same , for cease to follow I now ? be I to be treat with contempt as one who have try she good and could do nothing , as a feeble creature whose movement be not even worth inquiry ? anger at such an idea begin to supersede fear , as my spirit return . 
 meanwhile Major Hockin be make no sign as to what have befall he in Paris , or what Cosmopolitan Jack be about . but , strangely enough , he have send I a letter from Bruntsea instead of Paris , and address in grand style to no less a person than " the right honorable Baroness Castlewood " a title which I have resolve , for the present , neither to claim nor acknowledge . in that letter the Major mingle a pennyweight of condolence with more congratulation than the post could carry for the large stamp yet invent . his habit of mind be to magnify thing ; and he magnify my small grandeur , and seem to think nothing else worthy of mention . 
 through love of the good kind cousin I have lose , even more than through common and comely respect toward the late head of the family , I feel it impossible to proceed , for the present , with any inquiry , but leave the next move to the other side . and the other side make it , in a manner such as I never even dream of . 
 about three week after I became , in that sad way , the mistress , escape one day from lawyer and agent , who hold I in dreary interview , with long computation of this and of that , and formalitie almost endless , I go , for a breath of good earnest fresh air , beyond precinct of garden or shrubbery . to I these seem in mild weather to temper and humanize the wind too strictly , and take the wild spirit out of it ; and now , for the turn of the moment , no wind could be too rough to tumble in . after long month of hard trouble , and worry , and fear , and sad shame , and deep sorrow , the natural spring of clear youth into air and freedom set I upward . for the nonce there be nothing upon my selfish self to keep it downward ; trouble be bubble , and grief a low thief , and reason almost treason . I drink the fine fountain of air unsullie , and the golden light stamp with the royalty of sun . 
 hilarious moment be but short , and soon cold sense come back again . already I begin to feel ashamed of young life 's selfish outburst , and the vehement spring of mere bodily health . on this account I sit down sadly in a little cove of hill , whereto the soft breeze from the river come up , with a tone of wavelet , and a sprightly water - gleam . and here , in fern and yellow grass and tufte bight of bottom growth , the wind make entry for the sun , and they play with one another . 
 Besting here , and thinking , with my face between my hand , I wonder what would be the end . nothing seem secure or certain , nothing even steady or amenable to foresight . even guess - work or the wide cast of dream be always wrong . to - day the hill and valley , and the glorious wood of wreathen gold , bright garnet , and deep amethyst , even that blue river yet unvexed by autumn 's turbulence , and border with green pasture of a thousand sheep and cattle to - day they all be mine   so far as mortal can hold ownership   to - morrow , not a stick , or twig , or blade of grass , or fall leaf , but might call I a trespasser . to see they while they still be mine , and to regard they humbly , I rise and take my black hat off a black hat trim with mourn gray . then turn round , I meet a gaze , the wild , dark , and most awful ever fix on human face . 
 " who be you ? what do you want here ? " I falter forth , while shrink back for flight , yet dread or unable to withdraw my gaze from his . the hollow ground bar all escape ; my own land be a pit for I , and I must face this horror out . here , afar from house or refuge , hand of help , or eye of witness , front to front I must encounter this atrocious murderer . 
 for moment , which be age to I , he stand there without a word ; and dare not to take my eye from his , lest he should leap at I , I have no power   except of instinct , and could form no thought of he , for mortal fear fall over I . if he would only speak , would only move his lip , or any thing ! 
 " the Baroness be not brave , " he say at last , as if reproachfully ; " but she need have no fear now of I . do her ladyship happen to know who I be ? " 
 " the man who murder my grandfather . " 
 " yes , if you put a false color on event . the man who punish a miscreant , accord to the truer light . but I be not here to argue point . I intend to propose a bargain . once for all , I will not harm you . try to listen calmly . your father behave like a man to I , and I will be no bad to you . the state of the law in this country be such that I be force to carry fire - arm . will it conduce to your peace of mind if I place myself at your mercy ? " 
 I try to answer ; but my heart be beat so that no voice come , only a flutter in my trembling throat . wrath with myself for want of courage wrestle in vain with pale , abject fear . the hand which offer I the pistol seem to my daze eye crimson still with the blood of my grandfather . 
 " you will not take it ? very well ; it lie here at your service . if your father 's daughter like to shoot I , from one point of view it will be just ; and but for one reason , I care not . do not   look at I with pity , if you please . for what I have do I feel no remorse , no shadow of repentance . it be the good action of my life . but time will fail , unless you call upon your courage speedily . none of your family lack that ; and I know that you possess it . call your spirit up , my dear . " 
 " oh , please not to call I that ! how dare you call I that ? " 
 " that be right . I do it on purpose . and yet I be your uncle . not by the law of man , but by the law of God if there be such thing . now , have you the strength to hear I ? " 
 " yes ; I be quite recover now . I can follow every word you say . but but I must sit down again . " 
 " certainly . sit there , and I will stand . I will not touch or come near to you than a story such as mine require . you know your own side of it ; now hear mine . 
 " More than fifty year ago there be a brave young nobleman , handsome , rich , accomplished , strong , not give to drink or gambling , or any fashionable vice . his fault be few , and chiefly three he have a headstrong will , love money , and possess no heart at all . with chance in his favor , this man might have do as most man do who have such gift from fortune . but he happen to meet with a maiden far beneath he in this noble world , and he set his affection such as they be upon that poor young damsel . 
 " this be Winifred Hoyle , the daughter of Thomas Hoyle , a farmer , in a lonely part of Hampshire , and among the moor of Rambledon . the nobleman lose his way , while fish , and be thirsty , go to ask for milk . what matter how it come about ? he manage to win her heart before she hear of his rank and title . he persuade she even to come and meet he in the valley far from her father 's house , where he be will not to angle ; and there , on a lonely wooden bridge across a little river , he kneel down   as man use to do   and pledge his solemn truth to she . his solemn lie his solemn lie ! 
 " such love as his could not overleap the bar of rank or the pale of wealth be you listen to I carefully ? or , at any rate , not both of they . if the poor farmer could only have give his winifred 50,000 pound , the peer would have drop his pride , perhaps , so far as to be honest . but farmer in that land be poor , and Mr. Hoyle could give his only child his blessing only . and this he do in London , where his simple mind be all abroad , and he know not church from chapel . he take his daughter for the wife of a lord , and so she take herself , poor thing ! when she be but his concubine . in 1809 such trick be easily play by villain upon young girl so simple . 
 " but he give her attestation and certificate under his own hand ; and her poor father sign it , and see it secure in a costly case , and then go home as proud as need be for the father of a peer , but swear to keep it three year secret , till the king should give consent . such foul lie it be the pride of a lord to tell to a farmer . 
 " you do not exclaim of course you do not . the instinct of your race be in you , because you be legitimate . those of the rob side be in I , because I be of the robbed . I be your father 's eld brother . which be the bad , you proud young womam , the dastard or the bastard ? " 
 " you have wrong , most bitter wrong , " I answer , meet fierce eye mildly ; " but you should remember that I be guiltless of those wrong , and so be my father . and I think that if you talk of birth so , you must know that gentleman speak quietly to lady . " 
 " what concern be that of mine ? a gentleman be some one 's son . I be the son of nobody . but to you I will speak quietly , for the sake of your poor father . and you must listen quietly . I be not famous for sweet temper . well , this great lord take his toy to Paris , where he have she at his mercy . she could not speak a word of French ; she do not know a single soul . in vain she pray he to take she to his english home ; or , if not that , to restore she to her father . not to be too long about it any more than he be a few month be enough for he . he find fault with her manner , with her speech , her dress , she every thing all which he have right , perhaps , to do , but should have use it early . and she , although not bear to the noble privilege of weariness , have be an old man 's darling , and could not put up with harshness . from word they come to bad , until he strike she , tell she of her shame , or rather his own infamy , and leave she among stranger , helpless , penniless , and brokenhearte , to endure the consequence . 
 " there and thus I see the light beneath most noble auspex . but I need not go on with all that . as long as human rule remain , this happy tale will always be repeat with immense applause . my mother 's love be turn to bitter hatred of his lordship , and , when her father die from grief , to eager thirst for vengeance . and for this purpose I be bear . 
 " you see that for a bastard I have be fairly educate ; but not a farthing do his lordship ever pay for that , or even to support his casual . my grandfather Hoyle leave his little all to his daughter Winifred ; and upon that , and my mother 's toil and mine , we have keep alive . lose sight of my mother gladly for she be full of pride , and hop no more to trouble he , after get her father 's property he marry again , or rather he marry for the first time without perjury , which enable the man to escape from it . she be of his own rank as you know the daughter of an earl , and not of a farmer . it would not have be safe to mock she , would it ? and there be no temptation . 
 " the history of my mother and myself do not concern you . such people be of no account until they grow dangerous to the great . we live in cheap place and wander about , care for no one , and care for by the same . Mrs. Hoyle and Thomas Hoyle we call ourselves when we want name ; and I do not even know the story of our wrong till the heat and fury of youth be past . both for her own sake and mine my mother conceal it from I . pride and habit , perhaps , have dull she just desire for vengeance ; and , know what I be , she fear the thing which have befall I . but when I be close upon thirty year old , and my mother eight - and - forty for she be betray in her teen a sudden illness seize she . believe her death to be near , she tell I , as calmly as possible , every thing , with all those large , quiet view of the past , which at such a time seem the regular thing , but make the wrong tenfold blacker . she do not die ; if she have , it might have be well both for she and I , and many other people . be you tired of my tale ? or do you want to hear the rest ? " 
 " you can not be ask I in earnest , " I reply , while I watch his wild eye carefully . " tell I the rest , if you be not afraid . " 
 " Afraid , indeed ! then , for want of that proper tendance and comfort which a few pound would have bring she , although she survive , she survive as a wreck , the mere relic and ruin of her poor unhappy self . I sink my pride for her sake , and even deign to write to he , in rank and wealth so far above I , in every thing else such a clot below my heel . he do the most arrogant thing a snob can do he never answer my letter . 
 " I scrap together a little money , and make my way to England , and come to that house which you now call yours and beard that noble nobleman that father to be so proud of ! he be get on now in year , and grow , perhaps , a little nervous , and my first appearance scar he . he get no obeisance from I , you may be certain , but still I do not revile he . I tell he of my mother 's state of mind , and the great care she require , and demand that , in common justice , he , have bring she to this , should help she . but nothing would he promise , not a sixpence even , in the way of regular allowance . any thing of that sort could only be arrange by mean of his solicitor . he have so expensive a son , with a very large and grow family , that he could not be pledge to any yearly sum . but if I would take a draft for 100 pound , and sign an acquittance in full of all claim , I might have it , upon prove my identity . 
 " what identity have I to prove ? he have take good care of that . I turn my back on he and leave the house , without even ask for his curse , though as precious as a good man 's blessing . 
 " it be a wild and windy night , but with a bright moon rise , and go across this park or whatever it be call I meet my brother . at a crest of the road we meet face to face , with the moon across our forehead . we have never meet till now , nor even hear of one another ; at least he have never hear of I . he start back as if at his own ghost ; but I have nothing to be startle at , in this world or the other . 
 " I make his acquaintance , with deference , of course , and we get on very well together . at one time it seem good luck for he to have illegitimate kindre ; for I save his life when he be tangle in the weed of this river while bath . you owe I no thank . I think twice about it , and if the name would have end with he , I would never have use my basket - knife . by trade I be a basket - maker , like many another ' love - child . ' 
 " however , he be grateful , if ever any body be , for I run some risk in do it ; and he always do his very good for I , and encourage I to visit he . not at his home of course that would never do but when he be with his regiment . short of money as he always be , through his father 's nature and his own , which in some point be the very opposite , he be even desirous to give I some of that ; but I never take a farthing from he . if I have it at all , I would have it from the proper one . and from he I resolve to have it . 
 " how terrified you look ! I be come to it now . be you sure that you can bear it ? it be nothing very harrowing ; but still , young lady " 
 " I feel a little faint , " I could not help say ; " but that be nothing . I must hear the whole of it . please to go on without mind I . " 
 " for my own sake I will not , as well as for your . I can not have you faint , and bring people here . go to the house and take food , and recover your strength , and then come here again . I promise to be here , and your father 's daughter will not take advantage of my kindness . " 
 though his eye be fierce   instead of be sad   and full of strange tempestuous light , they bear some likeness to my father 's , and assert power over I . reluctant as I be , I obey this man , and leave he there , and go slowly to the house , walk as if in a troubled dream . 




 CHAPTER LII 

 for life , DEATH 

 upon my return , I see nothing for a time but fan and feather of brown fern , dark shag of ling , and pod spur of broom and furze , and wisps of grass . with great relief   of which I feel ashamed while even breathe it , I think that the man be afraid to tell the rest of his story , and have flee ; but ere my cowardice have much time for self - congratulation a tall figure rise from the ground , and fear compel I into courage . for throughout this long interview more and more I feel an extremely unpleasant conviction . that stranger might not be a downright madman , nor even what be call a lunatic ; but still it be clear that upon certain point the law of this country , for instance , and the value of rank and station his opinion be so outrageous that his reason must be affect . and , even without such proof as these , his eye and his manner be quite enough . therefore I have need of no small caution , not only concern my word and gesture , but as to my look and even thought , for he seem to divine these last as quickly as they flash across I . I never have learn to conceal my thought , and this first lesson be an awkward one . 
 " I hope you be well , " he say , as kindly as it be possible for he to speak . " now have no fear of I , once more I tell you . I will not sham any admiration , affection , or any thing of that kind ; but as for harm you why , your father be almost the only kind heart I ever meet ! " 
 " then why do you send a most vile man to fetch I , when my father be dead in the desert ? " 
 " I never do any thing of the sort . it be do in my name , but not by I ; I never even hear of it until long after , and I have a score to settle with the man who do it . " 
 " but Mr. Goad tell I himself that you come and say you be the true Lord Castlewood , and order he at once to America . I never see truth more plainly stamp on a new situation the face of a rogue than I see it then on the face of Mr. Goad . " 
 " you be quite right ; he speak the truth to the utmost of his knowledge . I never see Goad , and he never see I . I never even dream of pretend to the title . I be personate by a mean , low friend of Sir Montague Hockin ; base - bear as I be , I would never stoop to such a trick . you will find out the meaning of that by - and - by . I have take the law into my own hand it be the only way to work such law I have commit what be call a crime . but , compare with Sir Montague Hockin , I be white than yonder shearle on his way to the river for his evening drink . " 
 I gaze at his face , and could well believe it . the set sun shine upon his chin and forehead good , resolute , well - mark feature ; his nose and mouth be keen and clear , his cheek curt and pale   though they would have be well for be a trifle clean . there be nothing suggestive of falsehood or fraud , and but for the wildness of the eye and flash of cold ferocity , it might have be call a handsome face . 
 " very well , " he begin again , with one of those jerk which have frighten I , " your father be kind to I , very kind indeed ; but he know the old lord too well to attempt to interpose on my behalf . on the other hand , he give no warning of my manifest resolve ; perhaps he think it a woman 's threat , and I no well than a woman ! and partly for his sake , no doubt , though mainly for my mother 's , I make the short work which I make ; for he be horribly straiten and in his free , light way he tell I so by his hard curmudgeon of a father . 
 " to that man , hopeless as he be , I give fair grace , however , and plenty of opening for repentance . none of they would he embrace , and he think scorn of my lenity . and I might have go on with such weakness long , if I have not hear that his coach - and - four be order for the Moonstock Inn . 
 " that he should dare thus to pollute the spot where he have so forswear himself ! I resolve that there he should pay justice , either with his life or death . and I go to your father 's place to tell he to prepare for disturbance ; but he be go to see his wife , and I simply borrow a pistol . 
 " now you need not be at all afraid nor shrink away from I like that . I be bind upon strict justice than any judge that set forth on circuit ; and I mean to give , and do give , what no judge afford to the guilty the chance of lead a well life . I have bring my mother to England , and she be in a poor place in London ; her mind be fail more and more , and revert to her love - time , the one short happiness of her life . ' if I could but see he , if I could but see he , and show he his tall and clever son , he would forgive I all my sin in think ever to be his wife . oh , Thomas ! I be too young to know it . if I could but see he once , just once ! ' 
 " how all this drive I no tongue can tell . but I never let she know it ; I only say , ' Mother , he shall come and see you if he ever see any body more ! ' and she trust I and be satisfied . she only say , ' take my picture , Thomas , to remind he of the happy time , and his pledge to I inside of it . ' and she give I what she have keep for year in a bag of chamois leather , the case of which I speak before , which even in our hard time she would never send to the pawn - shop . 
 " the rest be simple enough . I swear by the God , or the Devil , who make I , that this black - hearted man should yield either his arrogance or his life . I follow he to the Moon valley , and fate ordain that I should meet he where he forswear himself to my mother ; on that very plank where he have breathe his deadly lie he breathe his last . would you like to hear all about it ? " 
 for answer I only bow my head . his calm , methodical way of tell his tale , like a common adventure with a dog , be more shocking than any fury . 
 " then it be this . I watch he from the Moonstock Inn to a house in the village , where he din with company ; and I do not even know that it be the house of his son , your father so great a gulf be fix between the legitimate and the bastard ! he have cross the wooden bridge in go , and be sure to cross it in come back . how he could tread those plank without contrition and horror but never mind . I resolve to bring he to a quiet parley there , and I wait in the valley . 
 " the night be soft , and dark in patch where the land or wood close in ; and the stream be brown and throw no light , though the moon be on the upland . time and place alike be fit for our little explanation . the path wind down the meadow toward I , and I know that he must come . my firm intention be to spare he , if he give I a chance of it ; but he never have the manner to do that . 
 " here I wait , with the cold leaf flutter around I , until I hear a firm , slow step come down the narrow path . then a figure appear in a stripe of moonlight , and stop , and rest on a staff . perhaps his lordship 's mind go back some five - and - thirty year , to time when he tell pretty story here ; and perhaps he laugh to himself to think how well he have get out of it . whatever his meditation be , I let he have they out , and wait . 
 " if he have even sigh , I might have feel more kindness toward he ; but he only give something between a cough and a grunt , and I clearly hear he say , ' gout to - morrow morning ! what the devil do I drink port - wine for ! ' he strike the ground with his stick and come onward , think far more of his foot than heart . 
 " then , as he plant one foot gingerly on the timber and stay himself , I leap along the bridge and meet he , and without a word look at he . the moon be top the crest of the hill and throw my shadow upon he , the last that ever fall upon his body to its knowledge . 
 " ' Fellow , out of the way ! ' he cry , with a most commanding voice and air , though only too well he know I ; and my wrath against he begin to rise . 
 " ' you pass not here , and you never make another live step on this earth , ' I say , as calmly as now I speak , ' unless you obey my order . ' 
 " he see his peril , but he have courage perhaps his only virtue . ' Fool ! whoever you be , ' he shout , that his voice might fetch he help ; ' none of these moon - strike way with I ! if you want to rob I , try it ! ' 
 " ' you know too well who I be , ' I answer , as he make to push I back . ' Lord Castlewood , here you have the choice to lick the dust , or be dust ! here you forswore yourself ; here you pay for perjury . on this plank you kneel to poor Winifred Hoyle , whom you ruin and cast by ; and now on this plank you shall kneel to her son and swear to obey he or else you die ! ' 
 " in spite of all his pride , he tremble as if I have be Death himself , instead of his own dear eld son . 
 " ' what do you want ! ' as he ask , he lay one hand on the rickety rail and shake it , and the dark old tree behind he shake . ' how much will satisfy you ? ' 
 " ' Miser , none of your money for we ! it be too late for your half crown ! we must have a little of what you have grudge have none to spare your honor . my demand be simple , and only two . my mother be fool enough to yearn for one more sight of your false face ; you will come with I and see she . ' 
 " ' and if I yield to that , what next ? ' 
 " ' the next thing be a trifle to a nobleman like you . here I have , in this blue trinket   false gem and false gold , of course , your solemn signature to a lie . at the foot of that you will have the truth to write , " I be a perjured liar ! " and proudly sign it " Castlewood , " in the presence of two witness . this can not hurt your feeling much , and it need not be expensive . ' 
 " fury flash in his bright old eye , but he strove to check its outbreak . the gleaning of life , after threescore year , be well , in such lordly field , than the whole of the harvest we get . he know that I have he all to myself , to indulge my filial affection . 
 " ' you have be mislead ; you have never hear the truth ; you have only hear your mother 's story . allow I to go back and to sit in a dry place ; I be tired , and no long young ; you be bind to hear my tale as well . I pass a dry stump just now ; I will go back : there be no fear of interruption . ' my lord be talk against time . 
 " ' from this bridge you do not budge until you have go on your knee and swear what I shall dictate to you ; this time it shall be no perjury . here I hold your curse pledge ' 
 " he strike at I , or at the locket no matter which but it fly away . my right arm be cripple by his heavy stick ; but I be leave - handed , as a bastard should be . from my left hand he take his death , and I throw the pistol after he : such love have he earn from his love - child ! " 
 Thomas Castlewood , or Hoyle , or whatever else his name be , here break off from his miserable word , and , forget all about my presence , set his gloomy eye on the ground . lightly he might try to speak , but there be no lightness in his mind , and no spark of light in his poor dead soul . be so young , and unacquainted with the turn of life - wear mind , I be afraid to say a word except to myself , and to myself I only say , " the man be mad , poor fellow ; and no wonder ! " 
 the sun be set , not upon the vast Pacific from desert height , but over the quiet hill and through the soft valley of tame England ; and , different as the whole scene be , a certain other sad and fearful sunset lie before I : the fall of night upon my die father and his helpless child , the hour of anguish and despair ! here at last be the cause of all lay horribly before I ; and the pity deeply move I pass into cold abhorrence . but the man be lose in his own vision . 
 " so in your savage wrath , " I say , " you kill your own father , and in your fright leave mine to bear the brunt of it . " 
 he raise his dark eye heavily , and his thought be far astray from mine . he do not know what I have say , though he know that I have speak . the labor of call to mind and tell his treatment of his father have work upon he so much that he could not freely shift attention . 
 " I come for something , something that can be only have from you , " he say , " and only since your cousin 's death , and something most important . but will you believe I ? it be wholly go , go from mind and memory ! " 
 " I be not surprised at that , " I answer , look at his large wan face , and while I do so , lose half my horror in strange sadness . " whatever it be , I will do it for you ; only let I know by post . " 
 " I see what you mean not to come any more . you be right about that , for certain . but your father be good to I , and I love he , though I have no right to love any one . my letter will show that I wrong he never . the weight of the world be off my mind since I have tell you every thing ; you can send I to the gallow , if you think fit , but leave it till my mother die . good - by , poor child . I have spoil your life , but only by chance consequence , not in murder - birth as I be bear . " 
 before I could answer or call he back , if I even wish to do so , he be far away , with his long , quiet stride ; and , like his life , his shadow fall , chilling , sombre , cast away . 




 CHAPTER LIII 

 BRUNTSEA DEFIANT 

 thus at last by no direct exertion of my own , but by turn after turn of thing to which I blindly give my little help the mystery of my life be solve . many thing yet remain to be fetch up to focus and see round ; but the point of point be settle . 
 of all concern , my father alone stand blameless and heroic . what tear of shame and pride I shed , for ever have doubt he ! not doubt his innocence of the crime itself , but his motif for take it upon he . I have be mean enough to dream that my dear father outraged justice to conceal his own base birth ! 
 that ever such thought should have enter my mind may not make I charitable to the wicked thought of the world at large , but , at any rate , it ought to do so . and the man in question , my own father , who have starve himself to save I ! well have I be the most illegal child ever issue into this cold world , than dare to think so of my father , and then find he the model of every thing . 
 to hide the perjury , avarice , and cowardice of his father , and to appease the bitter wrong , he have even bow to take the dark suspicion on himself , until his wronged and half - sane brother   to whom , moreover , he owe his life   should have time to fly from England . no doubt he blame himself as much as he condemn the wretched criminal , because he have leave his father so long unwarned and so unguarded , and have thoughtlessly use light word about he , which fall not lightly on a stern , distempered mind . hence , perhaps , the exclamation which have tell against he so . 
 and then when he break jail which also tell against he terribly to revisit his shattered home , it be likely enough that he mean after that to declare the truth , and stand his trial as a man should do . but his wife , perhaps , in her poor weak state , could not endure the thought of it , know how often jury be injury , and see all the weight against he . she naturally pledge he to pursue his flight , " for her sake , " until she should be well able to endure his trial , and until he should have more than his own pure word and character to show . and probably if he have then be try , with so many thing against he , and no production of that poor brother , his tale would have seem but a flimsy invention , and " guilty " would have be the verdict . and they could not know that , in such case , the guilty man would have come forward , as we shall see that he mean to do . 
 when my father hear of his dear wife 's death , and believe , no doubt , that I be bury with the rest , the gloom of a broken and fated man , like polar night , settle down on he . what matter to he about public opinion or any thing else in the world just now ? the sin of his father be on his head ; let they rest there , rather than be trumpet by he . he have nothing to care for ; let he wander about . and so he do for several year , until I become a treasure to he for parental be not intrinsic value and then , for my sake , as now appear , he betake we both to a large kind land . 
 revolve these thing sadly , and a great many more which need not be tell , I think it my duty to go as soon as possible to Bruntsea , and tell my good and faithful friend what I be loath to write about . there , moreover , I could obtain what I want to confirm I the opinion of an upright , law - abide , honorable man about the course I propose to take . and there I might hear something more as to a thing which have trouble I much in the deep of my own trouble the melancholy plight of dear Uncle Sam . Wild , and absurd as it may appear to people of no gratitude , my heart be set upon fare forth in search of the noble Sawyer , if only it could be reconcile with my duty here in England . that such a proceeding would avail but little , seem now , alas ! too manifest ; but a plea of that kind generally mean that we have no mind to do a thing . 
 be that as it will , I make what my dear Yankees to use the Major 's impertinent phrase call ' straight track " for that ancient and obsolete town , rejuvenize now by its Signor . the cause of my good friend 's silence not to use that affected word " reticence " be quite unknown to I , and disturb my spirit with futile guess . 
 Resolute , therefore , to pierce the bottom of every survive mystery , I make claim upon " Mr. Stixon , junior " as " Stixon 's boy " have now vindicate his right to be call , up to supper - time and he with high chivalry respond . not yet be he wed to Miss Polly Hopkins , the daughter of the pickle - pork man ; otherwise would he or could he have make telegraphic blush at the word " Bruntsea ? " and would he have be quite so eager to come ? 
 such thing be trifle , compare to our own , which naturally fill the universe . I be bind to be a great lady now , and patronize and regulate and drill all the doing of nature . so I durst not even ask , though desire much to do so , how young Mr. Stixon be get on with his delightful polly . and his father , as soon as he find I turn into the mistress , and " his lady "   as he would have I call thenceforth , whether or no on my part , not another word would he tell I of the household sentiment , politic , or romance . it would have be think a thing beneath I to put any nice little question now , and I be oblige to take up the tone which other use toward I . but all the while I long for freedom , Uncle Sam , Suan Isco , and even Martin of the Mill . 
 Law business , however , and other hinderance , keep I from start at once for Bruntsea , impatient as I be to do so . indeed , it be not until the morning of the last Saturday in November that I be able to get away . the weather have turn to much rain , I remember , with two or three tempestuous night , and the wood be almost bare of leaf , and the Thames look brown and violent . 
 in the fly from Newport to Bruntsea I hear great roller thunder heavily upon the steep bar of shingle , and such a lake of water shine in the old bed of the river that I quite believe at first that the Major have carry out his grand idea , and bring the river back again . but the flyman shake his head , and look very serious , and tell I that he fear bad time be come . what I see be the work of the Lord in heaven , and no man could prevail against it . he have always say , though no concern of his for he belong to Newport that even a british officer could not fly in the face of the Almighty . he himself have a brother on the work , regular employ , and draw good money , and proud enough about it ; and the time he have tell he across a pint of ale howsomever , our place be to hope for the good ; but the top of the spring be not come yet , and a pilot out of Newport tell he the water be make uncommon strong ; but he do hope the wind have nigh blow itself out ; if not , they would have to look bless sharp tomorrow . he have hear say that in time of Queen Elizabeth sixscore of house be wash clean away , and the river itself knock right into the sea ; and a thing as have be once might just come to pass again , though folk be all so clever now they think they wor above it . but , for all that , their grandfather ' goggle might fit they . but here we be in Bruntsea town , and , bless his old eye yes ! if I please to look along his whip , I might see ancient pilot come , he do believe , to warn of they ! 
 follow his guidance , I descry a stout old man , in a sailor 's dress , weather - proof hat , and long boot , stand on a low seawall , and hold vehement converse with some Bruntsea boatman and fisherman who be sprawl on the stone as usual . 
 " Driver , you know he . take the low road , " I say , " and ask what his opinion be . " 
 " no need to ask he , " the flyman answer ; " old bank would never be here , miss , if he be of two opinion . he hath come to fetch his daughter out of harm , I doubt , the wife of that there Bishop Jim , they call he the chap with two nail to his thumb , you know . would you like to hear how they all take it , miss ? " 
 with these word he turn to the right , and drive into Major Hockin 's " Sea Parade . " there we stop to hear what be go on , and it prove to be well worth our attention . the old pilot perhaps have exhausted reason , and now be begin to give way to wrath . the afternoon be deepen fast , with heavy gray cloud lower , show no definite edge , but streak with hazy line , and spot by some little murky blur or blot , like tar pot , carry slowly . 
 " Hath Noah 's Ark ever tell a lie ? " the ancient pilot shout , point with one hand at these , and with a clinch fist at the sea , whence come puff of sullen air , and turn his gray lock backward . " Mackerel sky when the sun get up , mermaiden 's egg at noon , and now afore sunset Noah 's Arks ! any of they breweth a gale of wind , and the three of they bode a temp . and the top of the spring of the year to - morrow . be ye daft , or all go upon the spree , my man ? your father would ' a know what the new moon mean . be this all that cometh out of larn to read ? " 
 " have a pinch of ' bacco , old man , " say one , " to help you off with that stiff reel . what consarn can he be of yourn ? " 
 " do not   you be put out , mate , " cry another . " never come sea as could top that bar , and never will in our time . go and calk your old leaky craft , Master Banks . " 
 " we have ride out a good many gale without seek prophet from Newport a place never heerd on when this old town be make . " 
 " come and wet your old whistle at the ' Hockin Arms , ' bank . you must want it , after that long pipe . " 
 " ' Hockin Arms , ' indeed ! " the pilot answer , turn away in a rage from they . " what Hockin arm will there be this time to - morrow ? Hockin leg want , more likely , and Hockin wing . and you poor grinning ninny , as ought to have four leg , ye'll be pray that ye have they to - morrow . however , ye've   have warning , and ye can not   blame I . the power of the Lord be in the air and sea . be this the sort of stuff ye trust in ? " 
 he set one foot against our Major 's wall an action scarcely honest while it be so green and , come from a hale and very thickset man , the contemptuous push send a fathom of it outward . rattle , rattle go the new patent concrete , start up the lazy - pat fellow down below . 
 " you will try the wall of a jail , " cry one . " you go to Noah 's Ark , " shout another . the rest bid he go to a place much bad ; but he button his jacket in disdain , and march away , without spoil the effect by any more weak word . 
 " right you be , " cry my flyman " right you be , Master Banks . they lubber will sing another song to - morrow . Gee up , old hoss , then ! " 
 all this , and the ominous scowl of the sky and menacing roar of the sea   already crowd with black roller , disturb I so that I could say nothing , until , at the corner of the grand new hotel , we meet Major Hockin himself , attire in a workman 's loose jacket , and carry a shovel . he be cover with mud and dry flake of froth , and even his short white whisker be incrust with sparkle of brine ; but his face be ruddy and smile , and his manner as hearty as ever . 
 " you here , Erema ! oh , I beg pardon Baroness Castlewood , if you please . my dear , again I congratulate you . " 
 " you have as little cause to do that as I fear I can find in your case . you have no news for I from America ? how sad ! but what a poor plight you yourself be in ! " 
 " not a bit of it . at first sight you might think so ; and we certainly have have a very busy time . send back the fly . leave your bag at our hotel . Porter , be quick with Lady Castlewood 's luggage . one piece of luck befall I to receive so often this beautiful hand . what a lot of young fellow now would die of envy " 
 " I be glad that you still can talk nonsense , " I say ; " for I truly be frighten at this great lake , and so many of your house even stand in the water . " 
 " it will do they good . it will settle the foundation and crystallize the mortar . they will look twice as well when they come out again , and never have rat or black beetle . we be foolish enough to be frighten at first ; and there may have be danger a fortnight ago . but since that tide we have work day and night , and every thing be now so stable that fear be simply ridiculous . on the whole , it have be a most excellent thing quite the making , in fact , of Bruntsea . " 
 " then Bruntsea must be make of water , " I reply , gaze sadly at the gulf which part we from the Sea Parade , the Lyceum , and Baths , the Bastion Promenade , and so on ; beyond all which the streaky turmoil and misty scud of the wave be see . 
 " make of beer , more likely , " he retort , with a laugh . " if my fellow work like horse which they do they also drink like fish . their mouth be so dry with the pickle , they say . but the total abstainer be the bad , be out of practice with the can . however , let we make no complaint . we ought to be truly thankful ; and I shall miss the exercise . that be why you have hear so little from I . you see the position at a glance . I have never be to Paris at all , Erema . I have not rub up my parleywoo , with a blast from Mr. Bellows . I be stop by a telegram about this job acrior illum . I have some Latin once , quite enough for the House of Commons , but it all ooze out at my elbow ; and to lady   by some superstition   it be rude though they treat we to bad french enough . never mind . what I want to say be this , that I have do nothing , but respect your sad trouble ; for you take a wild fancy to that poor bedridden , who never do you a stroke of good except about Cosmopolitan Jack , and whose removal have come at the very nick of time . for what could you have do for money , with the Yankees cut each other 's throat , and your nugget quite sure to be annex , or , at the very good , square up in greenback ? " 
 " you ought not to speak so , Major Hockin . if all your plan be not under water , I should be quite put out with you . my cousin be not bedridden ; neither be he at all incapable , as you have call he once or twice . he be an infinitely superior man to to what one generally see ; and when you have hear what I have to tell , in his place you would have do just as he do . and as for money , and ' happy release ' as the people who never want it for themselves express it such word simply sicken I ; at great time they be so sordid . " 
 " what be there in this world that be not sordid to the young in one sense , and to the old in another ? " 
 Major Hockin so seldom speak in this didactic way , and I be so unable to make it out , that , have expect some tiff on his part at my juvenile arrogance , I be just in the mould for a deep impression from sudden stamp of philosophy . I have nothing to say in reply , and he go up in my opinion greatly . 
 he know it ; and he say , with touching kindness , " Erema , come and see your dear aunt Mary . she have have an attack of rheumatic gout in her thimble - finger , and her maid have worry she out of her life , and by far the most brilliant of her cock   worth 20 pound they tell I   breathe his last on Sunday night , with gape , or croup , or something . this be why you have not hear again from she . I have be in the trench day and night , stone out the sea with his own stone , by a new form of concrete discover by myself . and unless I be very much mistaken in fact , I do not hesitate to say but such thing be not in your line at all . let we go up to the house . our job be do , and I think Master Neptune may pound away in vain . I have get a new range in the kitchen now , partly of my own invention ; you can roast , or bake , or steam , or stew , or frizzle kabob all by turn a screw . and not only that , but you can keep thing hot , pip hot , and ripen , as it be , well than when they first be do . instead of any burned iron taste , or scum on the gravy , or clottiness , they mellow by wait , and make their own sauce . if I ever have time I shall patent this invention ; why , you may burn brick - dust in it , bath - brick , hearth - stone , or potsherd ! at any hour of the day or night , while the sea be in this condition , I may want my dinner ; and there we have it . we say grace immediately , and down we sit . let we take it by surprise , if it can be take so . up through my chief drive , instanter ! I think that I scarcely ever feel more hungry . the thought of that range always set I off . and one of its countless beauty be the noble juicy fragrance . " 
 Major Hockin certainly possess the art so meritorious in a host of make people hungry ; and we mount the hill with alacrity , after pass his letter - box , which remind I of the mysterious lady . he point to " Desolate Hole , " as he call it , and say that he believe she be there still , though she never come out now to watch their house . and a man of dark and repel aspect have be see once or twice by his workman , during the time of their night relay , rapidly walk toward Desolate Hole . how any one could live in such a place , with the roar and the spray of the sea , as it have be , at the very door , and through the window , some people might understand , but not the Major . 
 Good Mrs. Hockin receive I with her usual warmth and kindness , and scold I for have fail to write more to she , as all people seem to do when conscious of have neglect that duty themselves . then she show I her thimble - finger , which certainly be a little swollen ; and then she pour forth her gratitude for her many blessing , as she always do after any little piece of grumble . and I tell she that if at her age I be only a quarter as pleasant and sweet of temper , I should consider myself a blessing to any man . 
 after dinner my host produce the locket , which he have keep for the purpose of show it to the artist 's son in Paris , and which he admire so intensely that I wish it be mine to bestow on he . then I tell he that , through a thing wholly unexpected the confession of the criminal himself no journey to Paris be needful now . I repeat that strange and gloomy tale , to the loud accompaniment of a rise wind and roar sea , while both my friend listen intently . 
 " now what can have lead he so to come to you ? " they ask ; " and what do you mean to do about it ? " 
 " he come to I , no doubt , to propose some bargain , which could not be make in my cousin 's lifetime . but the telling of his tale make he feel so strange that he really could not remember what it be . as to what I be to do , I must beg for your opinion ; such a case be beyond my decision . " Mrs. Hockin begin to reply , but stop , look dutifully at her lord . 
 " there be no doubt what you be bind to do , at least in one way , " the Major say . " you be a british subject , I suppose , and you must obey the law of the country . a man have confess to you a murder no matter whether it be commit twenty year ago or two minute ; no matter whether it be a savage , cold - blooded , premeditated crime , or whether there be thing to palliate it . your course be the same ; you must hand he over . in fact , you ought never to have let he go . " 
 " how could I help it ? " I plead , with surprise . " it be impossible for I to hold he . " 
 " then you should have shoot he with his own pistol . he offer it to you . you should have grasp it , point it at his heart , and tell he that he be a dead man if he stir . " 
 " Aunt Mary , would you have do that ? " I ask . " it be so easy to talk of fine thing ! but in the first place , I have no wish to stop he ; and in the next , I could not if I have . " 
 " my dear , " Mrs. Hockin reply , perceive my distress at this view of the subject , " I should have do exactly what you do . if the law of this country ordain that woman be to carry they out against great strong man , who , after all , have be sadly injure , why , it prove that woman ought to make the law , which to my mind be simply ridiculous . " 




 CHAPTER LIV 

 BRUNTSEA DEFEATED 

 little sleep have I that night . such conflict be in my mind about the proper thing to be do next , and such a war of the wind outside , above and between the distant uproar of the long tumultuous sea . of that sound much be intercept by the dead bulk of the cliff , but the wind swing fiercely over this , and rattle through all shelter . in the morning the storm be furious ; but the Major declare that his weather - glass have turn , which prove that the gale be break . the top of the tide would be at one o'clock , and after church we should behold a sight he be rather proud of the impotent wrath of the wind and tide against his patent concrete . 
 " my dear , I scarcely like such talk , " Mrs. Hockin gently interpose . " to I it seem almost defiant of the power of the Lord . remember what happen to poor Smeaton at least I think his name be Smeaton , or Stanley , be it ? but I dare say you know well . he defy the strength of the Lord , like the people at the mouth of their tent , and he be swallow up . " 
 " Mary , my dear , get your prayer - book . Rasper 's fly be wait for we , and the parson have no manner . when he drop off , I present to the living ; and I be not at all sure that I shall let George have it . he be fond of procession , and all that stuff . the only procession in the Church of England be that of the lord of the manor to his pew . I will be the master in my own church . " 
 " of course , dear , of course ; so you ought to be . it always be so in my father 's parish . but you must not speak so of our poor George . he may be ' high - church , ' as they call it ; but he know what be due to his family , and he have a large one come . " 
 we set off hastily for the church , through blast of rain and buffet of wind , which threaten to overturn the cab , and the seaward window be white , as in a snowstorm , with pellet of froth , and the drift of sea - scud . I try to look out , but the blur and the dash obscure the sight of every thing . and though in this low road we be partly shelter by the pebble ridge , the driver be several time oblige to pull his poor horse up and face the wind , for fear of our be blow over . 
 that ancient church , with its red - tile spire , stand well up in the good old town , at the head of a street whose principal object now certainly be to lead to it . three hundred year ago that street have business of its own to think of , and be brave perhaps with fine man and maid at the time of the spanish Armada . its only bravery now be the good old church , and some queer gable , and a crypt   which be true to itself by be bury up to the spandrel , and one or two corner where saint use to stand , until they be pelt out of they , and where fisher - like man , in the lodge season , stand sell fish catch at Billingsgate . but to Bruntsea itself the great glory of that street be rather of hope than of memory . Bailiff Hopkins have take out three latticed window , and put in one grand one of plate - glass , with " finish " blind all varnish . and even on a Sunday morning Bruntsea want to know what ever the bailiff be at behind they . some say that he do all his pickling on a Sunday ; and by put up ' spectacle glass " he have challenge the old inhabitant to come and try his focus . 
 despite all the rattle and roar of the wind , we go on in church as usual . the vicar have a stout young curate from Durham , who could outshout any temp , with a good stone wall between they ; and the Bruntsea folk be of thick constitution than to care an old hat for the weather . whatever be ' send by the Lord " they take with a grumble , but no excitement . the clock in front of the gallery tell the time of the day as five minute to twelve , when the vicar , a pleasant old - fashioned man , pronounce his text , which he always do thrice over to make we sure of it . and then he hitch up his old black gown , and direct his gaze at the lord of the manor , to impress the whole church with authority . Major Hockin acknowledge in a proper manner this courtesy of the minister by rub up his crest , and look even more wide - awake than usual ; whereas Aunt Mary , whose kind heart long to see her own son in that pulpit , calmly settle back her shoulder , and arrange her head and eye so well as to seem at a distance in rapt attention , while have a nice little dream of her own . but suddenly all be break up . the sexton   whose license as warden of the church , and even whose duty it be to hear the sermon only fitfully , from the tower arch , where he watch the boy , and sniff the bakehouse of his own dinner   to the consternation of every body , this faithful man run up the nave , with his hand above his head , and shout , 
 " all Brownzee be awash , awash " sound it so as to rhyme with " lash " " the zea , the zea be all over we ! " 
 the clergyman in the pulpit turn and look through a window behind he , while all the congregation rise . 
 " it be too true , " the preacher cry ; " the sea be in over the bank , my friend . every man must rush to his own home . the blessing of the Lord be on you through his fearful visitation ! " 
 he have no time to say more ; and we think it very brave of he to say that , for his own house be in the low village , and there he have a wife and child sick . in half a minute the church be empty , and the street below it full of people , strive and struggle against the blast , and breast it at an incline like swimmer , but beat back ever and anon and hurl against one another , with tattered umbrella , hat go , and bonnet hang . and among they , like gull before the wind , blow dollop of spray and chunk of froth , with every now and then a slate or pantile . 
 all this be so bad that scarcely any body find power to speak , or think , or see . the Major do his very good to lead we , but could by no mean manage it . and I scream into his sound ear to pull Aunt Mary into some dry house for she could not face such buffeting and to let I fare for myself as I might . so we leave Mrs. Hockin in the bailiff 's house , though she want sadly to come with we , and on we go to behold the bad . and thus , by run the bye of the wind , and craftily hug the corner , we get to the foot of the street at last , and then could go no far . 
 for here be the very sea itself , with furious billow pant . before we roll and run a fearful surf of crested whiteness , tear by the screeching squall , and toss in clash tuft and pinnacle . and into these came , sweep over the shattered chine of shingle , gigantic surge from the outer deep , tower as they cross the bar , and comb against the sky - line , then rush onward , and drive the huddle of the ponde wave before they . 
 the tide be yet rise , and at every blow the wreck and the havoc grow bad and bad . that long sweep of brick - work , the " Grand Promenade , " bow and bulge , with wall and window knuckle in and out , like wattle ; the " Sea Parade " be a parade of sea ; and a bathing - machine wheel upward lay , like a wreck Noah 's Ark , on the top of the " Saline - Silico - Calcareous Baths . " 
 the Major stand by I , while all his construction " go by the board , " as they say at sea ; and verily every thing be at sea . I grieve for he so that it be not the spray alone that put salt drop on my cheek . and I could not bear to turn and look at his good old weather - beat face . but he be not the man to brood upon his woe in silence . he might have use nice language , perhaps , but his inner sense be manful . 
 " I do not   care a damn , " he shout , so that all the woman hear he . " I can only say I be devilish glad that I never let one of those house . " 
 there be a little band of seaman , under the shelter of a garden wall , crouch , or sitting , or stand   or whatever may be the attitude , acquire by much voyaging and experience of bad weather , which can not be solve , as to centre of gravity , even by the man who do it , and these man be so take with the Major 's manifesto , clinch at once and clarify to they by strong , short language , that they give he a loud " hurrah , " which fly on the wing of the wind over house - top . so queer and sound be english feeling that now Major Hockin become in truth what hitherto he be in title only the lord and master of Bruntsea . 
 " a boat ! a boat ! " he call out again . " we know not who be drown . the bank still break the wave ; a stout boat surely could live inside it . " 
 " yes , a boat could live well enough in this cockle , though never among they breaker , " old Barnes , the fisherman , answer , who use to take we out for whiting ; " but Lord bless your honor , all the boat be thump to piece , except yonner one , and who can get at she ? " 
 before restore his hand to their proper dwelling - place his pocket he jerk his thumb toward a long white boat , which we have not see through the blind scud . bereft of its brother , or sister for all fluctuate thing be feminine that boat survive , in virtue of stand a few foot high than the rest . but even so , and mount on the last hump of the pebble ridge , it be roll and reel with stress of the wind and the wash of wild water under it . 
 " how nobly our Lyceum stand ! " the Major shout , for any thing less than a shout be dumb . " this be the time to try institution . I be proud of my foundation . " 
 in answer to his word appear a huge brown surge , a mountain ridge , seethe backward at the crest with the spread and weight of onset . this great wave smite all other wave away , or else embody they , and gather its height against the poor wear pebble bank , and descend . a roar distinct above the universal roar proclaim it ; a crash of conflict shake the earth , and the shattered bank be swallow in a world of leap whiteness . when this wild mass dash onward into the swell flood before we , there be no sign of Lyceum leave , but stub of foundation , and a mangle roof roll over and over , like a hen - coop . 
 " well , that beat every thing I ever see , " exclaim the gallant Major . " what noble timber ! what mortise - work ! no London scamp there , my lad . but what come here ? why , the very thing we want ! barne , look alive , my man . run to your house , and get a pair of oar and a bucket . " 
 it be the boat , the last survive boat of all that hail from Bruntsea . that monstrous billow have toss it up like a school - boy 's kite , and drop it whole , with an upright keel , in the inland sea , though nearly half full of water . drive on by wind and wave , it labor heavily toward we ; and more than once it seem certain to sink as it broach to and ship sea again . but half a dozen bold fisherman rush with a rope into the short angry surf to which the poll shingle bank still act as a powerful breakwater , else all Bruntsea have collapse and they haul up the boat with a hearty cheer , and run she up straight with , " yo heave oh ! " and turn she on her side to drain , and then launch she again , with a bucket and a man to bail out the rest of the water , and a pair of heavy oar bring down by Barnes , and nobody know what other thing . 
 " naught to steer with . rudder go ! " cry one of the man , as the furious gale drive the boat , athwart the street , back again . 
 " want another oar , " say Barnes . " what a fool I be to bring only two ! " 
 " here you be ! " shout Major Hockin . " one of you help I to pull up this pole . " 
 through a shattered gate they wad into a little garden , which have be the pride of the season at Bruntsea ; and there from the ground they tear up a pole , with a board at the top nail across it , and the follow not rare legend : " lodging to let . inquire within . first floor front , and back parlor . " 
 " fust - rate thing to steer with ! would never have believe you have the sense ! " so shout Barnes a rough man , roughen by the stress of storm and fright . " get into starn - sheet if so liketh . ye know , ye may be useful . " 
 " I defy you to push off without my sanction . useful , indeed ! I be the captain of this boat . all the ground under it be mine . do you think , you set of salt radical , that I mean to let you go without I ? and all among my own house ! " 
 " look sharp , governor , if you have the pluck , then . mind , we be more like to be swamp than not . " 
 as the boat swing about , Major Hockin jump in , and so , on the spur of the moment , do I. we stagger all about with the heave and roll , and both would have fall on the plank , or out over , if we have not tumble , with opposite impetus , into the arm of each other . then a great wave burst and soak we both , and we fall into sit on a slippery seat . 
 meanwhile two man be tug at each oar , and Barnes himself steer with the sign - board ; and the head of the boat be keep against the wind and the billow from our breakwater . some of these seem resolve   though shorn of depth and height in cross   to rush all over we and drown we in the washer - woman 's dry ground . by skill and presence of mind , our captain , Barnes , foil all their violence , till we get a little shelter from the ruin of the " Young Men 's Christian Institute . " 
 " hold all ! " cry Barnes ; " only keep her head up , while I look about what there be to do . " 
 the sight be a thing to remember ; and be on the well side now of the scud , because it be fly away from we , we could make out a great deal more of the trouble which have befall Bruntsea . the stormy fiord which have usurp the ancient track of the river be about a furlong in width , and troughe with white wave vault over . and the sea rush through at the bottom as well , through score of yard of pebble , as it do in quiet weather even , when the tide be brim . we in the tossing boat , with her head to the inrush of the outer sea , be just like people sit upon the float or raft of a furious weir ; and if any such surge have top the ridge as the one which fling our boat to we , there could be no doubt that we must go down as badly as the Major 's house . however , we hop for the good , and gaze at the desolation inland . 
 not only the Major 's great plan , but all the low line of old Bruntsea , be knock to piece , and lose to knowledge in freak of wind - lash water . man and woman be run about with favorite bit of furniture , or feather - bed , or baby ' cradle , or whatever they have catch hold of . the butt end of the three old street that lead down toward the sea - ground be dip , as if play seesaw in the surf , and the storm make gangway of they and lighthouse of the lamp - post . the old public - house at the corner be down , and the wave leap in at the post - office door , and wreck the globe of the chemist . 
 " Drift and dash , and roar and rush , and the devil let loose in the thick of it . my eye be wear out with it . take the glass , Erema , and tell we who be next to be wash away . a new set of clothe - prop for Mrs. Mangles I pay for the very day I come back from town . " 
 with these word , the lord of the submarine manor   whose strength of spirit amaze I   offer his pet binocular , which he never go without upon his own domain . and fisherman Barnes , as we rise and fall , once more save we from be ' swamp " by his clever way of paddle through a scallop in the stern , with the board about the first floor front to let . 
 the seaman , just keep way on the boat , shelter their eye with their left hand , and fix they on the tumultuous scene . 
 I also gaze through the double glass , which be a very clear one ; but none of we see any human being at present in any peril . 
 " old pilot be right , after all , " say one ; " but what a good job as it come o ' middle day , and good of all of a Sunday ! " 
 " I have heere say , " reply another , " that the like thing come to pass nigh upon three hunder year agone . how do you get your thing out , Jem Bishop ? " 
 Jem , the only one of they whose house be in the havoc , regard with a sailor 's calmness the entry of the sea through his bedroom window , and be go to favor we with a narrative , when one of his mate exclaim , 
 " what do I see yonner , lad ? away beyond town altogether . seemeth to I like a fellow swimming . Miss , will you lend I spy - glass ? never seed a double - barrel one before . can use he with one eye shut , I s'pose ? " 
 " no good that way , Joe , " cry Barnes , with a wink of superior knowledge , for he often have use this binocular . " shut one eye for one barrel stand to reason , then , you shut both for two , my son . " 
 " stow that , " say the quick - eyed sailor , as he bring the glass to bear in a moment . " it be a man in the water , lad , and swim to save the witch , I do believe . " 
 " bless I ! " cry the Major ; " how stupid of we ! I never think once of that poor woman . she must be wash out long ago . pull for your life , my friend . a guinea apiece if you save she . " 
 " and another from I , " I cry . whereupon the boat sweep round , and the tough ash bent , and we rush into no small danger . for nearly half a mile have we to pass of rag and boisterous water , almost as wild as the open sea itself at the breach of the pebble ridge . and the risk of a heavy sea boarding we be fearfully multiply by have thus to cross the storm instead of breast it . useless and helpless , and only in the way , and batter about by wind and sea , so that my Sunday dress be become a drag , what folly , what fatuity , what frenzy , I might call it , could ever have lead I to jump into that boat ? " I do not   know . I only know that I always do it , " say my sensible self to its mad sister , as they both shut their eye at a great white wave . " if I possibly survive , I will try to know well . but ever from my childhood I be get into scrape . " 
 the boat labor on , with a good many grunt , but not a word from any one . More than once we be oblige to fetch up as a great billow top the poor shingle bank ; and we take so much water on board that the man say afterward that I save they . I only remember sit down and work at the bucket with both hand , till much of the skin be go , and my arm and many other place ache . but what be that to be compare with drowning ? 
 at length we be opposite " Desolate Hole , " which be a hole no long , but fill and flood with the churn whirl and reckless dominance of water . tuft and tussock of shatter brush and rolling wreck play round it , and the old gray stone of mullione window split the wash like mooring - post . we pass and gaze ; but the only sound be the whistling of the temp , and the only live sight a sea - gull , weary of his wing , and drown . 
 " no living creature can be there , " the Major break our long silence . " Land , my friend , if land we may . we risk our own life for nothing . " 
 the man lie back on their oar to fetch the gallant boat to the wind again , when through a great gap in the ruin they see a sight that startle manhood . at the back of that ruin , on the landward side , on a wall which , totter under they , there be two figure stand . one a tall man , urge on , the other a woman shrink . at a glance , or with a thought , I know they both . one be Lord Castlewood 's first love , the other his son and murderer . 
 our man shout with the whole power of their heart to tell that miserable pair to wait till succor should be bring to they . and the Major stand up and wave his hat , and in do so tumble back again . I can not tell how could I tell in the thick of it ? but an idea or a flit of fancy touch I   and afterward become conviction   that while the man hear we not at all , and have no knowledge of we , his mother turn round and see we all , and face the storm in preference . 
 whatever the cause may have be , at least she suddenly change her attitude . the man have be point to the roof , which threaten to fall in a mass upon they , while she have be shudder back from the depth of eddying wave below she . but now she draw up her poor bent figure , and lean on her son to obey he . 
 our boat , with strong arm labor for life , sweep round the old gable of the ruin ; but we be compel to " give it wide berth , " as Captain Barnes shout ; and then a black squall of terrific wind and hail burst forth . we bow our head and draw our body to their tight compass , and every rib of our boat vibrate as a violin do ; and the oar be beat flat , and dash their drip into fringe like a small - toothed comb . 
 that great squall be either a whirlwind or the crown blast of a hurricane . it beat the high wave hollow , as if it fall from the sky upon they ; and it snap off one of our oar at the hilt , so that two of our man roll backward . and when we be able to look about again the whole roof of " Desolate Hole " be go , and little of the wall leave stand . and how we should guide our course , or even save our life , we know not . 
 we be compel to bring up as good we might with the boat 's head to the sea , and so to keep it by use the steering gear against the survive oar . as for the people we be come to save , there be no chance whatever of approach they . even without the mishap to the oar , we never could have reach they . 
 and indeed when first we see they again they seem well off than ourselves be . for they be not far from dry land , and the man   a skillful and powerful swimmer   have a short piece of plank , which he know how to use to support his weak companion . 
 " brave fellow ! fine fellow ! " the Major cry , little know whom he be admire . " see how he keep up his presence of mind ! such a man as that be worth any thing . and he care more for she than he do for himself . he shall have the Society 's medal . one more long and strong stroke , my noble friend . oh , great God ! what have befall he ? " 
 in horror and pity we gaze . the man have be dash against something headlong . he whirl round and round in white water , his leg be throw up , and we see no more of he . the woman cast off the plank , and toss her helpless arm in search of he . a shriek , ring far on the billowy shore , declare that she have lose he ; and then , without a struggle , she clasp her hand , and the merciless water swallow she . 
 " it be all over , " cry Major Hockin , lift his drenched hat solemnly . " the Lord knoweth well . he have take they home . " 




 CHAPTER LV 

 a dead letter 

 with that great tornado , the wind take a leap of more point of the compass than I can tell . barne , the fisherman , say how many ; but I might be quite wrong in repeat it . one thing , at any rate , be within my compass it have be blow to the top of its capacity , direct from the sea , but now it begin to blow quite as hard along the shore . this rough ingratitude of wind to wave , which have follow each breath of its order , produce extraordinary passion , and rake they into pointed wind - cock . 
 " Captain , we can not   live this out , " cry Barnes ; " we must run she ashore at once ; tide have turn ; we might be blow out to sea , with one oar , and then the Lord himself could not   save we . " 
 cripple as we be , we contrive to get into a creek , or backwater , near the Major 's gate . here the man run the boat up , and we all climb out , stiff , battered , and terrify , but do our good to be most truly thankful . 
 " go home , Captain , as fast as you can , and take the young lady along of you , " say Mr. Barnes , as we stand and gaze at the weltering breadth of disaster . " we be bear to the drip , but not you , Sir ; and you be not so young as you be , you know . " 
 " I be young than ever I be , " the lord of the manor answer , sternly , yet glance back to make sure of no interruption from his well half who have not even hear of his danger . " none of that nonsense to I , Barnes . you know your position , and I know mine . on board of that boat you take the lead , and that may have mislead you . I be very much oblige to you , I be sure , for all your skill and courage , which have save the life of all of we . but on land you will just obey I . " 
 " sartinly , Captain . what be your order ? " 
 " nothing at all . I give no order . I only make suggestion . but if your experience see a way to recover those two poor body , let we try it at once at once , Barnes . Erema , run home . this be no scene for you . and tell Margaret to put on the double - bottomed boiler , with the stock she make on Friday , and a peck of patent pease . there be nothing to beat pea soup ; and truly one never know what may happen . " 
 this be only too evident now , and nobody disobey he . 
 run up his " drive " to deliver that message , at one of the many bend I see people from Bruntsea hurry along a footpath through the dairy - farm . while the flood continue this be their only way to meet the boat 's crew . on the step of " Smuggler 's Castle "   as Bruntlands House be still call by the wicked   I turn again , and the new sea - line be fringe with active searcher . I know what they be look for , but , scar and drench and shiver as I be , no more would I go near they . my duty be rather to go in and comfort dear Aunt Mary and myself . in that melancholy quest I could do no good , but a great deal of harm , perhaps , if any thing be find , by break forth about it . 
 Mrs. Hockin have not the least idea of the danger we have encounter . Bailiff Hopkins have send her home in Rasper 's fly by an inland road , and she keep a good scolding quite ready for her husband , to distract his mind from disaster . that trouble have happen she could not look out of her window without know ; but could it be right , at their time of life , to stand in the wet so , and challenge providence , and spoil the first turkey - poult of the season ? 
 but when she hear of her husband 's peril , in the midst of all his loss , his self - command , and noble impulse first of all to rescue life , she burst into tear , and hug and kiss I , and say the same thing nearly fifty time . 
 " just like he . just like my Nicholas . you think he a speculative , selfish man . now you see your mistake , Erema . " 
 when her veteran husband come home at last   thoroughly jade , and bring his fisherman to gulp the pea soup and to gollop the turkey , a small share of mind , but a large one of heart , be require to imagine her doing . enough that the Major keep say , " Pooh - pooh ! " and the more he say , the less he get of it . 
 when feeling calm down , and we return to fact , our host and hero   who , in plain truth , have not so wholly eclipse I in courage , though of course I expect no praise , and get none , for people hate courage in a lady , to put it more simply , the Major himself , make a considerable fuss , as usual for to my mind he never could be Uncle Sam produce from the case of his little " Church Service , " to which he have stick like a Briton , a sealed and stamp letter , address to I at Castlewood , in Berkshire ' stamp , " not with any post - office tool , but merely with the red thing which pay the english post . 
 Sodden and blur as the writing be , I know the clear , firm hand , the same which on the envelope at Shoxford have tempt I to meanness . this letter be from Thomas Hoyle ; the Major have take it from the pocket of his corpse ; all doubt about his death be go . when he feel his foot on the very shore , and turn to support his mother , a violent wave strike the back of his head upon Major Hockin 's pillar - box . 
 such sadness come into my heart though sternly it should have be gladness that I beg their pardon , and go away , as if with a private message . and wicked as it may have be , to read be more than once to cry . the letter begin abruptly : 
 " you know nearly all my story now . I have only to tell you what bring I to you , and what my present offer be . but to make it clear , I must enlarge a little . 
 " there be no compact of any kind between your father and myself . he forbear at first to tell what he must have know , partly , perhaps , to secure my escape , and partly for other reason . if he have be bring to trial , his duty to his family and himself would have lead he , no doubt , to explain thing . and if that have fail , I would have return and surrender myself . as thing happen , there be no need . 
 " through bad luck , with which I have nothing to do , though doubtless the whole have be pile on my head , your father 's home be destroy , and he seem to have lose all care for every thing . yet how much well off be he than I ! upon I the curse fall at birth ; upon he , after thirty year of ease and happiness . however , for that very reason , perhaps , he bear it bad than I do . he grow imbittere against the world , which have in no way ill - treat he ; whereas its very first principle be to scorn all such as I be . he seem to have become a misanthrope , and a fatalist like myself . though it might almost make one believe the existence of such a thing as justice to see pride pay for its wickedness thus the injury to the outcast son recoil upon the pampered one , and the family arrogance crown itself with the ignominy of the family . 
 " in any case , there be no necessity for my interference ; and be deny by fate all sense of duty to a father , I be naturally drive to double my duty to my mother , whose life be leave hang upon mine . so we two for many year wander about , shun island and insular prejudice . I also shun your father , though   so far as I know   he neither seek I nor take any trouble to clear himself . if the one child now leave he have be a son , heir to the family property and so on , he might have behave quite otherwise , and he would have be bind to do so . but have only a female child , who might never grow up , and , if she do , be very unlikely to succeed , he must have resolve at least to wait . and perhaps he confirm himself with the reflection that even if people believe his tale   so long after date and so unvouched , so far as family annal be concern , the remedy would be as bad as the disease . moreover , he owe his life to I , at great risk of my own ; and to pay such a debt with the hangman 's rope would scarcely appear quite honorable , even in the good society . 
 " it be not for I to pretend to give his motif , although from my knowledge of his character I can guess they pretty well , perhaps . we go our several way in the world , neither of we very fortunate . 
 " one summer , in the Black Forest , I fall in with an outcast englishman , almost as great a vagabond as myself . he be under the ban of the law for write his father 's name without license . he do not tell I that , or perhaps even I might have despise he , for I never be dishonest . but one great bond there be between we we both detest law and man . my intimacy with he be the one thing in life which I be ashamed of . he pass by a false name then , of course . but his true name be Montague Hockin . my mother be in very weak health then , and her mind for the most part clouded ; and I need not say that she know nothing of what I have do for her sake . that man pretend to take the great interest in her condition , and to know a doctor at Baden who could cure she . 
 " we avoid all city   as he know well , and live in simple village , subsist partly upon my work , and partly upon the little income leave by my grandfather , Thomas Hoyle . but , compare with Hockin , we be well off ; and he do his good to swindle we . luckily all my faith in mankind be confine to the feminine gender , and not much even of that survive . in a very little time I see that people may repudiate law as well from be below as from be above it . 
 " then he come one night , with the fine style and noble contempt of every thing . we must prepare ourselves for great news , and all our kindness to he would be repay tenfold in a week or two . let I go into Freyburg that time to - morrow night , and listen . I ask he nothing as to what he mean , for I be begin to weary of he , as of every body . however , I think it just worth while , have some one who buy my wicker - work , to enter the outskirt of the town on the follow evening , and wait to be tell if any news be stir . and the people be amazed at my not know that last night the wife of an english lord for so they call he , though no lord yet have run away with a golden - bearded man , believe to be also English . 
 " about that you know more , perhaps , than I do . but I wish you to know what that Hockin be , and to clear myself of complicity . of Herbert Castlewood I know nothing , and I never even see the lady . and to say   as Sir Montague Hockin have say   that I plot all that wickedness , from spite toward all of the Castlewood name , be to tell as foul a lie as even he can well indulge in . 
 " it need not be say that he do not know my story from any word of mine . to such a fellow I be not likely to commit my mother 's fate . but he seem to have guess at once that there be something strange in my history ; and then , after spy and low prying at my mother , to have shape his own conclusion . then , have entirely under his power that young fool who leave a kind husband for he , he conceive a most audacious scheme . this be no less than to rob your cousin , the last Lord Castlewood , not of his wife and jewel and ready money only , but also of all the disposable portion of the Castlewood estate . for the lady 's mother have take good care , like a true hungarian , to have all the land settle upon her daughter , so far as the husband could deal with they . and though , at the date of the marriage , he could not really deal at all with they your father be still alive it appear that his succession   when it afterward take place   be bind , at any rate , as against himself . a divorce might have cancel this I can not say but your late cousin be the last man in the world to incur the needful exposure . upon this they naturally count . 
 " the new ' Lady Hockin '   as she call herself , with as much right as ' Lady Castlewood '   flirt about while her beauty last ; but even then find her master in a man of deep wickedness . but if her poor husband desire revenge which he do not seem to have do , perhaps he could not have have it well . she be seize with a loathsome disease , which devour her beauty , like Herod and his glory . I believe that she still live , but no one can go near she ; least of all , the fastidious Montague . " 
 at this part of the letter I draw a deep breath , and exclaim , " thank God ! " I know not how many time ; and perhaps it be a crime of I to do it even once . 
 " find his nice prospective game destroy by this little accident for he mean to have marry the lady after her husband 's death , and set you at defiance ; but even he could not do that now , little as he care for opinion what do he do but shift hand altogether ? he make up his mind to confer the honor of his hand on you , have see you somewhere in London , and his tactic become the very opposite of what they have be hitherto . your father 's innocence now must be maintain instead of his guiltiness . 
 " with this in view , he be fool enough to set the detective police after I I , who could snap all their nose off ! for he see how your heart be all set on one thing , and expect to have you his serf forever , by the simple expedient of hang I . the detective fail , as they always do . he also fail in his overture to you . 
 " you do your utmost against I also , for which I bear you no ill - will , but rather admire your courage . you act in a straightforward way , and employ no dirty agency . of your simple device I have no fear . however , I think it as well to keep an eye upon that Hockin , and a worthy old fool , some relation of his , who have bring you back from America . to this end I keep my head - quarter near he , and establish my mother comfortably . she be order sea air , and have have enough . to - morrow I shall remove she . by the time you receive this letter we shall both be far away , and come back no more ; but first I shall punish that Hockin . without personal violence this will be do . 
 " now what I propose to you be simple , moderate , and most strictly just . my mother 's little residue of life must pass in ease and comfort . she have wrong no one , but ever be wrong . allow she 300 pound a year , to be pay as I shall direct you . for myself I will not take a farthing . you will also restore , as I shall direct , the trinket upon which she set great value , and for which I seek vainly when we come back to England . I happen to know that you have it now . 
 " in return for these just act , you have the right to set forth the whole truth publicly , to proclaim your father 's innocence , and   as people will say   his chivalry ; and , which will perhaps rejoice you also , to hear no more of 
 " THOMAS HOYLE . 
 " P.S. of course I be trust your honor in this . but your father 's daughter can be no sneak ; as indeed I have already prove . " 




 CHAPTER lvi 

 with his own sword 

 " what a most wonderful letter ! " cry the Major , when , after several careful perusal , I think it my duty to show it to he . " he call I a ' worthy old fool , ' do he ? well , I call he something a great deal bad an unworthy skulk , a lunatic , a subverter of rank , and a Radical ! and because he be a bastard , be the whole world base ? and to come and live like that in a house of mine , and pay I no rent , and never even let I see he ! your grandfather be quite right , my dear , in give he the cold shoulder . of course you will not   pay he a farthing . " 
 " you forget that he be dead , " I answer , " and his poor mother with he . at least he behave well to his mother . you call he a hero when you know not who he be . poor fellow , he be dead ! and , in spite of all , I can not help be very sorry for he . " 
 " yes , I dare say . woman always be . but you must show a little common - sense , Erema . your grandfather seem to have have too much , and your father far too little . we must keep this matter quiet . neither the man nor the woman must we know , or a nice stir we shall have in all the county paper . there must be an inquest , of course , upon they both ; but none of the fellow read this direction , for the admirable reason that they can not read . our come forward could do no good , and just now Bruntsea have other thing to think of ; and , first and foremost , my ruin , as they say . " 
 " please not to talk of that , " I exclaim . " I can raise any quantity of money now , and you shall have it without pay interest . you want the course of the river restore , and now you have more you have get the very sea . you could float the Bridal Veil itself , I do believe , at Bruntsea . " 
 " you have suggest a fine idea , " the Major exclaim , with emphasis . " you certainly should have be an engineer . it be a thousand time easy as every body know to keep water in than to keep it out . have burst my barricade , the sea shall stop inside and pay for it . far less capital will be require . by Jove , what a fool I must have be not to see the hand of Providence in all this ! Mary , can you spare I a minute , my dear ? the noble idea have occur to I . well , never mind , if you be busy ; perhaps I have well not state it crudely , though it be not true that it happen every hour . I shall turn it over in my mind throughout the evening service . I mean to be there , just to let they see . they think that I be crush , of course . they will see their mistake ; and , Erema , you may come . the gale be over , and the evening bright . you sit by the fire , Mary , my dear ; I shall not let you out again ; keep the silver kettle boil . in church I always think more clearly than where people talk so much . but when I come home I require something . I see , I see . instead of an idle , fashionable lounging - place for nincompoop from London , instead of flirtation and novel - reading , vulgarity , show , and indecent attire , and positively immoral bathing , we will now have industry , commerce , wealth , triumph of mechanism , lofty enterprise , and international good - will . a harbor have be the great want of this coast ; see what a thing it be at Newport ! we will now have a harbor and float dock , without any muddy , malarious river all blue water from the sea ; and our fine cliff range shall be stud with good house . and the whole shall be call ' erema - port . ' " 
 well , Erema must be get very near her port , although it be not at Bruntsea . enough for this excellent man and that still more excellent woman that there they be , as busy and as happy as the day be long which impose some limit upon happiness , perhaps , inasmuch as to the busy every day be short . but Mrs. Hockin , though as full of fowl as ever , get no White Sultans nor any other rarity now from Sir Montague Hockin . that gentleman still be alive so far , at least , as we have hear of ; but no people own any self - respect ever deal with he , to their knowledge . he gamble away all his father 's estate , and the Major buy the last of they for his young son , a very noble Captain Hockin   accord to his mother 's judgment , whom I never have the honor of see . Sir Montague live in a sad plight somewhere , and his cousin still hop that he may turn honest . 
 but as to myself and far great person , still there be a few word to be say . as soon as all necessary thing be do at Bruntsea and at Castlewood , and my father 's memory clear from all stain , and by simple truth ennoble , in a manner strictly legal and consistent with heavy expense , myself have make a long deposition and receive congratulation as soon as it be possible , I leave they all , and set sail for America . 
 the rashness of such a plan it be more easy for one to establish than two to deny . but what be there in it of peril or of enterprise compare with what I have be through already ? I could not keep myself now from go , and reason but little about it . 
 meanwhile there have be no further tiding of Colonel Gundry or firm , or even Martin of the Mill himself . but one thing I do which show some little foresight . as soon as my mind be make up , and long before ever I could get away , I write to Martin Clogfast , tell he of my intention , and beg he , if he have any idea of the army , or the Sawyer , or even firm , or any thing whatever of interest , to write   without lose a day   to I , direct his letter to a house in New York whose address Major Hockin give I . 
 so many thing have to be do , and I listen so foolishly to the Major   who do his very good to stop I , that it come to be May , 1862   nearly four year after my father 's death , before I could settle all my plan and start . for every body say that I be much too young to take such a journey all by myself , and " what every body say must be right , " whenever there be no exception to prove the rule . " Aunt Marys " be not to be find every day , nor even Major Hockins ; and this again help to throw I back in get away from England . and but for his vast engineering idea , and another slight touch of rheumatic gout   bring upon herself by Mrs. Hockin through set seven hen in one evening , the Major himself might have come with I , " to observe the new military tactic , " as well as to look for his cousin Sampson . 
 in recount this I seem to be as long as the thing itself be in accomplish . but at last it be do , and most kindly be I offer the very thing to suit I permission to join the party of a well - know british officer , Colonel Cheriton , of the Engineers . this gentleman , be of the high repute as a writer upon military subject , have leave from the federal government to observe the course of this tremendous war . and perhaps he will publish some day what seem as yet to be wholly want a calm and impartial narrative of that unparalleled conflict . at any rate , he mean to spare no trouble in a matter so instructive , and he take his wife and two daughter very nice girl , who do I a world of good to establish they in Washington , or wherever the case might require . 
 lucky as this be for I , I could not leave my dear and faithful friend without deep sorrow ; but we all agree that it should be only for a very little time . we land first at New York , and there I find two letter from Martin of the Mill . in the first he grumble much , and tell I that nothing be yet know about Uncle Sam ; in the second he grumble   if possible   more , but give I some important news . to wit , he have receive a few line from the Sawyer , who have fail as yet to find his grandson , and sadly lament the misery he see , and the shocking destruction of God 's good work . he say that he could not bring himself to fight   even if he be young enough   against his own dear countryman , one of whom be his own grandson ; at the same time he feel that they must be put down for try to have thing too much their own way . about slavery , he have see too much of nigger to take they at all for his equal , and no white man with any self - respect would desire to be their brother . the child of Ham be put down at the bottom , as their nose and their lip pronounce , accord to divine revelation ; and for son of Japheth to break up the noble nation in the world , on their account , be like rush in to inherit their curse . as sure as his name be Sampson Gundry , those who have do it would get the bad , though as yet they be do wonder . and there could be no doubt about one thing which party it be that begin it . but come what would of it , here he be ; and never would saw - mill see he again unless he bring Firm Gundry . but he want news of poor Miss ' Rema ; and if any come to the house , they must please to send it to the care of Colonel Baker , headquarters of the Army of the Potomac . 
 this be the very thing I wish to know , and I see now how stupid I must have be not to have think of it long ago . for Colonel Baker be , to my knowledge , an ancient friend of Uncle Sam , and have join the national army at the very outbreak of the war . well know not only in California , but throughout the States , for gallantry and conduct , this officer have be a great accession to the Federal cause , when so many waver , and so he be appoint to a good command . but , alas ! when I tell Colonel Cheriton my news , I learn from he   who have carefully watch all the incident of the struggle   that Uncle Sam 's noble friend have fall in the battle of Ball 's Bluff , while charge at the head of his regiment . 
 still , there be hope that some of the officer might know where to find Uncle Sam , who be not at all a man to be mislay ; and be allow to accompany my english friend , I go on to Washington . we find that city in a highly nervous state , and from time to time ready to be capture . General Jackson be almost at the gate , and the President every day be call out for man . the Army of Virginia have be beat back to intrenchment before the capital , and General Lee be invade Maryland . battle follow battle , thick as blow upon a threshing - floor , and though we be always say to be victorious , the enemy seem none the more to run away . in this confusion , what chance have I of discover even the Sawyer ? 
 Colonel Cheriton   who must have find I a dreadful thorn in the flank of his strategy   miss no opportunity of inquiry , as he go from one valley to another . for the war seem to run along the course of river , though it also pass through the forest and lake , and go up into the mountain . our wonderfully clever and kind member of the british army be delighted with the movement of General Lee , who alone show scientific elegance in slay his fellow - countryman ; and the bad of it be that instead of go after my dear Uncle Sam , Colonel Cheriton be always rush about with map , plan , and telescope , to follow the tracery of Lee 's campaign . to treat of such matter be far beyond I , as I be most thankful to confess . neither will I dare to be sorry for a great man do what become his duty . my only complaint against he be that he keep we in a continual fright . 
 however , this go by , and so do many other thing , though heavily laden with grief and death ; and the one thing we learn be to disbelieve ninety - nine out of every hundred . letter for the Sawyer be dispatch by I to every likely place for he , and advertisement put into countless newspaper , but none of they seem to go near he . Old as he be , he avoid feather - bed , and roam like a true californian . but at last I find he , in a sad , sad way . 
 it be after the battle of Chancellorsville , and our army have be drive back across the Rappahannock . " our army , " I call it , because   although we belong to neither party   fortune have bring we into contact with these , and know more about they , we be bind to take their side . and not only that , but to I it appear altogether beyond controversy that a man of large mind and long experience   such as Uncle Sam have   should know much well than his grandson which cause be the one to fight for . at the same time firm be not at all to be condemn . and if it be true , as Martin Clogfast say , that trouble of mind at my absence have drive he into a prejudiced view , nothing could possibly be more ungracious than for I to make light of his judgment . 
 be twenty year old by this time , I be wise than I use to be , and now make a practice of thinking twice before rush into peril , as I use to do in California , and to some extent also in England . for though my adventure might not have be as strange as many I myself have hear of   especially from Suan Isco , nevertheless they have comprise enough of teaching and suffer also to make I careful about have any more . and so for a long time I keep at the furth distance possible , in such a war , from the vexing of the air with cannon , till even Colonel Cheriton 's daughter perfectly soft and peaceful girl begin to despise I as a coward . know what I have be through , I indulge their young opinion . 
 therefore they be the more startled when I set forth under a sudden impulse , or perhaps impatience , for a town very near the head - quarter of the defeat General Hooker . as they be so brave , I ask they whether they would come with I ; but although their father be know to be there , they turn pale at the thought of it . this please I , and make I more resolute to go ; and in three day ' time I be at Falmouth , a town on our side of the Rappahannock . 
 here I see most miserable sight that make I ashamed of all trifle fear . when hundred and thousand of gallant man be die in crippled agony , who or what be I to make any fuss about my paltry self ? clumsy as I be , some kind and noble lady teach I how to give help among the sufferer . 
 at first I cry so at every body 's pain , while ask why ever they should have it , that I do some good by put they up to bear it rather than distress I so . and when I begin to command myself   as custom soon enable I , I do some little good again by show they how I care for they . their poor weak eye , perhaps never expect to see a nice thing in the world again , use to follow I about with a faint , slow roll , and a feeble spark of jealousy . 
 that I should have have such a chance of do good , onefold to other and a thousandfold to self , at this turn of life , when I be full of little I , be another of the many most clear indication of a kind hand over I . every day there be well than a year of ordinary life in break the mind from its little selfish turn , and open the heart to a large power . and all this discipline be need . 
 for one afternoon , when we all be tired , with great heat upon we suddenly , and the fly begin to be dreadful , our chief be rather unwell and fast asleep , the surgeon away , and our bed as full as they could be , I be call down to reason with an applicant who would take no denial . " a rough man , a very rough old man , and in a most terrible state of mind , " say the girl who bring the message ; " and room he would have , or he would know the reason . " 
 " the reason be not far to seek , " I answer , more to myself than she , as I run down the stair to discomfit that old man . at the open door , with the hot wind toss wear white curl and parch shrivel cheek , now wearily raise his battered hat , stand my dear Uncle Sam , the Sawyer . 
 " Lor ' a massy ! young lady , be you altogether daft ? in my good of day , never be I lip for kiss . and the bootiful creatur come now , I be not   save your life , have I now ? " 
 " yes , fifty time over fifty thousand time . Uncle Sam , do not   you know Erema ? " 
 " my eye be dash ! and dash they be , to forget the look of your , my dearie . seven day have I march without thank the Lord ; and hot coal of fire have he pour upon I now , for his mercy endureth forever . to think of you to think of you as like my own child as could be only of more fine breed here stand in front of I , like this here ! there ! I never dream to do that again , and would scorn a young man at the sight of it . " 
 the Sawyer be too honest to conceal that he be weep . he simply turn his tanned and weather face toward the door - post , not to hide his tear , but reconcile his pride by feign it . I feel that he must be at very low ebb , and all that I have see of other people 's sorrow have no power to assuage I . inside the door , to keep the hot wind out and hide my eye from the old man 's face , I have some little quiet sob , until we could both express ourselves . 
 " it be poor firm , the poor , poor lad ! oh , what hath happen he ? that I should see the day ! " 
 Uncle Sam 's deep voice break into a moan , and he bow his rough forehead on his arm , and shake . then I take he by the sleeve and bring he in . 
 " not dead poor firm , your only one not dead ? " as soon as word would come , I ask , and tremble for the opening of his lip . 
 " not dead not quite ; but ten time bad . he hath fly into the face of the Lord , like Saul and his armor - bearer ; he hath fall on his own sword ; and the bad of it be that the darn thing will not   come out again . " 
 " Firm the last person in the world to do it ! oh , Uncle Sam , surely they have tell you " 
 " no lie no lie at all , my dear . and not only that , but he wanteth now to die and will not   be long first , I reckon . but no time to lose , my dear . the Lord hath send you to make he happy in his leaving of the world . can ' e raise a bed and a doctor here ? if he would but groan , I could bear it a bit , instead of bleed inward . and for sartin sure , a ' would groan nicely , if only by force of habit , at first sight of a real doctor . " 
 " there be half a dozen here , " I say ; " or at least close by . he shall have my own bed . but where be he ? " 
 " we have lay ' un in the sand , " he answer , simply , " for to dry his perspiration . that weak the poor chap be that he streameth night and day , miss . never would you know he for our Firm now , any more than I for Sampson Gundry . ah I ! but the Lord be hard on we ! " 
 slowly and heavily he go his way to fetch poor firm to the hospital ; while , with light foot but a heavy heart , I return to arouse our manager . speedily and well be all thing do ; and in half an hour Finn lie upon my bed , with two of the clever surgeon of New York most carefully examine his waste frame . these whisper and shake their head , as in such a case be indispensable ; and listen eagerly , I hear the senior surgeon say , " no , he could never bear it . " the young man seem to think otherwise , but to give way to the long experience . then dear Uncle Sam , have buy a new hat at the corner of the street , come forward . know too well what excitement be , and how it change every one , I lift my hand for he to go back ; but he only put his great hot web of finger into mine , and draw I to he softly , and cover I up with his side . " he heareth nort , nort , nort , " he whisper to I ; and then speak aloud : 
 " gentleman and lady or lady and gentleman , be the more correct form nowadays have I leave to say a word or two ? then if I have , as your manner to I showeth , and heartily thank you for that same , my word shall go into an acorn - cup . this lad , lay out at your mercy here , be as fine a young fellow as the West hath ever raise straight and nimble , and could tell no lie . family reason , as you will excoose of , draw he to the arm of rebellion . I may have do , and overdone it myself , in argue cantrip and conviction , whereof to my knowledge good never come yet . at any rate , off he go anyhow , and the force of nature draw I after he . no matter that to you , I dare say ; but it would be , if you be in it . 
 " lady and gentleman , here he be , and no harm can you make out of he . although he hath fight for the wrong side to our thinking , bravely hath he fight , and make his way to a colonelship , worth five thousand dollar , if ever they pay their wage . never do I think that he would earn so much , have never own gift of machinery ; and concern the handling of the dollar , perhaps , will carry my opinion out . but where be I wander of a little thing like that ? 
 " it hath please the Lord , who doeth all thing well , when finally come to look back upon the Lord hath see fit to be down on this young man for go agin his grandfather . from Californy a free state , mind you he come away to fight for slavery . and how hath he magnify his office ? by shoot the big man on that side , the almighty foe of the Union , the foremost captain of Midian the general in whom they trust . no bullet of our could touch he ; but by his own weapon he hath fall . and soon as Ephraim Gundry hear it , he do what you see do to he . " 
 Uncle Sam have say his say which must have cost he dearly withdraw from the bed where his grandson 's body lie shrunken , lax , and grimy . to be sure that it be firm , I give one glance for Firm have always be straight , tall , and large and then , in a miserable mood , I steal to the Sawyer 's side to stand with he . " be I to blame ? be this my fault ? for even this be I to blame ? " I whisper ; but he do not heed I , and his hand be like hard stone . 
 after a long , hot , heavy time , while I be labor vainly , the Sawyer also   through exhaustion of excitement   weary , and afraid to begin again with new bad news , as beat people expect to do , the young surgeon come up to he , and say , " will you authorize it ? " 
 " to cut ' un up ? to show your museum what a western lad be ? never . by the Blue River he shall have a good grave . so help I God , to my own , my man ! " 
 " you misunderstand I . we have more subject now than we should want for fifty year . War knock the whole of their value on the head . we have fifty body as good as this , and be simply oblige to bury they . what I mean be , shall we pull the blade out ? " 
 " can he do any thing with that there blade in he ? I have hear of a man in Kentucky once " 
 " yes , yes ; we know all those story , Colonel suit the newspaper , not the journal . this fellow have what must kill he inside ; he be wear to a shadow already . if there it be leave , die he must , and quick stick ; inflammation be set up already . if we extract it , his chance of survive be scarcely one in a hundred . " 
 " let he have the one , then , the one in the hundred , like the ninety and nine lost sheep . the Lord can multiply a hundredfold some threescore , and some an hundredfold . I will speak to he , gentleman , while you try the job . " 




 CHAPTER LVII 

 FEMALE suffrage 

 all that could be do by skill and care and love , be do for Firm . our lady manager and head nurse never leave he when she could be spar , and all the other lady vie in zeal for this young soldier , so that I could scarcely get near he . his grandfather 's sad and extraordinary tale be confirm by a wound prisoner . Poor Ephraim Gundry 's rare power of sight have be fatal perhaps to the cause he fight for , or at least to its great captain . return from desperate victory , the general , wrap in the fold of night , and perhaps in the gloom of his own stern thought , while it seem quite impossible that he should be see , encounter the fire of his own troop ; and the order to fire be give by his favorite officer , Colonel Firm Gundry . when the young man learn that he have destroy , by a linger death , the chief idol of his heart , he call for a rifle , but all refuse he , know too well what his purpose be . then under the tree , without a word or sigh , he set the hilt of his sword upon the earth , and the point to his heart as well as he could find it . the blade pass through he , and then snap off but I can not bear to speak of it . 
 and now , few people might suppose it , but the substance of which he be make will be clear , when not only his own knowledge of his case but also the pure scientific reasoning establish a truth more frankly acknowledge in the New World than in the old one . it be prove that , with a good constitution , it be safe to receive two wound than one , even though they may not be at the same time take . Firm have be shoot by the captain of mexican robber , as long ago relate . he be dreadfully pull down at the time , and few people could have survive it . but now that stand he in the very good stead , not only as a lesson of patience , but also in the question of cartilage . but not be certain what cartilage be , I can only refer inquirer to the note - book of the hospital , which have be print . 
 for we it be enough to know that   shatter as he be and must be   this brave and single - minded warrior struggle for the time successfully with that great enemy of the human race , to whom the human race so largely consign one another and themselves . but some do say , and emphatically Uncle Sam , that Colonel Firm Gundry for a colonel he be now , not by courtesy , but commission would never have hold up his head to do it , but must have go on with his raving for death , if somebody have not arrive in the nick of time , and cry over he a female somebody from old England . 
 and , even after that , they say that he never would have care to be a man again , never would have calm his conscience with the reflection , so commonplace and yet so high that have do our good accord to our light , we must not dwell always on our darkness if once again , and for the residue of life , there have not be some one to console he a consolation that need not have , and be well without , pure reason , come , as that would come , from a quarter whence it be never quite welcome . enough for I that he never lay hand to a weapon of war again , and never shall unless our own home be invade . 
 for after many month each equal to a year of teaching and of humbling there seem to be a good time for I to get away and attend to my duty in England . of these I have be remind often by letter , and once by a messenger ; but all money matter seem dust in the balance where life and death be swing . but now Uncle Sam and his grandson , have their love knit afresh by disaster , be eager to start for the saw - mill , and trust all except their own business to Providence . 
 I have tell they that , when they go westward , my time would be come for start eastward ; and be unlikely to see they again , I should hope for good news frequently . and then I get dear Uncle Sam by himself , and beg he , for the sake of firm 's happiness , to keep he as far as he could from Pennsylvania Sylvester . at the same time I think that the very nice young lady who jump upon his nose from the window , Miss Annie I forget her name , or at any rate I tell he so would make he a good straightforward wife , so far as one could tell from have see she . and that seem to have be settle in their infancy . and if he would let I know when it be to be , I have see a thing in London I should like to give they . 
 when I ask the Sawyer to see to this , instead of be sorry , he seem quite pleased , and nod sagaciously , and put his hat on , as he generally do , to calculate . 
 " both of they gal have marry long ago , " he say , look at I with a fine soft gaze ; " and bad handfuls their mate have get of they . but what make you talk of they , missy or ' my lady , ' as now you be in old country , I hear what make you think of they like that , my dearie ? " 
 " I can not   tell what make I think of they . how can I tell why I think of every thing ? " 
 " still , it be an odd thing for your ladyship to say . " 
 " Uncle Sam , I be nobody 's ladyship , least of all your . what make you speak so ? I be your own little wandering child , whose life you save , and whose father you love , and who lose all who love she . even from you I be force to go away . oh , why be it always my fate my fate ? " 
 " hush ! " say the old man ; and I stop my outburst at his whisper . " to talk of fate , my dearie , show either one thing or the other that we have no will of our own , or else that we know not how to guide it . I never know a good man talk of fate . the heathen and the pagan make it . the Lord in heaven be enough for I ; and he always hath allow I my own free - will , though I may not have handle ' un cleverly . and he giveth you your own will now , my missy to go from we or to stop with we . and be as you be a very grand young woman now , own english land and income pay in gold instead of greenback the same as our nugget seem likely to my idea it would be wrong if we be so much as to ask you . " 
 " be that what you be full of , then , and what make you so mysterious ? I do think that you know I well , and I have a right to hope so . " 
 " concern of yourself alone be not what we must think of . you might do this , or you might do that , accord to what you be tell , or , even more , accord to what be deny you . for poor honest people , like Firm and I , to deal with such a case be out of knowledge . for we it be go by the will of the Lord , and dead agin your own desire . " 
 " but , dear Uncle Sam , " I cry , feel that now I have he upon his own tenterhook , " you rebuke I as sharply as lie in your nature for dare to talk about fate just now ; but to what else come your own conduct , if you be bind to go against your own desire ? if you have such a lot of freewill , why must you do what you do not like to do ? " 
 " well , well , perhaps I be talk rather large . the will of the world be upon we as well . and we must have respect for its settlement . " 
 " now let I , " I say , with a trembling wish to have every thing right and maidenly . " I have see so much harm from misunderstanding , and they be so simple when it be too late let I ask you one or two question , Uncle Sam . you always answer every body . and to you a crooked answer be impossible . " 
 " business be business , " the Sawyer say . " my dear , I contract accordingly . " 
 " very well . then , in the first place , what do you wish to have do with I ? put aside all the gossip , I mean , of people who have never even hear of I . " 
 " why , to take you back to saw - mill with we , where you always be so natural . " 
 " in the next place , what do your grandson wish ? " 
 " to take you back to saw - mill with he , and keep you there till death do you part , as chanceth to all mortal pair . " 
 " and now , Uncle Sam , what do I wish ? you say we all have so much free - will . " 
 " it be natural that you should wish , my dear , to go and be a great lady , and marry a nobleman of your own rank , and have a lot of little nobleman . " 
 " then I fly against nature ; and the fault be yours for fill I so with machinery . " 
 the Sawyer be beat , and he never say again that a woman can not argue . 




 CHAPTER lviii 

 beyond desert , and deserts 

 from all the carnage , havoc , ruin , hatred , and fury of that wicked war we set our little convoy forth , with pass procure from either side . accord to all rule of war , Firm be no doubt a prisoner ; but have save his life , and take his word to serve no more against they , remember also that he have do they more service than ten regiment , the Federal authority be not sorry to be quit of he . 
 he , for his part , be of a deep , retentive nature , bore in his wounded breast a sorrow which would last his lifetime . to I he say not a single word about his bitter fortune , and he could not bring himself to ask I whether I would share it . only from his eye sometimes I know what he be think ; and have pass through so much grief , I be move with deep compassion . poor firm have be train by his grandfather to a strong , earnest faith in Providence , and now this compel he almost to believe that he have be specially visit . for fly in the face of his good grandfather , and selfishly indulge his own stiff neck , his punishment have be hard , and almost heavy than he could bear . whatever might happen to he now , the spring and the flower of his life be go ; he still might have some calm existence , but never win another day of cloudless joy . and if he have only say this , or think about it , we might have look at he with less sadness of our own . 
 but he never say any thing about himself , nor give any opening for our comfort to come to he . only from day to day he behave gently and lovingly to both of we , as if his own trouble must be fight out by himself , and should dim no other happiness . and this keep we think of his sorrow all the more , so that I could not even look at he without a flutter of the heart , which be afraid to be a sigh . 
 at last , upon the great mountain range , through which we now be toil , with the snow little more than a mantle for the peak , and a sparkling veil for sunrise , dear Uncle Sam , who have often show sign of impatience , draw I apart from the rest . Straightforward and blunt as he generally be , he do not seem altogether ready to begin , but pull off his hat , and then put it on again , the weather be now cold and hot by turn . and while he do this he be think at his utmost , as every full vein of his forehead declare . and be at home with his way , I wait . 
 " think you get ahead of I ? no , not you , " he exclaim at last , in reply to some version of his own of my idea , which I carefully make a nonentity under the scrutiny of his keen blue eye . " no , no , missy ; you wait a bit . Uncle Sam be not hatch yesterday , and it take fifty young lady to go round he . " 
 " be that from your size , Uncle Sam , or your depth ? " 
 " well , a mixture of both , I do believe . now the last thing you ever would think of , if you live to be old than Washington 's nurse , be the very thing I mean to put to you . only you must please to take it well , accord to my meaning . you see our firm go to a shadow , do not   you ? very well ; the fault of that be all yourn . why not up and speak to he ? " 
 " I speak to he every day , Uncle Sam , and I spare no effort to fatten he . I be sure I never dream of become such a cook . but soon he will have Suan Isco . " 
 " Old Injun be darn ! it be not the stomach , it be the heart as want nourishment with yon poor lad . he looketh that pitiful at you sometimes , my faith , I can hardly tell whether to laugh at his newing or cry at the lean face that do it . " 
 " you be not talk like yourself , Uncle Sam . and he never do any thing of the kind . I be sure there be nothing to laugh at . " 
 " no , no ; to be sure not . I make a mistake . Heroic be the word , of course every thing be heroic . " 
 " it be heroic , " I answer , with some vexation at his lightness . " if you can not see it , I be sorry for you . I like large thing ; and I know of nothing large than the way poor firm be go on . " 
 " you to stand up for he ! " Colonel Gundry answer , as if he could scarcely look at I . " you to talk large of he , my Lady Castlewood , while you be do of his heart into small wittle ! well , I do believe , if no one else , that you be a straightforward one . " 
 " and what be I do that be crook now ? " 
 " well , not to say crook , Miss ' Rema ; no , no . only onconsistent , when square up . " 
 " Uncle Sam , you be a puzzle to I to - day . what be inconsistent ? what be there to square up ? " 
 he fetch a long breath , and look wondrous wise . then , as if his main object be to irritate I , he make a long stride , and say , " Soup 's a - bilin now . " 
 " let it boil over , then . you must say what you mean . oh , Uncle Sam , I only want to do the right ! " 
 " I dessay . I dessay . but have you get the pluck , miss ? our little missy would ' a do more than that . but come to be great lady why , they take another tune . with much mind , of course it might be otherwise . but none of them have any much of that to spare . " 
 " your view be a narrow one , " I reply , know how that would astonish he . " you judge by your own experience only ; and to do that show a sad want of breadth , as the lady in England express it . " 
 the Sawyer star , and then take off his hat , and then feel all about for his spectacle . the idea of be regard by a " female " from a large and lofty point of view , make a new sensation in his system . 
 " yes , " I continue , with some enjoyment , " let we try to look largely at all thing , Uncle Sam . and suppose I capable of that , what be the proper and the lofty course to take ? " 
 he look at I with a strange twinkle in his eye , and with three word discomfit I " pop the question . " 
 much as I have hear of woman 's right , equality of body and mind with man , and superiority in moral , it do not appear to I that her privilege could be drive to this extent . but I shake my head till all my hair come down ; and so if our constitutional right of voting by color be exercise , on this occasion it claim the timid benefit of ballot . 
 with we a suggestion , for the time discard , have often double effect by - and - by ; and though it be out of my power to dream of act up to such direction , there could be no possible harm in review such a theory theoretically . 
 now nothing beyond this be in my thought , nor even so much as that   safely may I say , when Firm and myself meet face to face on the third day after Uncle Sam 's idea . our little caravan , of which the Sawyer be the captain , be bind for Blue River and its neighborhood , have quit the Sacramento track by a fork on the left not a league from the spot where my father have bid adieu to mankind . and know every twist and turn of rock , our driver bring we at the camping - time almost to the verge of chaparral . 
 I know not exactly how far we be come , but the dust - cloud of memory be stir , and though mountain look small than they use to look , the thing do among they seem large . and wander forth from the camp to think , when the evening meal be over , lo ! there I stand in that selfsame breach or portal of the desert in which I stand once by my father 's side , with scared and weary eye , vainly seek safety 's shattered landmark . the time of year be different , be the ripe end of October now ; but though the view be change in tint , it be even more impressive . sombre memory , and deep sense of grandeur , which be always sad , and solemn light , and steal shadow , compass I with thoughtfulness . in the mouth of the gorge be a gray block of granite , whereupon I sit down to think . 
 old thought , dull thought , thought as common as the cloud that cross the distant plain , and as vague as the wind that move they they please and they pass , and they may have shed kindly influence , but what be they ? the life that lie before we be , in some way , too , below we , like yon vast amplitude of plain ; but it must be traverse foot by foot , and laboriously travail , without the cloudy vaporing or the high - fly meditation . and all that must be do by I , alone , with none to love I , and   which for a woman be so much bad   nobody ever to have for my own , to cherish , love , and cle to . 
 tier upon tier , and peak over peak , the fine mountain of the world be soar into the purple firmament . like northern light , they flash , or flush , or fade into a reclining gleam ; like ladder of heaven , they bar themselves with cloudy air ; and like heaven itself , they rank their white procession . lonely , feeble , puny , I look up with awe and reverence ; the mind pronounce all thing small compare with this magnificence . yet what will all such grandeur do the self - defensive heart inquire for puny , feeble , lonely I ? 
 before another shadow deepen or another light grow pale , a slow , uncertain step draw near , and by the mere chance it happen to be Ephraim Gundry 's . I be quite surprised , and tell he so ; and he say that he also be surprised at meet I in this way . remember how long I have be here , I think this most irrational , but check myself from say so , because he look so poorly . and more than that , I ask he kindly how he be this evening , and smooth my dress to please his eye , and offer he a chair of rock . but he take no notice of all these thing . 
 I think of the time when he would have behave so very differently from this , and nothing but downright pride enable I to repress vexation . however , I resolve to behave as kindly as if he be his own grandfather . 
 " how grand these mountain be ! " I say . " it must do you good to see they again . even to I it be such a delight . and what must it be to you , a native ? " 
 " yes , I shall wander from they no more . how I wish that I have never do so ? " 
 " have man less courage than woman ? " I ask , with one glance at his pale wear face . " I owe you the debt of life ; and this be the place to think and speak of it . I use to talk freely of that , you know . you use to like to hear I speak ; but now you be tired of that , and tired of all the world as well , I fear . " 
 " no , I be tired of nothing , except my own vile degradation . I be tired of my want of spirit , that I can not cast my load . I be tired of my lack of reason , which should always guide a man . what be the use of mind or intellect , reasoning power , or whatever it be call , if the whole of they can not enable a man to hold out against a stupid heart ? " 
 " I think you should be proud , " I say , while tremble to approach the subject which never have be touch between we , " at have a nature so sensitive . your evil chance might have be any body 's , and must of course have be somebody 's . but nobody else would have take it so so delightfully as you have do ! " 
 " delightfully ! be that the word you use ? may I ask who get any delight from it ? " 
 " why , all who hate the Southern cause , " I reply , with a sudden turn of thought , though I never have mean to use the word . " surely that need no explanation . " 
 " they be delighted , be they ? yes , I can very well believe it . narrow - minded bigot ! yes , they be sure to be delighted . they call it a just visitation , of course , a righteous retribution . and they hope I may never get over it . " 
 " I pray you to take it more gently , " I say ; " they be very good man , and wish you no harm . but they must have their own opinion ; and naturally they think they just . " 
 " then all their opinion be just wrong . they hope to see I go down , to my grave . they shall not have that pleasure . I will outlive every old John Brown of they . I do not care two cent to live just now . henceforth I will make a point of it . if I can not fight for true freedom any more , have ruin it perhaps already , the least I can do be to give no more triumph to its bitter enemy . I will eat and drink , and begin this very night . I suppose you be one of they , as you put their argument so neatly . I suppose you consider I a vile slave - driver ? " 
 " you be very ill , " I say , with my heart so full of pity that anger could not enter ; " you be very ill , and very weak . how could you drive the very good slave now even such a marvel as Uncle Tom ? " 
 Firm Gundry smile ; on his lean dry face there shine a little flicker , which make I think of the time when he buy a jest - book , publish at Cincinnati , to make himself agreeable to my mind . and little as I mean it , I smile also , think of the way he use to come out with his hard - fight joke , and expect it . 
 " I wish you be at all as you use to be , " he say , look at I softly through the courage of his smile , " instead of be such a grand lady . " 
 " and I wish you be a little more like yourself , " I answer , without think ; " you use to think always there be nobody like I . " 
 " suppose that I be of the same opinion still ? tenfold , fiftyfold , a millionfold ? " 
 " to suppose a thing of that sort be a little too absurd , when you have show no sign of it . " 
 " for your own dear sake I have show no sign . the reason of that be too clear to explain . " 
 " then how stupid I must be not to see an atom of it ! " 
 " why , who would have any thing to say to I a break - down man , a fellow mark out for curse , one who hat even the sight of himself ? the low of the low would shun I . " 
 he turn away from I , and gaze back toward the dismal , miserable , spectral desert ; while I stand face the fruitful , delicious , flowery Paradise of all the world . I think of the difference in our lot , and my heart be in misery about he . then I conquer my pride and my littleness and trumpery , and do what the gentle sweet Eve might have do . and never have I grieve for that action since . 
 with tear on my cheek quite undissemble , and a breast not ashamed of flutter , I run to Firm Gundry , and take his right hand , and allow he no refuge from tender wet eye . then before he could come to see the meaning of this haste because of his very high discipline I be out of his distance , and sit on a rock , and I lift my eye , full of eloquence , to his ; then I drop they , and pull my hat forward , and say , as calmly as be possible , " I have do enough . the rest remain with you , Firm Gundry . " 
 the rest remain with he . enough that I be part of that rest ; and if not the foundation or crown of it , something desirous to be both , and fail   if fail it ever do   from no want of trial . Uncle Sam say that I never fail at all , and never do fail in any thing , unless it be when I find that blame nugget , for which we get three wagon - load of greenback ; which   when prosperity at last revive   will pay perhaps for grease all twelve wheel . 
 Jowler admit not that failure even . as soon as he recover from canine dementia , approach very closely to rabie , at see I in the flesh once more   so that the Sierra Nevada ring with avalanche of barking , he tug I to the place where his tooth be set in gold , and prove that he have no hydrophobia . his tooth be scanty now , but he still can catch a salmon , and the bright zeal and loyalty of his soft brown eye and the sprightly elevation of his tail be still among dog as pre - eminent as they be to mankind inimitable . 
 now the war be past , and here we sit by the bank of the soft Blue River . the early storm and young conflict of a clouded life be over . still out of sight there may be yet a sea of trouble to buffet with ; but it be not merely a selfish thought that other will face it with I . dark mystery have be clear away by be confront bravely ; and the lesson have be learn that life   like California flower   be of infinite variety . this little river , ten step wide , on one side have all lupin , on the other side all larkspur . can I tell why ? can any body ? can even itself , so full of voice and light , unroll the reason ? 
 behind we tower the stormy crag , before we spread soft tapestry of earth and sweep of ocean . below we lie my father 's grave , whose sin be not his own , but fall on he , and find he loyal . to he be I loyal also , as a daughter should be ; and in my lap lie my reward for I be no more erema .