phantom fortune 


 A novel 

 by the AUTHOR of " LADY AUDLEY 's SECRET , " " VIXEN , " ETC . ETC . ETC . 

 content 

 I. PENELOPE 
 II . ULYSSES 
 III . on the wrong ROAD 
 IV . the last stage 
 V. FORTY year after 
 VI . MAULEVRIER 's HUMBLE FRIEND 
 VII . in the SUMMER morning 
 VIII . there be always a skeleton 
 IX . a CRY in the darkness 
 x. ' o bitterness of thing TOO sweet ' 
 XI . ' if I be to do as iseult do ' 
 XII . ' the GREATER CANTLE of the world be lose ' 
 xiii . ' since PAINTED or not paint all shall fade ' 
 XIV . ' not yet ' 
 XV . ' of all MEN else I have avoid THEE ' 
 XVI . ' her face resigned to BLISS or BALE ' 
 XVII . ' and the spring come SLOWLY up this way ' 
 xviii . ' and COME AGEN , be IT by NIGHT or DAY ' 
 XIX . the OLD MAN on the FELL 
 XX . LADY MAULEVRIER 's LETTER - BAG 
 XXI . on the DARK BROW of HELVELLYN 
 XXII . WISER than LESBIA 
 XXIII . ' a young LAMB 's heart among the FULL - grown flock ' 
 XXIV . ' now nothing LEFT to LOVE or HATE ' 
 XXV . CARTE BLANCHE 
 XXVI . ' proud can I never be of what I hate ' 
 XXVII . LESBIA CROSSES PICCADILLY 
 XXVIII . ' CLUBS , diamond , HEARTS , in WILD DISORDER see ' 
 XXIX . ' SWIFT , SUBTLE POST , CARRIER of GRISLY CARE ' 
 XXX . ' ROSES choked among THORNS and THISTLES ' 
 XXXI . ' kind be MY love to - DAY , TO - morrow KIND ' 
 XXXII . WAYS and MEANS 
 XXXIII . BY SPECIAL LICENCE 
 XXXIV . ' our love be new , and then but in the spring ' 
 XXXV . ' all FANCY , PRIDE , and FICKLE maidenhood ' 
 xxxvi . a RASTAQUOUERE 
 XXXVII . LORD HARTFIELD REFUSES a fortune 
 xxxviii . ON BOARD the ' CAYMAN ' 
 XXXIX . in STORM and DARKNESS 
 XL . a note of ALARM 
 XLI . PRIVILEGED information 
 XLII . ' shall it be ? ' 
 XLIII . ' alas , for SORROW be all the end of this ' 
 XLIV . ' oh , SAD KISSED MOUTH , how SORROWFUL it be ! ' 
 XLV . ' that fall arrest without all BAIL ' 
 XLVI . the day of reckoning 


  H. French , Del.    T. Symmons , Sc ' the Old Man Sat look at Mary in Silence for some Moments . ' 
 H. French , del .    T. Symmons , sc " the old man sit look at Mary in silence for some moment . " 

 CHAPTER I. 

 PENELOPE . 


 People din early forty year ago than they do now . even that salt of the earth , the elect of society , represent by that little great world which lie between the narrow circle bound by Bryanstone Square on the north and by Birdcage Walk on the south , do not consider seven o'clock too early an hour for a dinner party which be to be follow by rout , drum , concert , conversazione , as the case might be . it be seven o'clock on a lovely June evening , and the Park be already desert , and carriage be roll swiftly along all the Westend square , carry rank , fashion , wealth , and beauty , political influence , and intellectual power , to the particular circle in which each be destine to illumine upon that particular evening . 

 stateliest among London square , Grosvenor in some wise a wonder to the universe as newly light with gas grave Grosvenor , with its heavy old georgian house and pompous portico , sparkle and shine , not alone with the novel splendour of gas , but with the light of many wax candle , cluster flower - like in silver branch and girandole , multiply their flame in numerous mirror ; and of all the house in that stately square none have a more impose aspect than Lord Denyer 's dark red brick mansion , with stone dressing , and the massive grandeur of an egyptian mausoleum . 

 Lord Denyer be an important personage in the political and diplomatic world . he have be ambassador at Constantinople and at Paris , and have now retire on his laurel , an influence still , but no long an active power in the machine of government . at his house gather all that be most brilliant in London society . to be see at Lady Denyer 's evening party be the guinea stamp of social distinction ; to dine with Lord Denyer be an opening in life , almost as valuable as University honour , and more difficult of attainment . 

 it be during the quarter of an hour before dinner that a group of person , mostly personage , congregate round Lord Denyer 's chimney - piece , naturally trend towards the social hearth , albeit it be the season for rose and lily rather than of fire , and the hum of the city be float in upon the breath of the warm June evening through the five tall window which open upon Lord Denyer 's balcony . 

 the ten or twelve person assemble seem only a sprinkling in the large lofty room , furnish sparsely with amber satin sofas , a pair of florentine marble table , and half an acre or so of look glass . voluminous amber drapery shroud the window , and deaden the sound of rolling wheel , and the voice and footfall of western London . the drawing room of those day be neither artistic nor picturesque neither early English nor Low Dutch , nor Renaissance , nor anglo - japanese . a stately commonplace distinguish the reception room of the great world . upholstery stagnate at a dead level of fluted leg , gilding , plate glass , and amber satin . 

 Lady Denyer stand a little way in advance of the group on the hearthrug , fan herself , with her eye on the door , while she listen languidly to the remark of a youthful diplomatist , a sprig of a lordly tree , upon the last dťbut at her Majesty 's Theatre . 

 ' my own idea be that she scream , ' say her ladyship . ' but the new Rosinas generally do scream . why do we have a new Rosina every year , whom nobody ever hear of afterwards ? what become of they ? do they die , or do they set up as sing mistress in second - rate watering - place ? ' hazard her ladyship , with her eye always on the door . 

 she be a large woman in amethyst satin , and a gauze turban with a diamond aigrette , a splendid jewel , which would not have misbeseeme the head - gear of an indian prince . Lady Denyer be one of the last woman who wear a turban , and that oriental head - dress become her bold and massive feature . 

 infinitely bore by the whiskerless attachť , who have enter upon a disquisition on the genius of Rossini as compare with this new man Meyerbeer , her ladyship make believe to hear , while she listen intently to the confidential murmur of the group on the hearthrug , the little knot of personage cluster round Lord Denyer . ' indian mail in this morning , ' say one ' nothing else talk of at the club . very flagrant case ! a good deal bad than Warren Hastings . quite clear there must be a public inquiry House of Lords criminal prosecution . ' 

 ' I be tell on very good authority , that he have be recall , and be now on his passage home , ' say another man . 

 Lord Denyer shrug his shoulder , purse up his lip , and look ineffably wise , a way he have when he know very little about the subject under discussion . 

 ' how will she take it , do you think ? ' inquire Colonel Madison , of the Life Guards , a man about town , and an inveterate gossip , who know everybody , and everybody 's family history , down to the peccadillo of people 's great grandmother . 

 ' you will have an opportunity of judging , ' reply his lordship , coolly . ' she be to be here this evening . ' 

 ' but do you think she will show ? ' ask the Colonel . ' the mail must have bring the news to she , as well as to other people suppose she know nothing about it beforehand . she must know that the storm have burst . do you think she will - - ' 

 ' come out in the thunder and lightning ? ' interrupt Lord Denver ; ' I be sure she will . she have the pride of Lucifer and the courage of a lion . five to one in pony that she be here before the clock strike seven ! ' 

 ' I think you be right . I know her mother , Constance Talmash . Pluck be a family characteristic of the Talmashes . wicked as devil , and brave as lion . Old Talmash , the grandfather , shoot his valet in a paroxysm of delirium tremen , ' say Colonel Madison . ' she be a splendid woman , and she will not   flinch . I would rather back she than bet against she . ' 

 ' Lady Maulevrier ! ' announce the groom of the chamber ; and Lady Denyer move at least three pace forward to meet her guest . 

 the lady who enter , with slow and stately movement and proudly balanced head , might have serve for a model as Juno or the Empress Livia . she be still in the bloom of youth , at most seven - and - twenty , but she have all the calm assurance of middle - age . no dowager , harden by the varied experience of a quarter of a century in the great world , could have face society with more perfect coolness and self - possession . she be beautiful , and she let the world see that she be conscious of her beauty , and the power that go along with it . she be clever , and she use her cleverness with unfailing tact and unscrupulous audacity . she have win her place in the world as an acknowledge beauty , and one of the leader of fashion . two year ago she have be the glory and delight of anglo - indian society in the city of Madras , rule that remote and limited kingdom with a despotic power . then all of a sudden she be order , or she order her physician to order she , an immediate departure from that perilous climate , and she come back to England with her three - year - old son , two Ayahs , and four european servant , leave her husband , Lord Maulevrier , Governor of the Madras Presidency , to finish the term of his service in an enforced widowhood . 

 she return to be the delight of London society . she throw open the family mansion in Curzon Street to the very good people , but to those only . she go out a great deal , but she be never see at a second - rate party . she have not a single doubtful acquaintance upon her visit list . she spend half of every year at the family seat in Scotland , be a miracle of goodness to the poor of her parish , and teach her boy his alphabet . 

 Lord Denyer come forward while his wife and Lady Maulevrier be shake hand , and greet she with more than his usual cordiality . Colonel Madison watch for the privilege of a recognise nod from the divinity . Sir Jasper Paulet , a legal luminary of the first brilliancy , likely to be employ for the Crown if there should be an inquiry into Lord Maulevrier 's conduct out yonder , come to press Lady Maulevrier 's hand and murmur a tender welcome . 

 she accept their friendliness as a matter of course , and not by the faint extra quiver of the tremulous star which glitter in a circlet above her raven hair do she betray her consciousness of the cloud that darken her husband 's reputation . never have she appear gayer , or more completely satisfied with herself and the world in which she live . she be ready to talk about anything and everything the newly - wed queen , and the fortunate Prince , whose existence among we have all the charm of novelty of Lord Melbourne 's decline health and Sir Robert Peel 's slide scale mesmerism the Oxford tract the late balloon ascent the opera Macready 's last production at Drury lane Bulwer 's new novel that clever little comic paper , just struggle into popularity what do you call the thing Punch ? yes , Punch , or the London Charivari a much more respectable paper than its parisian prototype . 

 seat next Lord Denyer , who be an excellent listener , Lady Maulevrier 's vivacity never flag throughout the dinner , happily not so long as a modern banquet , albeit more ponderous and not less expensive . from the turtle to the pine and strawberry , Lady Maulevrier hold her host or her right - hand neighbour in interested conversation . she always know the particular subject likely to interest particular people , and be a good listener as well as a good talker . her right - hand neighbour be Sir Jasper Paulet , who have be allot to the pompous wife of a court physician , a lady who have begin her married life in the outer darkness of Guildford Street , Bloomsbury , with a household consist of a maid - of - all - work and a boy in button , with an occasional interregnum of charwoman ; and for whom all the length and breadth of Harley Street be now much too small . 

 Sir Jasper be only decently civil to this haughty matron , who on the strength of a card for a ball or a concert at the palace once in a season affect to be on the most intimate term with Royalty , and know everything that happen , and every fluctuation of opinion in that charm circle . the great lawyer 's left ear be listen greedily for any word of meaning that might fall from the lip of Lady Maulevrier ; but no such word fall . she talk delightfully , with a touch - and - go vivacity which be the high form of dinner - table talk , not dwell with a heavy hand upon any one subject , but glance from theme to theme with airy lightness . but not one word do she say about the governor of Madras ; and at this juncture of affair it would have be the worst possible taste to inquire too closely after his lordship 's welfare . 

 so the dinner wear on to its stately close , and just as the solemn procession of flunkey , long as the shadowy line of the king in ' Macbeth , ' file off with the empty ice - dish , Lady Maulevrier say something which be as if a shell have explode in the middle of the table . 

 ' perhaps you be surprised to see I in such good spirit , ' she say , beam upon her host , and speak in those clear , perfectly finish syllable which be hear far than the loud accent of less polished speaker , ' but you will not wonder when I let you into the secret . Maulevrier be on his way home . ' 

 ' indeed ! ' say Lord Denyer , with the most benignant smile he could command at such short notice . he feel that the muscle round his eye and the corner of his mouth be betray too much of his real sentiment . ' you must be very glad . ' 

 ' I be gladder than I can say , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , gaily . ' that horried climate a sky like molten copper an atmosphere that taste of red - hot sand that flat barren coast never suit he . his term of office would expire in little more than a year , but I hardly think he could have live out the year . however , I be happy to say the mail that come in to - day I suppose you know the mail be in ? '   Lord Denyer bow   ' bring I a letter from his Lordship , tell I that he have send in his resignation , and take his passage by the next big ship that leave Madras . I imagine he will be home in October . ' 

 ' if he have a favourable passage , ' say Lord Denyer . ' favour by your good wish the wind and the wave ought to deal gently with he . ' 

 ' ah , we have do with the old day of greek story , when Neptune be open to feminine influence , ' sigh her ladyship . ' my poor Ulysses have no goddess of wisdom to look after he . ' 

 ' perhaps not , but he have the most charming of Penelopes wait for he at home . ' 

 ' a Penelope who go to dinner , and take life pleasantly in his absence . that be a new order of thing , be it not ? ' say her ladyship , laughingly . ' I hope my poor Ulysses will not come home thoroughly break in health , but that our sutherlandshire breeze will set he up again . ' 

 ' rather an ordeal after India , I should think , ' say Lord Denyer . 

 ' it be his native air . he will revel in it . ' 

 ' Delicious country , no doubt , ' assent his lordship , who be no sportsman , and who detest Scotland , grouse moor , deer forest , salmon river include . 

 his only idea of a winter residence be Florence or Capri , and of the two he prefer Capri . the island be at that time little frequent by Englishmen . it have hardly be fashionable since the time of Tiberius , but Lord Denyer go there , accompany by his french chef , and a dozen other servant , and rough it in a native hotel ; while Lady Denyer winter at the family seat among the hill near Bath , and give herself over to low Church devotion , and work of benevolence . she make herself a terror to the neighbourhood by the strictness of her idea all through the autumn and winter ; and in the spring she go up to London , put on her turban and her diamond , and plunge into the vortex of west - end society , where she revolve among other jewel matron for the season , tell herself and her intimate that this sacrifice of inclination be due to his lordship 's position . Lady Denyer be not the less serious - minded because she be see at every aristocratic resort , and wear low gown with very short sleeve , and a great display of mottled arm and dimpled elbow . 

 now come her ladyship 's smile signal for the withdrawal of that fair half of the assembly which be suppose to be indifferent to Lord Denyer 's famous port and Madeira . she have be throw out her gracious signal unperceive for at least five minute before Lady Maulevrier respond , so entirely be that lady absorb in her conversation with Lord Denyer ; but she catch the look at last , and rise , as if move by the same machinery which impel her hostess , and then , graceful as a swan sail with the current , she drift down the room to the distant door , and head the stately procession of matronly velvet and diamond , herself at once the most regal and the most graceful figure in that bevy of fair woman . 

 in the drawing - room nobody could be gayer than Lady Maulevrier , as she mark the time of Signor Paponizzi 's saltarello , exquisitely perform on the Signor 's famed Amati violin or talk of the late scandal always except that late scandal of all which involve her own husband in subdued murmur with one of her intimate . in the dining - room the man draw close together over their wine , and tear Lord Maulevrier 's character to rag . yea , they rent he with their tooth and gnaw the flesh from his bone , until there be not so much left of he as the dog leave of Jezebel . 

 he have be a scamp from his cradle , a spendthrift at Eton and Oxford , a blackleg in his manhood . false to man , false to woman . clever ? yes , undoubtedly , just as Satan be clever , and as unscrupulous as that very Satan . this be what his friend say of he over their wine . and now he be rumour to have sell the british force in the carnatic province to one of the native Princes . yes , to have take gold , gold to an amount which clive in his most rapacious moment never dream of , for his countryman 's blood . tiding of dark transaction between the Governor and the native Princes have reach the ear of the Government , tiding so vague , so incredible , that the Government might naturally be slow to believe , still slow to act . there be whisper of a woman 's influence , a beautiful ranee , a creature as fascinating and as unscrupulous as Cleopatra . the scandal have be grow for month past , but it be only in the letter receive to - day that the rumour have take a tangible shape , and now it be currently report that Lord Maulevrier have be recall , and would have to answer at the bar of the House of Lords for his misdemeanour , which be of a much dark colour than those act for which Warren Hastings have be call to account fifty year before . 

 yet in the face of all this , Lady Maulevrier bear herself as proudly as if her husband 's name be spotless , and talk of his return with all the ardour of a fond and trust wife . 

 ' one of the fine bit of act I ever see in my life , ' say the court physician . ' Mademoiselle Mars never do anything well . ' 

 ' do you really think it be act ? ' inquire Lord Denyer , affect a youthful candour and trustfulness which at his age , and with his experience , he could hardly be suppose to possess . 

 ' I know it , ' reply the doctor . ' I watch she while she be talk of Maulevrier , and I see just one bead of perspiration break out on her upper lip an unmistakable sign of the mental struggle . ' 

 CHAPTER II . 

 ULYSSES . 


 October be end drearily with north - east wind , dust , drift dead leaf , and a steel - grey sky ; and the Dolphin Hotel at Southampton be glorify by the presence of Lady Maulevrier and suite . her ladyship 's suite be on this occasion limit to three servant her french maid , a footman , and a kind of factotum , a man of no distinct and arbitrary signification in her ladyship 's household , neither butler nor steward , but that privileged being , an old and trusted servant , and a person who be suppose to enjoy more of Lady Maulevrier 's confidence than any other member of her establishment . 

 this James Steadman have be valet to her ladyship 's father , Lord Peverill , during the decline year of that nobleman . the narrow limit of a sick room have bring the master and servant into a close companionship than be common to that relation . Lady Diana Angersthorpe be a devoted daughter , and in her attendance upon the Earl during the last three year of his life a life which close more than a year before her own marriage she see a great deal of James Steadman , and learn to trust he as servant be not often trust . he be not more than twenty year of age at the beginning of his service , but he be a man of extraordinary gravity , much in advance of his year ; a man of shrewd common - sense and clear , sharp intellect . not a read man , or a man in any way superior to his station and belonging , but a man who could think quickly , and understand quickly , and who always seem to think rightly . prompt in action , yet steady as a rock , and to all appearance recognise no earthly interest , no human tie , beyond or above the interest of his master . as a nurse Steadman show himself invaluable . Lord Peverill leave he a hundred pound in acknowledgment of his service , which be something for Lord Peverill , who have very little ready cash wherewith to endow his only daughter . after his death the title and the estate go to a distant cousin ; Lady Diana Angersthorpe be take in hand by her aunt , the Dowager Marchioness of Carrisbrook ; and James Steadman would have have to find employment among stranger , if Lady Diana have not plead so urgently with her aunt as to secure he a somewhat insignificant post in her ladyship 's establishment . 

 ' if ever I have a house of my own , you shall have a well place in it , Steadman , ' say Lady Diana . 

 she keep her word , and on her marriage with Lord Maulevrier , which happen about eighteen month afterwards , Steadman pass into that nobleman 's service . he be a member of her ladyship 's bodyguard , and his employment seem to consist chiefly in poking fire , cut the leaf of book and newspaper , superintend the footman 's attendance upon her ladyship 's household pet , and convey her sentiment to the other servant . he be in a manner Lady Maulevrier 's mouthpiece , and although treat with a respect that verge upon awe , he be not a favourite with the household . 

 and now the house in Mayfair be give over to the charge of caretaker . all the other servant have be despatch by coach to her ladyship 's favourite retreat in Westmoreland , within a few mile of the Laureate 's home at Rydal Mount , and James Steadman be charge with the whole responsibility of her ladyship 's travel arrangement . 

 Penelope have come to Southampton to wait for Ulysses , whose ship have be due for more than a week , and whose white sail might be expect above the horizon at any moment . James Steadman spend a good deal of his time wait about at the dock for the early news of Greene 's ship , the Hypermnestra ; while Lady Maulevrier wait patiently in her sitting - room at the Dolphin , whose three long french window command a full view of the High Street , with all those various distraction afford by the chief thoroughfare of a provincial town . her ladyship be provide with a large box of book , from eber ' in Bond Street , a basket of fancy work , and her favourite Blenheim spaniel , Lalla Rookh ; but even these source of amusement do not prevent the involuntary expression of weariness in occasional yawn , and frequent pacing up and down the room , where the formal hotel furniture have a comfortless and chilly look . 

 Fellside , her ladyship 's place in Westmoreland , be the pleasure house which , among all her possession , she most value ; but it have hitherto be reserve for summer occupation , or for perhaps two or three week at Easter , when the spring be exceptionally fine . the sudden determination to spend the come winter in the house near Grasmere be consider a curious freak of Lady Maulevrier 's , and she be constrain to explain her motif to her friend . 

 ' his lordship be out of health , ' she say , ' and want perfect rest and retirement . now , Fellside be the only place we have in which he be likely to get perfect rest . anywhere else we should have to entertain . Fellside be out of the world . there be no one to be entertain . ' 

 ' except your neighbour , Wordsworth . I suppose you see he sometimes ? ' 

 ' dear simple - minded old soul , he give nobody any trouble , ' say her ladyship . 

 ' but be not Westmoreland very cold in winter ? ' ask her friend . 

 Lady Maulevrier smile benignly , as at an inoffensive ignorance . 

 ' so sheltered , ' she murmur . ' we be at the base of the Fell . Loughrigg rise up like a cyclopean wall between we and the wind . ' 

 ' but when the wind be in the other direction ? ' 

 ' we have Nabb Scar . you do not know how we be girdle and defend by hill . ' 

 ' very pleasant , ' agree the friend ; ' but for my own part I would rather winter in the south . ' 

 those terrible rumour which have first come upon the world of London last June , have be grow dark and more define ever since , but still Lady Maulevrier make believe to ignore they ; and she act her part of unconsciousness with such consummate skill that nobody in her circle could be sure where the acting begin and where the ignorance leave off . the astute Lord Denyer declare that she be a wonderful woman , and know more about the real state of the case than anybody else . 

 meanwhile it be say by those who be suppose to be well - inform that a mass of evidence be accumulate against Lord Maulevrier . the India House , it be rumour , be busy with the secret investigation of his case , prior to that public inquiry which be to come on during the next session . his private fortune would be make answerable for his misdemeanours his life , say the alarmist , might pay the penalty of his treason . on all side it be agree that the case against Lord Maulevrier be black as Erebus ; and still Lady Maulevrier look society in the face with an unshaken courage , and be ready with smile and gracious word for all comer . 

 but now come a hard trial , which be to receive the man who have disgrace she , lower her pride to the dust , degrade the name she bear . she have marry he , not love he nay , pluck another love out of her heart in order that she might give herself to he . she have marry he for position and fortune ; and now by his folly , by his extravagance , and by that greed of gold which be inevitable in the spendthrift and profligate , he have go near to cheat she out of both name and fortune . yet she so command herself as to receive he with a friendly air when he arrive at the dolphin , on a dull grey autumn afternoon , after she have wait for he nearly a fortnight . 

 James Steadman usher in his lordship , a frail attenuate look figure , of middle height , wrap in a furred cloak , yet shiver , a pale sickly face , light auburn whisker , light blue eye , full and large , but with no intellectual power in they . Lady Maulevrier be sit by the fire , in a melancholy attitude , with the Blenheim spaniel on her lap . her son be at Hastings with his nurse . she have nothing near and dearer than the spaniel . 

 she rise and go over to her husband , and let he kiss she . it would have be too much to say that she kiss he ; but she submit her lip unresistingly to his , and then they sit down on opposite side of the hearth . 

 ' a wretched afternoon , ' say his lordship , shivering , and draw his chair close to the fire . Steadman have take away his fur - line cloak . ' I have really underrate the disagreeableness of the english climate . it be abominable ! ' 

 ' to - day be not a fair sample , ' answer her ladyship , try to be cheerful ; ' we have have some pleasant autumn day . ' 

 ' I det autumn ! ' exclaim Lord Maulevrier , ' a season of dead leaf , damp , and dreariness . I should like to get away to Montpellier or Nice as soon as we can . ' 

 her ladyship give he a scathing look , half - scornful , half - incredulous . 

 ' you surely would not dream of leave the country , ' she say , ' under present circumstance . so long as you be here to answer all charge no one will interfere with your liberty ; but if you be to cross the Channel ' 

 ' my slanderer might insinuate that I be run away , ' interrupt Maulevrier , ' although the very fact of my return ought to prove to every one that I be able to meet and face this cabal . ' 

 ' be it a cabal ? ' ask her ladyship , look at he with a gaze that search his soul . ' can you meet their charge ? can you live down this hideous accusation , and hold up your head as a man of honour ? ' 

 the sensualist 's blue eye nervously shun that look of earnest interrogation . his lip answer the wife 's speak question with a lie , a lie make manifest by the expression of his countenance . 

 ' I be not afraid , ' he say . 

 his wife answer not a word . she be assure that the charge be true , and that the battered rake who shiver over the fire have neither courage nor ability to face his accuser . she see the whole fabric of her life in ruin , her son the penniless successor to a tarnished name . there be silence for some minute . Lady Maulevrier sit with lowered eyelid look at the fire , deep in painful thought . two perpendicular wrinkle upon her broad white forehead so calm , so unclouded in society tell of gnawing care . then she steal a look at her husband , as he recline in his arm - chair , his head lie back against the cushion in listless repose , his eye look vacantly at the window , whence he could see only the rain - blur front of opposite house , blank , dull window , grey slat roof , against a leaden sky . 

 he have be a handsome man , and he be handsome still , albeit premature decay , the result of an evil life , be distinctly mark in his faded face . the dull , yellow tint of the complexion , the tarnish dimness of the large blue eye , the discontent droop of the lip , the languor of the attitude , the pallid transparency of the waste hand , all tell of a life wear threadbare , energy exhaust , chance throw away , a mind abandon to despair . 

 ' you look very ill , ' say his wife , after that long blank interval , which mark so unnatural an apathy between husband and wife meeting after so long a severance . 

 ' I be very ill . I have be worried to death surround by rogue and liar the victim of a most infernal conspiracy . ' he speak hurriedly , grow whiter and more tremulous as he go on . 

 ' do not   talk about it . you agitate yourself to no purpose , ' say Lady Maulevrier , with a tranquillity which seem heartless yet which might be the result of suppress feeling . ' if you be to face this scandal firmly and boldly next January , you must try to recover physical strength in the meanwhile . mental energy may come with well health . ' 

 ' I shall never be any well , ' say Lord Maulevrier , testily ; ' that infernal climate have shatter my constitution . ' 

 ' two or three month of perfect rest and good nursing will make a new man of you . I have arrange that we shall go straight from here to Fellside . no one can plague you there with that disguised impertinence call sympathy . you can give all your thought to the ordeal before you , and be ready to meet your accuser . fortunately , you have no Burke against you . ' 

 ' Fellside ? you think of go to Fellside ? ' 

 ' yes . you know how fond I be of that place . I little think when you settle it upon I a cottage in Westmoreland with fifty acre of garden and meadow so utterly insignificant that I should ever like it well than any of your place . ' 

 ' a charming retreat in summer ; but we have never winter there ? what put it into your head to go there at such a season as this ? why , I daresay the snow be on the top of the hill already . ' 

 ' it be the only place I know where you will not be watch and talk about , ' reply Lady Maulevrier . ' you will be out of the eye of the world . I should think that consideration would weigh more with you than two or three degree of the thermometer . ' 

 ' I detest cold , ' say the Earl , ' and in my weak health - - ' 

 ' we will take care of you , ' answer her ladyship ; and in the discussion which follow she bear herself so firmly that her husband be fain to give way . 

 how could a disgraced and ruin man , break in health and spirit , contest the mere detail of life with a high - spirited woman ten year his junior ? 

 the Earl want to go to London , and remain there at least a week , but this her ladyship strenuously opposed . he must see his lawyer , he urge ; there be step to be take which could be take only under legal advice counsel to be retain . if this lie invention of Satan be really destine to take the form of a public trial , he must be prepare to fight his foe on their own ground . 

 ' you can make all your preparation at Fellside , ' answer his wife , resolutely . ' I have see Messrs. Rigby and Rider , and your own particular ally , Rigby , will go to you at Fellside whenever you want he . ' 

 ' that be not like my be on the spot , ' say his lordship , nervously , evidently much disconcert by her ladyship 's firmness , but too feeble in mind and body for a prolonged contest . 

 ' I ought to be on the spot . I be not without influence ; I have friend , man in power . ' 

 ' surely you be not go to appeal to friendship in order to vindicate your honour . these charge be true or false . if they be false your own manhood , your own rectitude , can face they and trample upon they , unaide by back - stair influence . if they be true , no one can help you . ' 

 ' I think you , at least , ought to know that they be as false as hell , ' retort the Earl , with an attempt to maintain his dignity . 

 ' I have act as if I so believe , ' reply his wife . ' I have live as if there be no such slander in the air . I have steadily ignore every report , every insinuation have hold my head as high as if I know you be immaculate . ' 

 ' I expect as much from you , ' answer the Earl , coolly . ' if I have not know you be a woman of sense I should not have marry you . ' 

 this be his utmost expression of gratitude . his next remark have reference solely to his own comfort . where be his room ? at what hour be they to dine ? and hereupon he ring for his valet , a german Swiss , and a servant out of a thousand . 

 CHAPTER III . 

 on the wrong ROAD . 


 Lord and Lady Maulevrier leave Southampton next morning , post . they take two servant in the rumble , Steadman and the footman . Steadman be to valet his lordship , the footman to be useful in all emergency of the journey . the maid and the valet be to travel by heavy coach , with the luggage her ladyship dispense with all personal attendance during the journey . 

 the first day take they to Rugby , whither they travel across country by Wallingford and Oxford . the second day take they to Lichfield . Lord Maulevrier be out of health and feeble , and grumble a good deal about the fatigue of the journey , the badness of the weather , which be dull and cold , east wind all day , and a light frost morning and night . as they progress northward the sky look grayer , the air become more biting . his lordship insist upon the stage be shorten . he lie in bed at his hotel till noon , and be seldom ready to start till two o'clock . he could see no reason for haste ; the winter would be long enough in all conscience at Fellside . he complain of mysterious ache and pain , describe himself in the presence of hotel - keeper and headwaiter as a mass of malady . he be nervous , irritable , intensely disagreeable . Lady Maulevrier bear his humour with unwavering patience , and win golden opinion from all sort of people by her devotion to a husband whose blighted name be the common talk of England . everybody , even in distant provincial town , have hear of the scandal against the Governor of Madras ; and everybody look at the sallow , fade Anglo - indian with morbid curiosity . his lordship , sensitive on all point touch his own ease and comfort , be keenly conscious of this unflattering inquisitiveness . 

 the journey , protract by Lord Maulevrier 's languor and ill - health , drag its slow length along for nearly a fortnight ; until it seem to Lady Maulevrier as if they have be travel upon those dismal , flat , unpicturesque road for month . each day be so horribly like yesterday . the same hedgerow and flat field , and pass glimpse of river or canal . the same absence of all beauty in the landscape the same formal hotel room , and smirk landlady and so on till they come to Lancaster , after which the country become more interesting hill arise in the background . even the smoky manufacturing town through which they pass without stop , be less abominable than the level monotony of the Midland county . 

 but now as they draw near the hill the weather grow cold , snow be speak of , and when they get into Westmoreland the mountain - peak gleam whitely against a lead - colour sky . 

 ' you ought not to have bring I here in such weather , ' complain the Earl , shiver in his sable , as he sit in his corner of the travel chariot , look discontentedly at the gloomy landscape . ' what be to become of we if we be catch in a snowstorm ? ' 

 ' we shall have no snow worth talk about before we be safely house at Fellside , and then we can defy the element , ' say Lady Maulevrier , coolly . 

 they sleep that night at Oxenholme , and start next morning , under a clean , bright sky , intend to take luncheon at Windermere , and to be at home by nightfall . 

 but by the time they get to windermere the sky have change to a dark grey , and the people at the hotel prophesy a heavy fall before night , and urge the Earl and Countess to go no far that day . the latter part of the road to Fellside be rough and hilly . if there should be a snowstorm the horse would never be able to drag the carriage up the steep bit of the way . here , however , Lord Maulevrier 's obstinacy come into play . he would not endure another night at an hotel so near his own house . he be sick to death of travel , and want to be at rest among comfortable surrounding . 

 ' it be murder to bring I here , ' he say to his wife . ' if I have go to Hastings I should have be a new man by this time . as it be I be a great deal bad than when I land . ' 

 everyone at the hotel notice his lordship 's white and haggard look . he have be know there as a young man in the bloom of health and strength , and his decay be particularly obvious to these people . 

 ' I see death in his face , ' the landlord say , afterwards . 

 every one , even her ladyship 's firmness and good sense , give way before the invalid 's impatience . at three in the afternoon they leave the hotel , with four horse , to make the remain nineteen mile of the way in one stage . they have not be on the road half an hour before the snow begin to fall thickly , whiten everything around they , except the lake , which show a dark leaden surface at the bottom of the slope along the edge of which they be travel . too sullen for speech , Lord Maulevrier sit back in his corner , with his sable cloak draw up to his chin , his travel cap cover head and ear , his eye contemplate the whiten world with a weary anger . his wife watch the landscape as long as she could , but the snow soon begin to darken all the air , and she could see nothing save that blank blinding fall . 

 half - way to Fellside there be a point where two road meet , one lead towards Grasmere , the other towards the village of Great Langdale , a cluster of humble habitation in the heart of the hill . when the horse have struggle as far as this point , the snow be six inch deep on the road , and make a thick curtain around they as it fall . by this time the Earl have doze off to sleep . 

 he wake an hour after , let down the window , which let in a snow - laden gust , and try to pierce the gloom without . 

 ' as black as Erebus ! ' he exclaim , ' but we ought to be close at home by this time . yes , thank God , there be the light . ' 

 the carriage draw up a minute afterwards , and Steadman come to the door . 

 ' very sorry , my lord . the horse must have take a wrong turn after we cross the bridge . and now the man say they can not   go back to Fellside unless we can get fresh horse ; and I be afraid there be no chance of that here . ' 

 ' here ! ' exclaim the Earl , ' what do you mean by here ? where the devil be we ? ' 

 ' Great Langdale , my lord . ' 

 a door open and let out a flood of light the red light of a wood fire , the pale flame of a candle upon the snowy darkness , reveal the panel hall of a neat little rustic inn : an eight - day clock tick in the corner , a black and white sheep - dog come out at his master 's heel to investigate the traveller . to the right of the door show the light of a window , shelter by a red curtain , behind which the chief of the village be enjoy their evening . 

 ' have you any post - horse ? ' ask the Earl , discontentedly , as the landlord stand on the threshold , shade the candle with his hand . ' no , sir . we do not   keep post - horse . ' 

 ' of course not . I know as much before I ask , ' say the Earl . 

 ' we be fix in this dismal hole for the night , I suppose . how far be we from Fellside ? ' 

 ' seven mile , ' answer the landlord . ' I beg your pardon , my lord ; I do not   know it be your lordship , ' he add , hurriedly . ' we be in sore trouble , and it make a man daft - like ; but if there be anything we can do - - ' 

 ' be there no hope of get on , Steadman ? ' ask the Earl , cut short these civility . 

 ' not with these horse , my lord . ' 

 ' and you hear we can not   get any other . be there any farmer about here who could lend we a pair of carriage horse ? ' 

 the landlord know of no such person . 

 ' then we must stop here till to - morrow morning . what infernal fool those post - boy must be , ' protest Lord Maulevrier . 

 James Steadman apologise for the postilion , explain that when they come to the critical point of their journey , where the road branch off to the Langdales , the snow be fall so thickly , the whole country be so hidden in all - pervade whiteness , that even he , who know the way so well , could give no help to the driver . he could only trust to the instinct of local postilion and local horse ; and instinct have prove wrong . 

 the traveller alight , and be usher into a not uncomfortable - look parlour ; very low as to the ceiling , very old - fashioned as to the furniture , but spotlessly clean , and enliven by a good fire , to which his lordship draw near , shiver and mutter discontentedly to himself . 

 ' we might be bad off , ' say her ladyship , look round the bright little room , which please she well than many a state apartment in the large hotel at which they have stop . 

 ' hardly , unless we be out on the moor , ' grumble her husband . ' I be sick to death of this ill - advise , unreasonable journey . I be at a loss to imagine your motive in bring I here . you must have have a motive . ' 

 ' I have , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , with a freezing look . ' I want to get you out of the way . I tell you that plainly enough at Southampton . ' 

 ' I do not   see why I should be hurry away and hide , ' say Lord Maulevrier . ' I must face my accuser , soon or later . ' 

 ' of course . the day of reckoning must come . but in the meantime have you no delicacy ? do you want to be point at everywhere ? ' 

 ' all I know be that I be very ill , ' answer her husband , ' and that this wretched journey have make I twenty year old . ' 

 ' we shall be safe at home before noon to - morrow , and you can have Horton to set you right again . you know you always believe in his skill . ' 

 ' Horton be a clever fellow enough , as country doctor go ; but at Hastings I could have have the good physician in London to see I , ' grumble his lordship . 

 the rustic maid - servant come in to lay the table , assist by her ladyship 's footman , who look a good deal too tall for the room . 

 ' I shall not   dine , ' say the Earl . ' I be a great deal too ill and cold . light a fire in my room , girl , and send Steadman to I ' this to the footman , who hasten to obey . ' you can send I up a basin of soup presently . I shall go to bed at once . ' 

 he leave the room without another word to his wife , who sit by the hearth star thoughtfully at the cheery wood fire . presently she look up , and see that the man and maid be go on with their preparation for dinner . 

 ' I do not care about dining alone , ' say her ladyship . ' we lunch at windermere , and I have no appetite . you can clear away those thing , and bring I some tea . ' 

 when the table furniture have be clear , and a neat little tea - tray set upon the white cloth , Lady Maulevrier draw her chair to the table , and take out her pocket - book , from which she produce a letter . this she read more than once , meditate profoundly upon its content . 

 ' I be very sorry he have come home , ' write her correspondent , ' and yet if he have stay in India there must have be an investigation on the spot . a public inquiry be inevitable , and the knowledge of his arrival in the country will precipitate matter . from all I hear I much fear that there be no chance of the result be favourable to he . you have ask I to write the unvarnished truth , to be brutal even , remember . his delinquency be painfully notorious , and I apprehend that the last sixpence he own will be answerable . his landed estate I be tell can also be confiscate , in the event of an impeachment at the bar of the House of Lords , as in the Warren Hastings case . but as yet nobody seem clear as to the form which the investigation will take . in reply to your inquiry as to what would have happen if his lordship have die on the passage home , I believe I be justify in say the scandal would have be allow to die with he . he have contrive to provoke powerful animosity both in the Cabinet and at the India House , and there be , I fear , an intention to pursue the inquiry to the bitter end . ' 

 assurance of the writer 's sympathy follow these harsh truth . but to this polite commonplace her ladyship pay no attention . her mind be intent on hard fact , the dismal probability of the near future . 

 ' if he have die upon the passage home ! ' she repeat . ' would to God that he have so die , and that my son 's name and fortune could be save . ' 

 the innocent child who have never give she an hour 's care ; the one creature she love with all the strength of her proud nature his future be to be blight by his father 's misdoing overshadow by shame and dishonour in the very dawn of life . it be a wicked wish an unnatural wish to find room in a woman 's breast ; but the wish be there . would to God he have die before the ship touch an english port . 

 but he be live , and would have to face his accuser and she , his wife , must give he all the help she could . 

 she sit long by the wan fire . she take nothing but a cup of tea , although the landlady have send in substantial accompaniment to the tea - tray in the shape of broiled ham , new - lay egg , and hot cake , argue that a traveller on such a night must be hungry , albeit disinclined for a ceremonious dinner . she have be sit for nearly an hour in almost the same attitude , when there come a knock at the door , and , on be bid to enter , the landlady come in , with some log in her apron , under pretence of replenish the fire . 

 ' I be afraid your fire must be get low , and that you would be amost starve , my lady , ' she say , as she put on the log , and sweep up the ash on the hearth . ' such a dreadful night . so early in the year , too . I be think we shall have a gay hard winter . ' 

 ' that do not always follow , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' have Steadman come downstairs ? ' 

 ' yes , my lady . he tell I to tell your ladyship that his lordship be pretty comfortable , and hop to pass a good night . ' 

 ' I be glad to hear it . you can give I another room , I suppose . it would be well for his lordship not to be disturb , as he be very much out of health . ' 

 ' there be another room , my lady , but it be very small . ' 

 ' I do not   mind how small , if it be clean and airy . ' 

 ' yes , my lady . I be thankful to say you will not   find dirt or stuffiness anywhere in this house . his lordship do look mortal badly , ' add the landlady , shake her head dolefully ; ' and I remember he such a fine young gentleman , when he use to come down the Rothay with the otter hound , run along the bank joomping in and out of the beck up to his knee in the water and now to see he , so white and mashiate , and break - down like , in the very prime of life , all along of live out in a hot country , among blackamoor , which be use to it poor , ignorant creature and never know no well . it must be a hard trial for you , my lady . ' 

 ' it be a hard trial . ' 

 ' ah ! we all have our trial , rich and poor , ' sigh the woman , who desire nothing well than to be allow to unbosom her woe to the grand look lady in the fur - border cloth pelisse , with beautiful dark hair pile up in clustering mass above a broad white forehead , and slender white hand on which diamond flash and glitter in the firelight , an unaccustomed figure by that rustic hearth . 

 ' we all have our trial high and low . ' 

 ' that remind I , ' say Lady Maulevrier , look up at she , ' your husband say you be in trouble . what do that mean ? ' 

 ' Sickness in the house , my lady . a brother of mine that go to America to make his fortune , and seem to be do so well for the first five or six year , and write home such beautiful letter , and then leave off write all at once , and we make sure as he be dead , and never get a word from he for ten year , and just three week ago he drop in upon we as we be sit over our tea between the light , look as white as a ghost . I give a shriek when I see he , for I be regular scared out of my sens . " Robert 's ghost ! " I cry ; but it be Robert himself , come home to we to die . and he be lie upstairs now , with so little life in he that I expect every breath to be his last . ' 

 ' what be his complaint ? ' 

 ' Apathy , my lady . dear , dear , that be not it . I never do remember the doctor 's foreign name . ' 

 ' Atrophy , ' perhaps . 

 ' yes , my lady , that be it . happen such crack - jaw word come easy to a scholar like your ladyship . ' 

 ' do the doctor give no hope ? ' 

 ' well , no , my lady . he do not   go so far as to say there be no hope , though Robert have be badly so long . it all depend , he say , upon the rallying power of the constitution . the lung be not go , and the heart be not disease . if there be rallying power , Robert will come round , and if there be not   he will sink . but the doctor say nature will have to make an effort . but I have my own idea about the case , ' add the landlady , with a sigh . 

 ' what be your idea ? ' 

 ' that our Robert be mark for death when he come into this house , and that he mean what he say when he speak of come home to die . thing have go against he for the last ten year in America . he marry and take his wife out to a farm in the Bush , and think to make a good thing out of farming with the bit of brass he have save at heeam . but America be not   Gert Langdale , you see , my lady , and his knowledge stand he in no stead in the Bush ; and first he lose his money , and he fashe himself terrible about that , and then he lose a child or two , and then he lose his wife , and he come back to we a break - hearted man , with no wish to live . the doctor may call it atrophy , but I will call it what the scripture call it , a broken and a wound spirit . ' 

 ' who be your doctor ? ' 

 ' Mr. Evans , of Ambleside . ' 

 ' that little half - blind old man ! ' exclaim her ladyship . ' surely you have no confidence in he ? ' 

 ' not much , my lady . but I do not   believe all the doctor in London could do anything for Robert . good nursing will bring he round if anything can ; and he get that , I can assure your ladyship . he be my only brother , the only kith and kin that be leave to I , and he and I be gay fond of each other when he be young . you may be sure I do not   spare any trouble , and my good man think the good of his larder or his celler hardly good enough for Robert . ' 

 ' I be sure you be kind good people , ' reply her ladyship gently ; ' but I should have think Mr. Horton , of Grasmere , could have do more than old Evans . however , you know well . I hope his lordship be not go to add to your care by be lay up here , but he look very ill this evening . ' 

 ' he do , my lady , mortal bad . ' 

 ' however , we must hope for the good . Steadman be a splendid servant in illness . he nurse my father for year . will you tell he to come to I , if you please ? I want to hear what he think of his lordship , and to discuss the chance of our get home early to - morrow . ' 

 the landlady retire , and summon Mr. Steadman , who be enjoy his modest glass of grog in front of the kitchen fire . he have teach himself to dispense with the consolation of tobacco , lest he should at any time make himself obnoxious to her ladyship . 

 Steadman be closet with Lady Maulevrier for the next half - hour , during which his lordship 's condition be gravely discuss . when he leave the sitting - room he tell the landlord to be sure and feed the post - horse well , and make they comfortable for the night , so that they might be ready for the drive to Fellside early next morning . 

 ' do you think his lordship will be well enough to travel ? ' ask the landlord . 

 ' he have make up his mind to get home ill or well , ' answer Steadman . ' he have waste about a week by his dawdling way on the road ; and now he be in a fever to get to Fellside . ' 

 CHAPTER IV . 

 the last stage . 


 the post - horse which have be well feed , but accommodate somewhat poorly in stable and barn be quite ready to go on next morning ; but Lord Maulevrier be not able to leave his room , where her ladyship remain in close attendance upon he . the hill and valley be white with snow , but there be none fall , and Mr. Evans , the elderly surgeon from Ambleside , ride over to Great Langdale on his elderly cob to look at Robert Haswell , and be call in to see Lord Maulevrier . her ladyship have speak lightly of his skill on the previous evening , but any doctor be well than none , so this feeble little personage be allow to feel his lordship 's pulse , and look at his lordship 's tongue . 

 his opinion , never too decidedly give , be a little more hazy than usual on this occasion , perhaps because of a certain awfulness , to unaccustomed eye , in Lady Maulevrier 's proud bearing . he say that his lordship be low , very low , and that the pulse be more irregular than he like , but he commit himself no far than this , and go away , promise to send such pill and potion as be appropriate to the patient 's condition . 

 a boy ride the same pony over to langdale later in the afternoon with the promise medicine . 

 throughout the short winter day , which seem terribly long in the stillness and solitude of Great Langdale , Lady Maulevrier keep watch in the sick - room , Steadman go in and out in constant attendance upon his master save for one half - hour only , which her ladyship pass in the parlour below , in conversation with the landlady , a very serious conversation , as indicate by Mrs. Smithson 's grave and somewhat troubled look when she leave her ladyship ; but a good deal of her trouble may have be cause by her anxiety about her brother , who be pronounce by the doctor to be ' much the same . ' 

 at eleven o'clock that night a mount messenger be send off to Ambleside in hot haste to fetch Mr. Evans , who come to the inn to find Lady Maulevrier kneeling beside her husband 's bed , while Steadman stand with a troubled countenance at a respectful distance . 

 the room be dimly light by a pair of candle burn on a table near the window , and at some distance from the old four - post bedstead , shade by dark moreen curtain . the surgeon look round the room , and then fumble in his pocket for his spectacle , without the aid of which the outside world present itself to he under a blurred and uncertain aspect . 

 he put on his spectacle , and move towards the bed ; but the first glance in that direction show he what have happen . the outline of the rigid figure under the coverlet look like a sculptured effigy upon a tomb . a sheet be draw over the face of death . 

 ' you be too late to be of any use , Mr. Evans , ' murmur Steadman , lay his hand upon the doctor 's sleeve and draw he away towards the door . 

 they go softly on to the landing , off which open the door of that other sick - room where the landlady 's brother be lie . 

 ' when do this happen ? ' 

 ' a quarter of an hour after the messenger ride off to fetch you , ' answer Steadman . ' his lordship lie all the afternoon in a heavy sleep , and we think he be go on well ; but after dark there be a difficulty in his breathing which alarm her ladyship , and she insist upon you be send for . the messenger have hardly be go a quarter of an hour when his lordship wake suddenly , mutter to himself in a curious way , give just one long draw sigh , and and all be over . it be a terrible shock for her ladyship . ' 

 ' indeed it must have be , ' murmur the village doctor . ' it be a great surprise to I . I know Lord Maulevrier be low , very low , the pulse feeble and intermittent ; but I have no fear of anything of this kind . it be very sudden . ' 

 ' yes , it be awfully sudden , ' say Steadman , and then he murmur in the doctor 's ear , ' you will give the necessary certificate , I hope , with as little trouble to her ladyship as possible . this be a dreadful blow , and she - - ' 

 ' she shall not be trouble . the body will be remove to - morrow , I suppose . ' 

 ' yes . he must be bury from his own house . I send a second messenger to Ambleside for the undertaker . he will be here very soon , no doubt , and if the shell be ready by noon to - morrow , the body can be remove then . I have arrange to get her ladyship away to - night . ' 

 ' so late ? after midnight ? ' 

 ' why not ? she can not stay in this small house so near the dead . there be a moon , and there be no snow fall , and we be within seven mile of Fellside . ' 

 the doctor have nothing furth to say against the arrangement , although such a drive seem to he a somewhat wild and reckless proceeding . Mr. Steadman 's grave , self - possess manner answer all doubt . Mr. Evans fill in the certificate for the undertaker , drink a glass of hot brandy and water , and remount his nag , in nowise relish his midnight ride , but console himself with the reflection that he would be handsomely pay for his trouble . 

 an hour later Lady Maulevrier 's travel carriage stand ready in the stable yard , in the deep shadow of wall and gable . it be at Steadman 's order that the carriage wait for her ladyship at an obscure side door , rather than in front of the inn . an east wind be blow keenly along the mountain road , and the careful Steadman be anxious his mistress should not be expose to that chilly blast . 

 there be some delay , and the four horse jingle their bit impatiently , and then the door of the inn open , a feeble light gleam in the narrow passage within , Steadman stand ready to assist her ladyship , there be a bustle , a confusion of dark figure on the threshold , a huddled mass of cloak and fur wrap be lift into the carriage , the door be clap to , the horse go clatter out of the yard , turn sharply into the snowy road , and start at a swing pace towards the dark sullen bulk of Loughrigg Fell . 

 the moon be shin upon Elterwater in the valley yonder the mountain ridge , the deep gorge below those sullen height , look back where the shadow of night enfold they , but all along the snow - white road the silver light shine full and clear , and the mountain way look like a path through fairyland . 

 CHAPTER V. 

 forty year after . 


 ' what a horrid day ! ' say Lady Mary , throw down her book with a yawn , and look out of the deep bay window into a world of mountain and lake which be cloud over by a dense veil of rain and dull grey mist ; such rain as one see only in a lake district , a curtain of gloom which shut off sky and distance , and narrow the world to one solitary dwelling , suspend amidst cloud and water , like another ark in a new deluge . 

 rain such rain as make out - of - door exercise impossible be always an affliction to Lady Mary Haselden . her delight be in open air and sunshine fish in the lake and river sit in some shelter hollow of the hill more fitting for an eagle 's nest than for the occupation of a young lady , try to paint those ever - vary , unpaintable mountain peak , which change their hue with every change of the sky swimming , rid , rove far and wide over hill and heather pleasure all more or less masculine in their nature , and which be a subject of regret with Lady Maulevrier . 

 Lady Lesbia be of a different temper . she love ease and elegance , the gracious luxury of life . she love art and music , but not to labour hard at either . she play and sing a little excellently within that narrow compass which she have allot to herself play Mendelssohn 's ' Lieder ' with finished touch and faultless phrasing , sing Heine 's ballad with consummate expression . she paint not at all . why should anyone draw or paint indifferently , she ask , when Providence have furnish the world with so many great painter in the past and present ? she could not understand Mary 's ardent desire to do the thing herself , to be able with her own pencil and her own brush to reproduce the lake and valley , the wild brown hill she love so passionately . Lesbia do not care two straw for the lovely lake district amidst which she have be rear , every pike and force , every beck and gill whereof be distinctly dear to her young sister . she think it a very hard thing to have spend so much of her life at Fellside , a trial that would have hardly be endurable if it be not for grandmother . Grandmother and Lesbia adore each other . Lesbia be the one person for whom Lady Maulevrier 's stateliness be subjugate by perfect love . to all the rest of the world the Countess be marble , but to Lesbia she be wax . Lesbia could mould she as she please ; but happily Lesbia be not the kind of young person to take advantage of this privilege ; she be thoroughly ductile or docile , and have no desire , at present , which run counter to her grandmother . 

 Lesbia be a beauty . in her nineteenth year she be a curious reproduction in face and figure , expression and carriage , of that Lady Diana Angersthorpe who five and forty year ago flutter the dove - cot of St. James 's and Mayfair by her brilliant beauty and her keen intelligence . there in the panel drawing - room at Fellside hang Harlow 's portrait of Lady Diana in her zenith , in a short - waiste , white satin frock , with large puff gauze sleeve , through which the perfect arm show dimly . stand under that picture Lady Lesbia look as if she have step out of the canvas . she be to be paint by Millais next year . Lady Maulevrier say , when she have be introduce , and society be begin to talk about she : for Lady Maulevrier make up her mind five or six year ago that Lesbia should be the reign beauty of her season . to this end she have educate and train she , furnish she with all those grace well calculate to please and astonish society . she be too clever a woman not to discover Lesbia 's shallowness and lack of all great gift , save that one peerless dower of perfect beauty . she know exactly what Lesbia could be train to do ; and to this end Lesbia have be educate ; and to this end Lady Maulevrier bring down to Fellside the most accomplished of hanoverian governess , who have learn French in Paris , and have toil in the educational mill with profit to herself and her pupil for a quarter of a century . to this lady the Countess entrust the education of her granddaughter ' mind , while for their physical training she provide another teacher in the person of a clever little parisian dancing mistress , who have set up at the West - end of London as a teacher of dancing and calisthenic , and have utterly fail to find pupil enough to pay her rent and keep her modest pot - au - feu going . Mademoiselle Thiebart be very glad to exchange the uncertainty of a first floor in North Audley Street for the comfort and security of Fellside Manor , with a salary of one hundred and fifty pound a year . 

 both Fršulein and Mademoiselle have be quick to discover that Lady Lesbia be the apple of her grandmother 's eye , while Lady Mary be comparatively an outsider . 

 so it come about that Mary 's education be in somewise a mere picking - up of the crumb which fall from Lesbia 's table , and that she be allow in a general way to run wild . she be much quick at any intellectual exercise than Lesbia . she learn the lesson that be give she at railroad speed , and rattle off her exercise with a slap - dash penmanship which horrify the neat and niggle Fršulein , and then rush off to the lake or mountain , and by this mean grow browner and browner , and more indelibly freckle day by day , thus widen the gulf between herself and her beauty sister . 

 but it be not to be suppose that because Lesbia be beautiful , Mary be plain . this be very far from the truth . Mary have splendid hazel eye , with a dancing light in they when she smile , ruddy auburn hair , white tooth , a deeply - dimple chin , and a vivacity and archness of expression , which serve only in her present state of tutelage for the subjugation of old woman and shepherd boy . Mary have be teach to believe that her chance of future promotion be of the small ; that nobody would ever talk of she , or think of she by - and - by when she in her turn would make her appearance in London society , and that it would be a very happy thing for she if she be so fortunate as to attract the attention of a fashionable physician , a Canon of Westminster or St. Paul 's , or a barrister in good practice . 

 Mary turn up her pert little nose at this humdrum lot . 

 ' I would much rather spend all my life among these dear hill than marry a nobody in London , ' she say , fearless of that grand old lady at whose frown so many people shiver . ' if you do not   think people will like I and admire I a little you have well save yourself the trouble of take I to London . I do not   want to play second fiddle to my sister . ' 

 ' you be a very impertinent person , and deserve to be take at your word , ' reply my lady , scowl at she ; ' but I have no doubt before you be twenty you will tell another story . ' 

 ' oh ! ' say Mary , now just turn seventeen , ' then I be not to come out till I be twenty . ' 

 ' that will be soon enough , ' answer the Countess . ' it will take you as long to get rid of those odious freckle . and no doubt by that time Lesbia will have make a brilliant marriage . ' 

 and now on this rainy July morning these two girl , neither of whom have any serious employment for her life , or any serious purpose in living , waste the hour , each in her own fashion . 

 Lesbia recline upon a cushion seat in the deep embrasure of a Tudor window , her pose perfection it be one of many such attitude which Mademoiselle have teach she , and which by assiduous training have become a second nature . poor Mademoiselle , have finish her mission and teach Lesbia all she could teach , have now depart to a new and far less luxurious situation in a finishing school at Passy ; but Fršulein M ller be still retain , as watch - dog and duenna . 

 Lesbia 's pale blue morning gown harmonise exquisitely with a complexion of lily and rose , violet eye , and golden - brown hair . her feature be distinguish by that perfect chiselling which give such a haughty grace to her grandmother 's countenance , even at sixty - seven year of age a loveliness which , like the sculptured marble it resemble , be unalterable by time . Lesbia be read Keats . it be her habit to read the poet , carefully and deliberately , take up one at a time , and duly lay a volume aside when she find herself mistress of its content . she have no passion for poetry , but it be an elegant leisurely kind of reading which suit her languid temperament . moreover , her grandmother have tell she that an easy familiarity with the great poet be of all knowledge that which good qualify a woman to shine in conversation , without offend the superior sex by any assumption of scholarship . 

 Mary be a very different class of reader ; capricious , omniverous , tear out the heart of book , roam from flower to flower in the field of literature , love old and new , romance and reality , novel , travel , play , poetry , and never dwell long on any one theme . perhaps if Mary have live in the bosom of a particularly sympathetic family she might have be reckon almost a genius , so much of poetry and originality be there in her free unconventional character ; but hitherto it have be Mary 's mission in life to be snub , whereby she have acquire a very poor opinion of her own talent . 

 ' oh , ' she cry with a desperate yawn , while Lesbia smile her languid smile over endymion , ' how I wish something would happen anything to stir we out of this statuesque , sleep - beauty state of be . I verily believe the spider be all asleep in the ivy , and the mouse behind the wainscot , and the horse in the stable . ' 

 ' what could happen ? ' ask Lesbia , with a gentle elevation of pencil brow . ' be not these lovely line 

 " and coverlid gold - tinted like the peach , 
 or ripe October 's fade marigold , 
 fall sleek about he in a thousand fold . " 
 Faded marigold ! be not that intensely sweet ? ' 

 ' very well for your sleepy Keats , but I do not   suppose you would have notice the passage if marigold be not in fashion , ' say Mary , with a touch of scorn . ' what could happen ? why a hundred thing an earthquake , flood , or fire . what could happen , do you say , Lesbia ? why Maulevrier might come home unexpectedly , and charm we out of this death - in - life . ' 

 ' he would occasion a good deal of unpleasantness if he do , ' answer Lesbia , coldly . ' you know how angry he have make grandmother . ' 

 ' because he keep race - horse which have an unlucky knack of losing , ' say Mary , dubiously . ' I suppose if his horse win , grandmother would rather approve ? ' 

 ' not at all . that would make hardly any difference , except that he would not ruin himself quite so quickly . Grandmother say that a young man who go on the turf be sure to be ruin soon or later . and then Maulevrier 's habit be altogether wild and foolish . it be very hard upon grandmother , who have such noble ambition for all of we . ' 

 ' not for I , ' answer Mary smile . ' her view about I be very humble . she consider that I shall be most fortunate if a doctor or a lawyer condescend to like I well enough to make I an offer . he might make I the offer without like I , for the sake of hear himself and his wife announce as Mr. and Lady Mary Snooks at dinner party . that would be too horrid ! but I daresay such thing have happen . ' 

 ' do not   talk nonsense , Mary , ' say Lesbia , loftily . ' there be no reason why you should not make a really good marriage , if you follow grandmother 's advice and do not   affect eccentricity . ' 

 ' I do not   affect eccentricity , but I be afraid I really be eccentric , ' murmur Mary , meekly , ' for I like so many thing I ought not to like , and detest so many thing which I ought to admire . ' 

 ' I daresay you will have tame down a little before you be present , ' say Lesbia , carelessly . 

 she could not even affect a profound interest in anyone but herself . she have a narrowness of mental vision which prevent she look beyond the limited circle of her own pleasure , her own desire , her own dream and hope . she be one of those strictly correct young woman who be not likely to do much harm in the world but who be just as unlikely to do any good . Mary sigh , and go back to her book , a bulky volume of travel , and try to lose herself in the sandy waste of Africa , and to be deeply interested in the source of the Congo , not , in her heart of heart , care a straw whether that far - away river come from the mountain of the moon , or from the moon itself . to - day she could not pin her mind to page which might have interest she at another time . her thought be with Lord Maulevrier , that fondly - love only brother , just seven year her senior , who have take to race - horse and bad way , and seem to be try his hard to dissipate the splendid fortune which his grandmother , the dowager Countess , have nurse so judiciously during his long minority . Maulevrier and Mary have always be what the young man call ' no end of chum . ' 

 he call she his own brown - eyed Molly , much to the annoyance of Lady Maulevrier and Lesbia ; and Mary 's life be all gladness when Maulevrier be at Fellside . she devote herself wholly to his amusement , ride and drive with he , follow on her pony when he go otter hunting , and very often abandon the pony to the care of some stray mountain youth in order to join the hunter , and go leap from stone to stone on the margin of the stream , and occasionally , in moment of wild excitement , when the hound be in full cry , splash in and out of the water , like a naiad in a neat little hunting - habit . 

 Mary look after Maulevrier 's stable when he be away , and have supreme command of a kennel of fox - terrier which cost her brother more money than the Countess would have care to know ; for in the wide area of Lady Maulevrier 's ambition there be no room for two hundred guinea fox - terrier , be they never so perfect . 

 Altogether Mary 's life be a different life when her brother be at home ; and in his absence the good part of her day be spend in think about he and fulfil the duty of her position as his representative in stable and kennel , and among certain rustic in the district , chiefly of the sporting type , who be Maulevrier 's choose ally or protťgťs . 

 never , perhaps , have two girl of patrician lineage live a more secluded life than Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter . they have know no pleasure beyond the narrow sphere of home and home friend . they have never travel they have see hardly anything of the outside world . they have never be to London or Paris , or to any city large than York ; and their visit to that centre of dissipation have be of the brief , a mere flash of mild gaiety , a horticultural show or an oratorio , and back by express train , closely guard by governess and footman , to Fellside . in the autumn , when the leaf be fall in the woode ground of Fellside , the young lady be send , still under guardianship of governess and footman , to some quiet seaside resort between Alnwick and Edinburgh , where Mary live the wild free life she love , roam about the beach , boat , shrimping , seaweed - gathering , make hard work for the governess and footman who have be send in charge of she . 

 Lady Maulevrier never accompany her granddaughter on these occasion . she be a vigorous old woman , straight as a dart , slim as a girl , active in her degree as any young athlete among those hill , and she declare that she never feel the need of change of air . the sodden shrubbery , the fall leaf , do she no harm . never within the memory of this generation have she leave Fellside . her love of this mountain retreat be a kind of culte . she have come here break spirit , perhaps break hearted , bring her dead husband from the little inn at Great Langdale forty year ago , and she have hardly leave the spot since that day . 

 in those day Fellside House be a very different kind of dwelling from the gracious modern Tudor mansion which now crown and beautify the hill - side above Grasmere Lake . it be then an old ramble stone house , with queer little room and inconvenient passage , low ceiling , thatched gable , and all manner of strange nook and corner . Lady Maulevrier be of too strictly conservative a temper to think of pull down an old house which have be in her husband 's family for generation . she leave the original cottage undisturbed , and build her new house at right angle with it , connect the two with a wide passage below and a handsome corridor above , so that access should be perfect in the event of she require the accommodation of the old quaint , low ceile room for her family or her guest . during forty year no such necessity have ever arise ; but the old house , know as the south wing , be still leave intact , the original furniture undisturbed , although the only occupant of the building be her ladyship 's faithful old house - steward , James Steadman , and his elderly wife . 

 the house which Lady Maulevrier have build for herself and her grandchild have not be create all at once , though the nucleus date forty year back be a handsome building . she have add more room as necessity or fancy dictate , now a library with bedroom over it , now a music room for Lady Lesbia and her grand piano anon a billiard - room , as an agreeable surprise for Maulevrier when he come home after a tour in America . thus the house have grow into a long low pile of Tudor masonry steep gable , heavily mullione casement , grey stone wall , curtain with the rich growth of passion - flower , magnolia , clematis , myrtle and rose and all those flower which thrive and flourish in that mild and sheltered spot . 

 the view from those mullione casement be perfect . Switzerland could give hardly any more exquisite picture than that lake shut in by hill , grand and bold in their varied outline , so rich in their colouring that the eye , dazzle with beauty , forget to calculate the actual height of those craggy peak and headland , the mind forget to despise they because they be not so lofty as Mont Blanc or the Matterhorn . the velvet sward of the hill slop steeply downward from Lady Maulevrier 's drawing - room window to the road beside the lake , and this road be so hide by the woode screen which bound her ladyship 's ground that the lake seem to lie in the green heart of her garden , a lovely , placid lake on summer day , reflect the emerald hue of the surround hill , and look like a smooth green meadow , which invite the foot passenger to cross it . 

 the house be approach by a wind carriage drive that lead up and up and up from the road beside the lake , so screened and shelter by shrubbery and pine wood , that the stranger know not whither he be go , till he come upon an opening in the wood , and the stately italian garden in front of a massive stone porch , through which he enter a spacious oak - panel hall , and anon , descend a step or two , he find himself in Lady Maulevrier 's drawing - room , and face to face with that divine view of the everlaste hill , the lake shin below he , bath in sunlight . 

 or if it be the stranger 's evil fate to come in wet weather , he see only a rain - blot landscape the blurred outline of grey mountain peak , scowl at he from the other side of a grey pool . but if the picture without be depressing , the picture within be always good to look upon , for those oak - panel or tapestrie room , communicate by richly - curtain doorway from draw room to library , from library to billiard room , be as perfect as wealth and taste could make they . Lady Maulevrier argue that as there be but one house among all the possession of her race which she care to inhabit , she have a right to make that house beautiful , and she have spar nothing upon the beautification of Fellside ; and yet she have spend much less than would have be squander by any pleasure - love dowager , restlessly rove from Piccadilly to the Engadine , from Pontresina to Nice or Monaco , wind up with Easter in Paris , and then back to Piccadilly . her ladyship 's friend wonder that she could care to bury herself alive in Westmoreland , and expatiate on the eccentricity of such a life ; nay , those who have never see Fellside argue that Lady Maulevrier have take in her old age to hoarding , and that she pig at a cottage in the Lake district , in order to swell a fortune which young Maulevrier would set about squandering as soon as she be in her coffin . but here they be wrong . it be not in Lady Maulevrier 's nature to lead a sordid life in order to save money . yet in these quiet year that be go start with that golden nucleus which her husband be suppose to have bring home from India , obtain no one know how , the Countess have amass one of the large fortune possess by any dowager in the peerage . she have it , and she hold it , with a grasp that nothing but death could loosen ; nay , that all - foresee mind of hers might contrive to cheat grim death itself , and to scheme a way for protect this wealth , even when she who have gather and garner it should be moulder in her grave . the entail estate belong to Maulevrier , be he never such a fool or spendthrift ; but this fortune of the dowager 's be her own , to dispose of as she please , and not a penny of it be likely to go to the young Earl . 

 Lady Maulevrier 's pride and hope be concentrate upon her granddaughter Lesbia . she should be the inheritress of this noble fortune she should spread and widen the power of the Maulevrier race . Lesbia 's son should link the family name with the name of his father ; and if by any hazard of fate the present Earl should die young and childless , the old Countess 's interest should be strain to the uttermost to obtain the title for Lesbia 's offspring . why should she not be Countess of Maulevrier in her own right ? but in order to make this future possible the most important factor in the sum be yet to be find in the person of a husband for Lady Lesbia a husband worthy of peerless beauty and exceptional wealth , a husband whose own fortune should be so important as to make he above suspicion . that be Lady Maulevrier 's scheme to we d wealth to wealth to double or quadruple the fortune she have build up in the long slow year of her widowhood , and thus to make her granddaughter one of the great lady in the land ; for it need hardly be say that the man who be to we d Lady Lesbia must be she equal in wealth and lineage , if not her superior . 

 Lady Maulevrier be not a miser . she be liberal and benevolent to all who come within the circle of her life . wealth for its own sake she value not a jot . but she live in an age in which wealth be power , and ambition be her rule passion . as she have be ambitious for her husband in the day that be go , she be now ambitious for her granddaughter . Time have intensify the keen eagerness of her mind . she have be disappoint , cruelly , bitterly , in the ambition of her youth . she have be make to drink the cup of shame and humiliation . but to this ambition of her old age she hold with even great tenacity . God help she if she should be disappoint here ! 

 it be not to be suppose that so astute a schemer as Lady Maulevrier have not survey the marriage market in order to discover that fortunate youth who should be deem worthy to become the winner of Lesbia 's hand . year ago , when Lesbia be still in the nursery , the dowager have make herself informed of the age , weight , and colour of every likely runner in the matrimonial stake ; or , in plainer word , have keep herself , by her correspondence with a few intimate friend , and her close study of the fashionable newspaper , thoroughly acquaint with the character and exploit , the disposition and antecedent , of those half - dozen eld son , among whom she hop to find Lesbia 's lord and master . she know her peerage by heart , and she know the family history of every house record therein ; the sin and weakness , the folly and loss of bygone year ; the taint , mental and physical ; the lateral branch and intermarriage ; the runaway wife and unfaithful husband ; idiot son or scrofulous daughter . she know everything that be to be know about that aristocratic world into which she have be bear sixty - seven year ago ; and the sum - total of her knowledge be that there be one man whom she desire for her granddaughter 's husband one man , and one only , and into whose hand , when earth and sky should fade from her glaze eye , she could be content to resign the sceptre of power . 

 there be no doubt half - a - dozen , or more , in the list of eld son , who be fairly eligible . but this young man be the Achilles in the rank and file of chivalry , and her soul yearn to have he and no other for her darling . 

 her soul yearn to he with a tenderness which be not all on Lesbia 's account . forty - nine year ago she have fondly love his father love he and have be fain to renounce he ; for Ronald Hollister , afterwards Earl of Hartfield , be then a young son , and the two family have agree that marriage between pauper be an impudent fly in the face of Providence , which must be put down with an iron hand . Lord Hartfield send his son to Turkey in the diplomatic service ; and the old dowager Lady Carrisbrook whisk her niece off to London , and keep she there , under watch and ward , till Lord Maulevrier propose and be accept by she . there should be no foolishness , no clandestine correspondence . the iron hand crush two young heart , and secure a brilliant future for the body which survive . 

 fifteen year later Ronald 's eld brother die unmarried . he abandon that career of vagrant diplomacy which have take he all over Europe , and as far as Washington , and re - appear in London , the most elegant man of his era , but thoroughly blasť . there be rumour of an unhappy attachment in the Faubourg Saint Germain ; of a tragedy at Petersburg . society protest that Lord Hartfield would die a bachelor , as his brother die before he . the Hollisters be not a marry family , say society . but six or seven year after his return to England Lord Hartfield marry Lady Florence Ilmington , a beauty in her first season , and a very sweet but somewhat prudish young person . the marriage result in the birth of an heir , whose appearance upon this mortal stage be follow within a year by his father 's exit . hence the Hartfield property , always a fine estate , have be nurse and fatten during a long minority , and the present Lord Hartfield be repute one of the rich young man of his time . he be also speak of as a superior person , inherit all his father 's intellectual gift , and have the reputation of be singularly free from the vice of profligate youth . he be neither prig nor pedant , and he be very popular in the good society ; but he be not ashamed to let it be see that his ambition soar high than the fashionable world of turf and stable , card and pigeon match . 

 though not of the gay world , nor in it , Lady Maulevrier have contrive to keep herself thoroughly en rapport with society . her few choose friend , with whom she correspond on term of perfect confidence , be among the good people in London not the circulator of club - house canard , the picker - up of second - hand gossip from the society paper , but actor in the comedy of high life , arbiter of fashion and taste , bear and breed in the purple . 

 last season Lord Hartfield 's absence have cast a cloud over the matrimonial horizon . he have be a traveller for more than a year Patagonia , Peru , the Pyramids , Japan , the North Pole society care not where the fact that he be go be all - sufficient . bachelor a shade less eligible come to the front in his absence and become first favourite . Lady Maulevrier , well inform in advance , have defer Lesbia 's presentation till next season , when she be tell Lord Hartfield would certainly re - appear . his plan have be make for return before Christmas ; and it would seem that his scheme of life be lay down with as much precision as if he have be a prince of the blood royal . thus it happen , to Lesbia 's intense disgust , that her dťbut be defer till the verge of her twentieth birthday . it would never do , Lady Maulevrier tell herself , for the edge to be take off the effect which Lesbia 's beauty be to make on society during Lord Hartfield 's absence . he must be there , on the spot , to see this star rise gently and slowly above society 's horizon , and to mark how everybody bow down and worship the new light . 

 ' I shall be an old woman before I appear in society , ' say Lesbia , petulantly ; ' and I shall be like a wild woman of the wood ; for I have see nothing , and know nothing of the civilised world . ' 

 ' you will be ever so much more attractive than the young woman I hear of , who have see and know a great deal too much , ' answer the dowager ; and as her granddaughter know that Lady Maulevrier 's word be a law that alter not , there be no more idle repining . 

 her ladyship give no reason for the postponement of Lesbia 's presentation . she be far too diplomatic to breathe a word of her idea with regard to Lord Hartfield . anything like a matrimonial scheme would have be revolt to Lesbia , who have grand , but not sordid view about matrimony . she think it her mission to appear and to conquer . a crowd of suitor would sigh around she , like the love and grace round that fair Belinda whose story she have read so often ; and it would be her part to choose the most worthy . the day be go when a girl would so much as look at such a fribble as Sir Plume . her virgin fancy demand the tennysonian ideal , the grave and knightly Arthur . 

 but when Lesbia think of the most worthy , it be always of the worthy in her own particular sphere ; and he of course would be title and wealthy , and altogether fit to be her husband . he would take she by the hand and lead she to a high seat on the dai , and place upon her head , or at least upon her letter - paper and the panel of her carriage , a coronet in which the strawberry leaf should stand out more prominently than in her brother 's emblazonment . Lesbia 's mind could not conceive an ignoble marriage , or the possibility of the most worthy happen to be find in a low circle than her own . 

 and now it be the end of July , and the season which should have be glorify by Lady Lesbia 's dťbut be over and do with . she have read in the society paper of all the ball , and birthday , and race meeting , and regatta , and cricket match , and gown , and parasol , and bonnet what this beauty wear on such an occasion , and how that other beauty look on another occasion and she feel as she read like a spell - bind princess in a fairy tale , mew up in a battlemented tower , and deprive of her legitimate share in all the pleasure of earth . she have no patience with Mary that wild , unkempt , ungraceful creature , who could be as happy as summer day be long , race about the hill with her bamboo alpenstock , riot with a pack of fox - terrier , practise long loser , row on the lake , do all thing unbecoming Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter . 

 that long rainy day drag its slow length to a close ; and then come fine day , in which molly and her fox - terrier go wander over the sunlit hill , skip and dance across the mountain streamlet gill , as they be call in this particular world almost as gaily as the shadow of fleecy cloudlet dance up yonder in the windy sky . molly spend half her day among the hill , steal off from governess and grandmother and the stately beauty sister , and sometimes hardly be miss by they , so ill do her young exuberance harmonise with their calm life . 

 ' one can tell when Mary be at home by a perpetual banging of door , ' say Lesbia , which be a sisterly exaggeration found upon fact , for Molly be give to impetuous rushing in and out of room when that eager spirit of hers impel the light lithe body upon some new expedition . nor be the society of fox - terrier conducive to repose or stateliness of movement ; and Maulevrier 's terrier , although strictly forbid the house , be for ever break bond and leap in upon Molly 's retirement at all unreasonable hour . she and they be enchant to get away from the beautiful luxurious room , and to go rove by hill - side and force , away to Easedale Tarn , to bask for hour on the grassy margin of the deep still water , or to row round and round the mountain lake in a rotten boat . it be here , or in some kindre spot , that Molly get through most of her reading here that she read Shakespeare , Byron , and Shelley , and Wordsworth dwelling lingeringly and lovingly upon every line in which that good old man speak of her native land . sometimes she climb to high ground , and feel herself ever so much near heaven upon the crest of Silver Howe , or upon the rugged stony steep of Dolly Waggon pike , half way up the dark brow of Helvellyn ; sometimes she disappear for hour , and climb to the summit of the hill , and wander in perilous pathway on Striding Edge , or by the dark still water of the Red Tarn . this have be her life ever since she have be old enough to have an independent existence ; and the hill and the lake , and the book of her own choosing , have do a great deal more in ripen her mind than Fršulein M ller and that admirable series of educational work which have be provide for the tuition of modern youth . grammar and geography , primer and elementary work of all kind , be Mary 's detestation ; but she love book that touch her heart and fill her mind with thought wide and deep enough to reach into the infinite of time and space , the mystery of mind and matter , life and death . 

 nothing occur to break the placid monotony of life at Fellside for three long day after that rainy morning ; and then come an event which , although commonplace enough in itself , mark the beginning of a new era in the existence of Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter . 

 it be evening , and the two girl be dawdle about on the slop lawn before the drawing - room window , where Lady Maulevrier read the newspaper in her own particular chair by one of those broad Tudor window , accord to her infallible custom . remote as her life bad be from the busy world , her ladyship have never allow her knowledge of public life and the bent of modern thought to fall into arrear . she take a keen interest in politic , in progress of all kind . she be a staunch conservative , and look upon every liberal politician as her personal enemy ; but she take care to keep herself informed of everything that be be say or do in the enemy 's camp . she have an intense respect for Lord Bacon 's maxim : Knowledge be power . it be a kind of power secondary to the power of wealth , perhaps ; but wealth unprotecte by wisdom would soon dwindle into poverty . 

 Lady Lesbia saunter about the lawn , look very elegant in her cream - colour indian silk gown , very listless , very tired of her lovely surrounding . neither lake nor mountain possess any charm for she . she have have too much of they . Mary roam about with a swifter footstep , look at the rose , pluck off a dead leaf , or a canker bud here and there . presently she tear across the lawn to the shrubbery which screen the lawn and flower garden from the wind carriage drive sink many foot below , and disappear in a thicket of arbutus and irish yew . 

 ' what terribly hoydenish manner ! ' murmur Lesbia , with a languid shrug of her shoulder , as she stroll back to the drawing - room . 

 she care very little for the newspaper , for politic not at all ; but anything be well than everlasting contemplation of the blue still water , and the rugged crest of Helm Crag . 

 ' what be the matter with Mary that she rush off like a mad woman ? ' inquire Lady Maulevrier , look up from the Times . 

 ' I have not   the least idea . Mary 's movement be quite beyond the limit of my comprehension . perhaps she have go after a bird's - nest . ' 

 Mary be intent upon no bird' - nest . her quick ear have catch the sound of manly voice in the wind drive under the pine wood ; and surely , yes , surely one be a clear and familiar voice , which herald the coming of happiness . in such a moment she seem to have wing . she become unconscious that she touch the earth ; she go skim bird - like over the lawn , and in and out , with flutter muslin frock , among arbutus and bay , yew and laurel , till she stand poise lightly on the top of the woode bank which border the steep ascent to Lady Maulevrier 's gate , look down at two figure which be saunter up the drive . 

 they be both young man , both tall , broad - shoulder , manly , walk with the easy swing movement of man accustom to active exercise . one , the handsomer of the two in Mary 's eye , since she think he simply perfection , be fair - haired , blue - eye , the typical Saxon . this be Lord Maulevrier . the other be dark , bronze by foreign travel , perhaps , with black hair , cut very close to an intelligent - looking head , bar to the evening breeze . 

 ' Hulloa ! ' cry Maulevrier . ' there be Molly . how d'ye do , old girl ? ' 

 the two man look up , and molly look down . delight at her brother 's return so fill her heart and mind that there be no room leave for embarrassment at the appearance of a stranger . 

 ' O , Maulevrier , I be so glad ! I have be pin for you . why do not   you write to say you be come ? it would have be something to look forward to . ' 

 ' could not . never know from day to day what I be go to be up to ; besides , I know I should find you at home . ' 

 ' of course . we be always at home , ' say Mary ; ' go up to the house as fast as ever you can . I will go and tell grandmother . ' 

 ' and tell they to get we some dinner , ' say Maulevrier . 

 Mary 's flutter figure dip and be go , vanish in the dark labyrinth of shrub . the two young man saunter up to the house . 

 ' we need not   hurry , ' say Maulevrier to his companion , whom he have not take the trouble to introduce to his sister . ' we shall have to wait for our dinner . ' 

 ' and we shall have to change our dusty clothe , ' add the other ; ' I hope that man will bring our portmanteaux in time . ' 

 ' oh , we need not   dress . we can spend the evening in my den , if you like ! ' 

 Mary fly across the lawn again , and bound up the step of the verandah a picturesque swiss verandah which make a cover promenade in front of the house . 

 ' Mary , may I ask the meaning of this excitement , ' inquire her ladyship , as the breathless girl stand before she . 

 ' Maulevrier have come home . ' 

 ' at last ? ' 

 ' and he have bring a friend . ' 

 ' indeed ! he might have do I the honour to inquire if his friend 's visit would be agreeable . what kind of person ? ' 

 ' I have no idea . I do not   look at he . Maulevrier be look so well . they will be here in a minute . may I order dinner for they ? ' 

 ' of course , they must have dinner , ' say her ladyship , resignedly , as if the whole thing be an infliction ; and Mary run out and interview the butler , beg that all thing might be make particularly comfortable for the traveller . it be nine o'clock , and the servant be enjoy their eventide repose . 

 have give her order , Mary go back to the drawing - room , impatiently expectant of her brother 's arrival , for which event Lesbia and her grandmother wait with perfect tranquillity , the dowager calmly continue the perusal of her Times , while Lesbia sit at her piano in a shadowy corner , and play one of Mendelssohn 's soft Lieder . to these dreamy strain Maulevrier and his friend presently enter . 

 ' how d'ye do , grandmother ? how do , Lesbia ? this be my very good friend and canadian travel companion , Jack Hammond Lady Maulevrier , Lady Lesbia . ' 

 ' very glad to see you , Mr. Hammond , ' say the dowager , in a tone so purely conventional that it might mean anything . ' Hammond ? I ought to remember your family the Hammonds of - - ' 

 ' of nowhere , ' answer the stranger in the easy tone ; ' I spring from a race of nobody , of whose existence your ladyship be not likely to have hear . ' 

 CHAPTER VI . 

 MAULEVRIER 's HUMBLE FRIEND . 


 that faint interest which Lady Lesbia have feel in the advent of a stranger dwindle to nothing after Mr. Hammond 's frank avowal of his insignificance . at the very beginning of her career , with the world wait to be conquer by she , a high - bear beauty could not be expect to feel any interest in nobody . Lesbia shake hand with her brother , honour the stranger with a stately bend of her beautiful throat , and then withdraw herself from their society altogether as it be , and begin to explore her basket of crewel , at a distant table , by the soft light of a shaded lamp , while Maulevrier answer his grandmother 's question , and Mary stand watch he , hang on his word , as if unconscious of any other presence . 

 Mr. Hammond go over to the window and look out at the view . the moon be rise above the amphitheatre of hill , and her ray be silver the placid bosom of the lake . light be dot here and there about the valley , telling of village life . the Prince of Wales 's hotel yonder sparkle with its many light , like a castle in a fairy tale . the stranger have look upon many a grander scene , but on none more lovely . here be lake and mountain in little , without the snow - peak and awful inaccessible region of solitude and peril ; homely hill that one might climb , placid english vale in which english poet have live and die . 

 ' Hammond and I mean to spend a month or six week with you , if you can make we comfortable , ' say Maulevrier . 

 ' I be delighted to hear that you can contemplate stay a month anywhere , ' reply her ladyship . ' your usual habit be as restless as if your life be a disease . it shall not be my fault if you and Mr. Hammond be uncomfortable at Fellside . ' 

 there be courtesy , but no cordiality in the reply . if Mr. Hammond be a sensitive man , touchily conscious of his own obscurity , he must have feel that he be not want at Fellside that he be an excrescence , matter in the wrong place . 

 nobody have present the stranger to Lady Mary . it never enter into Maulevrier 's mind to be ceremonious about his sister molly . she be so much a part of himself that it seem as if anyone who know he must need know she . molly sit a little way from the window by which Mr. Hammond be stand , and look at he doubtfully , wonderingly , with not altogether a friendly eye , as he stand with his profile turn to she , and his eye upon the landscape . she be inclined to be jealous of her brother 's friend , who would most likely deprive she of much of that beloved society . Hitherto she have be Maulevrier 's choose companion , at Fellside indeed , his sole companion after the dismissal of his tutor . now this brown , bearded stranger would usurp her privilege those two young man would go roam over the hill , fishing , otter - hunting , go to distant wrestling match and leave she at home . it be a hard thing , and she be prepared to detest the interloper . even to - night she would be a loser by his presence . under ordinary circumstance she would have go to the dining - room with Maulevrier , and sit by he and wait upon he as he eat . but she dare not intrude herself upon a meal that be to be share with a stranger . 

 she look at John Hammond critically , eager to find fault with his appearence ; but unluckily for her present humour there be not much room for fault - finding . 

 he be tall , broad - shoulder , well - build . his enemy would hardly deny that he be good - look nay , even handsome . the massive regular feature be irreproachable . he be more sunburnt than a gentleman ought to be , Mary think . she tell herself that his good look be of a vulgar quality , like those of Charles Ford , the champion wrestler , whom she see at the sport the other day . why do Maulevrier pick up a companion who be evidently not of his own sphere ? hoydenish , plain - speak , frank and affectionate as Mary Haselden be , she know that she belong to a race apart , that there be circle beneath circle , below her own world , circle which hers could never touch , and she suppose Mr. Hammond to be some waif from one of those nethermost world a village doctor 's son , perhaps , or even a tradesman 's send to the University by some benevolent busybody , and place at a disadvantage ever afterwards , an unfortunate anomaly , suspend between two world like Mahomet 's coffin . 

 the butler announce that his lordship 's dinner be serve . 

 ' come along , molly , ' say Maulevrier ; ' come and tell I about the terrier , while I eat my dinner . ' 

 Mary hesitate , glance doubtfully at her grandmother , who make no sign , and then slip out of the room , hang fondly on her brother 's arm , and almost forget that there be any such person as Mr. Hammond in existence . 

 when these three be go Lady Lesbia express herself strongly upon Maulevrier 's folly in bring such a person as Mr. Hammond to Fellside . 

 ' what be we to do with he , grandmother ? ' she say , pettishly . ' be he to live with we , and be one of we , a person of whose belonging we know positively nothing , who own that his people be common ? ' 

 ' my dear , he be your brother 's friend , and we have the right to suppose he be a gentleman . ' 

 ' not on that account , ' say Lesbia , more sharply than she will not . ' do not   he make a friend , or almost a friend of Jack Howell , the huntsman , and of Ford , the wrestler . I have no confidence in Maulevrier 's idea of fitness . ' 

 ' we shall find out all about this Mr. Hamleigh no Hammond in a day or two , ' reply her ladyship , placidly ; ' and in the meantime we must tolerate he , and be grateful to he if he reconcile Maulevrier to remain at Fellside for the next six week . ' 

 Lesbia be silent . she do not consider Maulevrier 's presence at Fellside an unmitigated advantage , or , indeed , his presence anywhere . those two be not sympathetic . Maulevrier make fun of his eld sister 's perfection , chaff she intolerably about the great man she be go to captivate , in her first season , the great house in which she be go to reign . Lesbia despise he for that neglect of all his opportunity of culture which have leave he , after the most orthodox and costly curriculum , almost as ignorant as a ploughboy . she despise a man whose only delight be in horse and hound , gun and fishing - tackle . molly would have care very little for the gun or the fishing - tackle perhaps in the abstract ; but she care for everything that interested Maulevrier , even to the bagful of rat which be let loose in the stable - yard sometimes , for the education of a particularly game fox - terrier . 

 there be plenty of talk and laughter at the dinner - table , while the Countess and Lady Lesbia converse gravely and languidly in the dimly - light drawing - room . the dinner be excellent , and both traveller be ravenous . they have eat nothing since breakfast , and have drive from windermere on the top of the coach in the keen evening air . when the sharp edge of the appetite be blunt , Maulevrier begin to talk of his adventure since he and Molly have last meet . he have not be dissipate in London all the time or , indeed , any great part of the time of his absence from Fellside ; but Molly have be leave in Cimmerian , darkness as to his proceeding . he never write a letter if he could possibly avoid do so . if it become a vital necessity to he to communicate with anyone he telegraph , or , in his own language , ' wire ' to that person ; but to sit down at a desk and labour with pen and ink be not within his capacity or his view of his mission in life . 

 ' if a fellow be to write letter he might as well be a clerk in an office , ' he say , ' and sit on a high stool . ' 

 thus it happen that when Maulevrier be away from Fellside , no fair ch telaine of the Middle Ages could be more ignorant of the movement or whereabout of her crusader knight than Mary be of her brother 's going on . she could but pray for he with fond and faithful prayer , and wait and hope for his return . and now he tell she that thing have go badly with he at Epsom , and bad at Ascot , that he have be , as he express it , ' up a tree , ' and that he have go off to the Black Forest directly the Ascot week be over , and at Rippoldsau he have meet his old friend and fellow traveller , Hammond , and they have go for a walk tour together among the homely village , the watchmaker , the timber cutter , the pretty peasant girl . they have dance at fair and shoot at village sport and have altogether enjoy the thing . Hammond , who be something of an artist , have sketch a good deal . Maulevrier have do nothing but smoke his german pipe and enjoy himself . 

 ' I be glad to find myself in a world where a horse be an exception and not the rule , ' he say . 

 ' oh , how I should love to see the Black Forest ! ' cry Mary , who know the first part of Faust by heart , albeit she have never be give permission to read it , ' the gnome and the witch der Freisch tz all that be lovely . of course , you go up the Brocken ? ' 

 ' of course , ' answer Mr. Hammond ; ' Mephistopheles be our valet de place , and we go up among a company of witch rid on broomstick . ' and then quote , 

 ' Seh ' die Bšume hinter Bšumen , 
 Wie sie schnell vor berr cken , 
 Und die Klippen , die sich b cken , 
 Und die langen Felsennasen , 
 Wie sie schnarchen , wie sie blasen ! ' 
 this be the first time he have address himself directly to Mary , who sit close to her brother 's side , and never take her eye from his face , ready to pour out his wine or to change his plate , for the serve - man have be dismiss at the beginning of this unceremonious meal . 

 Mary look at the stranger almost as superciliously as Lesbia might have do . she be not inclined to be friendly to her brother 's friend . 

 ' do you read German ? ' she inquire , with a touch of surprise . 

 ' you have well ask he what language he do not read or speak , ' say her brother . ' Hammond be an admirable Crichton , my dear by - the - by , who be admirable Crichton ? know everything , can twist your little head the right way upon any subject . ' 

 ' oh , ' think Mary , ' highly cultivate , be he ? very proper in a man who be educate on charity to have work his hard at the University . ' 

 she be not prepared to think very kindly of young man who have be successful in their college career , since poor Maulevrier have make such a dismal failure of his , have be gate and send down , and plough , and have everything ignominious do to he that could be do , which ignominy have involve an expenditure of money that Lady Maulevrier bemoan and lament until this day . because her brother have not be virtuous , Mary grudge virtuous young man their triumph and their honour . great , raw - boned fellow , who have take their degree at Scotch Universities , come to Oxford and Cambridge and sweep the board , Maulevrier have tell she , when his own failure demand explanation . perhaps this Mr. Hammond have graduate north of the Tweed , and have come southward to rob the native . Mary be not any more inclined to be civil to he because he be a linguist . he have a pleasant manner , frank and easy , a good voice , a cheery laugh . but she have not yet make up her mind that he be a gentleman . 

 ' if some benevolent old person be to take a fancy to Charles Ford , the wrestler , and send he to a Scotch University , I daresay he would turn out just as fine a fellow , ' she think , Ford be somewhat of a favourite as a local hero . 

 the two young man go off to the billiard - room after they have din . it be half - past ten by this time , and , of course , Mary do not go with they . she bid her brother good - night at the dining - room door . 

 ' good - night , molly ; be sure you be up early to show I the dog , ' say Maulevrier , after an affectionate kiss . 

 ' good - night , Lady Mary , ' say Mr. Hammond , hold out his hand , albeit she have no idea of shake hand with he . 

 she allow her hand to rest for an instant in that strong , friendly grasp . she have not rise to give a couple of finger to a person whom she consider her inferior ; but she be inclined to snub Mr. Hammond as rather a presume young man . 

 ' well , Jack , what do you think of my beauty sister ? ' ask his lordship , as he choose his cue from the well - fill rack . 

 the lamp be light , the table uncover and ready , Carambole in his place , albeit it be month since any player have enter the room . everything which concern Maulevrier 's comfort or pleasure be do as if by magic at Fellside ; and Mary be the household fairy whose influence secure this happy state of thing . 

 ' what can any man think except that she be as lovely as the fine of Reynold 's portrait , as that Lady Diana Beauclerk of Colonel Aldridge 's , or the Kitty Fisher , or any example you please to name of womanly loveliness ? ' 

 ' glad to hear it , ' answer Maulevrier , chalk his cue ; ' can not   say I admire she myself not my style , do not   you know . too much of my lady Di too little of poor Kitty . but still , of course , it always please a fellow to know that his people be admire ; and I know that my grandmother have view , grand view , ' smile down at his cue . ' shall I break ? ' and he begin with the usual miss in baulk . 

 ' thank you , ' say Mr. Hammond , begin to play . ' matrimonial view , of course . very natural that her ladyship should expect such a lovely creature to make a great match . be there no one in view ? have there be no family conclave no secret treaty ? be the young lady fancy free ? ' 

 ' perfectly . she have be bury alive here ; except parson and a few decent people whom she be allow to meet now and then at the house about here , she have see nothing of the world . my grandmother have keep Lesbia as close as a nun . she be not so fond of Molly , and that young person have wild way of her own , and give everybody the slip . by - the - by , how do you like my little Moll ? ' 

 the adjective be hardly accurate about a young lady who measure five foot six , but Maulevrier have not yet grow out of the idea belong to that period when Mary be really his little sister , a girl of twelve , with long hair and short petticoat . 

 Mr. Hammond be slow to reply . Mary have not make a very strong impression upon he . dazzle by her sister 's pure and classical beauty , he have no eye for Mary 's homelier charm . she seem to he a frank , affectionate girl , not too well - mannered ; and that be all he think of she . 

 ' I be afraid Lady Mary do not like I , ' he say , after his shot , which give he time for reflection . 

 ' oh , Molly be rather farouche in her manner ; never would train fine , do not   you know . her ladyship lecture till she be tired , and now Mary run wild , and I suppose will be leave at grass till six month before her presentation , and then they will put she on the pillar - rein a bit to give she a well mouth . good shot , by Jove ! ' 

 John Hammond be use to his lordship 's style of conversation , and understand his friend at all time . Maulevrier be not an intellectual companion , and the distance be wide between the two man ; but his lordship 's gaiety , good - nature , and acuteness make amend for all shortcoming in culture . and then Mr. Hammond may have be one of those good conservative who do not expect very much intellectual power in an hereditary legislator . 

 CHAPTER VII . 

 in the SUMMER morning . 


 John Hammond love the wild freshness of morning , and be always eager to explore a new locality ; so he be up at five o'clock next morning , and out of door before six . he leave the sophisticated beauty of the Fellside garden below he , and climb higher and high up the Fell , till he be able to command a bird's - eye view of the lake and village , and just under his foot , as it be , Lady Maulevrier 's favourite abode . he be provide with a landscape glass which he always carry in his ramble , and with the aid of this he could see every stone of the building . 

 the house , add to at her ladyship 's pleasure , and without regard to cost , cover a considerable extent of ground . the new part consist of a straight range of about a hundred and twenty foot , face the lake , and commandingly place on the crest of a steepish slope ; the old building , at right angle with the new , make a quadrangle , the third and fourth side of which be form by the dead wall of servant ' room and coach - house , which have no window upon this inner enclose side . the old building be low and irregular , one portion of the roof thatch , another tile . in the quadrangle there be an old - fashioned garden , with geometrical flower - bed , a yew tree hedge , and a stone sun - dial in the centre . a peacock stalk about in the morning light , and greet the newly rise sun with a discordant scream . presently a man come out of a half glass door under a verandah which shade one side of the quadrangle , and stroll about the garden , stop here and there to cut a dead rose , or trim a geranium , a stoutly - build broad shoulder man , with gray hair and beard , the image of well - feed respectability . 

 Mr. Hammond wonder a little at the man 's leisurely movement as he saunter about , whistle to the peacock . it be not the manner of a servant who have duty to perform rather that of a gentleman live at ease , and hardly know how to get rid of his time . 

 " some superior functionary , I suppose , " think Hammond , " the house - steward , perhaps . " 

 he ramble a long way over the hill , and come back to Fellside by a path of his own discovering , which bring he to a wooden gate lead into the stable - yard , just in time to meet Maulevrier and Lady Mary emerge from the kennel , where his lordship have be inspect the terrier . 

 ' Angelina be bully about the muzzle , ' say Maulevrier ; ' we shall have to give she away . ' 

 ' oh , do not , ' cry Mary . ' she be a most perfect darling , and laugh so deliciously whenever she see I . ' 

 Angelina be in Lady Mary 's arm at this moment ; a beautifully mark little creature , all thew and sinew , palpitate with suppress emotion , and grin to her heart 's content . 

 Lady Mary look very fresh and bright in her neat tailor gown , kilte kirtle , and tight - fitting bodice , with neat little brass button . it be a gown of Maulevrier 's ordering , make at his own tailor 's . her splendid chestnut hair be uncover , the short crisp curl about her forehead dance in the morning air . her large , bright , brown eye be dance , too , with delight at have her brother home again . 

 she shake hand with Mr. Hammond more graciously than last night ; but still with a carelessness which be not complimentary , look at he absently , as if she hardly know that he be there , and hug Angelina all the time . 

 Hammond tell his friend about his ramble over the hill , yonder , up above that homely bench call ' rest , and be thankful , ' on the crest of Loughrigg Fell . he be begin to learn the name of the hill already . Yonder darkle brow , rugged , gloomy looking , be Nab Scar ; yonder green slope of sunny pasture , stretch wide its two arm as if to enfold the valley , be Fairfield ; and here , close on the left , as he face the lake , be Silver Howe and Helm Crag , with that stony excrescence on the summit of the latter know as the ' Lion and the Lamb . ' Lady Maulevrier 's house stand within a circle of mountain peak and long fell , which wall in the deep , placid , fertile valley . 

 ' if you be not too tired to see the garden , we might show they to you before breakfast , ' say Maulevrier . ' we have three - quarter of an hour to the good . ' 

 ' half an hour for a stroll , and a quarter to make myself presentable after my long walk , ' say Hammond , who do not wish to face the dowager and Lady Lesbia in disorder apparel . Lady Mary be such an obvious Tomboy that he might be pardon for leave she out of the question . 

 they set out upon an exploration of the garden , Mary cling to her brother 's arm , as if she want to make sure of he , and still carry Angelina . 

 the garden be as other garden , but pass beautiful . the slop lawn and richly - timbere bank , wind shrubbery , broad terrace cut on the side of the hill , give infinite variety . all that wealth and taste and labour could do to make those ground beautiful have be do the rare conifer , the lovely flower shrub grow and flourish there , and the flower bloom as they bloom only in Lakeland , where every cottage garden can show a wealth of luxurious bloom , unknown in more exposed and arid district . Mary be very proud of those garden . she have love they and work in they from her babyhood , trot about on chubby leg after some choose old gardener , carry a few weed or withered leaf in her pinafore , and fancy herself useful . 

 ' I help ' oo , do not   I , Teeven ? ' she use to say to the gray - head old gardener , who first teach she to distinguish flower from weed . 

 ' I shall never learn as much out of these horrid book as poor old Stevens teach I , ' she say afterwards , when the gray head be at rest under the sod , and governess , botany manual , and hard word from the Greek be the order of the day . 

 nine o'clock be the breakfast hour at Fellside . there be no family prayer . Lady Maulevrier do not pretend to be pious , and she put no restraint of piety upon other people . she go to Church on Sunday morning for the sake of example ; but she read all the new scientific book , subscribe to the Anthropological Society , and think as the new scientific people think . she rarely communicate her opinion among her own sex ; but now and then , in strictly masculine and superior society , she have be hear to express herself freely upon the nebular hypothesis and the doctrine of evolution . 

 ' after all , what do it matter ? ' she say , finally , with her grand air ; ' I have only to marry my granddaughter creditably , and prevent my grandson go to the dog , and then my mission on this insignificant planet will be accomplish . what new form that particular modification of molecule which you call Lady Maulevrier may take afterwards be hide in the great mystery of material life . ' 

 there be no family prayer , therefore , at Fellside . the sister have be properly educate in their religious duty , have be teach the anglican faith carefully and well by their governess , Fršulein M ller , who have become a staunch anglican before enter the family of the english nobility , and by the kind Vicar of Grasmere , who take a warm interest in the orphan girl . their grandmother have give they to understand that they might be as religious as they like . she would be no let or hindrance to their piety ; but they must ask she no awkward question . 

 ' I have read a great deal and think a great deal , and my idea be still in a state of transition , ' she tell Lesbia ; and Lesbia , who be somewhat automatic in her piety , have no desire to know more . 

 Lady Maulevrier seldom appear in the forenoon . she be an early riser , be too vivid and highly string a creature , even at sixty - seven year of age , to give way to sloth . she rise at seven , summer and winter , but she spend the early part of the day in her own room , reading , writing , give order to her housekeeper , and occasionally interview Steadman , who , without any onerous duty , be certainly the most influential person in the house . People in the village talk of he , and envy he so good a berth . he have a gentleman 's house to live in , and to all appearance live as a gentleman . this tranquil retirement , free from care or labour , be a rich reward for the faithful service of his youth . and it be know by the well informed among the Grasmere people that Mr. Steadman be save money , and have share in the north - Western Railway . these fact have ooze out , of themselves , as it be . he be not a communicative man , and rarely waste half an hour at the snug little inn near St. Oswald 's Church , amidst the cluster of habitation that be once call Kirktown . he be an unsociable man , people say , and think himself well than Grasmere folk , the lodge - house keeper , and guide , and wrestler , and the honest friendly soul who be the outcome of that band of norwegian exile which find a home in these peaceful vale . 

 Miss M ller , more commonly know as Fršulein , officiate at breakfast . she never appear at the board when Lady Maulevrier be present , but in her ladyship 's absence Miss M ller be guardian of the propriety . she be a stout , kindly creature , and by no mean a formidable dragon . when the gong sound , John Hammond go into the dining - room , where he find Miss M ller seat alone in front of the urn . 

 he bow , quick to read ' governess ' or ' companion ' in the lady 's appearance ; and she bow . 

 ' I hope you have have a nice walk , ' she say . ' I see you from my bedroom window . ' 

 ' do you ? then I suppose yours be one of the few window which look into that curious old quadrangle ? ' 

 ' no , there be no window look into the quadrangle . those that be in the original plan of the house be wall up at her ladyship 's order , to keep out the cold wind which sweep down from the hill in winter and early spring , when the edge of Loughrigg Fell be white with snow . my window look into the garden , and I see you there with his lordship and Lady Mary . ' 

 Lady Lesbia come in at this moment , and salute Mr. Hammond with a haughty inclination of her beautiful head . she look lovelier in her simple morning gown of pale blue cambric than in her more elaborate toilette of last evening ; such purity of complexion , such lustrous eye ; the untarnished beauty of youth , breathe the delicate freshness of a newly - open flower . she might be as scornful as she please , yet John Hammond could not withhold his admiration . he be inclined to admire a woman who keep he at a distance ; for the general bent of young woman now - a - day be otherwise . 

 Maulevrier and Mary come in , and everyone sit down to breakfast . Lady Lesbia unbent a little presently , and smile upon the stranger . there be a relief in a stranger 's presence . he talk of new thing , place and people she have never see . she brighten and become quite friendly , deign to invite the expression of Mr. Hammond 's opinion upon music and art , and after breakfast allow he to follow she into the drawing - room , and to linger there fascinate for half an hour , look over her new book , and her last batch of music , but look most of all at she , while Maulevrier and Mary be loaf on the lawn outside . 

 ' what be you go to do with yourself this morning ? ' ask Maulevrier , appear suddenly at the window . 

 ' anything you like , ' answer Hammond . ' stay , there be one pilgrimage I be eager to make . I must see Wordsworth 's grave , and Wordsworth 's house . ' 

 ' you shall see they both , but they be in opposite direction one at your elbow , the other a four mile walk . which will you see first ? we will toss for it , ' take a shilling from a pocketful of loose cash , always ready for moment of hesitation . ' head , house ; tail , grave . tail it be . come and have a smoke , and see the poet 's grave . the splendour of the monument , the exquisite neatness with which it be keep , will astound you , consider that we live in a period of Wordsworth worship . ' 

 Hammond hesitate , and look at Lady Lesbia . 

 ' be not   you come ? ' call Maulevrier from the lawn . ' it be a fair offer . I have   get my cigarette case . ' 

 ' yes , I be come , ' answer the other , with a disappointed air . 

 he have hop that Lesbia would offer to show he the poet 's grave . he could not abandon that hope without a struggle . 

 ' will you come with we , Lady Lesbia ? we will suppress the cigarette ! ' 

 ' thank , no , ' she say , become suddenly frigid . ' I be go to practice . ' 

 ' do you never walk in the morning on such a lovely morning as this ? ' 

 ' not very often . ' 

 she have re - enter those frozen region from which his attention have lure he for a little while . she have remind herself of the inferior social position of this person , in whose conversation she have allow herself to be interested . 

 ' Filons ! ' cry Maulevrier from below , and they go . 

 Mary would have very much like to go with they , but she do not want to be intrusive ; so she go off to the kennel to see the terrier eat their morning and only meal of dog biscuit . 

 CHAPTER VIII . 

 there be always a skeleton . 


 the two young man stroll through the village , Maulevrier pause to exchange greeting with almost everyone he meet , and so to the rustic churchyard , above the beck . 

 the beck be swollen with late rain , and be brawl merrily over its stony bed ; the churchyard grass be deep and cool and shadowy under the cluster branch . the poet 's tomb be disappointing in its unlovely simplicity , its stern , slatey hue . the plain granite cross would have satisfy Mr. Hammond , or a cross in pure white marble , with a sculptured lamb at the base . surely the lamb , emblem at once pastoral and sacred , ought to enter into any monument to Wordsworth ; but that gray headstone , with its catalogue of date , those stern iron railing be these fit memorial of one whose soul so love nature 's loveliness ? 

 after Mr. Hammond have see the little old , old church , and the medallion portrait inside , have see all that Maulevrier could show he , in fact , the two young man go back to the place of graf , and sit on the low parapet above the beck , smoke their cigarette , and talk with that perfect unreserve which can only obtain between man who be old and try friend . they talk , as it be only natural they should talk , of that household at Fellside , where all thing be new to John Hammond . 

 ' you like my sister Lesbia ? ' say Maulevrier . 

 ' like she ! well , yes . the difficulty with most man must be not to worship she . ' 

 ' ah , she be not my style . and she be beastly proud . ' 

 ' a little hauteur give piquancy to her beauty ; I admire a grand woman . ' 

 ' so do I in a picture . Titian 's Queen of Cyprus , or any party of that kind ; but for flesh and blood I like humility a woman who know she be human , and not infallible , and only just a little well than you or I . when I choose a wife , she will be no such example of cultivate perfection as my sister Lesbia . I want no goddess , but a nice little womanly woman , to jog along the rough and tumble road of life with I . ' 

 ' Lady Maulevrier 's influence , no doubt , have in a great measure determine the bent of your sister 's character : and from what you have tell I about her ladyship , I should think a fix idea of her own superiority would be inevitable in any girl train by she . ' 

 ' yes , she be a proud woman a proud , hard woman and she have steep Lesbia 's mind in all her own pet idea and prejudice . yet , God know , we have little reason to hold our head high , ' say Maulevrier , with a gloomy look . 

 John Hammond do not reply to this remark : perhaps there be some difficulty for a man situate as he be in find a fit reply . he smoke in silence , look down at the pure swift water of the Rotha tumble over the crag and boulder below . 

 ' do not   somebody say there be always a skeleton in the cupboard , and the nobler and more ancient the race the big the skeleton ? ' say Maulevrier , with a philosophical air . 

 ' yes , your family secret be an attribute of a fine old race . the Pelopida , for instance in their case it be not a single skeleton , but a whole charnel house . I do not   think your skeleton need trouble you , Maulevrier . it belong to the remote past . ' 

 ' those thing never belong to the past , ' say the young man . ' if it be any other kind of taint profligacy madness , even the story of a duel that go very near murder a runaway wife a rebellious son a cruel husband . I have hear such story hint at in the record of family . but our story mean disgrace . I seldom see stranger put their head together at the club without fancy they be tell each other about my grandfather , and point I out as the grandson and heir of a thief . ' 

 ' why use unduly hard word ? ' 

 ' why should I stoop to sophistication with you , my friend . Dishonesty be dishonesty all the world over ; and to plunder Rajahs on a large scale be no less vile than to pick a pocket on Ludgate Hill . ' 

 ' nothing be ever prove against your grandfather . ' 

 ' no , he die in the nick of time , and the inquiry be squash , thank to the Angersthorpe interest , and my grandmother 's cleverness . but if he have live a few week long England would have ring with the story of his profligacy and dishonour . some people say he commit suicide in order to escape the inquiry ; but I have hear my mother emphatically deny this . my father tell she that he have often talk with the people who keep the little inn where his father die , and they be clear enough in their assertion that the death be a natural death the sudden collapse of an exhausted constitution . ' 

 ' be it on account of this scandal that your father spend the good part of his life away from England ? ' Hammond ask , feel that it be a relief to Maulevrier to talk about this secret burden of his . 

 the young Earl be light - hearted and frivolous by nature , yet even he have his graver moment ; and upon this subject of the old Maulevrier scandal he be peculiarly sensitive , perhaps all the more so because his grandmother have never allow he to speak to she about it , have never satisfy his curiosity upon any detail of that painful story . 

 ' I have very little doubt it be so though I be not   old enough when he die to hear as much from his own lip . my father go straight from the University to Vienna , where he begin his career in the diplomatic service , and where he soon afterwards marry a dowerless english girl of good family . he go to Rio as first secretary , and die of fever within seven year of his marriage , leave a widow and three baby , the young in long clothe . mother and baby all come over to England , and be at once establish at Fellside . I can remember the voyage and I can remember my poor mother who never recover the blow of my father 's death , and who die in yonder house , after five year of broken health and broken spirit . we have no one but the dowager to look to as child hardly another friend in the world . she do what she like with we ; she keep the girl as close as nun , so they have never hear a hint of the old history ; no breach of scandal have reach their ear . but she could not shut I up in a country house for ever , though she do succeed in keep I away from a public school . the time come when I have to go to the University , and there I hear all that have be say about Lord Maulevrier . the man who tell I about the old scandal in a friendly way pretend not to believe it ; but one night , when I have get into a row at a wine - party with a tailor 's son , he tell I that if his father be a snip my grandfather be a thief , and so he think himself the well breed of the two . I smash his nose for he , but as it be a decided pug before the row begin , that hardly square the matter . ' 

 ' do you ever hear the exact story ? ' 

 ' I have hear a dozen story ; and if only a quarter of they be true my grandfather be a scoundrel . it seem that he be immensely popular for the first year or so of his government , give more splendid entertainment than have be give at Madras for half a century before his time , lavish his wealth upon his favourite . then arise a rumour that the governor be insolvent and harass by his creditor , and then a new source of wealth seem to be at his command ; he be more reckless , more princely than ever ; and then , little by little , there arise the suspicion that he be traffic in english interest , sell his influence to petty prince , wink at those mysterious crime by which rightful heir be push aside to make room for usurper . lastly it become notorious that he be the slave of a wicked woman , false wife , suspect murderess , whose husband , a native prince , disappear from the scene just when his existence become perilous to the governor 's reputation . accord to one version of the story , the scandal of this Rajah 's mysterious disappearance , follow not long after by the ranee 's equally mysterious death , be the immediate cause of my grandfather 's recall . how much , or how little of this story or other dark story of the same kind be true , whether my grandfather be a consummate scoundrel , or the victim of a baseless slander , whether he leave India a rich man or a poor man , be know to no mortal except Lady Maulevrier , and compare with she the Theban Sphinx be a communicative individual . ' 

 ' let the dead bury their dead , ' say Hammond . ' neither you nor your sister can be the bad for this ancient slander . no doubt every part of the story have be distort and exaggerate in the telling ; and a great deal of it may be pure invention , evolve from the inner consciousness of the slanderer . God forbid that any whisper of scandal should ever reach Lady Lesbia 's ear . ' 

 he ignore poor Mary . it be to he as if there be no such person . her feeble light be extinguish by the radiance of her sister 's beauty ; her very individuality be annihilate . 

 ' as for you , dear old fellow , ' he say , with warm affection , ' no one will ever think the bad of you on account of your grandfather 's peccadillo . ' 

 ' yes , they will . hereditary genius be one of our modern craze . when a man 's grandfather be a rogue , there must be a taint in his blood . People do not   believe in spontaneous generation , moral or physical , now - a - day . typhoid breed typhoid , and typhus breed typhus , just as dog breed dog ; and who will believe that a cheat and a liar can be the father of honest man ? ' 

 ' in that case , know what kind of man the grandson be , I will never believe that the grandfather be a rogue , ' say Hammond , heartily . 

 Maulevrier put out his hand without a word , and it be warmly grasp by his friend . 

 ' as for her ladyship , I respect and honour she as a woman who have lead a life of self - sacrifice , and have wear her pride as an armour , ' continue Hammond . 

 ' yes , I believe the dowager 's character be rather fine , ' say Maulevrier ; ' but she and I have never hit our horse very well together . she would have like such a fellow as you for a grandson , Jack a man who take high honour at Oxford , and could hold his own against all comer . such a grandson would have gratify her pride , and would have repay she for the trouble she have take in nursing the Maulevrier estate ; for however poor a property it be when her husband go to India there be no doubt that it be a very fine estate now , and that the dowager have be the making of it . ' 

 the two young man stroll up to Easedale Tarn before they go back to Fellside , where Lady Maulevrier receive they with a stately graciousness , and where Lady Lesbia unbent considerably at luncheon , and condescend to an animate conversation with her brother 's friend . it be such a new thing to have a stranger at the family board , a man whose information be well abreast with the march of progress , who could talk eloquently upon every subject which people care to talk about . in this new and animate society Lesbia seem like an enchant princess suddenly awaken from a spell - bind slumber . molly look at her sister with absolute astonishment . never have she see she so bright , so beautiful no long a picture or a statue , but a woman warm with the glow of life . 

 ' no wonder Mr. Hammond admire she , ' think poor Molly , who be quite acute enough to see the stranger 's keen appreciation of her sister 's charm , and positive indifference towards herself . 

 there be some thing which woman find out by instinct , just as the needle turn towards the magnet . shut a girl up in a tower till she be eighteen year old , and on the day of her release introduce she to the first man her eye have ever look upon , and she will know at a glance whether he admire she . 

 after luncheon the four young people start for Rydal Mount ; with Fršulein as chaperon and watch - dog . the girl be both good walker . Lady Lesbia even , though she look like a hot - house flower , have be train to active habit , could walk and ride , and play tennis , and climb a hill as become a mountain - breed damsel . molly , feel that her conversational power be not appreciate by her brother 's friend , take half a dozen dog for company , and with three fox - terrier , a little Yorkshire dog , a colley and an otter - hound , be at no loss for society on the road , more especially as Maulevrier give she most of his company , and entertain she with an account of his Black Forest adventure , and all the fine thing he have say to the fair - haired , blue - eyed Baden girl , who have sell he photograph or wild strawberry , or have awaken the echo of the hill with the music of their rustic flute . 

 Fršulein be perfectly aware that her mission upon this particular afternoon be not to let Lady Lesbia out of her sight for an instant , to hear every word the young lady say , and every word Mr. Hammond address to she . she have receive no specific instruction from Lady Maulevrier . they be not necessary , for the Fršulein know her ladyship 's intention with regard to her elder granddaughter , know they , at least , so far as that Lesbia be intend to make a brilliant marriage ; and she know , therefore , that the presence of this handsome and altogether attractive young man be to the last degree obnoxious to the dowager . she be oblige to be civil to he for her nephew 's sake , and she be too wise to let Lesbia imagine he dangerous : but the fact that he be dangerous be obvious , and it be Fršulein 's duty to protect her employer 's interest . 

 everybody know Lord Maulevrier , so there be no difficulty about get admission to Wordsworth 's garden and Wordsworth 's house , and after Mr. Hammond and his companion have explore these , they go back to the shore of the little lake , and climb that rocky eminence upon which the poet use to sit , above the placid water of silvery Rydal . it be a lovely spot , and that narrow lake , so poor a thing be magnitude the gauge of beauty , have a soft and pensive loveliness in the clear afternoon light . 

 ' Poor Wordsworth ' sigh Lesbia , as she stand on the grassy crag look down on the shin water , break in the foreground by fringe of rush , and the rich luxuriance of water - lily . ' be it not pitiable to think of the year he spend in this monotonous place , without any society worth speak of , with only the shabby collection of book , with hardly any interest in life except the sky , and the hill , and the peasantry ? ' 

 ' I think Wordsworth 's be an essentially happy life , in spite of his narrow range , ' answer Hammond . ' you , with your ardent youth and vivid desire for a life of action , can not imagine the calm bliss of reverie and constant communion with nature . Wordsworth have a thousand companion you and I would never dream of ; for he every flower that grow be an individual existence almost a soul . ' 

 ' it be a mild kind of lunacy , an everlasting opium dream without the opium ; but I be grateful to he for live such a life , since it have bequeath we some exquisite poetry , ' say Lesbia , who have be too carefully cultured to fleer or flout at Wordsworth . 

 ' I do believe there be an otter just under that bank , ' cry Molly , who have be watch the obvious excitement of her bandy - legged hound ; and she rush down to the brink of the water , leap lightly from stone to stone , and incite the hound to business . 

 ' let he alone , can not   you ? ' roar Maulevrier ; ' leave he in peace till he be want . if you disturb he now he will desert his holt , and we may have a blank day . the hound be to be out to - morrow . ' 

 ' I may go with you ? ' ask Mary , eagerly . 

 ' well , yes , I suppose you will want to be in it . ' molly and her brother go on an exploring ramble along the edge of the water towards Ambleside , leave John Hammond in Lesbia 's company , but closely guard by Miss M ller . these three go to look at Nab Cottage , where poor Hartley Coleridge end his brief and clouded day ; and they have go some way upon their homeward walk before they be rejoin by Maulevrier and Mary , the damsel 's kilte skirt considerably the bad for mud and mire . 

 ' what would grandmother say if she be to see you ! ' exclaim Lesbia , look contemptuously at the muddy petticoat . 

 ' I be not go to let she see I , so she will say nothing , ' cry Mary , and then she call to the dog , ' Ammon , Agag , Angelina ; ' and the three fox terrier fly along the road , fall over themselves in the swiftness of their flight , darting , and leaping , and scramble over each other , and offer the spectator the most intense example of joyous animal life . 

 the colley be far up on the hill - side , and the otter - hound be still hunt the water , but the terrier never go out of Mary 's sight . they look to she to take the initiative in all their sport . 

 they be back at Fellside in time for a very late tea . Lady Maulevrier be wait for they in the drawing - room . 

 ' oh , grandmother , why do you not take your tea ! ' exclaim Lesbia , look really distressed . ' it be six o'clock . ' 

 ' I be use to have you at home to hand I my cup , ' reply the dowager , with a touch of reproachfulness . 

 ' I be so sorry , ' say Lesbia , sit down before the tea - table , and begin her accustomed duty . ' indeed , dear grandmother , I have no idea it be so late ; but it be such a lovely afternoon , and Mr. Hammond be so interested in everything connect with Wordsworth ' 

 she be look her lovely at this moment , all that be soft in her nature call forth by her desire to please her grandmother , whom she really love . she hang over Lady Maulevrier 's chair , attend to her small want , and seem scarcely to remember the existence of anyone else . in this phase of her character she seem to Mr. Hammond the perfection of womanly grace . 

 Mary have rush off to her room to change her muddy gown , and come in presently , dress for dinner , look the picture of innocence . 

 John Hammond receive his tea - cup from Lesbia 's hand , and linger in the drawing - room talk to the dowager and her granddaughter till it be time to dress . Lady Maulevrier find herself favourably impress by he in spite of her prejudice . it be very provoking of Maulevrier to have bring such a man to Fellside . his very merit be objectionable . she try with exquisite art to draw he into some revealment as to his family and antecedent : but he evade every attempt of that kind . it be too evident that he be a self - make man , whose intellect and good look be his only fortune . it be criminal in Maulevrier to have bring such a person to Fellside . her ladyship begin to think seriously of send the two girl to St. Bees or Tynemouth for change of air , in charge of Fršulein . but any sudden proceeding of that kind would inevitably awaken Lesbia 's suspicion ; and there be nothing so fatal to a woman 's peace as this idea of danger . no , the peril must be face . she could only hope that Maulevrier would soon tire of Fellside . a week 's Westmoreland weather gray sky and long rainy day , would send these young man away . 

 CHAPTER IX . 

 a CRY in the darkness . 


 the peril have to be face , for the weather do not favour Lady Maulevrier 's hope . Westmoreland sky forget to shed their accustomed shower . Westmoreland hill seem to have lose their power of draw down the rain . that August be a lovely month , and the young people at Fellside revel in ideal weather . Maulevrier take his friend everywhere by hill and stream and force and gill to all those choose spot which make the glory of the Lake country on Windermere and Thirlmere , away through the bleak pass of Kirkstone to Ullswater on drive excursion , and on boat excursion , and pedestrian ramble , which latter the homely - minded Hammond seem to like good of all , for he be a splendid walker , and love the freedom of a mountain ramble , the liberty to pause and loiter and waste an hour at will , without be accountable to anybody 's coachman , or responsible for the well - being of anybody 's horse . 

 on some occasion the two girl and Miss M ller be of the party , and then it seem to John Hammond as if nothing be need to complete the glory of earth and sky . there be other day rougher journey when the man go alone , and there be day when Lady Mary steal away from her book and music , and all those study which she be suppose still to be pursue no long closely supervise by her governess , but on parole , as it be and go with her brother and his friend across the hill and far away . those be happy day for Mary , for it be always delight to she to be with Maulevrier ; yet she have a profound conviction of John Hammond 's indifference , kind and courteous as he be in all his dealing with she , and a sense of her own inferiority , of her own humble charm and little power to please , which be so acute as to be almost pain . one day this keen sense of humiliation break from her unaware in her talk with her brother , as they two sit on a broad heathy slope face to face with one of the Langdale pike , and with a deep valley at their foot , while John Hammond be climb from rock to rock in the gorge on their right , explore the beauty of Dungeon Ghyll . 

 ' I wonder whether he think I very ugly ? ' say Mary , with her hand clasp upon her knee , her eye fix on Wetherlam , upon whose steep brow a craggy mass of brown rock clothe with crimson heather stand out from the velvety green of the hill - side . 

 ' who think you ugly ? ' 

 ' Mr. Hammond . I be sure he do . I be so sunburnt and so horrid ! ' 

 ' but you be not ugly . why , Molly , what be you dream about ? ' 

 ' oh , yes , I be ugly . I may not seem so to you , perhaps , because you be use to I , but I know he must think I very plain compare with Lesbia , whom he admire so much . ' 

 ' yes , he admire Lesbia . there be no doubt of that . ' 

 ' and I know he think I plain , ' say Molly , contemplate Wetherlam with sorrowful eye , as if the sequence be inevitable . 

 ' my dear girl , what nonsense ! plain , forsooth ? ugly , quotha ? why , there be not a fine pair of eye in Westmoreland than my Molly 's , or a pretty smile , or whiter tooth . ' 

 ' but all the rest be horrid , ' say Mary , intensely in earnest . ' I be sunburnt , freckle , and altogether odious like a haymaker or a market woman . Grandmother have say so often enough , and I know it be the truth . I can see it in Mr. Hammond 's manner . ' 

 ' what ! freckle and sunburn , and the haymaker , and all that ? ' cry Maulevrier , laugh . ' what an expressive manner Jack 's must be , if it can convey all that like Lord Burleigh 's nod , by Jove . why , what a goose you be , Mary . Jack think you a very nice girl , and a very pretty girl , I will be bind ; but be not   you clever enough to understand that when a man be over head and ear in love with one woman , he be apt to seem just a little indifferent to all the other woman in the world ? and there be no doubt Jack be desperately in love with Lesbia . ' 

 ' you ought not to let he be in love with she , ' protest Mary . ' you know it can only lead to his unhappiness . you must know what grandmother be , and how she have make up her mind that Lesbia be to marry some great person . you ought not to have bring Mr. Hammond here . it be like let he into a trap . ' 

 ' do you think it be wrong ? ' ask her brother , smile at her earnestness . ' I should be very sorry if poor Jack should come to grief . but still , if Lesbia like he which I think she do we ought to be able to talk over the dowager . ' 

 ' never , ' cry Mary . ' Grandmother would never give way . you have no idea how ambitious she be . why , once when Lesbia be in a poetical mood , and say she would marry the man she like well in the world , if he be a pauper , her ladyship fly into a terrible passion , and tell she she would renounce she , that she would curse she , if she be to marry beneath she , or marry without her grandmother 's consent . ' 

 ' hard line for Hammond , ' say Maulevrier , rather lightly . ' then I suppose we must give up the idea of a match between he and Lesbia . ' 

 ' you ought not to have bring he here , ' retort Mary . ' you have well invent some plan for send he away . if he stay it will be only to break his heart . ' 

 ' dear child , man 's heart do not break so easily . I have fancy that mine be break more than once in my life , yet it be sound enough , I assure you . ' 

 ' oh ! ' sigh Mary , ' but you be not like he ; wound do not go so deep with you . ' 

 the subject of their conversation come out of the rocky cleft in the hill as Mary speak . she see his hat appear out of the gorge , and then the man himself emerge , a tall well - build figure , clothe in brown tweed , come towards they , with sketch - book and colour - box in his pocket . he have be make what he call memoranda of the waterfall , a stone or two here , a cluster of fern there , or a tree tear up by the root , and yet green and living , hang across the torrent , a rude natural bridge . 

 this round by the Langdale Pikes and Dungeon Ghyll be one of their good day ; or , at least , Molly and her brother think so ; for to those two the presence of Lesbia and her chaperon be always a restraint . 

 Mary could walk twice as far as her eld sister , and revel in hill - side path and all manner of rough place . they order their luncheon at the inn below the waterfall , and have it carry up on to the furzy slope in front of Wetherlam , where they could eat and drink and be merry to the music of the force as it come down from the hill behind they , while the light and shadow come and go upon yonder rugge brow , now gray in the shadow , now ruddy in the sunshine . 

 Mary be as gay as a bird during that rough and ready luncheon . no one would have suspect her uneasiness about John Hammond 's peril or her own plainness . she might let her real self appear to her brother , who have be her trust friend and father confessor from her babyhood ; but she be too thorough a woman to let Mr. Hammond discover the depth of her sympathy , the tenderness of her compassion for his woe . later , as they be walk home across the hill , by Great Langdale and Little Langdale , and Fox Howe and Loughrigg Fell , she fall behind a few pace with Maulevrier , and say to he very earnestly 

 ' you will not   tell , will you , dear ? ' 

 ' tell what ? ' he ask , star at she . 

 ' do not   tell Mr. Hammond what I say about his think I ugly . he might want to apologise to I , and that would be too humiliating . I be very childish to say such a silly thing . ' 

 ' undoubtedly you be . ' 

 ' and you will not   tell he ? ' 

 ' tell he anything that would degrade my Mary ? assail her dignity by so much as a breath ? soon would I have this tongue tear out with red - hot pincer . ' 

 on the next day , and the next , sunshine and summer sky still prevail ; but Mr. Hammond do not seem to care for ramble far afield . he prefer loitering about in the village , row on the lake , read in the garden , and play lawn tennis . he have only inclination for those amusement which keep he within a stone 's throw of Fellside : and Mary know that this disposition have arise in his mind since Lesbia have withdraw herself from all share in their excursion . Lesbia have not be rude to her brother or her brother 's friend ; she have decline their invitation with smile and sweetness ; but there be always some reason a new song to be practise , a new book to be read , a letter to be write why she should not go for drive or walk or steamboat trip with Maulevrier and his friend . 

 so Mr. Hammond suddenly find out that he have see all that be worth see in the Lake country , and that there be nothing so enjoyable as the placid idleness of Fellside ; and at Fellside Lady Lesbia could not always avoid he without a too - mark intention , so he taste the sweetness of her society to a much great extent than be good for his peace , if the case be indeed as hopeless as Lady Mary declare . he stroll about the ground with she ; he drink the sweet melody of her voice in Heine 's tender ballad ; he read to she on the sunlit lawn in the lazy afternoon hour ; he play billiard with she ; he be her faithful attendant at afternoon tea ; he give himself up to the study of her character , which , to his charmed eye , seem the perfection of pure and placid womanhood . there might , perhaps , be some lack of passion and of force in this nature , a marked absence of that impulsive feeling which be a charm in some woman : but this want be atone for by sweetness of character , and Mr. Hammond argue that in these calm nature there be often an unsuspected depth , a latent force , a grandeur of soul , which only reveal itself in the great ordeal of life . 

 so John Hammond hang about the luxurious drawing - room at Fellside in a manner which his friend Maulevrier ridicule as unmanly . 

 ' I have no idea you be such a tame cat , ' he say : ' if when we be salmon fishing in Canada anybody have tell I you could loll about a drawing - room all day listen to a girl squall and read novel , I should not   have believe a word of it . ' 

 ' we have plenty of rough on the shore of the St. Lawrence , ' answer Hammond . ' summer idleness in a drawing - room be an agreeable variety . ' 

 it be not to be suppose that John Hammond 's state of mind could long remain unperceived by the keen eye of the dowager . she see the gradual dawning of his love , she see the glow of its meridian . she be pleased to behold this proof of Lesbia 's power over the heart of man . so would she conquer the man foredoom to be her husband when the come time should bring they together . but agreeable as the fact of this first conquest might be , as an evidence of Lesbia 's supremacy among woman , the situation be not without its peril ; and Lady Maulevrier feel that she could no long defer the duty of warn her granddaughter . she have wish , if possible , to treat the thing lightly to the very last , so that Lesbia should never know there have be danger . she have tell she , a few day ago , that those drive , and walk with the two young man be undignifie , even although guard by the Fršulein 's substantial presence . 

 ' you be make yourself too much a companion to Maulevrier and his friend , ' say the dowager . ' if you do not take care you will grow like Mary . ' 

 ' I would do anything in the world to avoid that , ' reply Lesbia . ' our walk and drive have be very pleasant . Mr. Hammond be extremely clever , and can talk about everything . ' 

 her colour heighten ever so little as she speak of he , an indication duly observe by Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' no doubt the man be clever ; all adventurer be clever ; and you have sense enough to see that this man be an adventurer a mere sponge and toady of Maulevrier 's . ' 

 ' there be nothing of the sponge or the toady in his manner , ' protest Lady Lesbia , with a still deep blush , the warm glow of angry feeling . 

 ' my dear child , what do you know of such people or of the atmosphere in which they be generate ? the sponge and toady of to - day be not the clumsy fawn wretch you have read about in old - fashioned novel . he can flatter adroitly , and feed upon his friend , and yet maintain a show of manhood and independence . I will wager Mr. Hammond 's trip to Canada do not cost he sixpence , and that he hardly open his purse all the time he be in Germany . ' 

 ' if my brother want the company of a friend who be much poor than himself , he must pay for it , ' argue Lesbia . ' I think Maulevrier be lucky to have such a companion as Mr. Hammond . ' 

 yet , even while she so argue , Lady Lesbia feel in some manner humiliate by the idea that this man who so palpably worship she be too poor to pay his own travelling expense . 

 poet and philosopher may say what they will about the grandeur of plain living and high thinking ; but a young woman think well of the plain liver who be not compel to plainness by want of cash . the idea of narrow mean , of dependence upon the capricious generosity of a wealthy friend be not without its humiliating influence . Lesbia be barely civil to Mr. Hammond that evening when he praise her singing ; and she refuse to join in a four game propose by Maulevrier , albeit she and Mr. Hammond have beat Mary and Maulevrier the evening before , with much exultant hilarity . 

 Hammond have be at Fellside nearly a month , and Maulevrier be begin to talk about a move far northward . there be a grouse moor in Argyleshire which the two young man talk about as belong to some unnamed friend of the Earl 's , which they have think of shoot over before the grouse season be end . 

 ' Lord Hartfield have property in Argyleshire , ' say the dowager , when they talk of these shooting . ' do you know his estate , Mr. Hammond ? ' 

 ' Hammond know that there be such a place , I daresay , ' reply Maulevrier , reply for his friend . 

 ' but you do not know Lord Hartfield , perhaps , ' say her ladyship , not arrogantly , but still in a tone which imply her conviction that John Hammond would not be hand - in - glove with earl , in Scotland or elsewhere . 

 ' oh , yes ! I know he by sight every one in Argyleshire know he by sight . ' 

 ' naturally . a young man in his position must be widely know . be he popular ? ' 

 ' fairly so . ' 

 ' his father and I be friend many year ago , ' say Lady Maulevrier , with a faint sigh . ' have you ever hear if he resemble his father ? ' 

 ' I believe not . I be tell he be like his mother 's family . ' 

 ' then he ought to be handsome . Lady Florence Ilmington be a famous beauty . ' 

 they be sit in the drawing - room after dinner , the room dimly light by darkly - shade lamp , the window wide open to the summer sky and moonlit lake . in that subdue light Lady Maulevrier look a woman in the prime of life . the classical modelling of her feature and the delicacy of her complexion be unimpaire by time , while those trace of thought and care which give age to her face in the broad light of day be invisible at night . John Hammond contemplate that refined and placid countenance with profound admiration . he remember how her ladyship 's grandson have compare she with the Sphinx ; and it seem to he to - night , as he study her proud and tranquil beauty , that there be indeed something of the mysterious , the unreadable in that countenance , and that beneath its heroic calm there might be the ash of tragic passion , the trace of a life - long struggle with fate . that such a woman , so beautiful , so gifted , so well fit to shine and govern in the great world , should have be content to live a long life of absolute seclusion in this remote valley be in itself a social mystery which must need set an observant young man wonder . it be all very well to say that Lady Maulevrier love a country life , that she have make Fellside her earthly Paradise , and have no desire beyond it . the fact remain that it be not in Lady Maulevrier 's temperament to be satisfied with such an existence ; that falcon eye be never mean to gaze for ever upon one narrow range of mountain and lake ; that lip be make to speak among the great one of the world . 

 Lady Maulevrier be particularly gracious to her grandson 's friend this evening . Maulevrier speak so decisively about a speedy migration northward , seem so inclined to regret the time waste since the twelfth of the month , that she think the danger be past , and she could afford to be civil . she really like the young man , have no doubt in her own mind that he be a gentleman in the high and broad sense of the word , but not in the sense which make he an eligible husband for either of her granddaughter . 

 Lesbia be in a pensive mood this evening . she sit in the verandah , look dreamily at the lake , and at Fairfield yonder , a broad green slope , silver with moonlight , and seem to stretch far away into unfathomable distance . 

 if one could but take one 's lover by the hand and go wander over those mystic moonlit slope into some new unreal world where it would not matter whether a man be rich or poor , high - bear or low - bear , where there should be no such thing as rank and state to be win or lose ! Lesbia feel to - night as if she would like to live out her life in dreamland . reality be too hard , too much set round by difficulty and sacrifice . 

 while Lesbia be lose herself in that dream - world , Lady Maulevrier unbent considerably to John Hammond , and talk to he with more appearance of interest in his actual self , and in his own affair , than she have manifest , hitherto although she have be uniformly courteous . 

 she ask he his plan for the future have he choose a profession ? 

 he tell she that he have not . he mean to devote himself to literature and politic . 

 ' be not that rather vague ? ' inquire her ladyship . 

 ' everything be vague at first . ' 

 ' but literature now as an amusement , no doubt , it be delightful but as a profession do literature ever pay ? ' 

 ' there have be such case . ' 

 ' yes , I suppose so . Walter Scott , Gibbon , Macaulay , Froude , those make money no doubt . but there be a suspicion of hopelessness in the idea of a young man start in life intend to earn his bread by literature . one remember Chatterton . I should have think that in your case the law or the church would have be well . in the latter Maulevrier might have be useful to you . he be patron of three or four living . ' 

 ' you be too good even to think of such a thing , ' say Hammond ; ' but I have set my heart upon a political career . I must swim or sink in that sea . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier look at he with a compassionate smile poor young man ! no doubt he think himself a genius , and that door which have remain shut to everybody else would turn on their hinge directly he knock at they . she be sincerely sorry for he . young , clever , enthusiastic , and doom to bitter disappointment . 

 ' you have parent , perhaps , who be ambitious for you a mother who think her son a heaven - bear statesman ! ' say her ladyship , kindly . 

 ' alas , no ! that incentive to ambition be want in my case . I have neither father nor mother live . ' 

 ' that be very sad . no doubt that fact have be a bond of sympathy between you and Maulevrier ? ' 

 ' I believe it have . ' 

 ' well , I hope Providence will smile upon your path . ' 

 ' come what may , I shall never forget the happy week I have spend at Fellside , ' say Hammond , ' or your ladyship 's gracious hospitality . ' 

 he take up the beautiful hand , white to transparency , show the delicate tracing of blue vein , and press his lip upon it in chivalrous worship of age and womanly dignity . 

 Lady Maulevrier smile upon he with her calm , grave smile . she would have like to say , ' you shall be welcome again at Fellside , ' but she feel that the man be dangerous . not while Lesbia remain single could she court his company . if Maulevrier bring he she must tolerate his presence , but she would do nothing to invite that danger . 

 there be no music that evening . Maulevrier and Mary be play billiard ; Fršulein M ller be sit in her corner work at a high - art counterpane . Lesbia come in from the verandah presently , and sit on a low stool by her grandmother 's arm - chair , and talk to she in soft , coo accent , inaudible to John Hammond , who sit a little way off turn the leaf of the Contemporary Review : and this go on till eleven o'clock , the regular hour for retire , when Mary come in from the billiard - room , and tell Mr. Hammond that Maulevrier be wait for a smoke and a talk . then candle be light , and the lady all depart , leave John Hammond and his friend with the house to themselves . 

 they play a fifty game , and smoke and talk till the stroke of midnight , by which time it seem as if there be not another creature awake in the house . Maulevrier put out the lamp in the billiard - room , and then they go softly up the shadowy staircase , and part in the gallery , the Earl go one way , and his friend the other . 

 the house be large and roomy , spread over a good deal of ground , Lady Maulevrier have insist upon there be only two story . the servant ' room be all in a side wing , correspond with those old building which have be give over to Steadman and his wife , and among the villager of Grasmere enjoy the reputation of be haunt . a wide panel corridor extend from one end of the house to the other . it be light from the roof , and serve as a gallery for the display of a small and choice collection of modern art , which her ladyship have acquire during her long residence at Fellside . here , too , in Sheraton cabinet , be those treasure of old English china which Lady Maulevrier have inherit from past generation . 

 her ladyship 's room be situate at the southern end of this corridor , her bed - chamber be at the extreme end of the house , with window command two magnificent view , one across the lake and the village of Grasmere to the green slope of Fairfield , the other along the valley towards Rydal Water . this and the adjoining boudoir be the prettiest room in the house , and no one wonder that her ladyship should spend so much of her life in the luxurious seclusion of her own apartment . 

 John Hammond go to his room , which be on the same side of the house as her ladyship 's ; but he be in no disposition for sleep . he open the casement , and stand look out upon the moonlit lake and the quiet village , where one solitary light shine like a faint star in a cottage window , amidst that little cluster of house by the old church , once know as Kirktown . beyond the village rise gentle slope , crown with foliage , and above those woode crest appear the grand outline of the hill , surround and guard Easedale 's lovely valley , as the hill surround Jerusalem of old . 

 he look at that delicious landscape with eye that hardly see its beauty . the image of a lovely face come between he and all the glory of earth and sky . 

 ' I think she like I , ' he be say to himself . ' there be a look in her eye to - night that tell I the time be come when - - ' 

 the thought die unfinished in his brain . through the silent house , across the placid lake , there ring a wild , shrill cry that freeze the blood in his vein , or seem so to freeze it a shriek of agony , and in a woman 's voice . it ring out from an open window near his own . the sound seem close to his ear . 

 CHAPTER X. 

 ' o bitterness of thing too sweet . ' 


 only for an instant do John Hammond stand motionless after hear that unearthly shriek . in the next moment he rush into the corridor , expect to hear the sound repeat , to find himself face to face with some midnight robber , whose presence have cause that wild cry of alarm . but in the corridor all be silent as the grave . no open door suggest the entrance of an intruder . the dimly - burn lamp show only the long empty gallery . he stand still for a few moment listen for voice , footstep , the rustle of garment : but there be nothing . 

 nothing ? yes , a groan , a long - draw moaning sound , as of infinite pain . this time there be no doubt as to the direction from which the sound come . it come from Lady Maulevrier 's room . the door be ajar , and he could see the faint light of the night - lamp within . that fearful cry have come from her ladyship 's room . she be in peril or pain of some kind . 

 convince of this one fact , Mr. Hammond have not an instant 's hesitation . he push open the door without compunction , and enter the room , prepare to behold some terrible scene . 

 but all be quiet as death itself . no midnight burglar have violate the sanctity of Lady Maulevrier 's apartment . the soft , steady light of the night - lamp shone on the face of the sleeper . yes , all be quiet in the room , but not in that sleeper 's soul . the broad white brow be painfully contract , the lip draw down and distort , the delicate hand , half hide by the deep Valenciennes ruffle , clutch the coverlet with convulsive force . Sigh after sigh burst from the agitated breast . John Hammond gaze upon the sleeper in an agony of apprehension , uncertain what to do . be this dream only ; or be it some kind of seizure which call for medical aid ? at her ladyship 's age the idea of paralysis be not too improbable for belief . if this be a dream , then indeed the vision of Lady Maulevrier 's head upon her bed be more terrible than the dream of common mortal . 

 in any case Mr. Hammond feel that it be his duty to send some attendant to Lady Maulevrier , some member of the household who be familiar with her ladyship 's habit , her own maid if that person could be unearth easily . he know that the servant sleep in a separate wing ; but he think it more than likely that her ladyship 's personal attendant occupy a room near her mistress . 

 he go back to the corridor and look round he in doubt , for a moment or two . 

 close against her ladyship 's door there be a swing door , cover with red cloth , which seem to communicate with the old part of the house . John Hammond push this door , and it yield to his hand , reveal a lamp - light passage , narrow , old - fashioned , and low . he think it likely that Lady Maulevrier 's maid might occupy a room in this half - desert wing . as he push open the door he see an elderly man come towards he , with a candle in his hand , and with the appearance of have huddle on his clothe hastily . 

 ' you hear that scream ? ' say Hammond . 

 ' yes . it be her ladyship , I suppose . Nightmare . she be subject to nightmare . ' 

 ' it be very dreadful . her whole countenance be convulse just now , when I go into her room to see what be wrong . I be almost afraid of a fit of some kind . ought not she maid to go to she ? ' 

 ' she want no assistance , ' the man answer , coolly . ' it be only a dream . it be not the first time I have be awaken by a shriek like that . it be a kind of nightmare , no doubt ; and it pass off in a few minute , and leave she sleep calmly . ' 

 he go to her ladyship 's door , push it open a little way , and look in . ' yes , she be sleep as quietly as an infant , ' he say , shut the door softly as he speak . 

 ' I be very glad ; but surely she ought to have she maid near she at night , if she be subject to those attack . ' 

 ' it be no attack , I tell you . it be nothing but a dream , ' answer Steadman impatiently . 

 ' yet you be frightened , just as I be , or you would not have get up and dress , ' say Hammond , look at the man suspiciously . 

 he have hear of this old servant Steadman , who be suppose to enjoy more of her ladyship 's confidence than any one else in the household ; but he have never speak to the man before that night . 

 ' yes , I come . it be my duty to come , know her ladyship 's habit . I be a light sleeper , and that scream wake I instantly . if her ladyship 's maid be want I should call she . I be a kind of watch - dog , you see , sir . ' 

 ' you seem to be a very faithful dog . ' 

 ' I have be in her ladyship 's service more than forty year . I have reason to be faithful . I know her ladyship 's habit well than any one in the house . I know that she have a great deal of trouble in her early life , and I believe the memory of it come back upon she sometimes in her dream , and get the well of she . ' 

 ' if it be memory that wring that agonise shriek from she just now , her recollection of the past must be very terrible . ' 

 ' ah , sir , there be a skeleton in every house , ' answer James Steadman , gravely . 

 this be exactly what Maulevrier have say under the yew tree which Wordsworth plant . 

 ' good - night , sir , ' say Steadman . 

 ' good - night . you be sure that Lady Maulevrier may be leave safely that there be no fear of illness of any kind ? ' 

 ' no , sir . it be only a bad dream . good - night , sir . ' 

 Steadman go back to his own quarter . Mr. Hammond hear he draw the bolt of the swing door , thus cut off all communication with the corridor . 

 the eight - day clock on the staircase strike two as Mr. Hammond return to his room , even less inclined for sleep than when he leave it . strange , that nocturnal disturbance of a mind which seem so tranquil in the day . or be that tranquillity only a mask which her ladyship wear before the world : and be the bitter memory of event which happen forty year ago still a source of anguish to that highly strung nature ? 

 ' there be some mind which can not forget , ' John Hammond say to himself , as he meditate upon her ladyship 's character and history . ' the story of her husband 's crime may still be fresh in her memory , though it be only a tradition for the outside world . his crime may have involve some deep wrong do to herself , some outrage against her love and faith as a wife . one of the story Maulevrier speak of the other day be of a wicked woman 's influence upon the governor a much more likely story than that of any traffic in british interest or british honour , which would have be almost impossible for a man in Lord Maulevrier 's position . if the scandal be of a dark kind a guilty wife the mysterious disappearance of a husband the horror of the thing may have make a deep impression on Lady Maulevrier than even her nearest and dear dream of : and that superb calm which she wear like a royal mantle may be maintain at the cost of struggle which tear her heart - string . and then at night , when the will be dormant , when the nervous system be no long rule by the power of wake intelligence , the old familiar agony return , the hat image flash back upon the brain , and in proportion to the fineness of the temperament be the intensity of the dreamer 's pain . ' 

 and then he go on to reflect upon the long monotonous year spend in that lonely house , shut in from the world by those everlaste hill . albeit the house be an ideal house , set in a landscape of infinite beauty , the monotony must be none the less oppressive for a mind burden with dark memory , weigh down by sorrow which could seek no relief from sympathy , which could never become familiarise by discussion . 

 ' I wonder that a woman of Lady Maulevrier 's intellect should not have well know how to treat her own malady , ' think Hammond . 

 Mr. Hammond inquire after her ladyship 's health next morning , and be tell she be perfectly well . 

 ' Grandmother be in capital spirit , ' say Lady Lesbia . ' she be pleased with the content of yesterday 's Globe . Lord Denyer , the son of one of her old friend , have be make a great speech at Liverpool in the conservative interest , and her ladyship think we shall have a change of party before long . ' 

 ' a general shuffle of the card , ' say Maulevrier , look up from his breakfast . ' I be sure I hope so . I be no politician , but I like a row . ' 

 ' I hope you be a Conservative , Mr. Hammond , ' say Lesbia . 

 ' I have hop you would have know that ever so long ago , Lady Lesbia . ' 

 Lesbia blush at his tone , which be almost a reproach . 

 ' I suppose I ought to have understand from the general tenor of your conversation , ' she say ; ' but I be terribly stupid about politic . I take so little interest in they . I be always hear that we be be badly govern that the man who legislate for we be stupid or wicked ; yet the world seem to go on somehow , and we be no bad . ' 

 ' it be just the same with sport , ' say Maulevrier . ' every rainy spring we be tell that all the young bird have be drown , or that the grouse - disease have decimate the father and mother , and that we shall have nothing to shoot ; but when August come the bird be there all the same . ' 

 ' it be the nature of mankind to complain , ' say Hammond . ' Cain and Abel be the first farmer , and you see one of they grumble . ' 

 they be rather lively at breakfast that morning Maulevrier 's last breakfast but one for he have announce his determination of go to Scotland next day . other fellow would shoot all the bird if he dawdle any long . Mary be in deep despondency at the idea of his departure , yet she laugh and talk with the rest . and perhaps Lesbia feel a little move at the thought of lose Mr. Hammond . Maulevrier would come back to Mary , but John Hammond be hardly likely to return . their parting would be for ever . 

 ' you need not   sit quite in my pocket , Molly , ' say Maulevrier to his young sister . 

 ' I like to make the most of you , now you be go away , ' sigh Mary . ' oh , dear , how dull we shall all be when you be go . ' 

 ' not a bit of it ! you will have some fox - hunting , perhaps , before the snow be on the hill . ' 

 at the very mention of fox - hound Lady Mary 's bright young face crimson , and Maulevrier begin to laugh in a provoking way , with side - long glance at his young sister . 

 ' do you ever hear of Molly 's fox - hunting , by - the - by , Hammond ? ' he ask . 

 Mary try to put her hand before his lip , but it be useless . 

 ' why should not   I tell ? ' he exclaim . ' it be quite a heroic adventure . you must know our fox - hunting here be rather a peculiar institution , very good in its way , but strictly local . no horse could live among our hill , so we hunt on foot , and as the pace be good , and the work hard , nobody who start with the hound be likely to be in at the death , except the huntsman . we be all mad for the sport , and off we go , over the hill and far away , pick up a fresh field as we go . the ploughman leave his plough , and the shepherd leave his flock , and the farmer leave his thrashing , to follow we ; in every field we cross we get fresh blood , while those who join we at the start fall off by degree . well , it happen one day late in October , when there be long ridge of snow on Helvellyn , and patch of white on Fairfield , Mistress Mary here must need take her bamboo staff and start for the Striding Edge . it be just the day upon which she might have meet her death easily on that perilous point , but happily something occur to divert her juvenile fancy , for scarcely have she get to the bottom of Dolly Waggon pike you know dolly - - ' 

 ' intimately , ' say Hammond , with a nod . 

 ' Scarcely have she near the base of Dolly Waggon when she hear the huntsman 's horn and the hound at full cry , stream along towards Dunmail Raise . off fly molly , all among the butcher boy , and farmer ' man , and rosy - cheek squireen of the district racing over the rugged field clamber over the low stone wall up hill , down hill shout when the other shout never lose sight of the wave stern wind and doubling , and still go upward and upward , till she stand , pant and puff like a young grampus , on the top of Seat Sandal , still all among the butcher boy and the farmer 's man , and the guide and the red - cheek squireen , her frock tear to ribbon , her hat lose in a ditch , her hair stream down her back , and every inch of she , from her nose downward , splash and spatter with mire and clay . what a spectacle for god and man , guide and butcher boy . and there she stand with the sun go down beyond Coniston Old Man , and a seven - mile walk between she and Fellside . 

 ' Poor Lady Mary ! ' say Hammond , look at her very kindly : but Mary do not see that friendly glance , which betoken sympathy rather than scorn . she sit silent and very red , with droop eyelid , think her brother horribly cruel for thus publish her foolishness . 

 ' poor , indeed ! ' exclaim Maulevrier . ' she come crawl home after dark , footsore and draggle , look like a beggar girl , and as evil fate would have it , her ladyship , who so seldom go out , must need have be take afternoon tea at the vicarage upon that particular occasion , and be drive up the avenue as Mary crawl to the gate . the storm that follow may be more easily imagine than describe . ' 

 ' it be year and year ago , ' expostulate Mary , look very angry . ' Grandmother need not   have make such a fuss about it . ' 

 ' ah , but in those day she still have hope of civilise you , ' answer Maulevrier . ' since then she have abandon all endeavour in that direction , and have give you over to your own device and I . since then you have become a chartered libertine . you have letter of mark . ' 

 ' I do not   care what you call I , ' say Mary . ' I only know that I be very happy when you be at home , and very miserable when you be away . ' 

 ' it be hardly kind of you to say that , Lady Mary , ' remonstrate Fršulein M ller , who , up to this point , have be busily engage with muffin and gooseberry jam . 

 ' oh , I do not   mean that any one be unkind to I or use I badly , ' say Mary . ' I only mean that my life be empty when Maulevrier be away , and that I be always long for he to come back again . ' 

 ' I think you adore the hill , and the lake , and the villager , and your pony , and Maulevrier 's dog , ' say , Lesbia faintly contemptuous . 

 ' yes , but one want something human to love , ' answer Mary , make it very obvious that there be no warmth of affection between herself and the feminine member of her family . 

 she have not think of the significance of her speech . she be very angry with Maulevrier for have hold she up to ridicule before Mr. Hammond , who already despise she , as she believe , and whose contempt be more galling than it need have be , consider that he be a mere casual visitor who would go away and return no more . never till his coming have she feel her deficiency ; but in his presence she writhe under the sense of her unworthiness , and have an almost agonising consciousness of all those fault which her grandmother have tell she about so often with not the slight effect . in those day she have not care what Lady Maulevrier or any one else might say of she , or think of she . she live her life , and defied fortune . she be bad than her reputation . to - day she feel it a bitter thing that she have grow to the age of womanhood lack all those grace and accomplishment which make her sister adorable , and which might make even a plain woman charming . 

 never till John Hammond 's come have she feel a pang of envy in the contemplation of Lesbia 's beauty or Lesbia 's grace ; but now she have so keen a sense of the difference between herself and her sister that she begin to fear that this cruel pain must indeed be that low of all vice . even the difference in their gown be a source of humiliation to her how . Lesbia be look her lovely this morning , in a gown that be all lace and soft Madras muslin , flow , cloud - like ; while Mary 's tailor gown , with its trim tight bodice , horn button , and kilte skirt , seem to cry aloud that it have be make for a Tomboy . and this tailor gown be a costume to which Mary have condemn herself by her own folly . only a year ago , move by an artistic admiration for Lesbia 's delicate breakfast gown , Mary have tell her grandmother that she would like to have something of the same kind , whereupon the dowager , who do not take the faint interest in Mary 's toilet , but who have a stern sense of justice , reply 

 ' I do not think Lesbia 's frock and your habit will agree , but you can have some pretty morning gown if you like ; ' and the order have be give for a confection in muslin and lace for Lady Mary . 

 Mary come down to breakfast one bright June morning , in the new frock , feel very proud of herself , and look very pretty . 

 ' fine feather make fine bird , ' say Fršulein M ller . ' I should hardly have know you . ' 

 ' I wish you would always dress like that , ' say Lesbia ; ' you really look like a young lady ; ' and Mary dance about on the lawn , feel sylph - like , and quite in love with her own elegance , when a sudden uplifting of canine voice in the distance have send she fly to see what be the matter with the terri pack . 

 in the kennel there be riot and confusion . Ahab be demolish Angelina , Absalom have Agamemnon in a deadly grip . Dog - whip in hand , Mary rush to the rescue , and lay about she , like the knight of old , utterly forgetful of her frock . she soon succeed in restore order , but the Madras muslin , the Breton lace have perish in the conflict . she leave the kennel panting , and in rag and tatter , some of the muslin and lace hang about she in strip a yard long , but the great part remain in the possession of the terrier , who have maul and munch her finery to their heart ' content , while she be read the Riot Act . 

 she go back to the house , bow down by shame and confusion , and march straight to the dowager 's morning - room . 

 ' look what the terrier have do to I , grandmother , ' she say , with a sob . ' it be all my own fault , of course . I ought not to have go near they in that stupid muslin . please forgive I for be so foolish . I be not fit to have pretty frock . ' 

 ' I think , my dear , you can now have no doubt that the tailor gown be fit for you , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , with crush placidity . ' we have try the experiment of dress you like Lesbia , and you see it do not answer . tell Kibble to throw your new gown in the rag - bag , and please let I hear no more about it . ' 

 after this dismal failure Mary could not feel herself ill - use in have to wear tailor gown all the year round . she be allow cotton frock for very warm weather , and she have pretty gown for evening wear ; but her usual attire be cloth or linsey woolsey , make by the local tailor . sometimes Maulevrier order she a gown or a coat from his own man in Conduit Street , and then she feel herself smart and fashionable . and even the local tailor contrive to make her gown prettily , have a great appreciation of her straight willowy figure , and deem it a privilege to work for she , so that hitherto Mary have feel very well content with her cloth and linsey . but now that John Hammond so obviously admire Lesbia 's delicate raiment , poor Mary begin to think her woollen gown odious . 

 after breakfast Mary and Maulevrier go straight off to the kennel . his lordship have numerous instruction to give on this last day , and his lieutenant have to receive and register his order . Lesbia go to the garden with her book and with Fršulein the inevitable Fršulein as Hammond think she in close attendance . 

 it be a lovely morning , sultry , summer - like , albeit September have just begin . the tennis lawn , which have be level on one side of the house , be surround on three side by shrubbery plant forty year ago , in the beginning of Lady Maulevrier 's widowhood . all lovely tree grow there in perfection , shelter by the mighty wall of the mountain , feed by the mist from the lake . larch and mountain ash , and Lawsonian cyprus , deodara and magnolia , arbutus , and silver broom , acacia and lilac , flourish here in that rich beauty which make every cottage garden in the happy district a little paradise ; and here in a semi - circular recess at one end of the lawn be rustic chair and table and an umbrella tent . this be Lady Lesbia 's choose retreat on summer morning , and a favourite place for afternoon tea . 

 Mr. Hammond follow the two lady to their bower . 

 ' this be to be my last morning , ' he say , look at Lesbia . ' will you think I a great bore if I spend it with you ? ' 

 ' we shall think it very nice of you , ' answer Lesbia , without a vestige of emotion ; ' especially if you will read to we . ' 

 ' I will do any thing to make myself useful . what shall I read ? ' 

 ' anything you like . what do you say to Tennyson ? ' 

 ' that he be a noble poet , a teacher of all good ; but too philosophical for my present mood . may I read you some of Heine 's ballad , those song which you sing so exquisitely , or rather some you do not sing , and which will be fresher to you . my German be far from perfect , but I be tell it be passable , and Fršulein M ller can throw her scissor at I when my accent be too dreadful . ' 

 ' you speak german beautifully , ' say Fršulein . ' I wonder where you learn it ? ' 

 ' I have be a good deal in Germany , and I have a hanoverian valet who be quite a gentleman , and speak admirably . I think I learn more from he than from grammar or dictionary . I will go and fetch Heine . ' 

 ' what a very agreeable person Mr. Hammond be , ' say Fršulein , when he be go . ' we shall quite miss he . ' 

 ' yes , I have no doubt we shall miss he , ' say Lesbia , again without the faint emotion . 

 the governess begin to think that the ordeal of an agreeable young man 's presence at Fellside have be pass in safety , and that her pupil be unscathed . she have keep a close watch on the two , as in duty bind . she know that Hammond be in love with Lesbia ; but she think Lesbia be heart - whole . 

 Mr. Hammond come back with a shabby little book in his hand and establish himself comfortably in one of the two Beaconsfield chair . 

 he open his book at that group of short poem call Heimkehr , and read here and there , as fancy lead he . sometimes the strain be a love - song , brief , passionate as the cry of a soul in pain ; sometimes the verse be bitter and cynical ; sometimes full of tender simplicity , telling of childhood , and youth and purity ; sometimes dark with hidden meaning , grim , awful , cold with the chill breath of the charnel - house . sometimes Lesbia 's heart beat a little fast as Mr. Hammond read , for it seem as if it be he who be speak to she , and not the dead poet . 

 an hour or more pass in this way . Fršulein M ller be charm at hear some of her favourite poem , ask now for this little bit , and anon for another , and expatiate upon the merit of german poet in general , and Heine in particular , in the pause of the lecture . she be quite carry away by her delight in the poet , and be so entirely uplifted to the ideal world that , when a footman come with a message from Lady Maulevrier request her presence , she trip gaily off at once , without a thought of danger in leave those two together on the lawn . she have be a faithful watch - dog up to this point ; but she be now lull into a false sense of security by the idea that the time of peril be all but end . 

 so she leave they ; but could she have look back two minute afterwards she would have perceive the unwisdom of that act . 

 no soon have the Fršulein turn the corner of the shrubbery than Hammond lay aside his book and draw nearer Lesbia , who sit look downward , with her eye upon the delicate piece of fancy work which have occupy her finger all the morning . 

 ' Lesbia , this be my last day at Fellside , and you and I may never have a minute alone together again while I be here . will you come for a little walk with I on the Fell ? there be something I must say to you before I go . ' 

 Lesbia 's delicate cheek grow a shade more pale . Instinct tell she what be come , though never mortal man have speak to she of love . nor until now have Mr. Hammond ever address she by her christian name without the ceremonious prefix . there be a deep tone in his voice , a graver look in his eye , than she have ever notice before . 

 she rise , and take up her sunshade , and go with he meekly through the cultivate shrubbery of ornamental timber to the rougher pathway that wind through a copse of Scotch fir , which form the outer boundary of Lady Maulevrier 's domain . beyond the fir tree rise the grassy slope of the hill , on the brow of which sheep be feed . deep down in the hollow below the lawn and shrubberrie of Fellside the placid bosom of the lake shine like an emerald floor in the sunlight , reflect the verdure of the hill , and the white sheep dot about here and there . 

 there be not a breath in the air around they as those two saunter slowly side by side in the pine wood , not a cloud in the dazzle blue sky above ; and for a little time they too be silent , as if bind by a spell which neither dare to break . then at last Hammond speak . 

 ' Lesbia , you know that I love you , ' he begin , in his low , grave voice , tremulous with feeling . ' no word I can say to - day can tell you of my love more plainly than my heart have be tell you in every hour of this happy , happy time that you and I have spend together . I love you as I never hop to love , fervently , completely , believe that the perfection of earthly bliss will be mine if I can but win you . Dearest , be there such a sweet hope for I ; be you indeed my own , as I be your , heart and soul , and mind and be , till the last throb of life in this poor clay ? ' 

 he try to take her hand , but she draw herself away from he with a frightened look . she be very pale , and there be infinite distress in the dark violet eye , which look entreatingly , deprecatingly at her lover . 

 ' I dare not answer as you would like I to answer , ' she falter , after a painful pause . ' I be not my own mistress . my grandmother have bring I up , devote herself to I almost , and she have her own view , her own plan . I dare not frustrate they ! ' 

 ' she would like to marry you to a man of rank and fortune a man who will choose you , perhaps , because other people admire you , rather than because he himself love you as you ought to be love ; who will choose you because you be altogether the good and most perfect thing of your year ; just as he would buy a yearling at Newmarket or Doncaster . her ladyship mean you to make a great alliance coronet , not heart , be the counter for her game ; but , Lesbia , would you , in the bloom and freshness of youth you with the pulse of youth throb at your heart lend yourself to the calculation of age which have live its life and forget the very meaning of love ? would you submit to be play as a card in the game of a dowager 's ambition ? trust I , dearest , in the crisis of a woman 's life there be one only counsellor she should listen to , and that counsellor be her own heart . if you love I as I dare to hope you do trust in I , hold by I , and leave the rest to Heaven . I know that I can make your life happy . ' 

 ' you frighten I by your impetuosity , ' say Lesbia . ' surely you forget how short a time we have know each other . ' 

 ' an age . all my life before the day I see you be a dead , dull blank as compare with the magical hour I have spend with you . ' 

 ' I do not even know who and what you be . ' 

 ' first , I be a gentleman , or I should not be your brother 's friend . a poor gentleman , if you like , with only my own right arm to hew my pathway through the wood of life to the temple of fortune ; but trust I , only trust I , Lesbia , and I will so hew my path as to reach that temple . look at I , love . do I look like a man bear to fail ? ' 

 she look up at he shyly , with eye that be dim with tear . he look like a demi - god , tall , straight as the pine trunk amongst which he be stand , a frame form for strength and activity , a face instinct with mental power , dark eye that glow with the fire of intellect and passion . the sunlight give an almost unearthly radiance to the clear dark of his complexion , the curly brown hair cut close to the finely shape head , the broad brow and boldly model feature . 

 Lesbia feel in her heart that such a man must be destine for success , bear to be a conqueror in all strife , a victor upon every field . 

 ' have I the thews and sinew of a man doom to be beat in the battle ? ' he ask she . ' no , dearest ; Heaven mean I to succeed ; and with you to fight for I shall not be beat by adverse fortune . can you not trust Providence and I ? ' 

 ' I can not disobey my grandmother . if she will consent - - ' 

 ' she will not consent . you must defy Lady Maulevrier , Lesbia , if you mean to reward my love . but I will promise you this much , darling , that if you will be my wife with your brother 's consent which I be sure of before I ask for it , within one year of our marriage I will find mean of reconcile her ladyship to the match , and win her entire forgiveness for you and I . ' 

 ' you be talk of impossibility , ' say Lesbia , frown . ' why do you talk to I as if I be a child ? I know hardly anything of the world , but I do know the woman who have rear and educate I . my grandmother would never forgive I if I marry a poor man . I should be an outcast . ' 

 ' we would be outcast together happy outcast . besides , we should not always be poor . I tell you I be predestine to conquer fate . ' 

 ' but we should have to begin from the beginning . ' 

 ' yes , we should have to begin from the beginning , as Adam and Eve do when they leave Paradise . ' 

 ' we be not tell in the Bible that they have any happiness after that . it seem to have be all trouble and weariness , and toil and death , after the angel with the flaming sword drive they out of Eden . ' 

 ' they be together , and they must have be happy . oh , Lesbia , if you do not feel that you can face poverty and the world 's contempt by my side , and for my sake , you do not love I . love never calculate so nicely ; love never fear the future ; and yet you do love I , Lesbia , ' he say , try to fold she in his arm ; but again she draw herself away from he this time with a look almost of horror and stand face he , cling to one of the pine trunk , like a scared wood - nymph . 

 ' you have no right to say that , ' she say . 

 ' I have the divine right of my own deep love of heart which cry out to heart . do you think there be no magnetic power in true love which can divine the answer love in another ? Lesbia , call I an insolent coxcomb if you like , but I know you love I , and that you and I may be utterly happy together . oh , why why do you shrink from I , my beloved ; why withhold yourself from my arm ! oh , love , let I hold you to my heart let I seal our betrothal with a kiss ! ' 

 ' betrothal no , no ; not for the world , ' cry Lesbia . ' Lady Maulevrier would cast I off for ever ; she would curse I . ' 

 ' what would the curse of an ambitious woman weigh against my love ? and I tell you that her anger would be only a pass tempest . she would forgive you . ' 

 ' never you do not   know she . ' 

 ' I tell you she would forgive you , and all would be well with we before we have be marry a year . why can not you believe I , Lesbia ? ' 

 ' because I can not believe impossibility , even from your lip , ' she answer sullenly . 

 she stand before he with downcast eye , the tear stream down her pale cheek , exquisitively lovely in her agitation and sorrow . yes , she do love he ; her heart be beat passionately ; she be long to throw herself on his breast , to be fold upon that manly heart , in trust in that brave , bright look which seem to defy fortune . yes , he be a man bear to conquer ; he be handsome , intellectual , powerful in all mental and physical gift . a man of man . but he be , by his own admission , a very obscure and insignificant person , and he have no money . life with he mean a long fight with adverse circumstance ; life for his wife must mean patience , submission , long wait upon destiny , and perhaps with old age and grey hair the tardy turning of Fortune 's wheel . and be she for this to resign the kingdom that have be promise to she , the giddy height which she be bear to scale , the triumph and delight and victory of the great world ? yes , Lesbia love this fortuneless knight ; but she love herself and her prospect of promotion still well . 

 ' oh , Lesbia , can you not be brave for my sake trustful for my sake ? God will be good to we if we be true to each other . ' 

 ' God will not be good to I if I disobey my grandmother . I owe she too much ; ingratitude in I would be doubly base . I will speak to she . I will tell she all you have say , and if she give I the faint encouragement - - ' 

 ' she will not ; that be a foregone conclusion . tell she all , if you like ; but let we be prepare for the answer . when she deny the right of your heart to choose its own mate , then rise up in the might of your womanhood and defy she . tell she , " I love he , and be he rich or poor , I will share his fate ; " tell she boldly , bravely , nobly , as a true woman should ; and if she be adamant still , proclaim your right to disobey her worldly wisdom rather than the voice of your own heart . and then come to I , darling , and be my own , and the world which you and I will face together shall not be a bad world . I will answer for that . no trouble shall come near you . no humiliation shall ever touch you . only believe in I . ' 

 ' I can believe in you , but not in the impossible , ' answer Lesbia , with measured accent . 

 the voice be silver - sweet , but pass cold . just then there be a rustling among the pine branch , and Lesbia look round with a startled air . 

 ' be there any one listen ? ' she exclaim . ' what be that ? ' 

 ' only the breath of heaven . oh , Lesbia , if you be but a little less wise , a little more trustful . do not be a dumb idol . say that you love I , or do not love I . if you can look I in the face and say the last , I will leave you without another word . I will take my sentence and go . ' 

 but this be just what Lesbia could not do . she could not deny her love ; and yet she could not sacrifice all thing for her love . she lift the heavy lid which veil those lovely eye , and look up at he imploringly . 

 ' give I time to breathe , time to think , ' she say . 

 ' and then will you answer I plainly , truthfully , without a shadow of reserve , remember that the fate of two life hang on your word . ' 

 ' I will . ' 

 ' let it be so , then . I will go for a ramble over the hill , and return in time for afternoon tea . I shall look for you on the tennis lawn at half - past four . ' 

 he take she in his arm , and this time she yield herself to he , and the beautiful head rest for a few moment upon his breast , and the soft eye look up at he in confide fondness . he bend and kiss she once only , but a kiss that mean for life and death . in the next moment he be go , leave she alone among the pine tree . 

 CHAPTER XI . 

 ' if I be to do as ISEULT do . ' 


 Lady Maulevrier rarely appear at luncheon . she take some slight refection in her morning - room , among her book and paper , and in the society of her canine favourite , whose company suit she well at certain hour than the noisier companionship of her grandchild . she be a studious woman , love the silent life of book well than the inane chatter of everyday humanity . she be a woman who think much and read much , and who live more in the past than the present . she live also in the future , count much upon the splendid career of her beautiful granddaughter , which should be in a manner a lengthen out , a renewal of her own life . she look forward to the day when Lesbia should reign supreme in the great world , a famous beauty and leader of fashion , her every act and word inspire and direct by her grandmother , who would be the shadow behind the throne . it be possible nay , probable that in those day Lady Maulevrier would herself re - appear in society , establish her salon , and draw around her closing year all that be wittiest , good , and wisest in the great world . 

 her ladyship be repose in her low reading - chair , with a volume of Tyndall on the book - stand before she , when the door be open softly and Lesbia come glide in , and seat herself without a word on the hassock at her grandmother 's foot . Lady Maulevrier pass her hand caressingly over the girl 's soft brown hair , without look up from her book . 

 ' you be a late visitor , ' she say ; ' why do you not come to I after breakfast ? ' 

 ' it be such a lovely morning , we go straight from the breakfast table to the garden ; I do not think you want I . ' 

 ' I do not want you ; but I be always glad to see my pet . what be you do in the garden all the morning ? I do not hear you play tennis . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier have already interrogate the german governess upon this very subject , but she have her own reason for wish to hear Lesbia 's account . 

 ' no , it be too warm for tennis . Fršulein and I sit and work , and Mr. Hammond read to we . ' 

 ' what do he read ? ' 

 ' Heine 's ballad . he read german beautifully . 

 ' indeed ! I daresay he be at school in Germany . there be cheap school there to which middle - class people send their boy . ' 

 this be like a thrust from a rusty knife . 

 ' Mr. Hammond be at Oxford , ' Lesbia say , reproachfully ; and then , after a longish pause , she clasp her hand upon the arm of Lady Maulevrier 's chair , and say , in a plead voice , ' Grandmother , Mr. Hammond have ask I to marry he . ' 

 ' indeed ! only that ? and pray , do he tell you what be his mean of maintain Lord Maulevrier 's sister in the position to which her birth entitle she ? ' inquire the dowager , with crush calmness . 

 ' he be not rich ; indeed , I believe , he be poor ; but he be brave and clever , and he be full of confidence in his power to conquer fortune . ' 

 ' no doubt ; that be your true adventurer 's style . he confide implicitly in his own talent , and in somebody else 's banker . Mr. Hammond would make a tremendous figure in the world , I daresay , and while he be make it your brother would have to keep he . well , my dear Lesbia , I hope you give this gentleman the answer his insolence deserve ; or that you do well , and refer he to I . I should be glad to give he my opinion of his conduct a person admit to this house as your brother 's hanger - on tolerate only on your brother 's account ; such a person , nameless , penniless , friendless   except for Maulevrier 's too facile patronage , to dare to lift his eye to my granddaughter ! it be ineffable insolence ! ' 

 Lesbia crouch by her grandmother 's chair , her face hide from Lady Maulevrier 's falcon eye . every word utter by her ladyship sting like the knot cord of a knout . she know not whether to be most ashamed of her lover or of herself of her lover for his obscure position , his hopeless poverty ; of herself for her folly in love such a man . and she do love he , and would fain have plead his cause , have she not be cow by the authority that have rule she all her life . 

 ' Lesbia , if I think you have be silly enough , degrade enough , to give this young man encouragement , to have justify his audacity of to - day by any act or word of your , I should despise , I should detest you , ' say Lady Maulevrier , sternly . ' what could be more contemptible , more hateful in a girl rear as you have be than to give encouragement to the first comer to listen greedily to the first adventurer who have the insolence to make love to you , to be eager to throw yourself into the arm of the first man who ask you . that my granddaughter , a girl rear and teach and watch and guard by I , should have no more dignity , no more modesty , or womanly feeling , than a barmaid at an inn ! ' 

 Lesbia begin to cry . 

 ' I do not   see why a barmaid should not be a good woman , or why it should be a crime to fall in love , ' she say , in a voice break by sob . ' you need not speak to I so unkindly . I be not go to marry Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' oh , you be not ? that be very good of you . I be deeply grateful for such an assurance . ' 

 ' but I like he well than anyone I ever see in my life before . ' 

 ' you have see so many people . you have have such a wide area for choice . ' 

 ' no ; I know I have be keep like a nun in a convent : but I do not   think when I go into the world I shall ever see anyone I should like well than Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' wait till you have see the world before you make up your mind about that . and now , Lesbia , leave off talk and think like a child ; look I in the face and listen to I , for I be go to speak seriously ; and with I , when I be in earnest , what be say once be say for ever . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier grasp her granddaughter 's arm with long slender finger which hold it as tightly as the grasp of a vice . she draw the girl 's slim figure round till they be face to face , look into each other 's eye , the dowager 's eagle countenance light up with impassioned feeling , severe , awful as the face of one of the fatal sister , the avenger of blood , the harbinger of doom . 

 ' Lesbia , I think I have be good to you , and kind to you , ' she say . 

 ' you have be all that be kind and dear , ' falter Lesbia . 

 ' then give I measure for measure . my life have be a hard one , child ; hard and lonely , and loveless and joyless . my son , to whom I devote myself in the vigour of youth and in the prime of life , never love I , never repay I for my love . he spend his day far away from I , when his presence would have gladden my difficult life . he die in a strange land . of his three child , you be the one I take into my heart . I do my duty to the other ; I lavish my love upon you . do not give I curse instead of blessing . do not give I a stone instead of bread . I have build every hope of happiness or pleasure in this world upon you and your obedience . obey I , be true to I , and I will make you a queen , and I will sit in the shadow of your throne . I will toil for you , and be wise for you . you shall have only to shine , and dazzle , and enjoy the glory of life . my beautiful darling , for pity 's sake do not give yourself over to folly . ' 

 ' do not you marry for love , grandmother ? ' 

 ' no , Lesbia . Lord Maulevrier and I get on very well together , but ours be no love - match . ' 

 ' do nobody in our rank ever marry for love ? be all marriage a mere exchange and barter ? ' 

 ' no , there be love - match now and then , which often turn out badly . but , my darling , I be not ask you to marry for rank or for money . I be only ask you to wait till you find your mate among the noblest in the land . he may be the handsome and most accomplish of man , a man bear to win woman 's heart ; and you may love he as fervently as ever a village girl love her first lover . I be not go to sacrifice you , or to barter you , dearest . I mean to marry you to the good and noble young man of his day . you shall never be ask to stoop to the unworthy , not even if worthlessness wear strawberry leaf in his cap , and own the great estate in the land . ' 

 ' and if instead of wait for this King Arthur of yours I be to do as Iseult do as Guinevere do choose for myself - - ' 

 ' Iseult and Guinevere be wanton . I wonder that you can name they in comparison with yourself . ' 

 ' if I be to marry a good and honourable man who have his place to make in the world , would you never forgive I ? ' 

 ' you mean Mr. Hammond ? you may just as well speak plainly , ' say Lady Maulevrier , freezingly . ' if you be capable of such idiocy as that , Lesbia , I would pluck you out of my heart like a foul weed . I would never look upon you , or hear your name speak , or think of you again as long as I live . my life would not last very long after that blow . old age can not bear such shock . oh , Lesbia , I have be father and mother to you ; do not bring my grey hair in sorrow to the grave . ' 

 Lesbia give a deep sigh , and brush the tear from her cheek . yes , the very idea of such a marriage be foolishness . just now , in the pine wood , carry away by the force of her lover 's passion , by her own soft feeling , it have seem to she as if she could count the world well lose for his sake ; but now , at Lady Maulevrier 's foot , she become again true to her training , and the world be too much to lose . 

 ' what can I do , grandmother ? ' she ask , submissively , despairingly . ' he love I , and I love he . how can I tell he that he and I can never be anything to each other in this world ? ' 

 ' refer he to I . I will give he his answer . ' 

 ' no , no ; that will not do . I have promise to answer he myself . he have go for a walk on the hill , and will come back at four o'clock for my answer . ' 

 ' sit down at that table , and write as I dictate . ' 

 ' but a letter will be so formal . ' 

 ' it be the only way in which you can answer he . when he come back from his walk you will have leave Fellside . I shall send you off to St. Bees with Fršulein . you must never look upon that man 's face again . ' 

 Lesbia brush away a few more tear , and obey . she have be too well train to attempt resistance . Defiance be out of the question . 

 CHAPTER XII . 

 ' the GREATER CANTLE of the world be lose . ' 


 the sky be still cloudless when John Hammond stroll slowly up the leafy avenue at Fellside . he have be across the valley and up the hill to Easedale Tarn , and then by rough untrodden way , across a chaos of rock and heather , into a second valley , long , narrow , and sterile , know as Far Easedale , a desolate gorge , a rugged cleft in the heart of the mountain . the walk have be long and laborious ; but only in such clambering and toiling , such expenditure of muscular force and latent heat , could the man 's restless soul endure those long hour of suspense . 

 ' how will she answer I ? oh , my God ! how will she answer ? ' he say within himself , as he walk up the romantic winding road , which make so picturesque an approach to Lady Maulevrier 's domain , ' be my idol gold or clay ? how will she come through the crucible ? oh , dearest , sweetest , loveliest , only be true to the instinct of your womanhood , and my cup will be full of bliss , and all my day will flow as sweetly as the burden of a song . but if you prove heartless , if you love the world 's   wealth well than you love I ah ! then all be over , and you and I be lose to each other for ever . I have make up my mind . ' 

 his face settle into an expression of indomitable determination , as of a man who would die rather than be false to his own purpose . there be no glow of hope in his heart . he have no deep faith in the girl he love ; indeed in his heart of heart he know that this be to whom he have trust his hope of bliss be no heroine . she be a lovely , loveable girl , nothing more . how would she greet he when they meet presently on the tennis lawn ? with tear and entreaty , and pretty little deprecate speech , irresolution , timidity , vacillation , perhaps ; hardly with heroic resolve to act and dare for his sake . 

 there be no one on the tennis lawn when he go there , though the hour be close at hand at which Lesbia have promise to give he his answer . he sit down in one of the low chair , glad to rest after his long ramble have have no refreshment but a bottle of soda - water and a biscuit at the cottage by Easedale Tarn . he wait , calmly as to outward seeming , but with a heavy heart . 

 ' if it be Mary now whom I love , I should have little fear of the issue , ' he think , weigh his sweetheart 's character , as he weigh his chance of success . ' that young termagant would defy the world for her lover . ' 

 he sit in the summer silence for nearly half - an - hour , and still there be no sign of Lady Lesbia . her satin - line workbasket , with the work throw carelessly across it , be still on the rustic table , just as she have leave it when they go to the pine wood . wait be weary work when the bliss of a lifetime tremble in the balance ; and yet he do not want to be impatient . she might find it difficult to get away from her family , perhaps . she be closely watch and guard , as the most precious thing at Fellside . 

 at last the clock strike five , and Hammond could endure delay no long . he go round by the flower garden to the terrace before the drawing - room window , and through an open window to the drawing - room . 

 Lady Maulevrier be in her accustomed seat , with her own particular little table , magazine , book , newspaper at her side . Lady Mary be pour out the tea , a most unusual thing ; and Maulevrier be sit on a stool at her foot , with his knee up to his chin , very warm and dusty , eat pound cake . 

 ' where the mischief have you be hide yourself all day , Jack ? ' he call out as Hammond appear , look round the room as he enter , with eager , interrogate eye , for that one figure which be absent . 

 ' I have be for a walk . ' 

 ' you might have have the civility to announce your design , and Molly and I would have share your peregrination . ' 

 ' I be sorry that I lose the privilege of your company . ' 

 ' I suppose you lose your luncheon , which be of more importance , ' say Maulevrier . 

 ' will you have some tea ? ' ask Mary , who look more womanly than usual in a cream - colour surah gown one of her Sunday gown . 

 she have a faint hope that by this essentially feminine apparel she might lessen the prejudicial effect of Maulevrier 's cruel story about the fox - hunt . 

 Mr. Hammond answer absently , hardly look at Mary , and quite unconscious of her pretty gown . 

 ' thank , yes , ' he say , take the cup and saucer , and look at the door by which he momently expect Lady Lesbia 's entrance , and then , as the door do not open , he look down at Mary , very busy with china teapot and a brass kettle which hiss and throb over a spirit lamp . 

 ' will not   you have some cake , ' she ask , look up at he gently , grieve at the distress and disappointment in his face . ' I be sure you must be dreadfully hungry . ' 

 ' not in the least , thank . how come you to be entrust with those sacred vessel , Lady Mary ? what have become of Fršulein and your sister ? ' 

 ' they have rush off to St. Bees . Grandmother think Lesbia look pale and out of spirit , and pack she off to the seaside at a minute 's notice . ' 

 ' what ! she have leave Fellside ? ' ask Hammond , pal suddenly , as if a man have strike he . ' Lady Maulevrier , do I understand that Lady Lesbia have go away ? ' 

 he ask the question in an authoritative tone , with the air of a man who have a right to be answer . the dowager wonder at his surpass insolence . 

 ' my granddaughter have go to the seaside with her governess , ' she say , haughtily . 

 ' at a minute 's notice ? ' 

 ' at a minute 's notice . I be not in the habit of hesitate about any step which I consider necessary for my grandchild 's welfare . ' 

 she look he full in the face , with those falcon eye of her ; and he give she back a look as resolute , and every whit as full of courage and of pride . 

 ' well , ' he say , after a very perceptible pause , ' no doubt your ladyship have do wisely , and I must submit to your jurisdiction . but I have ask Lady Lesbia a question , and I have be promise an answer . ' 

 ' your question have be answer by Lady Lesbia . she leave a note for you , ' reply Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' thank , ' answer Mr. Hammond , briefly , and he hurry from the room without another word . 

 the letter be on the table in his bedroom . he have little hope of any good wait for he in a letter so write . the dowager and the world have triumph over a girl 's dawn love , no doubt . 

 this be Lesbia 's letter : 

 ' dear Mr. Hammond , Lady Maulevrier desire I to say that the 
 proposal which you honour I by make this morning be one which I 
 can not possibly accept , and that any idea of an engagement between 
 you and I could result only in misery and humiliation to both . she 
 think it well , under these circumstance , that we should not again 
 meet , and I shall therefore have leave Fellside before you receive 
 this letter . 
 ' with all good wish , very faithfully your , 
 ' LESBIA HASELDEN . ' 
 ' very faithfully mine faithful to her false training , to the worldly mind that rule she ; faithful to the god of this world Belial and Mammon , and the Moloch Fashion . poor cowardly soul ! she love I , and own as much , yet weakly fly from I , afraid to trust the strong arm and the brave heart of the man who love she , prefer the glitter sham of the world to the reality of true and honest love . well , child , I have weigh you in the balance and find you want . would to God it have be otherwise ! if you have be brave and bold for love 's sake , where be that pure and perfect chrysolite for which I would have barter you ? ' 

 he fling himself into a chair , and sit with his head bow upon his fold arm , and his eye not innocent of tear . what would he not have give to find truth and courage and scorn of the world 's wealth in that heart which he have try to win . do he think she altogether heartless because she so glibly renounce he ? no , he be too just for that . he call she only half - hearted . she be like the cat in the adage , ' let I dare not , wait upon I would . ' but he tell himself with one deep sigh of resignation that she be lose to he for ever . 

 ' I have try she , and find she not worth the winning , ' he say . 

 the house , even the lovely landscape smile under his window , the pastoral valley , smooth lake and willowy island , seem hateful to he . he feel himself hem round by those green hill , by yonder brown and rugged wall of Nabb Scar , stifle for want of breathe space . the landscape be lovely enough , but it be like a beautiful grave . he long to get away from it . 

 ' another man would follow she to St. Bees , ' he say . ' I will not . ' 

 he fling a few thing into a Gladstone bag , sit down , and write a brief note to Maulevrier , ask he to make his excuse to her ladyship . he have make up his mind to go to Keswick that afternoon , and would rejoin his friend to - morrow , at Carlisle . this do , he ring for Maulevrier 's valet , and ask that person to look after his luggage and bring it on to Scotland with his master 's thing ; and then , without a word of adieu to anyone , John Hammond go out of the house , with the Gladstone bag in his hand , and shake the dust of Fellside off his foot . 

 he order a fly at the Prince of Wales 's Hotel , and drive to Keswick , whence he go on to the Lodore . the gloom and spaciousness of Derwentwater , grey in the gathering dusk , suit his humour well than the emerald prettiness of Grasmere the roar of the waterfall make music in his ear . he din in a private room , and spend the evening roam on the shore of the lake , and at eleven o'clock go back to his hotel and sit late into the night read Heine , and think of the girl who have refuse he . 

 Mr. Hammond 's letter be deliver to Lord Maulevrier five minute before dinner , as he sit in the drawing - room with her ladyship and Mary . Poor Mary have put on another pretty gown for dinner , still bend upon efface Mr. Hammond 's image of she as a tousled , frantic creature in tear and muddy raiment . she sit watch the door , just as Hammond have watch it three hour ago . 

 ' so , ' say Maulevrier , ' your ladyship have succeed in drive my friend away . Hammond have leave Fellside , and beg I to convey to you his compliment and his grateful acknowledgment of all your kindness . ' 

 ' I hope I have not be uncivil to he , ' answer Lady Maulevrier coldly . ' as you have both make up your mind to go to - morrow , it can matter very little that he should go to - day . ' 

 Mary look down at the ribbon and lace on her prettiest frock , and think that it matter a great deal to she . yet , if he have stay , would he have see her frock or she ? with his bodily eye , perhaps , but not with the eye of his mind . those eye see only Lesbia . 

 ' no , perhaps it hardly matter , ' answer Maulevrier , with suppressed anger . ' the man be not worth talk about or think about . what be he ? only the good , true , brave fellow I ever know . ' 

 ' there be shepherd and guide in Grasmere of whom we could say almost as much , ' say Lady Maulevrier , ' yet you would scarcely expect I to encourage one of they to pay his address to your sister ? pray spare we all nonsense - talk , Maulevrier . this business be very well end . you ought never to have bring Mr. Hammond here . ' 

 ' I be sure of that now . I be very sorry I do bring he . ' 

 ' oh , the man will not die for love . a disappointment of that kind be good for a young man in his position . it will preserve he from more vulgar entanglement , and perhaps from the folly of a too early marriage . ' 

 ' that be a mighty philosophical way of look at the matter . ' 

 ' it be the only true way . I hope when you be my age you will have learn to look at everything in a philosophical spirit . ' 

 ' well , Lady Maulevrier , you have have it all your own way , ' say the young man , walk up and down the room in an angry mood . ' I hope you will never be sorry for have come between two people who love each other , and might have make each other happy . ' 

 ' I shall never be sorry for have save my granddaughter from an imprudent marriage . give I your arm , Maulevrier , and let I hear no more about Mr. Hammond . we have all have quite enough of he , ' say her ladyship , as the butler announce dinner . 

 CHAPTER XIII . 

 ' since PAINTED or not paint all shall fade . ' 


 Fršulein M ller and her charge return from St. Bees after a sojourn of about three week upon that quiet shore : but Lady Lesbia do not appear to be improve in health or spirit by the revivify breeze of the ocean . 

 ' it be a dull , horrid place , and I be bored to death there ! ' she say , when Mary ask how she have enjoy herself . ' there be no question of enjoyment . Grandmother take it into her head that I be look ill , and send I to the sea ; but I should have be just as well at Fellside . ' 

 this mean that between Lesbia and that distinctly inferior being , her young sister , there be to be no confidence . Mary have watch the life - drama act under her eye too closely not to know all about it , and be not inclined to be so put off . 

 that pale perturb countenance of John Hammond 's , those eager inquire eye look to the door which open not , have haunt Mary 's wake thought , have even mingle with the tangled web of her dream . oh , how could any woman scorn such love ? to be so loved , and by such a man , seem to Mary the perfection of earthly bliss . she have never be educate up to those wide and lofty view of life , which teach a woman that house and land , place and power , be the supreme good . 

 ' I can not   understand how you could treat that noble - minded man so badly , ' she exclaim one day , when she and Lesbia be alone in the library , and after she have sit for ever so long , star out of the window , meditate upon her sister 's cruelty . 

 ' of whom be you speak , pray ? ' 

 ' as if you do not   know ! of Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' and pray , how do you know that he be noble - minded , or that I treat he badly ? ' 

 ' well , as to his be noble - minded , that jump to the eye , as french book say . as for your treatment of he , I be look on all the time , and I know how unkind you be , and I hear he talk to you in the fir - copse that day . ' 

 ' you be listen ' cry Lesbia indignantly . 

 ' I be not listen ! I be pass by . and if people choose to carry on their love affair out of door they must expect to be overhear . I hear he plead to you , tell you how he would work for you , fight the battle of life for you , ask you to be trustful and brave for his sake . but you have a heart of stone . you and grandmother both have heart of stone . I think she must have take out your heart when you be little , and put a stone in its place . ' 

 ' really , ' say Lesbia , try to carry thing with a high hand , albeit her very human heart be beat passionately all the time , ' I think you ought to be very grateful to I and grandmother for refuse Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' why grateful ? ' 

 ' because it leave you a chance of get he for yourself ; and everybody can see that you be over head and ear in love with he . that jump to the eye , as you say . ' 

 Mary turn crimson , tremble with rage , look at her sister as if she would kill she , for a moment or so , and finally burst into tear . 

 ' that be not true , and it be shameful for you to say such a thing , ' she cry . 

 ' why , what a virago you be , Mary . well , I be very glad it be not true . Mr. Hammond be yes , I will be quite candid with you he be the only man I be ever likely to admire for his own sake . he be good , brave , clever , all that you think he . but you and I do not live in a world in which girl be free to follow their own inclination . I should break Lady Maulevrier 's heart if I be to make a foolish marriage ; and I owe she too much to set her wish at naught , or to make her decline year unhappy . I must obey she , at any cost to my own feeling . please never mention Mr. Hammond 's name . I be sure I have   have quite enough unhappiness about he . ' 

 ' I see , ' say Mary , bitterly . ' it be your own pain you think of , not his . he may suffer , so long as you be not worried . ' 

 ' you be an impertinent chit , ' retort Lesbia , ' and you know nothing about it . ' 

 after this there be no more say about Mr. Hammond ; but Mary do not forget he . she write long letter to her brother , who be still in Scotland , shooting , deer - stalk , fishing , kill something or other daily , in the most approved fashion of an Englishman take his pleasure . Maulevrier occasionally repay she with a telegram ; but he be not a good correspondent . he declare that life be too short for letter - writing . 

 Summer be go ; the lake be no long a shin emerald floor , dot with the reflection of the flock upon the verdant slope above it , but dull and grey of hue , and break by white - edge wavelet . patch of snow gleam on the misty height of Helvellyn , and the autumn wind howl and shriek around Fellside in the evening , when all the shutter be shut , and the outside world seem little more than an idea : that mystic hour when the sheep be slumber under the starry sky , and when , as the Westmoreland peasant believe , the fairy help the housewife at her spinning - wheel . 

 those October evening be very long and weary for Lesbia and her sister . Lady Maulevrier read and muse in her low chair beside the fire , with her book pile upon her own particular table , and light by her own particular lamp . she talk very little , but she be always gracious to her granddaughter and their governess , and she like they to be with she in the evening . Lesbia play or sing , or sit at work at her basket - table , which occupy the other side of the fireplace ; and Fršulein and Mary have the rest of the room to themselves , as it be , those two place by the hearth be sacred , as if dedicate to household god . Mary read immensely in those long evening , devouring volume after volume , feed her imagination with every kind of nutriment , good , bad , and indifferent . Fršulein M ller knit a woollen shawl , which seem to have neither begin , middle , nor end , and be always ready for conversation , but there be time when silence brood over the scene for long interval , and when every sound of the light wood - ash drop on the tile hearth be distinctly audible . 

 this state of thing go on for about three week after Lesbia 's return from St. Bees , Lady Maulevrier watchful of her granddaughter all the time , though say nothing . she see that Lesbia be not happy , not as she have be in the time before the coming of John Hammond . she have never be particularly gay or light - hearted , never gift with the wild spirit and buoyancy which make girlhood so lovely a season to some nature , a time of dance and song and joyousness , a morning of life steep in the beauty and gladness of the universe . she have never be gay as young lamb and foal and fawn and kitten and puppy dog be gay , by reason of the well - spring of delight within they , need no stimulus from the outside world . she have be just a little inclined to murmur at the dulness of her life at Fellside ; yet she have bear herself with a placid sweetness which have be Lady Maulevrier 's delight . but now there be a marked change in her manner . she be not the less submissive and dutiful in her bear to her grandmother , whom she both love and fear ; but there be moment of fretfulness and impatience which she could not conceal . she be captious and sullen in her manner to Mary and the Fršulein . she would not walk or drive with they , or share in any of their amusement . sometimes of an evening that studious silence of the drawing - room be suddenly break by Lesbia 's weary sigh , breathe unawares as she bent over her work . 

 Lady Maulevrier see , too , that Lesbia 's cheek be pale than of old , her eye less bright . there be a heavy look that tell of broken slumber , there be a pinched look in that oval check . good heaven ! if her beauty be to pale and wane , before society have bow down and worship it ; if this fair flower be to fade untimely ; if this prize rise in the garden of beauty be to wither and decay before it win the prize . 

 her ladyship be a woman of action , and no soon do this fear shape itself in her mind than she take step to prevent the evil her thought foreshadow . 

 among those friend of her youth and ally of her house with whom she have always maintain an affectionate correspondence be Lady Kirkbank , the fashionable wife of a sporting baronet , owner of a castle in Scotland , a place in Yorkshire , a villa at Cannes , and a fine house in Arlington Street , with an income large enough for their enjoyment . when Lady Diana Angersthorpe shine forth in the West End world as the acknowledge belle of the season , the star of Georgina Lorimer be begin to wane . she be the eld daughter of Colonel Lorimer , a man of good old family , and a fine soldier , who have fight shoulder to shoulder with Gough and Lawrence , and who have contrive to make a figure in society with very small mean . Georgina 's sister have all marry well . it be a case of necessity , the Colonel tell they ; they must either marry or gravitate ultimately to the workhouse . so the Miss Lorimers make the good use of their youth and freshness , and ' no good offer refuse ' be the guide rule of their young life . Lucy marry an East India merchant , and set up a fine house in Porchester Terrace . Maud marry wealth personify in the person of a lead member of the Tallow Chandlers ' company , and have her town house and country house , and as fine a set of diamond as a duchess . 

 but Georgina , the eld , trifle with her chance , and her twenty - seventh birthday beheld she pour out her father 's tea in a small furnished house in a street off Portland Place , which the Colonel have hire on his return from India , and which he declare himself unable to maintain another year . 

 ' directly the season be over I shall give up housekeeping and take a lodging at bath , ' say Colonel Lorimer . ' if you do not   like Bath all the year round you can stay with your sister . ' 

 ' that be the last thing I be likely to do , ' answer Georgina ; ' my sister be barely endurable when they be single and poor . they be quite intolerable now they be married and rich . I would soon live in the monkey - house at the Zoological than stay with either Lucy or Maud . ' 

 ' that be rank envy , ' retort her father ' you can not   forgive they for have do so much well than you . ' 

 ' I can not   forgive they for have married snob . when I marry I shall marry a gentleman . ' 

 ' when ! ' echo the parent , with a sneer laugh . ' had not   you well say " if " ? ' 

 at this period Georgina 's wan good look be in some measure counterbalance by the cumulative effect of half a dozen season in good society , which have give style to her person , ease to her manner , and sharpness to her tongue . nobody in society say sharp or more unpleasant thing than Miss Lorimer , and by virtue of this gift she get invite about a great deal more than she might have do have she be distinguish for sweetness of speech and manner . Georgie Lorimer 's presence at a dinner table give just that pungent flavour which be like the faint suspicion of garlic in a fricassee or of tarragon in a salad . 

 now in this very season , when Colonel Lorimer be inclined to speak of his daughter , as Sainte Beuve write of Musset , as a young woman with a very brilliant past , a lucky turn of event give Georgina a fresh start in life , which may be call a new departure . Lady Diana Angersthorpe , the belle of the season , take a fancy to she , be charm with her sharp tongue and acute sense of the ridiculous . the two become fast friend , and be see everywhere together . the good man all flock round the beauty , and all talk to the beauty 's companion : and before the season be over , Sir George Kirkbank , who have half make up his mind to propose to Lady Diana , find himself engage to that uncommonly jolly girl , Lady Diana 's friend . Georgina spend August and September with Lady Di , at the Marchioness of Carisbroke 's delightful villa in the Isle of Wight , and Sir George keep his yacht at Cowes all the time , and be in constant attendance upon his fiancťe . it be George and Georgie everywhere . in October Colonel Lorimer have the profound pleasure of give away his daughter , before the altar in St. George 's , Hanover Square , and it may be say of he that nothing in his relation with that young lady become he well than his manner of part with she . 

 so the needy Colonel 's daughter become Lady Kirkbank , and in the following spring Diana Angersthorpe be marry at the same St. George 's to the Earl of Maulevrier . the friend be divide by distance and by circumstance as the year roll on ; but friendship be steadily maintain ; and a regular correspondence with Lady Kirkbank , whose pen be as sharp as her tongue , be one of the mean by which Lady Maulevrier have keep herself thoroughly post in all those small event , unrecorde by newspaper , which make up the secret history of society . 

 it be of her old friend Georgie that her ladyship think in her present anxiety . Lady Kirkbank have more than once suggest that Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter should vary the monotony of Fellside by a visit to her place near Doncaster , or her castle north of Aberdeen ; but her ladyship have evade these friendly suggestion , be very jealous of any strange influence upon Lesbia 's life . now , however , there have come a time when Lesbia must have a complete change of scenery and surrounding , lest she should pine and dwindle in sullen submission to fate , or else defy the world and elope with John Hammond . 

 now , therefore , Lady Maulevrier decide to accept Lady Kirkbank 's hospitality . she tell her friend the whole story with perfect frankness , and her letter be immediately answer by a telegram . 

 ' I start for Scotland to - morrow , will break my journey by stay a night at Fellside , and will take Lady Lesbia on to Kirkbank with I next day , if she can be ready to go . ' 

 ' she shall be ready , ' say Lady Maulevrier . 

 she tell Lesbia that she have accept an invitation for she , and that she be to go to Kirkbank Castle the day after to - morrow . she be prepare for unwillingness , resistance even ; but Lesbia receive the news with evident pleasure . 

 ' I shall be very glad to go , ' she say , ' this place be so dull . of course I shall be sorry to leave you , grandmother , and I wish you would go with I ; but any change will be a relief . I think if I have to stay here all the winter , count the day and the hour , I should go out of my mind . ' 

 the tear come into her eye , but she wipe they away hurriedly , ashamed of her emotion . 

 ' my dear child , I be so sorry for you , ' murmur Lady Maulevrier . ' but believe I the day will come when you will be very glad that you conquer the first foolish inclination of your girlish heart . ' 

 ' yes , I daresay , when I be eighty , ' Lesbia answer , impatiently . she have make up her mind to submit to the inevitable . she have love John Hammond have be as near break her heart for he as it be in her nature to break her heart for anybody ; but she want to make a great marriage , to be renowne and admire . she have be rear and train for that ; and she be not go to belie her training . 

 a visitor from the great London world be so rare an event that there be naturally a little excitement in the idea of Lady Kirkbank 's arrival . the handsome and most spacious of the spare bedroom be prepare for the occasion . the housekeeper be tell that the dinner must be perfect . there must be nothing old - fashioned or ponderous ; there must be mind as well as matter in everything . rarely do Lady Maulevrier look at a bill of fare ; but on this particular morning she go carefully through the menu , and correct it with her own hand . 

 a pair of post - horse bring Lady Kirkbank and she maid from Windermere station , in time for afternoon tea , and the friend who have only meet twice within the last forty year , embrace each other on the threshold of Lady Maulevrier 's morning - room . 

 ' my dear Di , ' cry Lady Kirkbank , ' what a delight to see you again after such age ; and what a too lovely spot you have choose for your retreat from the world , the flesh , and the devil . if I could be a recluse anywhere , it would be amongst just such delicious surrounding . ' 

 without , twilight shade be gather ; within , there be only the light of a fire and a shade lamp upon the tea table ; there be just light enough for the two woman to see each other 's face , and the change which time have work there . 

 never do womanhood in advanced year offer a more striking contrast than that present by the woman of fashion and the recluse . Lady Maulevrier be almost as handsome in the winter of her day as she have be when life be in its spring . the tall , slim figure , erect as a dart , the delicately chisel feature and alabaster complexion , the soft silvery hair , the perfect hand , whiter and more transparent than the hand of girlhood , the stately movement and bearing , all combine to make Lady Maulevrier a queen among woman . her brocade gown of a deep shade of red , with a border of dark sable on cuff and collar , suggest a portrait by Velasquez . she wear no ornament except the fine old brazilian diamond which flash and sparkle upon her slender finger . 

 if Lady Maulevrier look like a picture in the Escurial , Lady Kirkbank resemble a caricature in La Vie Parisienne . everything she wear be in the very late fashion of the parisian demi - monde , that exaggerated elegance of a fashion plate which only the most exquisite of woman could redeem from vulgarity . plush , brocade , peacock 's feather , golden bangle , mousquetaire glove , a bonnet of purple plumage set off by ornament of filagree gold , an infantine little muff of lace and wild flower , buttercup and daisy ; and hair , eyebrow and complexion as artificial as the flower on the muff . 

 all that art could do to obliterate the trace of age have be do for Georgina Kirkbank . but seventy year be not to be obliterate easily , and the crow 's foot show through the bloom de Ninon , and the eye under the paint arch be glassy and haggard , the carnation lip have a withered look . Age be make all the more palpable by the artifice which would have disguise it . 

 Lady Maulevrier suffer an absolute shock at behold the friend of her youth . she have not accustom herself to the idea that woman in society could raddle their cheek , stain their lip , and play trick before high heaven with their eyebrow and eyelash . in her own youth paint face have be the ghastly privilege of a class of womankind of which the woman of society be suppose to know nothing . person who show their ankle and rouge their cheek be to be see of an afternoon in Bond Street ; but Lady Diana Angersthorpe have be teach to pass they by as if she see they not , to behold without see these creature outside the pale . and now she see her own dearest friend , a person distinctly within the pale , plaster with bismuth and stain with carmine , and wear hair of a colour so obviously false and inharmonious , that child - like faith could hardly accept it as reality . forty year ago Lady Kirkbank 's long ringlet have be darkest glossy brown , to - day she wear a tousled fringe of bright yellow , piquantly contrast with Vandyke brown eyebrow . 

 it take Lady Maulevrier some moment to get over the shock . she draw a chair to the fire and establish her friend in it , and then , with a little gasp , she say : 

 ' I be charm to see you again , Georgie ! ' 

 ' you darle , I be sure you would be glad . but you must find I awfully change awfully . ' 

 for world Lady Maulevrier could not have deny this truth . Happily Lady Kirkbank do not wait for an answer . 

 ' society be so wear , and George and I never seem to get an interval of quiet . Kirkbank be to be full of man next week . your granddaughter will have a good time . ' 

 ' there will be a few woman , of course ? ' 

 ' oh , yes , there be no avoiding that ; only one do not   reckon they . Sir George only count his gun . we expect a splendid season . I shall send you some bird of my own shooting . ' 

 ' you shoot ! ' exclaim Lady Maulevrier , amazed . 

 ' Shoot ! I should think I do . what else be there to amuse one in Scotland , after the salmon fishing be over ? I have never miss a season for the last thirty year , unless we have be abroad . ' 

 ' please , do not   innoculate Lesbia with your love of sport . ' 

 ' what ! you would not   like she to shoot ? well , perhaps you be right . it be hardly the thing for a pretty girl with her fortune to make . it spoil the delicacy of the skin . but I be afraid she will find Kirkbank dull if she do not   go out with the gun . she can meet we with the rest of the woman at luncheon . we have some capital picnic luncheon on the moor , I can assure you . ' 

 ' I know she will enjoy herself with you . she have be accustom to a very quiet life here . ' 

 ' it be a lovely spot ; but I own I can not understand how you can have live here exclusively during all these year you who use to be all life and fire , love change , action , political and diplomatic society , to dance upon the crest of the wave , as it be . your whole nature must have suffer some curious change . ' 

 their close intimacy of the past warrant freedom of speech in the present . 

 ' my nature do undergo a change , and a severe one , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , gloomily . 

 ' it be that horrid and I daresay unfortunate scandal about his lordship ; and then the sad shock of his death , ' murmur Lady Kirkbank , sympathetically . ' Most woman , with your youth and beauty , would have forget the scandal and the husband in a twelvemonth , and would have make a second marriage more brilliant than the first . but no indian widow who ever perform suttee be more worthy of praise than you , or even that person of Ephesus , whose story I have hear somewhere . indeed , I have always speak of your life as a long suttee . but you mean to re - appear in society next season , I hope , when you present your granddaughter ? ' 

 ' I shall certainly go up to London to present she , and possibly I may spend the season in town ; but I shall feel like Rip Van Winkle . ' 

 ' no , no , you will not , my dear Di . you have keep yourself au courant , I know . even my silly gossiping letter may have be of some use . ' 

 ' they have be most valuable . let I give you another cup of tea , ' say Lady Maulevrier , who have be officiate at her own exquisite tea - table , an arrangement of inlay wood , antique silver , and modern china , which her friend pronounce a perfect poem . 

 indeed , the whole room be poetic , Lady Kirkbank declare , and there be many highly praise scene which less deserve the epithet . the dark red wall and cedar dado , the stamp velvet curtain , of an indescribable shade between silver - grey and olive , the Sheraton furniture , the parqueterie floor and persian prayer - rug , the deep yet brilliant hue of crackle porcelain and chinese cloisonnť enamel , the artistic fireplace , with dog - stove , low brass fender , and ingle - nook recess under the high mantelpiece , all combine to form a luxurious and harmonious whole . 

 Lady Kirkbank admire the tout ensemble in the fitful light of the fire , the dim grey of deepen twilight . 

 ' there never be a more delicious cell ! ' she exclaim , ' but still I should feel it a prison , if I have to spend six week in the year in it . I never stay more than six week anywhere out of London ; and I always find six week more than enough . the first fortnight be rapture , the third and fourth week be calm content , the fifth be weariness , the sixth a fever to be go . I once try a seventh week at Pontresina , and I hat the place so intensely that I dare not go back there for the next three year . but now tell I . Diana , have you really perform suttee , have you bury yourself alive in this sweet spot deliberately , or have the love of retirement grow upon you , and have you become a kind of lotus - eater ? ' 

 ' I believe I have become a kind of lotus - eater . my retirement here have be no sentimental sacrifice to Lord Maulevrier 's memory . ' 

 ' I be glad to hear that ; for I really think the bad possible use a woman can make of her life be in waste it on lamentation for a dead and go husband . life be odiously short at the good , and it be mere imbecility to fritter away any of our scanty portion upon the dead , who can never be any the well for our tear . ' 

 ' my motive in live at Fellside be not reverence for the dead . and now let we talk of the gay world , of which you know all the secret . have you hear anything more about Lord Hartfield ? ' 

 ' ah , there be a subject in which you have reason to be interested . I have not forget the romance of your youth that first season in which Ronald Hollister use to haunt every place at which you appear . do you remember that wet afternoon at the Chiswick flower - show , when you and he and I take shelter in the orange house , and you two make love to each other most audaciously in an atmosphere of orange - blossom that almost stifle I ? yes , those be glorious day ! ' 

 ' a short summer of gladness , a brief dream , ' sigh Lady Maulevrier . ' be young Lord Hartfield like his father ? ' 

 ' no , he take after the Ilmingtons ; but still there be a look of your old sweetheart yes , I think there be an expression . I have not see he for nearly a year . he be still abroad , roam about somewhere in search of adventure . these young man who belong to the Geographical and the Alpine Club be hardly ever at home . ' 

 ' but though they may be sometimes lose to society , they be all the more worthy of society 's esteem when they do appear , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' I think there must be an ennoble influence in Alpine travel , or in the vast solitude of the Dark Continent . a man find himself face to face with unsophisticated nature , and with the grand force of the universe . Professor Tyndall write delightfully of his Alpine experience ; his mind seem to have ripen in the solitude and untainted air of the Alps . and I believe Lord Hartfield be a young man of very high character and of considerable cultivation , be he not ? ' 

 ' he be a splendid young fellow . I never hear a word to his disparagement , even from those people who pretend to know something bad about everybody . what a husband he would make for one of your girl ! ' 

 ' admirable ! but those perfect arrangement , which seem predestine by heaven itself , be so rarely realise on earth , ' answer the dowager , lightly . 

 she be not go to show her card , even to an old friend . 

 ' well , it would be very sweet if they be to meet next season and fall in love with each other , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' he be enormously rich , and I daresay your girl will not be portionless . ' 

 ' Lesbia may take a modest place among heiress , ' answer Lady Maulevrier . ' I have live so quietly during the last forty year that I could hardly help save money . ' 

 ' how nice ! ' sigh Georgie . ' I never save sixpence in my life , and be always in debt . ' 

 ' the little fortune I have save be much too small for division . Lesbia will therefore have all I can leave she . Mary have the usual provision as a daughter of the Maulevrier house . ' 

 ' and I suppose Lesbia have that provision also ? ' 

 ' of course . ' 

 ' Lucky Lesbia . I only wish Hartfield be come to we for the shooting . I would engage he should fall in love with she . Kirkbank be a splendid place for match - making . but the fact be I be not very intimate with he . he be almost always travel , and when he be at home he be not in our set . and now , my dear Diana , tell I more about yourself , and your own life in this delicious place . ' 

 ' there be so little to tell . the book I have read , the theory of literature and art and science which I have adopt and dismiss , learn and forget those be the history of my life . the idea of the outside world reach I here only in book and newspaper ; but you who have be live in the world must have so much to say . let I be the listener . ' 

 Lady Kirkbank desire nothing well . she rattle on for three - quarter of an hour about her doing in the great world , her social triumph , the wonderful thing she have do for Sir George , who seem to be as a puppet in her hand , the prince and princeling she have entertain , the song she have compose , the comedy she have write , for private representation only , albeit the Haymarket manager be die to produce it , the scathing witticism with which she have wither her social enemy . she would have go on much long , but for the gong , which remind she that it be time to dress for dinner . 

 half - an - hour later Lady Kirkbank be in the drawing - room , where Mary have retire to the most shadowy corner , anxious to escape the gaze of the fashionable visitor . 

 but Lady Kirkbank be not inclined to take much notice of Mary . Lesbia 's brilliant beauty , the exquisite greek head , the faultless complexion , the deep , violet eye , catch Georgina Kirkbank 's eye the moment she have enter the room , and she see that this girl and no other must be the beauty , the beloved and choose grandchild . 

 ' how do you do , my dear ? ' she say , take Lesbia 's hand , and then , as if with a gush of warm feeling , suddenly draw the girl towards she and kiss she on both cheek . ' I be go to be desperately fond of you , and I hope you will soon contrive to like I just a little . ' 

 ' I feel sure that I shall like you very much , ' Lesbia answer sweetly . ' I be prepared to love you as grandmother 's old friend . ' 

 ' oh , my dear , to think that I should ever be the old friend of anybody 's grandmother ! ' sigh Lady Kirkbank , with unaffected regret . ' when I be your age I use to think all old people odious . it never occur to I that I should live to be one of they . ' 

 ' then you have no dear grandmother whom you love , ' say Lesbia , ' or you would have like old people for her sake . ' 

 ' no , my love , I have no grandparent . I have a father , and he be all - sufficient anything beyond he in the ancestral line would have be a burden lay upon I great than I could bear , as the poet say . ' 

 Dinner be announce , and Mary come shyly out of her corner , blush deeply . 

 ' and this be Lady Mary , I suppose ? ' say Lady Kirkbank , in an off - hand way , ' how do you do , my dear ? I be go to steal your sister . ' 

 ' I be very glad , ' falter Mary . ' I mean I be glad that Lesbia should enjoy herself . ' 

 ' and some fine day , when Lesbia be married and a great lady , I shall ask you to come to Scotland , ' say Lady Kirkbank , condescendingly , and then she murmur in her friend 's ear , as they go to the dining - room , ' quite an english girl . very fresh and frank and nice , ' which be great praise for such a second - rate young person as Lady Mary . 

 ' what do you think of Lesbia ? ' ask Lady Maulevrier , in the same undertone . 

 ' she be simply adorable . your letter prepare I to expect beauty , but not such beauty . my dear , I think the progress of the human race be all in a downward line since our time ; but your granddaughter be as handsome as you be in your first season , and that be go very far . ' 

 CHAPTER XIV . 

 ' not yet . ' 


 Lady Kirkbank carry off Lesbia early next day , the girl radiant at the idea of see life under new condition . she have a few minute ' serious talk with her grandmother before she go . 

 ' Lesbia , you be go into the world , ' say Lady Maulevrier ; ' yes , even a country house be the world in little . you will have many admirer instead of one ; but I think , I believe , that you will be true to I and to yourself . ' 

 ' you need not fear , grandmother . I have be an idiot ; but but it be only a pass folly , and I shall never be so weak again . ' 

 Lesbia 's scornful lip and kindle eye give intensity to her speech . it be evident that she despise herself for that one touch of womanly softness which have make she as ready to fall in love with her first wooer as any peasant girl in Grasmere Vale . 

 ' I be delighted to hear you speak thus , dearest , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' and if Mr. Hamilton Hammond , I mean should have the audacity to follow you to Kirkbank , and to intrude himself upon you there perhaps to persecute you with clandestine address - - ' 

 ' I do not believe he would do anything clandestine , ' say Lesbia , draw herself up . ' he be quite above that . ' 

 ' my dear child , we know absolutely nothing about he . he have his way to make in the world unaide by family or connection . he be clever daring . such a man can not help be an adventurer ; and an adventurer be capable of anything . I warn you to beware of he . ' 

 ' I do not   suppose I shall ever see his face again , ' retort Lesbia , irritably . 

 she have make up her mind that her life be not to be spoil , her brilliant future sacrifice , for the sake of John Hammond ; but the wound which she have suffer in renounce he be still fresh , her feeling be still sore . any contemptuous mention of he sting she to the quick . 

 ' I hope not . and you will beware of other adventurer , Lesbia , man of a bad stamp than Mr. Hammond , more experienced in ruse and iniquity , man steep to the lip in worldly knowledge , man who look upon woman as mere counter in the game of life . the world think that I be rich , and you will no doubt take rank as an heiress . you will therefore be a mark for every spendthrift , noble or otherwise , who want to restore his broken fortune by a wealthy marriage . and now , my dearest , good - bye . half my heart go with you . nothing could induce I to part with you , even for a few week , except the conviction that it be for your good . ' 

 ' but we shall not be part next year , I hope , grandmother , ' say Lesbia , affectionately . ' you say something about present I , and then leave I in Lady Kirkbank 's care for the season . I should not like that at all . I want you to go everywhere with I , to teach I all the mystery of the great world . you have always promise I that it should be so . ' 

 ' and I have always intend that it should be so . I hope that it will be so , ' answer her grandmother , with a sigh ; ' but I be an old woman , Lesbia , and I be root to this place . ' 

 ' but why should you be root here ? what charm can keep you here , when you be so fit to shine in society ? you be old in nothing but year , and not even old in year in comparison with woman whom we hear of , go everywhere and mix in every fashionable amusement . you be full of fire and energy , and as active as a girl . why should you not enjoy a London season , grandmother ? ' plead Lesbia , nestle her head lovingly against Lady Maulevrier 's shoulder . 

 ' I should enjoy it , dearest , with you . it would be a renewal of my youth to see you shine and conquer . I should be as proud as if the glory be all my own . yes , dear , I hope that I shall be a spectator of your triumph . but do not let we plan the future . life be so full of change . remember what Horace say - - ' 

 ' Horace be a bore , ' say Lesbia . ' I hate a poet who be always harp upon change and death . ' 

 the carriage , which be to take the traveller to Windermere Station , be announce at this moment , and Lesbia and her grandmother give each other the farewell embrace . 

 ' you like Lady Kirkbank , I hope ? ' say Lady Maulevrier , as they go towards the hall , where that lady be wait for they , with Lady Mary and Fršulein M ller in attendance upon she . 

 ' she seem very kind , but I should like she well if she do not paint or if she paint well . ' 

 ' my dear child I be afraid it be the fashion of the day , just as it be in Pope 's time , and we ought to think nothing about it . ' 

 ' well , I suppose I shall get harden in time . ' 

 ' my dear Lesbia , ' shriek Lady Kirkbank from below , ' remember we have to catch a train . ' 

 Lesbia hurry downstairs , follow by Lady Maulevrier , who have to bid her friend adieu . the luggage have be send on in a cart , Lesbia 's trunk and dress basket form no small item . she be so well furnish with pretty gown of all kind that there have be no difficulty in get she ready for this sudden visit . she maid be on the box beside the coachman . Lady Kirkbank 's attendant , a Frenchwoman of five - and - thirty , who look as if she have graduate at Mabille , be to occupy the back seat of the landau . 

 Lady Mary look after her sister longingly , as the carriage drive down the hill . she be go into a new world , to see all kind of people clever people distinguish people musical , artistic , political people hunt and shoot people while Mary be to stay at home all the winter among the old familiar face . dearly as she love these hill and vale her heart sink a little at the thought of those long lonely month , day and evening that would be all alike , and which must be spend without sympathetic companionship . and there would be dreary day on which the weather would keep she a prisoner in her luxurious gaol , when the mountain , and the rugged path beside the mountain stream , would be inaccessible , when she would be restrict to Fršulein 's phlegmatic society , that lady be stout and lazy , fond of her meal , and give to afternoon slumber . Lesbia and Mary be not by any mean sympathetic ; yet , after all , blood be thick than water ; and Lesbia be intelligent , and could talk of the thing Mary love , which be well than total dumbness , even if she generally take an antagonistic view of they . 

 ' I shall miss she dreadfully , ' think Mary , as she stroll listlessly in the garden , where the leaf where fall and the flower fade . 

 ' I wonder if she will see Mr. Hammond at Lady Kirkbank 's ? ' muse Mary . ' if he be anything like a lover he would find out all about her visit , and seize the opportunity of she be away from grandmother . but then if he have be much of a lover he would have follow she to St. Bees . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier sorely miss her favourite grandchild . in a life spend in such profound seclusion , so remote from the busy interest of the world , this beloved companionship have become a necessity to she . she have concentrate her affection upon Lesbia , and the girl 's absence make a fearful blank . but her ladyship 's dignity be not compromise by any outward sign of trouble or loss . 

 she spend her morning in her own room , read and writing and musing at her leisure ; she drive or walk every fine afternoon , sometimes alone , sometimes attend by Mary , who hat these stately drive and walk . she din tete - a - tete with Mary , except on those rare occasion when there be visitor the Vicar and his wife , or some wandering star from other world . Mary live in profound awe of her grandmother , but be of far too frank a nature to be able to adapt her speech or her manner to her ladyship 's idea of feminine perfection . she be silent and shy under those falcon eye ; but she be still the same Mary , the girl to whom pretence or simulation of any kind be impossible . 

 letter come almost every day from Kirkbank Castle , letter from Lesbia describe the bright gay life she be live at that hospitable abode , the excursion , the ride , the picnic luncheon after the morning 's sport , the dinner party , the dance . 

 ' it be the most delightful house you can imagine , ' write Lesbia ; ' and Lady Kirkbank be an admirable hostess . I have quite forgive she for wear false eyebrow ; for after all , you know , one must have eyebrow ; they be a necessity ; but why do she not have the two arch alike ? they be never a pair , and I really think that French maid of hers do it on purpose . 

 ' by - the - bye , Lady Kirkbank be go to write to you to beseech you to let I go to Cannes and Monte Carlo with she . Sir George insist upon it . he say they both like young society , and will be horribly vex if I refuse to go with they . and Lady Kirkbank think my chest be just a little weak I almost break down the other night in that lovely little song of Jensen 's and that a winter in the south be just what I want . but , of course , dear grandmother , I will not   ask you to let I be away so long if you think you will miss I . ' 

 ' if I think I shall miss she ! ' repeat Lady Maulevrier . ' have the girl no heart , that she can ask such a question ? but can I wonder at that ? of what account be I or my love to her father , although I sacrifice myself for his good name ? can I expect that she should be of a different clay ? ' 

 and then , meditate upon the event of the summer that be go , Lady Maulevrier think 

 she renounce her first lover at my bidding ; she renounce her love for I at the bidding of the world . or be it not rather self - interest , the fear of make a bad marriage , which influence she in her renunciation of Mr. Hammond . it be not obedience to I , it be not love for I which make she give he up . it be the selfishness engraine in her race . well , I have heap my love upon she , because she be fair and sweet , and remind I of my own youth . I must let she go , and try to be happy in the knowledge that she be enjoy her life far away from I . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier write her consent to the extension of Lesbia 's visit , and by return of post come a letter from Lesbia which seem brim over with love , and which comfort the grandmother 's wound heart . 

 ' Lady Kirkbank and I be both agree , dearest , that you must join we at Cannes , ' write Lesbia . ' at your age it be very wrong of you to spend a winter in our horrible climate . you can travel with Steadman and your maid . Lady Kirkbank will secure you a charming suite of room at the hotel , or she would like it still well if you would stay at her own villa . do consent to this plan , dear grandmother , and then we shall not be part for a long winter . of course Mary would be quite happy at home run wild . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier sigh as she read this letter , sigh again , and heavily , as she put it back into the envelope . alas , how many and many a year have go , long , monotonous , colourless year , since she have see that bright southern world which she be now urge to revisit . in fancy she see it again to - day , the tideless sea of deep sapphire blue , the little wavelet break on a yellow beach , the white triangular sail , the wood full of asphodel and great purple and white lily , the atmosphere steep in warmth and light and perfume , the glare of white house in the sun , the red and yellow blind , the pot of green and orange and crimson clay , with oleander abloom , the wonderful glow of colour everywhere and upon all thing . and then as the eye of the mind recall these vivid image her bodily eye look out upon the rain - blot scene , the mountain rise in a dark and dismal circle round that sombre pool below , wall she in from the outer world . 

 ' I be at the bottom of a grave , ' she say to herself . ' I be in a live tomb , from which there be no escape . forty year ! forty year of patience and hope , for what ? for dream which may never be realise ; for descendant who may never give I the price of my labour . yes , I should like to go to my dear one . I should like to revisit the South of France , to go on to Italy . I should feel young again amidst that eternal , unchangeable loveliness . I should forget all I have suffer . but it can not be . not yet , not yet ! ' 

 presently with a smile of concentrated bitterness she repeat the word ' not yet ! ' 

 ' surely at my age it must be folly to dream of the future ; and yet I feel as if there be half a century of life in I , as if I have lose nothing in either mental or bodily vigour since I come here forty year ago . ' 

 she rise as she say these word , and begin to pace the room , with quiet , firm step , erect , stately , beautiful in her advanced year as she have be in her bloom and freshness , only with another kind of beauty an empress among woman . the boast that she have make to herself be no idle boast . at sixty - seven year of age her physical power show no sign of decay , her mental quality be at their good and bright . long year of thought and study have ripen and widen her mind . she be a woman fit to be the friend and counsellor of statesman , the companion and confidant of her sovereign : and yet fate willed that she should be bury alive in a Westmoreland valley , see the same hill and stream , the same rustic face , from year 's end to year 's end . surely it be a hard fate , a heavy penance , albeit self - impose . 

 Lesbia go straight from Scotland to Paris with Sir George and Lady Kirkbank . here they stay at the Bristol for just two day , during which her hostess go all over the fashionable quarter buy clothe for the Cannes campaign , and assist Lesbia to spend the hundred pound which her grandmother have send she for the replenishment of her well - provide wardrobe . it be astonish how little way a hundred pound go among the dressmaker , corset - maker , and shoemaker of Lutetia . 

 ' I have no notion that clothe be so dear , ' say Lesbia , when she see how little she have get for her money . 

 ' my dear , you have two gown which be absolutely chien , ' reply Lady Kirkbank , ' and you have a corset which give you a figure , which you must forgive I for say you never have before . ' 

 Lady Kirkbank have to explain that chien as apply to a gown or bonnet be the same thing as chic , only a little more so . 

 ' I hope my gown will always be chien , ' say Lesbia meekly . 

 next evening they be din at Cannes , with the blue sea in front of their window , din at a table all abloom with orange flower , tea rose , mignonette , waxen camellia , and pale Parma violet , while Lady Maulevrier and Mary din tete - a - tete at Fellside , with the feathery snow flake fall outside , and the world whiten all around they . 

 next day the world be all white , and Mary 's beloved hill be inaccessible . 

 who could tell how long they might be cover ; the winding track hide ; the narrow force look like black water or molten iron against that glitter whiteness ? Mary could only walk along the road by Loughrigg to the bench call ' rest and be thankful , ' from which she look with long eye across towards the Langdale Pikes , and to the sharp cone - shape peak , know as Coniston Old Man , just visible above the nearer hill . Fršulein M ller suggest that it be in just such weather as this that a well bring up young lady , a young lady with Vernunft and Anstand , should devote herself to the improvement of her mind . 

 ' let we read German this abscheulich afternoon , ' say the Fršulein . ' suppose we go on with the " sorrow of Werther . " ' 

 ' Werther be a fool , ' cry Mary ; ' any book but that . ' 

 ' will you choose your own book ? ' 

 ' let I read Heine . ' 

 Fršulein look doubtful . there be thing in Heine an all - pervade tone which render he hardly an appropriate poet for ' the young person . ' but Fršulein compromise the matter by let Mary read Atta Troll , the exact bearing of which neither of they understand . 

 ' how beautifully Mr. Hammond read Heine that morning ! ' say Mary , break off suddenly from a perfectly automatic reading . 

 ' you do not hear he , do you ? you be not there , ' say the Fršulein . 

 ' I be not there , but I hear he . I I be sit on the bank among the pine tree . ' 

 ' why do you not come and sit with we ? it would have be more ladylike than to hide yourself behind the tree . ' 

 Mary blush crimson . 

 ' I have be in the kennel with Maulevrier ; I be not fit to be see , ' she say . 

 ' hardly a ladylike admission , ' reply the Fršulein , who feel that with Lady Mary her chief duty be to reprove . 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 ' of all MEN else I have AVOIDED THEE . ' 


 it be afternoon . the white hill yonder and all the length of the valley be touch here and there with gleam of wintry sunlight , and Lady Maulevrier be take her solitary walk on the terrace in front of her house , a stately figure wrap in a furred mantle , tall , erect , move with measured pace up and down the smooth gravel path . now and then at the end of the walk the dowager stop for a minute or so , and stand as if in deep thought , with her eye dreamily contemplate the landscape . an intense melancholy shadow her face , as she thus gaze with brood eye on the naked monotony of those wintry hill . so have she look in many and many a winter , and it seem to she that her life be of a piece with those bleak hill , where in the dismal winter time nothing living trod . she stand gaze at the sink sun , a fiery ball shin at the end of a long gallery of crag and rock , like a lamp at the end of a corridor ; and as she gaze the red round orb drop suddenly behind the edge of a crag , as if she have be an enchantress and have dismiss it with a wave of her wand . 

 ' o Lord , how long , how long ? ' she say . ' how many time have I see that sun go down from this spot , in winter and summer , in spring and autumn ! and now that the one be I love and care for be far away , I feel all the weariness and emptiness of my life . ' 

 as she turn to resume her walk she hear the muffle sound of wheel in the road below , that road which be completely hide by foliage in summer , but which be now visible here and there between the leafless tree . a carriage with a pair of horse be come along the road from Ambleside . 

 Lady Maulevrier stand and watch until the carriage draw up at the lodge gate , and then , when the gate have be open , slowly ascend the wind drive to the house . 

 she expect no visitor ; indeed , there be no one likely to come to she from the direction of Ambleside . her heart begin to beat heavily , with the apprehension of come evil . what kind of evil she know not . bad news about her granddaughter , perhaps , or about Maulevrier . and yet that could hardly be . evil tiding of that kind would have reach she by telegram . 

 perhaps it be Maulevrier himself . his movement be generally erratic . 

 Lady Maulevrier hurry back to the house . she go through the conservatory , where the warm whiteness of azalia , and spirea , and arum lily contrast curiously with the cold white snow out of door , to the hall , where a stranger be stand talk to the butler . 

 he be a man of foreign appearance , wear a cloak line with sable , and a sable cap , which he remove as Lady Maulevrier approach . he be thin and small , with a clear olive complexion , olive incline to pale bronze , sleek raven hair , and black almond - shape eye . at the first glance Lady Maulevrier know that he be an oriental . her heart sink within she , and seem to grow chill as death at sight of he . anything associate with India be horrible to she . 

 the stranger come forward to meet she , bow deferentially . he have those lithe , gliding movement which she remember of old , when she have see prince and dignitary of the East creeping shoeless to her husband 's foot . 

 ' will your ladyship do I the honour to grant I an interview ? ' he say in very good English . ' I have travel from London expressly for that privilege . ' 

 ' then I fear you have waste your time , sir , whatever your mission may be , ' the dowager answer , haughtily . ' however , I be willing to hear anything you may have to say , if you will be good enough to come this way . ' 

 she move towards the library , the butler precede she to open the door , and the stranger follow she into the spacious room , where coal and log be heap high upon the wide dog stove , deeply recess beneath the old English mantelpiece . 

 it be one of the handsome room of the house , furnish with oak bookcase about seven foot high , above which vas of oriental ware and varied colouring stand boldly out against the dark oak wall . richly bind book in infinite variety testify to the wealth and taste of the owner ; while one side of the room be absorb by a wide gothic window , beyond which appear the panorama of lake and mountain , beautiful in every season . a tawny velvet curtain divide this room from the drawing - room ; but there be also a strong oak door behind the curtain , which be generally close in cold weather . 

 Lady Maulevrier go over to this door , and take the precaution to draw the bolt , before she seat herself in her arm - chair by the hearth . she have her own particular chair in all the room she occupy a chair which be sacred as a throne . 

 she draw off her sealskin glove , and motion with a slender white hand to the stranger to be seat . 

 ' to whom have I the honour of speak ? ' she ask , look ; he through and through with an unflinche gaze , as she would have look at death himself , have the grim skeleton figure come to beckon she . 

 he hand she a visit card on which be engrave 

 ' Louis Asoph , Rajah of Bisnagar . ' 

 ' if my memory do not deceive I as to the history of modern India , the territory from which you take your title have be absorb into the english dominion ? ' say Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' it be traffic away forty - three year ago , steal , filch from my father ! but so long as I have power to think and to act I will maintain my claim to that land ; yes , if only by the empty mockery of a name on a visit card . it be a duty I owe to myself as a man , which I owe still more to my murder father . ' 

 ' have you come all the way from London , and in such weather , only to tell I this story ? ' 

 she have twist his card between her finger as she listen to he , and now , with an action at once careless and contemptuous , she fling it upon the burn log . slight as the action be it be eloquent of scorn for the man . 

 ' no , Lady Maulevrier , my mention of this story , with which you be no doubt perfectly familiar , be only a preliminary . I have come to claim my own , and to appeal to you as a woman of honour to do I justice . Nay , I will say as a woman of common honesty ; since there be no nice point of honour in question , only the plain law of mine and thine , which I believe be the same among all nation and creed . I come to you , Lady Maulevrier , to ask you to restore to I the wealth which your husband steal from my father . ' 

 ' you come to my house , to I , an old woman , helpless , defenceless , in the absence of my grandson , the present Earl , to insult I , and insult the dead , ' say Lady Maulevrier , white as statuary marble , and as cold and calm . ' you come to rake up old lie , and to fle they in the face of a solitary woman , old enough to be your mother . do you think that be a noble thing to do ? even in your barbarous eastern code of moral and manner be that the act of a gentleman ? ' 

 ' we be no barbarian in the East , Lady Maulevrier . I come from the cradle of civilisation , the original fount of learning . we be scholar and gentleman , priest and soldier , two thousand year before your british ancestor run wild in their wood , and sacrifice to their unknown god or rocky altar reeking with human blood ! I know the errand upon which I have come be not a pleasant one , either for you or for I ; but I come to you strong in the right of a son to claim the heritage which be steal from he by an infamous mother and her more infamous paramour - - ' 

 ' I will not hear another word ! ' cry Lady Maulevrier , start to her foot , livid with passion . ' do not dare to pronounce that name in my hearing the name of that abominable woman who bring disgrace and dishonour upon my husband and his race . ' 

 ' and who bring your husband the wealth of my murder father , ' answer the Indian , defiantly . ' do not ignore that fact , Lady Maulevrier . what have become of that fortune two hundred thousand pound in money and jewel . it be know to have pass into Lord Maulevrier 's possession after my father be put away by his pay instrument . 

 ' how dare you bring that vile charge against the dead ? ' 

 ' there be man live in India who know the truth of that charge : man who be at Bisnagar when my father , sick and heartbroken , be shut up in his deserted harem , hem in by spy and traitor , man with murder in their face . there be those who know tint he be strangle by one of those wretch , that a grave be dig for he under the marble floor of his zenana , a grave in which his bone be find less than a year ago , in my presence , and fitly entomb at my bidding . he be say to have disappear of his own free will to have leave his palace under cover of night , and seek refuge from possible treachery in another province ; but there be those , and not a few , who know the real history of his disappearance who know , and at the time be ready to testify in any court of justice , that he have be get rid of by the ranee 's agent , and at Lord Maulevrier 's instigation , and that his possession in money and jewel have be convey in the palankin that carry the ranee and her woman to his lordship 's summer retreat near Madras . the ranee die at that retreat six month after her husband 's murder , not without suspicion of poison , and the wealth which she carry with she when she leave Bisnagar pass into his lordship 's possession . have your husband live , Lady Maulevrier , this story must have be bring to light . there be too many people in Madras interested in sift the fact . there must have be a public inquiry . it be a happy thing for you and your race that Lord Maulevrier die before that inquiry have be institute , and that many animosity die with he . lucky too for you that I be a helpless infant at the time , and that the Mahratta adventurer to whom my father 's territory have be transfer in the shuffling of card at the end of the war be deeply concerned in hush up the story . ' 

 ' and pray , why have you nurse your wrath in all these year ? why do you intrude on I after nearly half a century , with this legend of rapine and murder ? ' 

 ' because for nearly half a century I have be keep in profound ignorance of my father 's fate in ignorance of my race . Lord Maulevrier 's jealousy banish I from my mother 's arm shortly after my father 's death . I be send to the South of France under the care of an ayah . my first memory be of a monastery near Marseilles , where I be rear and educate by a Jesuit community , where I be baptise and bring up in the roman catholic faith . by the influence of the Jesuit Fathers I be place in a house of commerce at Marseilles . fund to provide for my education and establishment in life , under very modest condition , be send periodically by an agent at Madras . it be know that I be of East indian birth , but little more be know about I . it be only when year have go by and I be a merchant on my own account and could afford to go to India on a voyage of discovery yes , as much a voyage of discovery as that of Vasco de Gama or of Drake that I get from the Madras agent the clue which enable I , at the cost of infinite patience and infinite labour , to unravel the mystery of my birth . there be no need to enter now upon the detail of that story . I have overwhelming documentary evidence a cloud of witness to convince the most sceptical as to who and what I be . the document be some of they in my valise , at your ladyship 's service . other be at my hotel in London , ready for the inspection of your ladyship 's lawyer . I do not think you will desire to invite a public inquiry , or force I to recover my birthright in a court of justice . I believe that you will take a broad and nobler view of the case , and that you will restore to the wronged and abandon son the fortune steal from his murder father . ' 

 ' how dare you come to I with this tissue of lie ? how dare you look I in the face and charge my dead husband with treachery and dishonour ? I believe neither in your story nor in you , and I defy you to the proof of this vile charge against the dead ! ' 

 ' in other word you mean that you will keep the money and jewel which Lord Maulevrier steal from my father ? ' 

 ' I deny the fact that any such jewel or money ever pass into his lordship 's possession . that vile woman , your mother , whose infamy cast a dark cloud over Lord Maulevrier 's honour , may have rob her husband , may have empty the public treasury . but not a rupee or a jewel belong to she ever come into my possession . I will not bear the burden of her crime . her existence spoil my life banish I from India , a widow in all but the name , and more desolate than many widow . ' 

 ' Lord Maulevrier be know to leave India carry with he two large chest suppose to contain book but actually contain treasure . a man who be in the Governor 's confidence , and who have be the go - between in his intrigue , confess on his death - bed that he have assist in remove the treasure . now , Lady Maulevrier , since your husband die immediately after his arrival in England , and before he could have have any opportunity of convert or make away with the valuable so appropriate , it stand to reason that those valuable must have pass into your possession , and it be from your honour and good feeling that I claim their restitution . if you deny the claim so advanced , there remain but one course open to I , and that be to make my wrong public , and claim my right from the law of the land . ' 

 ' and do you suppose that any english judge or english jury would believe so wild a story or countenance so vile an accusation against the defenceless ? ' demand Lady Maulevrier , stand up before he , tall , stately , with flash eye and scornful lip , the image of proud defiance . ' bring forward your claim , produce your document , your witness , your death - bed confession . I defy you to injure my dead husband or I by your wild lie , your foul charge ! go to an english lawyer , and see what an english law court will do for you and your claim . I will hear no more of either . ' 

 she ring the bell once , twice , thrice , with passionate hand , and a servant fly to answer that impatient summon . 

 ' show this gentleman to his carriage , ' she say , imperiously . 

 the gentleman who call himself Louis Asoph bow , and retire without another word . 

 as the door close upon he , Lady Maulevrier stand , with clench hand and frown brow , star into vacancy . her right arm be outstretche , as if she would have wave the intruder away . suddenly , a strange numbness creep over that uplifted arm , and it fall to her side . from her shoulder down to her foot , that proud form grow cold and feelingless and dead , and she , who have so long carry herself as a queen among woman , sink in a senseless heap upon the floor . 

 CHAPTER XVI . 

 ' her face resigned to BLISS or BALE . ' 


 Lady Mary and the Fršulein have be sit in the drawing - room all this time wait for Lady Maulevrier to come to tea . they hear she come in from the garden ; and then the footman tell they that she be in the library with a stranger . not even the muffled sound of voice penetrate the heavy velvet curtain and the thick oak door . it be only by the loud ringing of the bell and the sound of footstep in the hall that Lady Mary know of the guest 's departure . she go to the door between the two room , and be surprised to find it bolt . 

 ' Grandmamma , will not   you come to tea ? ' she ask timidly , knock on the oaken panel , but there be no reply . 

 she knock again , and louder . still no reply . 

 ' perhaps her ladyship be go to take tea in her own room , ' she say , afraid to be officious . 

 Attendance upon her grandmother at afternoon tea have be one of Lesbia 's particular duty ; but Mary feel that she be an unwelcome substitute for Lesbia . she want to get a little near her grandmother 's heart if she could ; but she know that her attention be endure rather than like . 

 she go into the hall , where the footman on duty be star at the light snowflake dance past the window , perhaps wish he be a snowflake himself , and enjoy himself in that white whirligig . 

 ' be her ladyship have tea in the morning - room ? ' ask Mary . 

 the footman give a little start , as if awaken out of a kind of trance . the sheer vacuity of his mind might naturally slide into mesmeric sleep . 

 he tell Lady Mary that her ladyship have not leave the library , and Mary go in timidly , wonder why her grandmother have not join they in the drawing - room when the stranger be go . 

 the sky be dark outside the wide window , white hill and valley shroud in the shade of night . the library be only light by the glow of the log on the hearth , and in that ruddy light the spacious room look empty . Mary be turn to go away , think the footman have be mistake , when her eye suddenly light upon a dark figure lie on the ground . and then she hear an awful stertorous breathing , and know that her grandmother be lie there , stricken and helpless . 

 Mary shriek aloud , with a cry that pierce curtain and door , and bring Fršulein and half - a - dozen servant to her help . one of the man bring a lamp , and among they they lift the smite figure . oh , God ! how ghastly the face look in the lamplight ! - the feature draw to one side , the skin livid . 

 ' her ladyship have have a stroke , ' say the butler . 

 ' be she die ? ' falter Mary , white as ash . ' oh , grandmother , dear grandmother , do not   look at we like that ! ' 

 one of the servant rush off to the stable to send for the doctor . of course , be an indoor man , he no more thought of go out himself into the snowy night on such an errand than Noah think of go out of the ark to explore the face of the water in person . 

 they carry Lady Maulevrier to her bed and lay she there , like a figure carve out of stone . she be not unconscious . her eye be open , and she moan every now and then as if in bodily or mental pain . once she try to speak , but have no power to shape a syllable aright , and end with a shudder sigh . once she lift her left arm and wave it in the air , as if wave some one off in fear or anger . the right arm , indeed the whole of the right side , be lifeless , motionless as a stone . it be a piteous sight to see the beautiful feature draw and distort , the lip so accustomed to command mouth the broken syllable of an unknown tongue . Lady Mary sit beside the bed with clasped hand , pray dumbly , with her eye fix on her grandmother 's altered face . 

 Mr. Horton come , as soon as his stout mountain pony could bring he . he do not seem surprised at her ladyship 's condition , and accept the situation with professional calmness . 

 ' a marked case of hemiplegia , ' he say , when he have observe the symptom . 

 ' will she die ? ' ask Mary . 

 ' oh , dear , no ! she will want great care for a little while , but we shall bring she round easily . a splendid constitution , a noble frame ; but I think she have overwork her brain a little , read Huxley and Darwin , and the german physiologist upon whom Huxley and Darwin have build themselves . Metaphysics too . Schopenhauer , and the rest of they . a wonderful woman ! very few brain could hold what hers have have pour into it in the last thirty year . the conduct nerve between the brain and the spinal marrow have be overwork : too much activity , too constant a strain . even the rail and sleeper on the railroad wear out , do not   you know , if there be excessive traffic . ' 

 Mr. Horton have know Mary from her childhood , have give her Gregory 's powder , and see she safely through measle and other infantine ailment , so he be quite at home with she , and at Fellside generally . Lady Maulevrier have give he a good deal of her confidence during those thirty year in which he have practise as his father 's partner and successor at Grasmere . he use to tell people that he owe the good part of his education to her ladyship , who condescend to talk to he of the new book she read , and generally give he a volume to put in his pocket when he be leave she . 

 ' do not   be downhearte , Lady Mary , ' he say ; ' I shall come in two or three time a day and see how thing be go on , and if I see the slight difficulty in the case I will telegraph for Jenner . ' 

 Mary and the Fršulein sit up with the invalid all that night . Lady Maulevrier 's maid be also in attendance , and one of the manservant sleep in his clothe on a couch in the corridor , ready for any emergency . but the night pass peacefully , the patient sleep a good deal , and next day there be evident improvement . the stroke which have prostrate the body , which reduce the vigorous , active frame to an awful statue like stillness a quietude as of death of itself have not overcloud the intellect . Lady Maulevrier lie on her bed in her luxurious room , with wide Tudor window command half the circle of the hill , and be still the rule spirit of the house , albeit powerless to move that slender hand , the light wave of which have be as potent to command in her little world as royal sign - manual or sceptre in the great world outside . 

 now there remain only one thing unimpaire by that awful shock which have lay the stately frame low , and that be the will and sovereign force of the woman 's nature . voice be alter , speech be confused and difficult ; but the strength of will , the supreme power of mind , seem undiminished . 

 when Lady Maulevrier be ask if Lesbia should be telegraph for , she reply no , not unless she be in danger of sudden death . 

 ' I should like to see she before I go , ' she say , labour to pronounce the word . 

 ' dear grandmother , ' say Mary , tenderly , ' Mr. Horton say there be no danger . ' 

 ' then do not send for she ; do not even tell she what have happen ; not yet . ' 

 ' but she will miss your letter . ' 

 ' true . you must write twice a week at my dictation . you must tell she that I have hurt my hand , that I be well but can not use a pen . I would not spoil her pleasure for the world . ' 

 ' dear grandmother , how unselfish you be ! and Maulevrier , shall he be send for ? he be not so far away , ' say Mary , hop her grandmother would say yes . 

 what a relief , what an unspeakable solace Maulevrier 's presence would be in that dreary house , smite to a sudden and awful stillness , as if by the Angel of Death ! 

 ' no , I do not want Maulevrier ! ' answer her ladyship impatiently . 

 ' may I sit here and read to you , grandmother ? ' Mary ask , timidly . ' Mr. Horton say you be to be keep very quiet , and that we be not to let you talk , or talk much to you , but that we might read to you if you like . ' 

 ' I do not wish to be read to . I have my thought for company , ' say Lady Maulevrier . 

 Mary feel that this imply a wish to be alone . she bent over the invalid 's pillow and kiss the pale cheek , feel as if she be take a liberty in venture so much . she would hardly have do it have Lesbia be at home ; but she bad a feeling that in Lesbia 's absence Lady Maulevrier must want somebody 's love even her . and then she creep away , leave Halcott the maid in attendance , sit at her work at the window furthest from the bed . 

 ' alone with my thought , ' muse Lady Maulevrier , look out at the panorama of wintry hill , white , ghost - like against an iron sky . ' pleasant thought , truly ! wall in by the hill wall in and hem round for ever . this place have always feel like a grave : and now I know that it be my grave . ' 

 Fršulein , and Lady Mary , and the maid Halcott , a sedate personage of forty summer , have all be instruct by the doctor that Lady Maulevrier be to be keep profoundly quiet . she must not talk much , since speech be likely to be a painful effort with she for some little time ; she must not be talk to much by anyone , least of all must she be speak to upon any agitate topic . life must be make as smooth and easy for she as for a new - bear infant . no rough breath from the outer world must come near she . she be to see no one but she maid and her granddaughter . Mr. Horton , a plain family man , take it for grant that the granddaughter be dear to her heart , and likely to exercise a soothing influence . thus it happen that although Lady Maulevrier ask repeatedly that James Steadman should be bring to she , she be not allow to see he . she whose will have be paramount in that house , whose word have be law , be now treat as a little child , while the will be still as strong , the mind as keen as ever . 

 ' she would talk to he of business , ' say Mr. Horton , when he be tell of her ladyship 's desire to see Steadman , ' and that can not be allow , not for some little time at least . ' 

 ' she be very angry with we for refuse to obey she , ' say Lady Mary . 

 ' naturally , but it be for her own welfare she be disobey . she can have nothing to say to Steadman which will not keep till she be well . this establishment go by clockwork . ' 

 Mary wish it be a little less like clockwork . since Lady Maulevrier have be lie upstairs the voice which have once rule over the house muffle almost to dumbness the monotony of life at Fellside have seem all the more oppressive . the servant creep about with stealthier tread . Mary dare not touch either piano or billiard ball , and be naturally seize with a longing to touch both . the house have a darkened look , as if the shadow of doom overhung it . 

 during this regimen of perfect quiet Lady Maulevrier be not allow to see the newspaper ; and Mary be warn that in reading to her grandmother she be to avoid all exciting topic . thus it happen that the account of a terrible collision between the Scotch express and a luggage train , a little way beyond Preston , an accident in which seven people be kill and about thirty seriously hurt , be not make known to her ladyship ; and yet that fact would have be of intense interest and significance to she , since one of those passenger whose injury be fatal bore the name of Louis Asoph . 

 CHAPTER XVII . 

 ' and the spring come SLOWLY up this way . ' 


 the wintry week glide smoothly by in a dull monotony , and now Lady Maulevrier , still helpless , still compel to lie on her bed or her invalid couch , motionless as marble , have at least recover her power of speech , be allow to read and to talk , and to hear what be go on in that metropolitan world which she seem unlikely ever to behold again . 

 Lady Lesbia be still at Cannes , whence she write of her pleasure and her triumph , of flower and sapphire sea , and azure sky , of all thing which be not in the grey bleak mountain world that hem in Fellside . she be meet many of the people whom she be to meet again next season in the London world . she have make an informal dťbut in a very select circle , a circle in which everybody be more or less chic , or chien , or zinc , and she be taste all the sweet of success . but in none of her letter be there any mention of Lord Hartfield . he be not in the little great world by the blue tideless sea . 

 there be no talk of Lesbia 's return . she be to stay till the carnival ; she be to stay till the week before Easter . Lady Kirkbank insist upon it ; and both Lesbia and Lady Kirkbank upbraid Lady Maulevrier for her cruelty in not join they at Cannes . 

 so Lady Maulevrier have to resign herself to that solitude which have become almost the habit of her life , and to the society of Mary and the Fršulein . Mary be eager to be of use , to sit with her grandmother , to read to she , to write for she . the warm young heart be deeply move by the spectacle of this stately woman stricken into helplessness , chain to her couch , immure within four wall . to Mary , who so love the hill and the stream , the sun and the wind , this imprisonment seem unspeakable woe . in her pity for such a martyrdom she would have do anything to give pleasure or solace to her grandmother . unhappily there be very little Mary could do to increase the invalid 's sum of pleasure . Lady Maulevrier be a woman of strong feeling , not capable of love many people . she have concentrate her affection upon Lesbia : and she could not open her heart to Mary all at once because Lesbia be out of the way . 

 ' if I have a dog I love , and he be to die , I would never have another in his place , ' Lady Maulevrier say once ; and that speech be the keynote of her character . 

 she be very courteous to Mary , and seem grateful for her attention ; but she do not cultivate the girl 's society . Mary write all her letter in a fine bold hand , and with a rapid pen ; but when the letter - writing be over Lady Maulevrier always dismiss she . 

 ' my dear , you want to be out in the air , rid your pony , or scamper about with your dog , ' she say , kindly . ' it would be a cruelty to keep you indoor . ' 

 ' no , indeed , dear grandmother , I should like to stay . may I stop and read to you ? ' 

 ' no , thank you , Mary . I hate be read to . I like to devour a book . read aloud be such slow work . 

 ' but I be afraid you must sometimes feel lonely , ' falter Mary . 

 ' lonely , ' echo the dowager , with a sigh . ' I have be lonely for the last forty year I have be lonely all my life . those I love never give I back love for love never not even your sister . see how lightly she cut the link that bind she to I . how happy she be among stranger ! yes , there be one who love I truly , and fate part we . do fate part all true lover , I wonder ? ' 

 ' you part Lesbia and Mr. Hammond , ' say Mary , impetuously . ' I be sure they love each other truly . ' 

 ' the old and the worldly - wise be Fate , Mary , ' answer the dowager , not angry at this daring reproach . ' I know your sister ; and I know she be not the kind of woman to be happy in an ignoble life to bear poverty and deprivation . if it have be you , now , whom Mr. Hammond have choose , I might have take the subject into my consideration . ' 

 Mary flame crimson . 

 ' Mr. Hammond never give I a thought , ' she say , ' unless it be to think I contemptible . he be world too good for such a Tomboy . Maulevrier tell he about the fox - hunt , and they both laugh at I at least I have no doubt Mr. Hammond laugh , though I be too much ashamed to look at he . ' 

 ' Poor Mary , you be begin to find out that a young lady ought to be ladylike , ' say Lady Maulevrier ; ' and now , my dear , you may go . I be only joke with you . Mr. Hammond would be no match for any granddaughter of mine . he be nobody , and have neither friend nor interest . if he have go into the church Maulevrier could have help he ; but I daresay his idea be too broad for the church ; and he will have to starve at the bar , where nobody can help he . I hope you will bear this in mind , Mary , if Maulevrier should ever bring he here again . ' 

 ' he be never likely to come back again . he suffer too much ; he be treat too badly in this house . ' 

 ' Lady Mary , be good enough to remember to whom you be speak , ' say her ladyship , with a frown . ' and now please go , and tell some one to send Steadman to I . ' 

 Mary retire without a word , give Lady Maulevrier 's message to a footman in the corridor , slip off to her room , put on her sealskin hat and jacket , take her staff and go out for a long ramble . the hill and valley be still white . it have be a long , cold winter , and spring be still far off February have only just begin . 

 Lady Maulevrier 's couch have be wheel into the morning - room that luxurious room which be furnish with all thing needful to her quiet life , her book , her favourite colour , her favourite flower , every detail studiously arrange for her pleasure and comfort . she be wheel into this room every day at noon . when the day be bright and sunny her couch be place near the window : and when the day be dull and grey the couch be draw close to the low hearth , which flash and glitter with brightly coloured tile and artistic brass . 

 to - day the sky be dull , and the velvet couch stand beside the hearth . Halcott sit at work in the adjoining bed - chamber , and come in every now and then to replenish the fire : a footman be always on duty in the corridor . a spring bell stand among the elegant trifle upon her ladyship 's table ; and the light touch of her left hand upon the bell bring her attendant to her side . she resolutely refuse to have any one sit with she all day long . Solitude be a necessity of her be , she tell Mr. Horton , when he recommend that she should have some one always in attendance upon she . 

 as the week wear on her feature have be restore to their proud , calm beauty , her articulation be almost as clear as of old : yet , now and then , there would be a sudden faltering , the tongue and lip would refuse their office , or she would forget a word , or use a wrong word unconsciously . but there be no recovery of power or movement on that side of the body which have be stricken . the paralysed limb be still motionless , lifeless as marble ; and it be clear that Mr. Horton have begin to lose heart about his patient . there be nothing obscure in the case , but the patient 's importance make the treatment a serious matter , and the surgeon beg to be allow to summon Sir William Jenner . 

 this , however , Lady Maulevrier refuse . 

 ' I do not   want any fuss make about I , ' she say . ' I be content to trust myself to your skill , and I beg that no other doctor may be summon . ' 

 Mr. Horton understand his patient 's feeling on this point . she have a sense of humiliation in her helplessness , and , like some wound animal that crawl to its covert to die , she would fain have hide her misery from the eye of stranger . she have allow no one , not even Maulevrier , to be inform of the nature of her illness . 

 ' it will be time enough for he to know all about I when he come here , ' she say . ' I shall be oblige to see he whenever he do come . ' 

 Maulevrier have spend Christmas and New Year in Paris , Mr. Hammond still his companion . her ladyship comment upon this with a touch of scorn . 

 ' Mr. Hammond be like the Umbra you be read about the other day in Lord Lytton 's " last day of pompeii , " ' she say to Mary . ' it must be very nice for he to go about the world with a friend who frank he everywhere . ' 

 ' but we do not   know that Maulevrier frank he , ' protest Mary , blushing . ' we have no right to suppose that Mr. Hammond do not pay his own expense . ' 

 ' my dear child , be it possible for a young man who have no private mean to go gad about the world on equal term with a spendthrift like Maulevrier to pay for Moors in Scotland and apartment at the Bristol ? ' 

 ' but they be not stay at the Bristol , ' exclaim Mary . ' they be stay at an old - establish french hotel on the left side of the Seine . they be go about amongst the student and the workman , din at popular restaurant , hear people talk . Maulevrier say it be delightfully amusing ever so much well than the beat track of life in anglo - American Paris . ' 

 ' I daresay they be lead a bohemian life , and will get into trouble before they have do , ' say her ladyship , gloomily . ' Maulevrier be as wild as a hawk . ' 

 ' he be the dear boy in the world , ' exclaim Mary . 

 she be deeply grateful for her brother 's condescension in write she a letter of two page long , let she into the secret of his life . she feel as if Mr. Hammond be ever so much near to she now she know where he be , and how he be amusing himself . 

 ' Hammond be such a queer fellow , ' write Maulevrier , ' the strange thing interest he . he sit and talk to the workman for hour ; he poke his nose into all sort of place hospital , workshop , poverty - stricken den and people be always civil to he . he be what Lesbia call sympatico . ah ! what a mistake Lesbia and my grandmother make when they reject Hammond ! what a pearl above price they throw away ! but , you see , neither my lady nor Lesbia could appreciate a gem , unless it be richly set . ' 

 and now Lady Maulevrier lie on her couch by the fire , wait for James Steadman . she have see he several time since the day of her seizure , but never alone . there be an idea that Steadman must necessarily talk to she of business matter , or cause her mind to trouble itself about business matter ; so there have be a well - intentione conspiracy in the house to keep he out of her way ; but now she be much well , and her desire to see Steadman need no long be thwart . 

 he come at her bidding , and stand a little way within the door , tall , erect , square - shoulder , resolute - look , with a quiet force of character express in every feature . he be very much the same man that he have be forty year ago , when he go with her ladyship to Southampton , and accompany his master and mistress on that tedious journey which be destine to be Lord Maulevrier 's last earthly pilgrimage . time have do little to Steadman in those forty year , except to whiten his hair and beard , and imprint some thoughtful line upon his sagacious forehead . Time have do something for he mentally , insomuch as he have read a great many book and cultivate his mind in the monotonous quiet of Fellside . altogether he be a superior man for the passage of those forty year . 

 he have marry within the time , choose for himself the buxom daughter of a lodgekeeper , whose wife have long be lay at rest in Grasmere churchyard . the buxom girl have grow into a bulky matron , but she be a colourless personage , and her existence make hardly any difference in James Steadman 's life . she have bring he no child , and their fireside be lonely ; but Steadman seem to be one of those self - contain personage to whom a solitary life be no affliction . 

 ' I hope I see you in well health , my lady , ' he say , stand straight and square , like a soldier on parade . 

 ' I be well , thank you , Steadman ; well , but a poor lifeless log chain to this sofa . I send for you because the time have come when I must talk to you upon a matter of business . you hear , I suppose , that a stranger call upon I just before I have my attack ? ' 

 ' yes , my lady . ' 

 ' do you hear who and what he be ? ' 

 ' only that he be a foreigner , my lady . ' 

 ' he be of indian birth . he claim to be the son of the Ranee of Bisnagar . ' 

 ' he could do you no harm , my lady , if he be twenty time her son . ' 

 ' I hope not . now , I want to ask you a question . among those trunk and case and package of Lord Maulevrier 's which be send here by heavy coach , after they be land at Southampton , do you remember two case of book ? ' 

 ' there be two large case among the luggage , my lady ; very heavy case , iron clamp . I should not be surprised if they be full of book . ' 

 ' have they never be open ? ' 

 ' not to my knowledge . ' 

 ' be they lock ? ' 

 ' yes , my lady . there be two padlock on each chest . ' 

 ' and be the key in your possession ? ' 

 ' no , my lady . ' 

 ' where be the case ? ' 

 ' in the Oak Room , with the rest of the indian luggage . ' 

 ' let they remain there . no doubt those case contain the book of which I have be tell . you have not hear that the person call himself Rajah of Bisnagar have be here since my illness , have you ? ' 

 ' no , my lady ; I be sure he have not be here . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier give he a scrutinise look . 

 ' he might have come , and my people might have keep the knowledge from I , out of consideration for my infirmity , ' she say . ' I should be very angry if it be so . I should hate to be treat like a child . ' 

 ' you shall not be so treat , my lady , while I be in this house ; but I know there be no member of the household who would presume so to treat you . ' 

 ' they might do it out of kindness ; but I should loathe such kindness , ' say Lady Maulevrier , impatiently . ' though I have be smite down , though I lie here like a log , I have a mind to think and to plan ; and I be not afraid to meet danger , face to face . be you tell I the truth , Steadman ? have there be no visit conceal from I , no letter keep from I since I have be ill ? ' 

 ' I be tell you nothing but the truth , my lady . no letter have be keep from you ; no visitor have be to this house whose come you have not be tell of . ' 

 ' then I be content , ' say her ladyship , with a sigh of relief . 

 after this there follow some conversation upon business matter . James Steadman be trust with the entire management of the dowager 's income , the investment of her saving . his honesty be above all suspicion . he be a man of simple habit , his want few . he have save money in every year of his service ; and for a man of his station be rich enough to be unassailable by the tempter . 

 he have reconcile his mind to the monotonous course of life at Fellside in the beginning of thing ; and , as the year glide smoothly by , his character and want and inclination have , as it be , mould themselves to fit that life . he have easy duty , a comfortable home , supreme authority in the household . he be look up to and make much of in the village whenever he condescend to appear there ; and by the rareness of his visit to the Inn or the reading - room , and his unwillingness to accept hospitality from the tradesman of Grasmere and Ambleside , he maintain his dignity and exaggerate his importance . he have his book and his newspaper , his evening leisure , which no one ever dare to disturb . he have the old wing of the house for his exclusive occupation ; and no one venture to intrude upon he in his privacy . there be a bell in the corridor which communicate with his room , and by this bell he be always summon . there be servant who have be ten year at Fellside , and who have never cross the threshold of the red cloth door which be the only communication between the new house and the old one . Steadman 's wife perform all household duty of cooking and clean in the south wing , where she and her husband take all their meal , and live entirely apart from the other servant , an exclusiveness which be secretly resent by the establishment . 

 ' Mr. Steadman may be a very superior man , ' say the butler ' and I know that in his own estimation the Premier be not   in it compare with he ; but I never be fond of people who set themselves upon pinnacle , and I be not fond of the Steadmans . ' 

 ' Mrs. Steadman 's plain and homely enough , ' reply the housekeeper , ' and I know she would like to be more sociable , and drop into my room for a cup of tea now and then ; but Steadman do so keep she under his thumb : and because he be a misanthrope she be oblige to sit and mope alone . ' 

 if Steadman want to drive , there be a dogcart and horse at his disposal ; but he do not often leave Fellside . he seem in his humble way to model his life upon Lady Maulevrier 's seclude habit . it be grow dusk when Steadman leave his mistress , and she lie for some time look at the landscape over which twilight shadow be steal , and think of her own life . over that life , too , the shadow of evening be creep . she have begin to realise the fact that she be an old woman ; that for her all personal interest in life be nearly over . she have never feel her age while her activity be unimpaired . she have be oblige to remind herself very often that the afternoon and evening of life have slip away unawares in that tranquil retirement , and that the night be at hand . 

 for she the close of earthly life mean actual night . no new dawn , no mysterious after - life shine upon she with magical gleam of an unknown light upon the other side of the dark river . she have accept the Materialist 's bitter and barren creed , and have teach herself that this little life be all . she have learn to scorn the idea of a great Artificer outside the universe , a mighty spirit rid amidst the cloud , and rule the course of nature and the fate of man . she have school herself to think that the idea of a blind , unconscious nature , work automatically through infinite time and space , be ever so much grander than the old - world notion of a personal God , a being of infinite power and inexhaustible beneficence , mighty to devise and direct the universe , with knowledge reach to the farth confine of space , with ear to listen to the prayer of his low creature . her belief stop short even of the Deist 's faith in an Almighty Will . she see in creation nothing but the inevitable development of material law ; and it seem to she that there be quite as much hope of a heavenly world after death for the infusoria in the pool as for man in his pride and power . 

 she read she Bible as diligently as she read her Shakespeare , and the word of the Royal Preacher in some measure embody her own dreary creed . and now , in the darkening winter day , she watch the gloomy shadow creep over the rugged breast of Nabb Scar , and she think how there be a time for all thing , and that her day of hope and ambition be past . 

 of late year she have live for Lesbia , look forward to the day when she be to introduce this beloved grandchild to the great world of London ; and now that hope be go for ever . 

 what could a helpless cripple do for a fashionable beauty ? what good would it be for she to be convey to London , and to lie on a couch in Mayfair , while Lesbia ride in the row and go to three or four party every night with a more active chaperon ? 

 she have hop to go everywhere with her darling , to glory in all her success , to shield she from all possibility of failure . and now Lesbia must stand or fall alone . 

 it be a hard thing ; but perhaps the hard part of it be that Lesbia seem so very well able to get on without she . the girl write in the high spirit ; and although her letter be most affectionately word , they be all about self . that note be dominant in every strain . her triumph , her admirer , her bonnet , her gown . she have have more money from her grandmother , and more gown from Paris . 

 ' you have no idea how the people dress in this place , ' she write . ' I should have be quite out in the cold without my three new frock from Worth . the little Princess bonnet I wear be the rage . worth recommend I to adopt special flower and colour ; so I have wear nothing but primrose since I have be here , and my little primrose bonnet be to be see everywhere , sometimes on hideous old woman . Lady Kirkbank hop you will be able to go to London directly after Easter . she say I must be present at the May drawing - room that be imperative . People have begin to talk about I ; and unless I make my dťbut while their interest be fresh I shall be a failure . there be an american beauty here , and I believe she and I be consider rival , and young man lie wager about we , as to which will look well at a ball , or a regatta , what colour we shall wear , and so on . it be immense fun . I only wish you be here to enjoy it . the american girl be a most insolent person , but I have have the pleasure of crush she on several occasion in the calm way . in the description of the concert in last week 's newspaper I be call l'Anglais de marbre . I certainly have the decency to hold my tongue while Faure be sing . Miss Bolsover 's voice be hear ever so many time above the music . accord to our english idea she have most revolt manner , and the money she spend on her clothe would make your hair stand on end . now do , dearest grandmother , make all your arrangement for begin the campaign directly after Easter . you must take a house in the very choice quarter Lady Kirkbank suggest Grosvenor - place and it must be a large house , for of course you will give a ball . Lady K. say we might have Lord Porlock 's house poor Lady Porlock and her baby die a few week ago , and he have go to Sweden quite break - hearted . it be one of the new house , exquisitely furnish , and Lady K. think you might have it for a song . will you get Steadman to write to his lordship 's steward , and see what can be do ? 

 ' I hope the dear hand be well . you have never tell I how you hurt it . it be very sweet of Mary to write I such long letter , and quite a pleasant surprise to find she can spell ; but I want to see your own dear hand once more . ' 

 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 ' and COME agen be it by NIGHT or DAY . ' 


 those winter month be unutterably dreary for Lady Mary Haselden . she feel weigh down by a sense of death and woe near at hand . the horror of that dreadful moment in which she find her grandmother lie senseless on the ground , the terror of that distorted countenance , those start eye , that stertorous breathing , be not easily banish from a vivid girlish imagination ; see how few distraction there be to divert Mary 's thought , and how the sun sink and rise again upon the same inevitable surrounding , to the same monotonous routine . 

 her grandmother be kind than she have be in day go by , less inclined to find fault ; but Mary know that her society give Lady Maulevrier very little pleasure , that she could do hardly anything towards fill the gap make by Lesbia 's absence . there be no one to scold she , no one to quarrel with she . Fršulein M ller lecture she mildly from time to time ; but that stout German be too lazy to put any force or fire into her lecture . her reproof be like the fall of waterdrop on a stone , and infinite age would have be need to cause any positive impression . 

 February come to an end without sign or token from the outer world to disturb the even tenor of life at Fellside . Mary read , and read , and read , till she feel she be make up of the content of book , cram with other people 's idea . she read history , or natural science , or travel , or german poetry in the morning , and novel or english poetry in the evening . she have pledge herself to devote her morning indoor hour to instructive literature , and to accomplish some portion of study in every day . she be carry on her education on parole , as before state ; and she be too honourable to do less than be expect from she . 

 March come in with its most leonine aspect , howl and blustering ; north - east wind shriek along the gorge and wail from height to height . 

 ' I wonder the lion and the lamb be not blow into the lake , ' say Mary , look at Helm Crag from the library window . 

 she scamper about the garden in the very tooth of those bitter blast , and take her shiver terrier for run on the green slope of the Fell . the snow have gradually melt from the tide of the lowermost range of hill , but the mountain peak be still white and ghostly , the ground be still hard and slippery in the early morning . Mary have to take her walk alone in this bleak weather . Fršulein have a convenient bronchial affection which forbid she to venture so much as the point of her nose outside the house in an east wind , and which justify she in occasionally take her breakfast in bed . she spend her day for the most part in her arm - chair , draw close to the fireplace , which she still insist upon call the oven , knit diligently , or read the Rundschau . even music , which have once be her strong point , be neglect in this try weather . it be such a cold journey from the oven to the piano . 

 Mary play a good deal in her desultory manner , now that she have the drawing - room all to herself , and no fear of Lady Maulevrier 's critical ear or Lesbia 's superior smile . the Fršulein be pleased to hear her pupil ramble on with her favourite bit from Raff , and Hensel , and Schubert , and Mendelssohn , and Mozart , and be very well content to let she play just what she like , and to escape the trouble of train she to that exquisite perfection into which Lady Lesbia have be drill . Lesbia be not a genius , and the training process have be quite as hard for the governess as for the pupil . 

 thus the slow day wear on till the first week in March , and on one bleak bitter afternoon , when Fršulein M ller stick to the oven even a little close than usual , Mary feel she must go out , in the face of the east wind , which be toss the leafless branch in the valley below until the tree look like an angry crowd , hurl its arm in the air , fight , struggle , writhe . she must leave that dreary house for a little while , be it even to be lash and bruise and break by that fierce wind . so she tell Fršulein that she really must have her constitutional ; and after a feeble remonstrance Fršulein let she go , and subside luxuriously into the pillowed depth of her arm - chair . 

 there have be a hard frost , and all the mountain way be perilous , so Mary set out upon a steady tramp along the road lead towards the Langdales . the wind seem to assail she from every side , but she have accustom herself to defy the element , and she only hug her sealskin jacket close to she , and quicken her pace , chirrup and whistle to Ahab and Ariadne , the two fox - terrier which she have select for the privilege of a walk . 

 the terrier race along the road , and Mary , see that she have the road all to herself , race after they . a light snow - shower , large feathery flake fly wide apart , fall from the steel - grey sky ; but Mary mind the snow no more than she mind the wind . she race on , the terrier scamper , rush , fly before she , until , just where the road take a curve , she almost run into a horse , which be step along at a tremendous pace , with a light , high dogcart behind he . 

 ' hi ! ' cry the driver , ' where be you come , young woman ? have you never see a horse till to - day ? ' 

 some one beside the driver leapt out , and run to see if Mary be hurt . the horse have swerve to one side , rear a little , and then spin on for a few yard , leave she standing in the middle of the road . 

 ' why , it be molly ! ' cry the driver , who be no less distinguished a whip than Lord Maulevrier , and who have recognise the terrier . 

 ' I hope you be not hurt , ' say the gentleman who have alight , Maulevrier 's friend and shadow , John Hammond . 

 Mary be cover with confusion by her exploit , and could hardly answer Mr. Hammond 's very simple question . 

 she look up at he piteously , try to speak , and he take alarm at her scared expression . 

 ' I be sure you be hurt , ' he say earnestly , ' the horse must have strike you , or the shaft perhaps , which be bad . be it your shoulder that be hurt , or your chest ? lean on I , if you feel faint or giddy . Maulevrier , you have well drive your sister home , and get she look after . ' 

 ' indeed , I be not hurt ; not the least little bit , ' gasp Mary , who have recover her sens by this time . ' I be only frightened , and it be such a surprise to see you and Maulevrier . ' 

 a surprise yes a surprise which have set her heart throb so violently as to render she speechless . have horse or shaft - point strike she ever so , she would have hardly be more tremulous than she feel at this moment . never have she hop to see he again . he have set his all upon one cast love , woo , and lose her sister . why should he ever come again ? what be there at Fellside worth come for ? and then she remember what her grandmother think of he . he be a hanger - on , a sponge , a lead captain . he be Maulevrier 's Umbra , and must go where his patron go . it be a hard thing so to think of he , and Mary 's heart sink at the thought that Lady Maulevrier 's worldly wisdom might have reckon aright . 

 ' it be very foolish of I to run into the horse , ' say Mary , while Mr. Hammond stand wait for she to recover herself . 

 ' it be very foolish of Maulevrier to run into you . if he do not   drive at such a break - neck pace it would not   have happen . ' 

 Umbra be very plain - speak , at any rate . 

 ' there be rank ingratitude , ' cry Maulevrier , who have turn back , and be look down at they from his elevated perch . ' after my come all the way round by langdale to oblige you with a view of Elterwater . Molly 's all safe and sound . she would not   have mind if I would run over she . come along , child , get up beside I , Hammond will take the back seat . ' 

 this be easy say than do , for the back of the dogcart be pile with Gladstone bag , fishing rod , and hat - box ; but Umbra be ready to oblige . he hand Mary up to the seat by the driver , and clamber up at the back , when he hook himself on somehow among the luggage . 

 ' Dear Maulevrier , how delicious of you to come ! ' say Mary , when they be rattle on towards Fellside ; ' I hope you be go to stay for age . ' 

 ' well , I dare say , if you make yourself very agreeable , I may stay till after Easter . ' 

 Mary 's countenance fall . 

 ' Easter be in three week , ' she say , despondingly . 

 ' and be not   three week an age , at such a place as Fellside ? I do not   know that I should have come at all on this side of the August sport , only as the grandmother be ill , I think it a duty to come and see she . a fellow may not   care much for ancestor when they be well , you know ; but when a poor old lady be down on her luck , her people ought to look after she . so , here I be ; and as I know I should be mop to death here - - ' 

 ' thank you for the compliment , ' say Mary . 

 ' I bring Hammond along with I . of course , I know Lesbia be safe out of the way , ' add Maulevrier in an undertone . 

 ' it be very obliging of Mr. Hammond always to go where you wish , ' return Mary , who could not help a bitter feeling when she remember her grandmother 's cruel suggestion . ' has he no taste or inclination of his own ? ' 

 ' yes , he have , plenty of they , and much loftier taste than mine , I can tell you . but he be kind enough to let I hang on to he , and to put up with my frivolity . there never be two man more different than he and I be ; and I suppose that be why we get on so well together . when we be in Paris he be always up to his eye in serious work lecture , public library , workman 's syndicate , Mary Anne , the International heaven know what , make himself master of the political situation in France ; while I be rigolant and chaloupant at the Bal Bullier . ' 

 it be generous of Maulevrier to speak of his hanger - on thus ; and no doubt the society of a well - inform earnest young man be a great good for Maulevrier , a good far above the price of those pound , shilling , and penny which the Earl might spend for his dependent 's benefit ; but when a girl of Mary 's ardent temper have make a hero of a man , it gall she to think that her hero 's dignity should be sacrifice , his honour impeach , be it by the mere tittle . 

 Maulevrier make a good many inquiry about his grandmother , and seem really full of kindness and sympathy ; but it be with a feeling of profound awe , nay , of involuntary reluctance and shrinking , that he presently enter her ladyship 's sitting - room , usher in by Mary , who have be to her grandmother beforehand to announce the grandson 's arrival . 

 the young man have hardly ever be in a sick room before . he half expect to see Lady Maulevrier in bed , with a crowd of medicine bottle and a cut orange on a table by her side , and a sick nurse of the ancient - crone specie cower over the fire . it be an infinite relief to he to find his grandmother lie on a sofa by the fire in her pretty morning room . a little tea - table be draw close up to her sofa , and she be take her afternoon tea . it be rather painful to see she lift her tea - cup slowly and carefully with her left hand , but that be all . the dark eye still flash with the old eagle glance , the line of the lip be as proud and firm as ever . all sign of contraction or distortion have pass away . in hour of calm her ladyship 's beauty be unimpaire ; but with any strong emotion there come a convulsive work of the feature , and the face be momentarily draw and distort , as it have be at the time of the seizure . 

 Maulevrier 's presence have not an unduly agitate effect on her ladyship . she receive he with tranquil graciousness , and thank he for his coming . 

 ' I hope you have spend your winter profitably in Paris , ' she say . ' there be a great deal to be learn there if you go into the right circle . ' 

 Maulevrier tell she that he have find much to learn , and that he have go into circle where almost everything be new to he . whereupon his grandmother question he about certain noble family in the Faubourg Saint Germain who have be know to she in her own day of power , and whose movement she have observe from a distance since that time ; but here she find her grandson dark . he have not happen to meet any of the people she speak about : the plain truth be that he have live altogether as a Bohemian , and have not use one of the letter of introduction that have be give to he . 

 ' your friend Mr. Hammond be with you , I be tell , ' say Lady Maulevrier , not altogether with delight . 

 ' yes , I make he come ; but he be quite safe . he will bolt like a shot at the least hint of Lesbia 's return . he do not   want to meet that young lady again , I can assure you . ' 

 ' pray do not   talk in that injure tone . Mr. Hammond be a gentlemanlike person , very well inform , very agreeable . I have never deny that . but you could not expect I to allow my granddaughter to throw herself away upon the first adventurer who make she an offer . ' 

 ' Hammond be not an adventurer . ' 

 ' very well , I will not call he so , if the term offend you . but Mr. Hammond be Mr. Hammond , and I can not allow Lesbia to marry Mr. Hammond or Mr. Anybody , and I be very sorry you have bring he here again . there be Mary , a silly , romantic girl . I be very much afraid he have make an impression upon she . she colour absurdly when she talk of he , and fly into a passion with I the other day when I venture to hint that he be not a Rothschild , and that his society must be expensive to you . ' 

 ' his society do not cost I anything . Hammond be the soul of independence . he work as a blacksmith in Canada for three month , just to see what life be like in a wild district . there never be such a fellow to rough it . and as for Molly , well , now , really , if he happen to take a fancy to she , and if she happen to like he , I would not   bosh the business , if I be you , grandmother . take my word for it , molly might do bad . ' 

 ' of course . she might marry a chimney sweep . there be no answering for a girl of her erratic nature . she be silly enough and romantic enough for anything ; but I shall not countenance she if she want to throw herself away on a person without prospect or connection ; and I look to you , Maulevrier , to take care of she , now that I be a wretched log chain to this room . ' 

 ' you may rely upon I , grandmother , Molly shall come to no harm , if I can help it . ' 

 ' thank you , ' say her ladyship , touch her bell twice . 

 the two clear silvery stroke be a summon for Halcott , the maid , who appear immediately . 

 ' tell Mrs. Power to get his lordship 's room ready immediately , and to give Mr. Hammond the room he have last summer , ' say Lady Maulevrier , with a sigh of resignation . 

 while Maulevrier be with his grandmother John Hammond be smoke a solitary cigar on the terrace , contemplate the mountain landscape in its cold March greyness , and wonder very much to find himself again at Fellside . he have go forth from that house full of passionate indignation , shake off the dust from his foot , sternly resolve never again to cross the threshold of that fateful cave , where he have meet his cold - hearted Circe . and now , because Circe be safe out of the way , he have come back to the cavern ; and he be feel all the pain that a man feel who behold again the scene of a great past sorrow . 

 be this the old love and the old pain again , he wonder , or be it only the sharp thrust of a bitter memory ? he have believe himself cure of his useless love a great and noble love , waste on a small nature than his own . he have think that because his eye be open , and he understand the character of the girl he love , his cure must need be complete . yet now , face to face with the well - remember landscape , look down upon that dull grey lake which he have see smile in the sunshine , he begin to doubt the completeness of his cure . he recall the lovely face , the graceful form , the sweet , low voice the perfection of gracious womanhood , manner , dress , movement , tone , smile , all faultless ; and in the absence of that one figure , it seem to he as if he have come back to a tenantless , dismantled house , where there be nothing that make life worth live . 

 the red sun go down a fierce and lurid face that seem to scowl through the grey and Mr. Hammond feel that it be time to arouse himself from gloomy meditation and go in and dress for dinner . Maulevrier 's valet be to arrive by the coach with the heavy part of the luggage , and Maulevrier 's valet do that very small portion of valet which be ever require by Mr. Hammond . a man who have work at a forge in the backwood be not likely to be finicke in his way , or dependent upon servant for look after his raiment . 

 despite Mr. Hammond 's gloomy memory of past joy and disillusion , he contrive to make himself very agreeable , by - and - by , at dinner , and in the drawing - room after dinner , and the evening be altogether gay and sprightly . Maulevrier be in high spirit , full of his parisian experience , and talk slang as glibly as a student of the Quartier Latin . he would talk nothing but French , protest that he have almost forget his native tongue , and his French be the language of Larchey 's Dictionary of Argot , in which nothing be call by its right name . Mary be enchant with this new vocabulary , and want to have every word explain to she ; but Maulevrier confess that there be a good deal that be unexplainable . 

 the evening be much lively than those summer evening when the dowager and Lady Lesbia be present . there be something less of refinement , perhaps , and Fršulein remonstrate now and then about some small violation of the unwritten law of ' Anstand , ' but there be more mirth . Maulevrier feel for the first time as if he be master at Fellside . they all go to the billiard room soon after dinner , and Fršulein and Mary sit by the fire look on , while the two young man play . in such an evening there be no time for bitter memory : and John Hammond be surprised to find how little he have miss that enchantress whose absence have make the house seem desolate to he when he re - enter it . 

 he be tired with his journey and the vary emotion of the day , for it be not without strong emotion that he have consent to return to Fellside and he sleep soundly for the early part of the night . but he have train himself long ago to do with a very moderate portion of sleep , and he be up and dress while the dawn be still slowly creep along the edge of the hill . he go quietly down to the hall , take one of the bamboo from a collection of cane and mountain stick , and set out upon a morning ramble over the snowy slope . the snow shower of yesterday have only sprinkle the greensward upon the low ground , but in the upper region the winter snow still linger , give an Alpine character to the landscape . 

 John Hammond be too experience a mountaineer to be deter by a little snow . he go up Silver Howe , and from the rugged breast of the mountain see the sun leap up from amidst a chaos of hill and crag , in all his majesty , while the grey mist of night slowly float up from the valley that have lie hide below they , and Grasmere Lake sparkle and flash in the light of the newly - rise sun . 

 the church clock be strike eight as Hammond come at a brisk pace down to the valley . there be still an hour before breakfast , so he take a circuitous path to Fellside , and descend upon the house from the Fell , as he have do that summer morning when he see James Steadman saunter about in his garden . 

 within about a quarter of a mile of Lady Maulevrier 's shrubbery Mr. Hammond encounter a pedestrian , who , like himself , be evidently take a constitutional ramble in the morning air , but on a much less extended scale , for this person do not look capable of go far afield . 

 he be an old man , something under middle height , but look as if he have once be tall ; for his shoulder be much bent , and his head be sink on his chest . his whole form look waste and shrink , and John Hammond think he have never see so old a man or at any rate any man who be so deeply mark with all the sign of extreme age ; and yet in the backwood of America he have meet ancient settler who remember Franklin , and who have be boy when the battle of Bunker 's Hill be fresh in the memory of their father and mother . 

 the little old man be clothe in a thick grey overcoat of some shaggy kind of cloth which look like homespun . he wear a feel hat , and carry a thick oak stick , and there be nothing in his appearance to indicate that he belong to any high grade than that of the shepherd and guide with whom Hammond have make himself familiar during his previous visit . and yet there be something distinctive about the man , Hammond thought , something wild and uncanny , which make he unlike any of those hale and hearty - look dalesman on whom old age sate so lightly . no , John Hammond could not fancy this man , with his pallid countenance and pale crafty eye , to be of the same race as those rugged and honest - look descendant of the norseman . 

 perhaps it be the man 's exceeding age , for John Hammond make up his mind that he must be a centenarian , which give he so strange and unholy an air . he have the aspect of a man who have be bury and bring back to life again . 

 so might look one of those Indian Fakirs who have the power to suspend life by some mysterious process , and to lie in the darkness of the grave for a give period , and then at their own will to resume the function of the living . his long white hair fall upon the collar of his grey coat , and would have give he a patriarchal appearance have the face possess the dignity of age : but it be a countenance without dignity , a face deeply score with the line of evil passion and guilty memory the face of the vulture , with a touch of the ferret altogether a most unpleasant face , Mr. Hammond think . 

 and yet there be a kind of fascination about that bent and shrunken figure , those feeble movement , and shuffle gait . John Hammond turn to look after the old man when he have pass he , and stand to watch he as he go slowly up the Fell , plant his crutch stick upon the ground before every footstep , as if it be a third leg , and more serviceable than either of the other two . 

 Mr. Hammond watch he for two or three minute , but , as the old man 's movement have an automatic regularity , the occupation soon pal , and he turn and walk toward Fellside . a few yard near the ground he meet James Steadman , walk briskly , and smoke his morning pipe . 

 ' you be out early this morning , ' say Hammond , by way of civility . 

 ' I be always pretty early , sir . I like a mouthful of morning air . ' 

 ' so do I. by - the - bye , can you tell I anything about a queer - look old man I pass just now a little high up the Fell ? such an old , old man , with long white hair . ' 

 ' yes , sir . I believe I know he . ' 

 ' who be he ? do he live in Grasmere ? ' 

 Steadman look puzzle . 

 ' well , you see , sir , your description might apply to a good many ; but if it be the man I think you mean he live in one of the cottage behind the church . Old Barlow , they call he . ' 

 ' there can not   be two such man he must be at least a century old . if any one tell I he be a hundred and twenty I should not   be incline to doubt the fact . I never see such a shrivel , wrinkle visage , bloodless , too , as if the poor old wretch never feel your fresh mountain air upon his hollow cheek . a dreadful face . it will haunt I for a month . ' 

 ' it must be old Barlow , ' reply Steadman . ' good day , sir . ' 

 he walk on with his swing step , and at such a pace that he be up the side of the Fell and close upon old Barlow 's heel when Hammond turn to look after he five minute later . 

 ' there be a man who show few trace of age , at any rate , ' think Hammond . ' yet her ladyship tell I that he be over seventy . ' 

 CHAPTER XIX . 

 the OLD MAN on the FELL . 


 have make up his mind to stay at Fellside until after Easter , Maulevrier settle down very quietly for he . he ride a good deal , fish a little , look after his dog , play billiard , make a devout appearance in the big square pew at St. Oswald 's on Sunday morning , and behave altogether as a reform character . even his grandmother be fain to admit that Maulevrier be improve , and that Mr. Hammond 's influence upon he must be exercise for good and not for evil . 

 ' I plunge awfully last year , and the year before that , ' say Maulevrier , sit at tea in her ladyship 's morning room one afternoon about a week after his return , when she have express her gracious desire that the two young man should take tea with she . 

 Mary be in charge of the tea - pot and brass kettle , and look as radiant and as fresh as a summer morning . a regular Gainsborough girl , Hammond call she , when he praise she to her brother ; a true english beauty , unsophisticated , a little rustic , but full of youthful sweetness . 

 ' you see , I do not   know what a race stable meant , ' continue Maulevrier , mildly apologetic ' in fact , I think it be an easy way for a nobleman to make as good a living as your City swell , with their soft good or their Brummagem ware , a respectable trade for a gentleman to engage in . and it be only when I be half ruin that I begin to understand the business ; and as soon as I do understand it I make up my mind to get out of it ; and I be happy to say that I sell the very last of my stud in February , and Tony Lumpkin be his own man again . so you may welcome the prodigal grandson , and order the fat calf to be slain , grandmother ! ' 

 Lady Maulevrier stretch out her left hand to he , and the young man bend over it and kiss it affectionately . he feel really touch by her misfortune , and be fonder of she than he have ever be before . she have be somewhat hard with he in his boyhood , but she have always care for his dignity and protect his interest : and , after all , she be a noble old woman , a grandmother of whom a man might be justly proud . he think of the paint harridan , the bare - shoulder skeleton , whom some of his young friend be oblige to own in the same capacity , and he be thankful that he could reverence his father 's mother . 

 ' that be the good news I have hear for a long time , Maulevrier , ' say her ladyship graciously ; ' well medicine for my nerve than any of Mr. Horton 's preparation . if Mr. Hammond 's advice have influence you to get rid of your stable I be deeply grateful to Mr. Hammond . ' 

 Hammond smile as he sip his tea , sit close to Mary 's tray , ready to fly to her assistance on the instant should the brazen kettle become troublesome . it have a threatening way of hiss and bubble over its spirit lamp . 

 ' oh , you have no idea what a fellow Hammond be to lecture , ' answer Maulevrier . ' he be a tremendous Radical , and he think that every young man in my position ought to be a reformer , and devote the great part of his time and trouble to turn out the dirty corner of the world , upset those poor dear family who like to pig together in one room , order all the child off to school , marry the father and mother , thrust himself between free labour and free beer , and interfere with the liberty of the subject in every direction . ' 

 ' all that may sound like Radicalism , but I think it be the true Conservatism , and that every young man ought to do as much , if he want this timeworn old country to maintain its power and prosperity , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , with an approve glance at John Hammond 's thoughtful face . 

 ' right you be , grandmother , ' return Maulevrier , ' and I believe Hammond call himself a Conservative , and mean to vote with the Conservatives . ' 

 mean to vote ! an idle phrase , surely , think her ladyship , where the young man 's chance of get into Parliament be so remote . 

 that afternoon tea in Lady Maulevrier 's room be almost as cheerful as the tea - drinking in the drawing - room , unrestraine by her ladyship 's presence . she be pleased with her grandson 's conduct , and be therefore inclined to be friendly to his friend . she could see an improvement in Mary , too . the girl be more feminine , more subdued , graver , sweet ; more like that ideal woman of Wordsworth 's , whose image embody all that be pure and fairest in womanhood . 

 Mary have not forget that unlucky story about the fox - hunt , and ever since Hammond 's return she have be as it be on her good behaviour , refrain from her race with the terrier , and hold herself aloof from Maulevrier 's masculine pursuit . she shelter herself a good deal under the Fršulein 's substantial wing , and take care never to intrude herself upon the amusement of her brother and his friend . she be not one of those young woman who think a brother 's presence an excuse for a perpetual tete - a - tete with a young man . yet when Maulevrier come in quest of she , and entreat she to join they in a ramble , she be not too prudish to refuse the pleasure she so thoroughly enjoy . but afternoon tea be her privileged hour the time at which she wear her prettiest frock , and forget to regret her inferiority to Lesbia in all the grace of womanhood . 

 one afternoon , when they have all three walk to Easedale Tarn , and be come back by the side of the force , pick their way among the grey stone and the narrow thread of silvery water , it suddenly occur to Hammond to ask Mary about that queer old man he have see on the Fell nearly a fortnight before . he have often think of make the inquiry when he be away from Mary , but have always forget the thing when he be with she . indeed , Mary have a wonderful knack of make he forget everything but herself . 

 ' you seem to know every creature in Grasmere , down to the two - year - old baby , ' say Hammond , Mary have just stop to converse with an infantine group , straggle and struggle over the boulder . ' pray , do you happen to know a man call Barlow , a very old man ? ' 

 ' Old Sam Barlow , ' exclaim Mary ; ' why , of course I know he . ' 

 she say it as if he be a near relative , and the question palpably absurd . 

 ' he be an old man , a hundred , at least , I should think , ' say Hammond . 

 ' poor old Sam , not much on the wrong side of eighty . I go to see he every week , and take he his week 's tobacco , poor old dear . it be his only comfort . ' 

 ' be it ? ' ask Hammond . ' I should have doubt his have so humanise a taste as tobacco . he look too evil a creature ever to have yield to the soften influence of a pipe . ' 

 ' an evil creature ! what , old Sam ? why he be the most genial old thing , and as cheery love to hear the newspaper read to he the murder and railway accident . he do not   care for politic . everybody like old Sam Barlow . ' 

 ' I fancy the grasmere idea of reverend and amiable age must be strictly local . I can only say that I never see a more unholy countenance . ' 

 ' you must have be dream when you see he , ' say Mary . ' where do you meet he ? ' 

 ' on the Fell , about a quarter of a mile from the shrubbery gate . ' 

 ' do you ? I should not   have think he could have get so far . I have   a good mind to take you to see he , this very afternoon , before we go home . ' 

 ' do , ' exclaim Hammond , ' I should like it immensely . I think he a hateful - look old person ; but there be something so thoroughly uncanny about he that he exercise an absolute fascination upon I : he magnetise I , I think , as the green - eyed cat magnetise the bird . I have be positively long to see he again . he be a kind of human monster , and I hope some one will have a big bottle make ready for he and preserve he in spirit when he die . ' 

 ' what a horrid idea ! no , sir , dear old Barlow shall lie beside the Rotha , under the tree Wordsworth plant . he be such a man as Wordsworth would have love . ' 

 Mr. Hammond shrug his shoulder , and say no more . Mary 's little vehement way , her enthusiasm , her love of that valley , which might be call her native place , albeit her eye have open upon heaven 's light far away , her humility , be all very delightful in their way . she be not a perfect beauty , like Lesbia ; but she be a fresh , pure - minded english girl , frank as the day , and if he have have a brother he would have recommend that brother to choose just such a girl for his wife . 

 Mr. Samuel Barlow occupy a little old cottage , which seem to consist chiefly of a gable end and a chimney stack , in that cluster of dwelling behind St. Oswald 's church , which be once know as the Kirk Town . visitor go downstairs to get to Mr. Barlow 's ground - floor , for the influence of time and advance civilisation have raise the pathway in front of Mr. Barlow 's cottage until his parlour have become of a cellar - like aspect . yet it be a very nice little parlour when one get down to it , and it enjoy winter and summer a perpetual twilight , since the light that creep through the leaded casement be temper by a screen of flowerpot , which be old Barlow 's particular care . there be no fine geranium in all Grasmere than Barlow 's , no big carnation or picotee , aster or arum . 

 it be about five o'clock in the March afternoon , when Mary usher John Hammond into Mr. Barlow 's dwelling , and , in the dim glow of a cheery little fire and the faint light that filter through the screen of geranium leaf , the visitor look for a moment or so doubtfully at the owner of the cottage . but only for a moment . those bright blue eye and apple cheek , that benevolent expression , bear no likeness to the strange old man he have see on the Fell . Mr. Barlow be toothless and nut - cracker like of outline ; he be thin and shrunken , and bent with the burden of long year , but his healthy visage have none of those deep line , those cross marking and hollow which make the pallid countenance of that other old man as ghastly as would be the abstract idea of life 's last stage embody by the bitter pencil of a Hogarth . 

 ' I have bring a gentleman from London to see you , Sam , ' say Mary . ' he fancy he meet you on the Fell the other morning . ' 

 barlow rise and quaver a cheery welcome , but protest against the idea of his have get so far as the Fell . 

 ' with my blessed rheumatic , you know it be not   in I , Lady Mary . I shall never get no furth than the churchyard ; but I like to sit on the wall hard by Wordsworth 's tomb in a warm afternoon , and to see the folk pass over the bridge ; and I can potter about look after my flower , I can . but it would be a dull life , now the poor old missus be go and the bairn all out at service , if it be not   for some one drop in to have a chat , or read I a bit of the news sometimes . and there be not   anybody in Grasmere , gentle or simple , that be kind to I than you , Lady Mary . Lord bless you , I do look forward to my newspaper . any more of they dreadful smash ? ' 

 ' no , Sam , thank Heaven , there have be no railway accident . ' 

 ' ah , we shall have them in August and September , ' say the old man , cheerily . ' they be bind to come then . there be a time for all thing , as Solomon say . when the season come t'smashe all coom . and no more of these mysterious murder , I suppose , which baffle t'police and keep I awake o ' night thinking of them . ' 

 ' surely you do not take delight in murder , Mr. Barlow ? ' say Hammond . 

 ' no , sir , I do not wish my fellow - creature to mak ' awa ' wi ' each other ; but if there be a murder go in the paper I like to get the benefit of it . I like to sit in front of my fire of an evening and wonder about it while I smoke my pipe , and fancy I can see the murderer hide in a garret in an out - of - the - way alley , or as a stowaway on board a gert ship , or as a miner deep down in a coalpit , and never think that even there t'police can track he . do you ever hear tell o ' Mr. de Quincey , sir ? ' 

 ' I believe I have read every line he ever write . ' 

 ' ah , you should have hear he talk about murder . it would have make you dream queer dream , just as he do . he live for year in the white cottage that Wordsworth once live in , just behind the street yonder a nice , neat , lile gentleman , in a houseful of book . I have   have many a talk with he when I be a young man . ' 

 ' and how old may you be now , Mr. Barlow ? ' 

 ' get on for eighty four , sir . ' 

 ' but you be not the old man in Grasmere , I should say , by twenty year ? ' 

 ' I do not   think there be many much old than I , sir . ' 

 ' the man I see on the Fell look at least a hundred . I wish you could tell I who he be ; I feel a morbid curiosity about he . ' 

 he go on to describe the old man in the grey coat , as minutely as he could , dwell on every characteristic of that singular - look old person ; but Samuel Barlow could not identify the description with any one in Grasmere . yet a man of that age , see walk on the hill - side at eight in the morning , could hardly have come from far afield . 

 CHAPTER XX . 

 LADY MAULEVRIER 's LETTER - BAG . 


 although Maulevrier have assure his grandmother that John Hammond would take flight at the first warning of Lesbia 's return , Lady Maulevrier 's dread of any meeting between her granddaughter and that ineligible lover determine she in make such arrangement as should banish Lesbia from Fellside , so long as there seem the slight danger of such a meeting . she know that Lesbia have love her fortuneless suitor ; and she do not know that the wound be cure , even by a season in the little - great world of Cannes . now that she , the ruler of that household , be a helpless captive in her own apartment , she feel that Lesbia at Fellside would be her own mistress , and hem round with the danger that beset richly - dower beauty and inexperienced youth . 

 John Hammond might be play a very deep game , perhaps assist by Maulevrier . he might ostensibly leave Fellside before Lesbia 's return , yet lurk in the neighbourhood , and contrive to meet she every day . if Maulevrier encourage this folly , they might be marry and over the border , before her ladyship fetter , impotent as she be could interfere . 

 Lady Maulevrier feel that Georgie Kirkbank be her strong rock . so long as Lesbia be under that astute veteran 's wing there could be no danger . in that embody essence of worldliness and diplomacy , there be an ever - present defence from all temptation that spring from romance and youthful impulse . it be a bitter thing , perhaps , to steep a young and pure soul in such an atmosphere , to harden a fresh young nature in the fiery crucible of fashionable life ; but Lady Maulevrier believe that the end would sanctify the mean . Lesbia , once married to a worthy man , such a man as Lord Hartfield , for instance , would soon rise to a high level than that Belgravian swamp over which the malarian vapour of falsehood , and slander , and self - seeking , and prurient imagining hang dense and thick . she would rise to the loftier table - land of that really great world which govern and admonish the ruck of mankind by example of noble deed and noble thought ; the world of statesman , and soldier , and thinker , and reformer ; the salt wherewithal society be salt . 

 but while Lesbia be tread the tortuous maze of fashion , it be well for she to be guide and guard by such an old campaigner as Lady Kirkbank , a woman who , in the language of her friend , ' know the rope . ' 

 Lesbia 's last letter have be to the effect that she be to go back to London with the Kirkbanks directly after Easter , and that directly they arrive she would set off with she maid for Fellside , to spend a week or a fortnight with her dear grandmother , before go back to Arlington Street for the May campaign . 

 ' and then , dearest , I hope you will make up your mind to spend the season in London , ' write Lesbia . ' I shall expect to hear that you have secure Lord Porlock 's house . how dreadfully slow your poor dear hand be to recover ! I be afraid Horton be not treat the case cleverly . why do you not send for Mr. Erichsen ? it be a shock to my nerve every time I receive a letter in Mary 's masculine hand , instead of in your lovely italian penmanship . strange be not   it ? how much well the woman of your time write than the girl of the present day ! Lady Kirkbank receive letter from stylish girl in a hand that would disgrace a housemaid . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier allow a post to go by before she answer this letter , while she deliberate upon the good and wise manner of arrange her granddaughter 's future . it be an agony to she not to be able to write with her own hand , to be oblige to so shape every sentence that Mary might learn nothing which she ought not to know . it be impossible with such an amanuensis to write confidentially to Lady Kirkbank . the letter to Lesbia be of less consequence ; for Lesbia , albeit so intensely beloved , be not in her grandmother 's confidence , least of all about those scheme and dream which concern her own fate . 

 however , the letter have to be write , so Mary be tell to open her desk and begin . 

 the letter to Lesbia run thus : 

 ' my dear child , 
 ' this be a world in which our bright day - dream generally end in 
 mere dreaming . for year past I have cherish the hope of 
 present you to your sovereign , to whom I be present six and 
 forty year ago , when she be so fair and girlish a creature that 
 she seem to I more like a queen in a fairy tale than the actual 
 ruler of a great country . I have beguile my monotonous day with 
 thought of the time when I should return to the great world , full 
 of pride and delight in show old friend what a sweet flower I 
 have rear in my mountain home ; but , alas , Lesbia , it may not be . 
 ' Fate have will otherwise . the maimed hand do not recover , 
 although Horton be very clever , and thoroughly understand my case . 
 I be not ill , I be not in danger ; so you need feel no anxiety about 
 I ; but I be a cripple ; and I be likely to remain a cripple for 
 month ; so the idea of a London season this year be hopeless . 
 ' now , as you have in a manner make your dťbut at Cannes , it would 
 never do to bury you here for another year . you complain of the 
 dullness last summer ; but you would find Fellside much duller now 
 that you have taste the elixir of life . no , my dear love , it will 
 be well for you to be present , as Lady Kirkbank propose , at the 
 first drawing - room after Easter ; and Lady Kirkbank will have to 
 present you . she will be pleased to do this , I know , for her letter 
 be full of enthusiasm about you . and , after all , I do not think you 
 will lose by the exchange . clever as I think myself , I fear I should 
 find myself sorely at fault in the society of to - day . all thing be 
 change : opinion , manner , creed , moral even . act that be 
 crime in my day be now venial error opinion that be 
 scandalous be now the mark of " advanced thought . " I should be too 
 formal for this easy - go age , should be ridicule as old - fashioned 
 and narrow - minded , should put you to the blush a dozen time a day 
 by my prejudice and opinion . 
 ' it be very good of you to think of travel so long a distance to 
 see I ; and I should love to look at your sweet face , and hear you 
 describe your new experience ; but I could not allow you to travel 
 with only the protection of a maid ; and there be many reason why I 
 think it well to defer the meeting till the end of the season , 
 when Lady Kirkbank will bring my treasure back to I , eager to tell 
 I the history of all the heart she have break . ' 
 the dowager 's letter to Lady Kirkbank be brief and business - like . she could only hope that her old friend Georgie , whose acuteness she know of old , would divine her feeling and her wish , without be explicitly tell what they be . 

 ' my dear Georgie , 
 ' I be too ill to leave this house ; indeed I doubt if I shall ever 
 leave it till I be take away in my coffin ; but please say nothing 
 to alarm Lesbia . indeed , there be no ground for fear , as I be not 
 dangerously ill , and may drag out an imprisonment of long year 
 before the coffin come to fetch I . there be reason , which you 
 will understand , why Lesbia should not come here till after the 
 season ; so please keep she in Arlington Street , and occupy her mind 
 as much as you can with the preparation for her first campaign . I 
 give you carte blanche . if Carson be still in business I should 
 like she to make my girl 's gown ; but you must please yourself in 
 this matter , as it be quite possible that Carson be a little behind 
 the time . 
 ' I must ask you to present my darling , and to deal with she exactly 
 as if she be a daughter of your own . I think you know all my view 
 and hope about she ; and I feel that I can trust to your friendship 
 in this my day of need . the dream of my life have be to launch she 
 myself , and direct she every step in the maze of town life ; but 
 that dream be over . I have keep age and infirmity at a distance , 
 have even forget that the year be go by ; and now I find 
 myself an old woman all at once , and my golden dream have vanish . ' 
 Lady Kirkbank 's reply come by return of post , and happily this gush epistle have not to be submit to Mary 's eye . 

 ' my dear Di , 
 ' my heart positively bleed for you . what be the matter with your 
 hand , that you talk of be a life - long prisoner to your room ? pray 
 send for Paget or Erichsen , and have yourself put right at once . no 
 doubt that local simpleton be make a mess of your case . perhaps 
 while he be dab with lint and lotion the real remedy be the 
 knife . I be sure amputation would be less melancholy than the 
 despondent state of feeling which you be now suffer . if any limb 
 of mine go wrong , I should say to the surgeon , " cut it off , and 
 patch up the stump in your good style ; I give you a fortnight , and 
 at the end of that time I expect to be go to party again . " life 
 be not long enough for dawdle surgery . 
 ' as regard Lesbia , I can only say that I adore she , and I be 
 enchant at the idea that I be to run she myself . I intend she to 
 be the beauty of the season not one of the lovely 
 debutante , or any rot of that kind but just the girl whom 
 everybody will be crazy about . there shall be a mob wherever she 
 appear , Di , I promise you that . there be no one in London who can 
 work a thing of that kind well than your humble servant . and when 
 once the girl be the talk of the town , all the rest be easy . she can 
 choose for herself among the very good man in society . offer will 
 pour in as thickly as circular from undertaker and mourning 
 warehouse after a death . 
 ' Lesbia be so cool - headed and sensible that I have not the least 
 doubt of her success . with an impulsive or romantic girl there be 
 always the fear of a fiasco . but this sweet child of yours have 
 be well bring up , and know her own value . she behave like a 
 queen here , where I need not tell you society be just a little 
 mixed ; though , of course , we only cultivate our own set . your heart 
 would swell with pride if you could see the way she put down man 
 who be not quite good style ; and the ease with which she crush 
 those odious american girl , with their fine complexion and loud 
 manner . 
 ' be assure that I shall guard she as the apple of my eye , and that 
 the detrimental who circumvent I will be a very Satan of schemer . 
 ' I can but smile at your mention of Carson , whose gown use to fit 
 we so well in our girlish day , and whose bill seem moderate 
 compare with the exorbitant account I get now . 
 ' Carson have long be forget , my dear soul , go with the snow 
 of last year . a long procession of fashionable french dressmaker 
 have pass across the stage since her time , like the phantom king 
 in Macbeth ; and now the last rage be to have our gown make by an 
 Englishman who work for the Princess , and who give himself most 
 insufferable air , or an Irishwoman who be employ by all the good 
 actress . it be to the latter , Kate Kearney , I shall entrust our 
 sweet Lesbia 's toilette . ' 
 the same post bring a love letter from Lesbia , full of regret at not be allow to go down to Fellside , and yet full of delight at the prospect of her first season . 

 ' Lady Kirkbank and I have be discuss my court dress , ' she write , 
 ' and we have decide upon a white cut - velvet train , with a border of 
 ostrich feather , over a satin petticoat embroider with seed 
 pearl . it will be expensive , but we know you will not mind that . 
 Lady Kirkbank take the idea from the costume Buckingham wear at the 
 Louvre the first time he meet Anne of Austria . be not   that clever of 
 she ? she be not a deep thinker like you ; be horribly ignorant of 
 science , metaphysic , poetry even . she ask I one day who Plato 
 be , and whether he take his name from the battle of Platoea ; and 
 she say she never could understand why people make a fuss about 
 Shakespeare ; but she have read all the secret history and memoir 
 that ever be write , and know all the in and out of court life 
 and high life for the last three hundred year ; and there be not a 
 person in the peerage whose family history she have not at her 
 finger ' end , except my grandfather . when I ask she to tell I 
 all about Lord Maulevrier and his achievement as Governor of 
 Madras , she have not a word to say . so , perhaps , she draw upon her 
 invention a little in talk about other people , and feel herself 
 restrain when she come to speak of my grandfather . ' 
 this passage in Lesbia 's letter affect Lady Maulevrier as if a scorpion have wriggle from underneath the sheet of paper . she fold the letter , and lay it in the satin - line box on her table , with a deep sigh . 

 ' yes , she be in the world now , and she will ask question . I have never warn she against pronounce her grandfather 's name . there be some who will not be so kind as Georgie Kirkbank ; some , perhaps , who will delight in humiliate she , and who will tell she the bad that can be tell . my only hope be that she will make a great marriage , and speedily . once the wife of a man with a high place in the world , worldling will be too wise to wound she by tell she that her grandfather be an unconvicted felon . ' 

 the die be cast . Lady Maulevrier might dread the hazard of evil tongue , of slanderous memory ; but she could not recall her consent to Lesbia 's dťbut . the girl be already launch ; she have be see and admire . the next stage in her career must be to be woo and win by a worthy wooer . 

 CHAPTER XXI . 

 on the DARK BROW of HELVELLYN . 


 while these plan be be settle , and while Lesbia 's future be the all - absorbing subject of Lady Maulevrier 's thought , Mary contrive to be happy than she have ever be in her life before . it be happiness that grow and strengthen with every day ; and yet there be no obvious reason for this deep joy . her life run in the same familiar groove . she walk and ride on the old pathway ; she row on the lake she have know from babyhood ; she visit her cottager , and teach in the village school , just the same as of old . the change be only that she be no long alone ; and of late the solitude of her life , the ever - present consciousness that nobody share her pleasure or sympathise with she upon any point , have weigh upon she like an actual burden . now she have Maulevrier , who be always kind , who understand and share almost all her taste , and Maulevrier 's friend , who , although not give to say smooth thing , seem warmly interested in her pursuit and opinion . he encourage she to talk , although he generally take the opposite side in every argument ; and she no long feel oppress or irritate by the idea that he despise she . 

 indeed , although he never flatter or even praise she , Mr. Hammond let she see that he like her society . she have go out of her way to avoid he , very fearful lest he should think her bold or masculine ; but he have take pain to frustrate all her effort in that direction ; he have refuse to go upon excursion which she could not share . ' Lady Mary must come with we , ' he say , when they be plan a morning 's ramble . thus it happen that Mary be his guide and companion in all his walk , and roam with he bamboo in hand , over every one of those mountainous path she know and love so well . distance be as nothing to they sometimes a boat help they , and they go over wintry windermere to climb the picturesque height above Bowness . sometimes they take pony , and a groom , and leave their steed to perform the wilder part of the way on foot . in this wise John Hammond see all that be to be see within a day 's journey of Grasmere , except the top of Helvellyn . Maulevrier have shirk the expedition , have always put off Mary and Mr. Hammond when they propose it . the season be not advanced enough the rugged pathway by the Tongue Ghyll would be as slippery as glass no pony could get up there in such weather . 

 ' we have not have any frost to speak of for the last fortnight , ' plead Mary , who be particularly anxious to do the honour of Helvellyn , as the real lion of the neighbourhood . 

 ' what a simpleton you be , molly ! ' cry Maulevrier . ' do you suppose because there be no frost in your grandmother 's garden and if you be to ask Staples about his peach he would tell you a very different story that there be a tropical atmosphere on Dolly Waggon Pike ? why , I would wager the ice on Grisdale Tarn be thick enough for skate . Helvellyn will not   run away , child . you and Hammond can dance the Highland Schottische on Striding Edge in June , if you like . ' 

 ' Mr. Hammond will not   be here in June , ' say Mary . 

 ' who know ? the train service be pretty fair between London and Windermere . Hammond and I would think nothing of put ourselves in the mail on a Friday night , and come down to spend Saturday and Sunday with you if you be good . ' 

 there come a sunny morning soon after Easter which seem mild enough for June ; and when Hammond suggest that this be the very day for Helvellyn , Maulevrier have not a word to say against the truth of that proposition . the weather have be exceptionally warm for the last week , and they have play tennis and sit in the garden just as if it have be actually summer . patch of snow might still linger on the crest of the hill but the approach to those bleak height could hardly be glacial . 

 Mary clasp her hand delightedly . 

 ' dear old Maulevrier ! ' she exclaim , ' you be always good to I . and now I shall be able to show you the Red Tarn , the high pool of water in England , ' she say , turn to Hammond . ' and you will see windermere wind like a silvery serpent between the hill , and grasmere shin like a jewel in the depth of the valley , and the sea glitter like a line of white light between the edge of earth and heaven , and the dark Scotch hill like couchant lion far away to the north . ' 

 ' that be to say these thing be all suppose to be on view from the top of the mountain ; but as a peculiar and altogether exceptional state of the atmosphere be essential to their be see , I need not tell you that they be rarely visible , ' say Maulevrier . ' you be talk to old mountaineer , Molly . Hammond have do Cotapaxi and have his little clamber on the equatorial Andes , and I well , child , I have do my Righi , and I have always find the boasted panorama envelop in dense fog . ' 

 ' it will not   be foggy to - day , ' say Mary . ' shall we do the whole thing on foot , or shall I order the pony ? ' 

 Mr. Hammond inquire the distance up and down , and be tell that it involve only a matter of eight mile , decide upon walk . 

 ' I will walk , and lead your pony , ' he say to Mary , but Mary declare herself quite capable of go on foot , so the pony be dispense with as a possible encumbrance . 

 this be plan and discuss in the garden before breakfast . Fršulein be tell that Mary be go for a long walk with her brother and Mr. Hammond ; a walk which might last over the usual luncheon hour ; so Fršulein be not to wait luncheon . Mary go to her grandmother 's room to pay her duty visit . there be no letter for she to write that morning , so she be perfectly free . 

 the three pedestrian start an hour after breakfast , in light marching order . the two young man wear their argyleshire shoot clothe homespun knickerbocker and jacket , thick - rib hose knit by Highland lass in Inverness . they carry a couple of hunting flask fill with claret , and a couple of sandwich box , and that be all . Mary wear her substantial tailor - gown of olive tweed , and a little toque to match , with a silver mount grouse - claw for her only ornament . 

 it be a delicious morning , the air fresh and sweet , the sun comfortably warm , a little too warm , perhaps , presently , when they have tread the narrow path by the Tongue Ghyll , and be begin to wind slowly upwards over rough boulder and last year 's bracken , tough and brown and tangle , towards that rugged wall of earth and stone tufte with rank grass , which call itself dolly Waggon Pike . here they all come to a stand - still , and wipe the dew of honest labour from their forehead ; and here Maulevrier fling himself down upon a big boulder , with the sol of his stout shoot boot in run water , and take out his cigar case . 

 ' how do you like it ? ' he ask his friend , when he have light his cigarette . ' I hope you be enjoy yourself . ' 

 ' I never be happy in my life , ' answer Hammond . 

 he be stand on high ground , with Mary at his elbow , point out and expatiate upon the detail of the prospect . there be the lake grasmere , a disk of shin blue ; Rydal , a patch of silver ; and windermere wind amidst a labyrinth of woode hill . 

 ' be not   you tired ? ' ask Maulevrier . 

 ' not a whit . ' 

 ' oh , I forget you have do Cotapaxi , or as much of Cotapaxi as live mortal ever have do . that make a difference . I be go home . ' 

 ' oh , Maulevrier ! ' exclaim Mary , piteously . 

 ' I be go home . you two can go to the top . you be both harden mountaineer , and I be not in it with either of you . when I rashly consent to a pedestrian ascent of Helvellyn I have forget what the gentleman be like ; and as to Dolly Waggon I have actually forget her existence . but now I see the lady as steep as the side of a house , and as stony no , naught but herself can be her parallel in stoniness . no , Molly , I will go no far . ' 

 ' but we shall go down on the other side , ' urge Mary . ' it be a little steeper on the Cumberland side , but not nearly so far . ' 

 ' a little steeper ! I can anything be steep than Dolly Waggon ? yes , you be right . it be steep on the Cumberland side . I remember come down a sheer descent , like an exaggerated sugar - loaf ; but I be on a pony , and it be the brute 's look - out . I will not go down the Cumberland side on my own leg . no , Molly , not even for you . but if you and Hammond want to go to the top , there be nothing to prevent you . he be a skilled mountaineer . I will trust you with he . ' 

 Mary blush , and make no reply . of all thing in the world she least want to abandon the expedition . yet to climb Helvellyn alone with her brother 's friend would no doubt be a terrible violation of those law of maidenly propriety which Fršulein be always expound . if Mary be to do this thing , which she long to do , she must hazard a lecture from her governess , and probably a biting reproof from her grandmother . 

 ' will you trust yourself with I , Lady Mary ? ' ask Hammond , look at she with a gaze so earnest so much more earnest than the occasion require that her blush deepen and her eyelid fall . ' I have do a good deal of climb in my day , and I be not afraid of anything Helvellyn can do to I . I promise to take great care of you if you will come . ' 

 how could she refuse ? how could she for one moment pretend that she do not trust he , that her heart do not yearn to go with he . she would have climb the shingly steep of Cotapaxi with he or cross the great Sahara with he and fear nothing . her trust in he be infinite as infinite as her reverence and love . 

 ' I be afraid Fršulein would make a fuss , ' she falter , after a pause . 

 ' Hang Fršulein , ' cry Maulevrier , puff at his cigarette , and kick about the stone in the clear running water . ' I will square it with Fršulein . I will give she a pint of fiz with her lunch , and make she see everything in a rosy hue . the good soul be fond of her Heidseck . you will be back by afternoon tea . why should there be any fuss about the matter ? Hammond want to see the Red Tarn , and you be die to show he the way . go , and joy go with you both . climb a stony hill be a form of pleasure to which I have not yet risen . I shall stroll home at my leisure , and spend the afternoon on the billiard - room sofa read Mudie 's last contribution to the comfort of home . ' 

 ' what a sybarite , ' say Hammond . ' come , Lady Mary , we must not   loiter , if we be to be back at Fellside by five o'clock . ' 

 Mary look at her brother doubtfully , and he give she a little nod which seem to say , ' go , by all mean ; ' so she dig the end of her staff into Dolly 's rugged breast , and mount cheerily , step lightly from boulder to boulder . 

 the sun be not so warm as it have be ten minute ago , when Maulevrier fling himself down to rest . the sky have cloud over a little , and a cool wind be blow across the breast of the hill . Fairfield yonder , that long smooth slope of verdure which a little while ago look emerald green in the sunlight , now wear a soft and shadowy hue . all the world be greyer and dimmer in a moment , as it be , and Coniston Lake in its distant valley disappear beneath a veil of mist , while the shimmering sea - line upon the verge of the horizon melt and vanish among the cloud that overhang it . the weather change very quickly in this part of the world . sharp drop of rain come spit at Hammond and Mary as they climb the crest of the pike , and stop , somewhat breathless , to look back at Maulevrier . he be trudge blithely down the wind way , and seem to have do wonder while they have be do very little . 

 ' how fast he be go ! ' say Mary . 

 ' Easy be the descent of Avernus . he be go down - hill , and we be go upwards . that make all the difference in life , you see , ' answer Hammond . 

 Mary look at he with divine compassion . she think that for he the hill of life would be hard than Helvellyn . he be brave , honest , clever ; but her grandmother have impress upon she that modern civilisation hardly have room for a young man who want to get on in the world , without either fortune or powerful connexion . he have well go to Australia and keep sheep , than attempt the impossible at home . 

 the rain be a pass shower , hardly worth speak of , but the glory of the day be over . the sky be grey , and there be dark cloud creep up from the sea - line . Silvery Windermere have take a leaden hue ; and now they turn their last fond look upon the Westmoreland valley , and set their face steadily towards Cumberland , and the fine grassy plateau on the top of the hill . 

 all this be not do in a flash . it take they some time to scale Dolly 's stubborn breast , and it take they another hour to reach Seat Sandal ; and by the time they come to the iron gate in the fence , which at this point divide the two county , the atmosphere have thicken ominously , and dark wreath of fog be float about and around they , whirl here and there by a boisterous wind which shriek and roar at they with savage fury , as if it be the voice of some Titan monarch of the mountain protest against this intrusion upon his domain . 

 ' I be afraid you will not   see the scottish hill , ' shout Mary , hold on her little cloth hat . 

 she be oblige to shout at the top of her voice , though she be close to Mr. Hammond 's elbow , for that shrill scream wind would have drown the voice of a stentor . 

 ' never mind the view , ' reply Hammond in the same fortissimo , ' but I really wish I have not   bring you up here . if this fog should get any bad , it may be dangerous . ' 

 ' the fog be sure to get bad , ' say Mary , in a brief lull of the hurly - burly , ' but there be no danger . I know every inch of the hill , and I be not a bit afraid . I can guide you , if you will trust I . ' 

 ' my brave of girl , ' he exclaim , look down at she . ' trust you ! yes , I would trust my life to you my soul my honour secure in your purity and good faith . ' 

 never have eye of live man or woman look down upon she with such tenderness , such fervent love . she look up at he ; look with eye which , at first bewilder , then grow bold , and lose themselves , as it be , in the dark grey depth of the eye they meet . the savage wind , hustling and howling , blow she nearer to he , as a reed be blow against a rock . dark grey mist be rise round they like a sea ; but have that ever - thickening , ever - darken vapour be the sea itself , and death inevitable , Mary Haselden would have hardly care . for in this moment the one precious gift for which her soul have long be yearn have be freely give to she . she know all at once , that she be fondly love by that one man whom she have choose for her idol and her hero . 

 what matter that he be fortuneless , a nobody , with but the poor chance of success in the world ? what if he must need , only to win the bare mean of existence , go to Australia and keep sheep , or to the Bed River valley and grow corn ? what if he must labour , as the peasant labour on the side of this rude hill ? gladly would she go with he to a strange country , and keep his log cabin , and work for he , and share his toilsome life , rough or smooth . no loss of social rank could lessen her pride in he , her belief in he . 

 they be stand side by side a little way from the edge of the sheer descent , below which the Bed Tarn show black in a basin scoop out of the naked hill , like water hold in the hollow of a giant 's hand . 

 ' look , ' cry Mary , point downward , ' you must see the Red Tarn , the high water in England ? ' 

 but just at this moment there come a blast which shake even Hammond 's strong frame , and with a cry of fear he snatch Mary in his arm and carry she away from the edge of the hill . he fold she in his arm and hold she there , thirty yard away from the precipice , safely shelter against his breast , while the wind rave round they , blow her hair from the broad , white brow , and show he that noble forehead in all its power and beauty ; while the darkness deepen round they so that they could see hardly anything except each other 's eye . 

 ' my love , my own dear love , ' he murmur fondly ; ' I will trust you with my life . will you accept the trust ? I be hardly worthy ; for less than a year ago I offer myself to your sister , and I think she be the only woman in this wide world who could make I happy . and when she refuse I I be in despair , Mary ; and I leave Fellside in the full belief that I have do with life and happiness . and then I come back , only to oblige Maulevrier , and determine to be utterly miserable at Fellside . I be miserable for the first two hour . memory of dead and go joy and disappointed hope be very bitter . and I try honestly to keep up my feeling of wretchedness for the first few day . but it be no use , molly . there be a genial spirit in the place , a laugh fairy who would not let I be sad ; and I find myself become most unromantically happy , eat my breakfast with a hearty appetite , think my cup of afternoon tea nectar for love of the dear hand that give it . and so , and so , till the new love , the purer and well love , grow and grow into a mighty tree , which be as an oak to an orchid , compare with that passion flower of early growth . Mary , will you trust your life to I , as I trust mine to you . I say to you almost in the word I speak last year to Lesbia , ' and here his tone grow grave almost to solemnity , ' trust I , and I will make your life free from the shadow of care trust I , for I have a brave spirit and a strong arm to fight the battle of life trust I , and I will win for you the position you have a right to occupy trust I , and you shall never repent your trust . ' 

 she look up at he with eye which tell of infinite faith , child - like , unquestione faith . 

 ' I will trust you in all thing , and for ever , ' she say . ' I be not afraid to face evil fortune . I do not care how poor you be how hard our life may be if if you be sure you love I . ' 

 ' sure ! there be not a beat of my heart or a thought of my mind that do not belong to you . I be yours to the very depth of my soul . my innocent love , my clear - eye , clear - soule angel ! I have study you and watch you and think of you , and sound the depth of your lovely nature , and the result be that you be for I earth 's one woman . I will have no other , Mary , no other love , no other wife . ' 

 ' Lady Maulevrier will be dreadfully angry , ' falter Mary . 

 ' be you afraid of her anger ? ' 

 ' no ; I be afraid of nothing , for your sake . ' 

 he lift her hand to his lip , and kiss it reverently , and there be a touch of chivalry in that reverential kiss . his eye cloud with tear as he look down into the trustful face . the fog have darken to a denser blackness , and it be almost as if they be engulf in sudden night . 

 ' if we be never to find our way down the hill ; if this be to be the last hour of our life , Mary , would you be content ? ' 

 ' quite content , ' she answer , simply . ' I think I have live long enough , if you really love I if you be not make fun . ' 

 ' what , molly , do you still doubt ? be it strange that I love you ? ' 

 ' very strange . I be so different from Lesbia . ' 

 ' yes , very different , and the difference be your high charm . and now , love , we have well go down whichever side of the hill be easy , for this fog be rather appalling . I forgive the wind , because it blow you against my heart just now , and that be where I want you to dwell for ever ! ' 

 ' do not   be frightened , ' say Mary . ' I know every step of the way . ' 

 so , lean on her lover , and yet guide he , slowly , step by step , grope their way through the darkness , Lady Mary lead Mr. Hammond down the wind track along which the pony and the guide travel so often in the summer season . and soon they begin to descend out of that canopy of fog which envelop the brow of Helvellyn , and to see the whole world smile beneath they , a world of green pasture and sheepfold , with a white homestead here and there amidst the field , look so human and so comfortable after that gloomy mountain top , round which the temp howl so outrageously . beyond those pasture stretch the dark water of Thirlmere , look like a broad river . 

 the descent be pass steep , but Hammond 's strong arm and steady step make Mary 's progress very easy , while she have in no wise exaggerate her familiarity with the winding and twisting of the track . yet as they have need to travel very slowly so long as the fog still surround they , the journey downward last a considerable time , and it be past five when they arrive at the little roadside inn at the foot of the hill . 

 here Mr. Hammond insist that Mary should rest at least long enough to take a cup of tea . she be very white and tired . she have be profoundly agitated , and look on the point of fainting , although she protest that she be quite ready to walk on . 

 ' you be not go to walk another step , ' say Hammond . ' while you be take your tea I will get you a carriage . ' 

 ' indeed , I have rather hurry on at once , ' urge Mary . ' we be so late already . ' 

 ' you will get home all the soon if you obey I . it be your duty to obey I now , ' say Hammond , in a lowered voice . 

 she smile at he , but it be a weak , wan little smile , for that descent in the wind and the fog have quite exhaust she . Mr. Hammond take she into a snug little parlour where there be a cheerful fire , and see she comfortably seat in an arm chair by the hearth , before he go to look after a carriage . 

 there be no such thing as a conveyance to be have , but the windermere coach would pass in about half an hour , and for this they must wait . it would take they back to Grasmere soon than they could get there on foot , in Mary 's exhausted condition . 

 the tea - tray be bring in presently , and Hammond pour out the tea and wait upon Lady Mary . it be a reversal of the usual formula but it be very pleasant to Mary to sit with her foot on the low brass fender and be wait upon by her lover . that fog on the brow of Helvellyn that pierce wind have chill she to the bone , and there be unspeakable comfort in the glow and warmth of the fire , in the refreshment of a good cup of tea . 

 ' Mary , you be my own property now , remember , ' say Hammond , watch she tenderly as she sip her tea . 

 she glance up at he shyly , now and then , with eye full of innocent wonder . it be so strange to she , as strange as sweet , to know that he love she ; such a marvellous thing that she have pledge herself to be his wife . 

 ' you be my very own mine to guard and cherish , mine to think and work for , ' he go on , ' and you will have to trust I , sweet one , even if the beginning of thing be not altogether free from trouble . ' 

 ' I be not afraid of trouble . ' 

 ' bravely speak ! first and foremost , then , you will have to announce your engagement to Lady Maulevrier . she will take it ill , no doubt ; will do she utmost to persuade you to give I up . have you courage and resolution , do you think , to stand against her argument ? can you hold to your purpose bravely , and cry , no surrender ? ' 

 ' there shall be no surrender , ' answer Mary , ' I promise you that . no doubt grandmother will be very angry . but she have never care for I very much . it will not hurt she for I to make a bad match , as it would have do in Lesbia 's case . she have have no day - dream no grand ambition about I ! ' 

 ' so much the well , my wayside flower ! when you have say all that be sweet and dutiful to she , and have let she know at the same time that you mean to be my wife , come weal come woe , I will see she , and will have my say . I will not promise she a grand career for my darling : but I will pledge myself that nothing of that kind which the world call evil no penury , or shabbiness of surrounding shall ever touch Mary Haselden after she be Mary Hammond . I can promise at least so much as that . ' 

 ' it be more than enough , ' say Mary . ' I have tell you that I would gladly share poverty with you . ' 

 ' sweet ! it be good of you to say as much , but I would not take you at your word . you do not   know what poverty be . ' 

 ' do you think I be a coward , or self - indulgent ? you be wrong , Jack . may I call you Jack , as Maulevrier do ? ' 

 ' may you ? ' 

 the question evoke such a gush of tenderness that he be fain to kneel beside her chair and kiss the little hand hold the cup , before he consider he have answer properly . 

 ' you be wrong , Jack . I do know what poverty mean . I have study the way of the poor , try to console they , and help they a little in their trouble ; and I know there be no pain that want of money can bring which I would not share willingly with you . do you suppose my happiness be dependent on a fine house and powdered footman ? I should like to go to the Red River with you , and wear cotton gown , and tuck up my sleeve and clean our cottage . ' 

 ' very pretty sport , dear , for a summer day ; but my Mary shall have a sweet life , and shall occasionally walk in silk attire . ' 

 that tea - drinking by the fireside in the inn parlour be the most delicious thing within John Hammond 's experience . Mary be a bewitching compound of earnestness and simplicity , so humble , so confiding , so perplexed and astound at her own bliss . 

 ' Confess , now , in the summer , when you be in love with Lesbia , you think I a horrid kind of girl , ' she say , presently , when they be stand side by side at the window , wait for the coach . 

 ' never , Mary . my crime be to have think very little about you in those day . I be so dazzle by Lesbia 's beauty , so charm by her accomplishment and girlish grace , that I forgot to take notice of anything else in the world . if I think of you at all it be as another Maulevrier a young Maulevrier in petticoat , very gay , and good - humour , and nice . ' 

 ' but when you see I rush about with the terrier I must have seem utterly horrid . ' 

 ' why , dearest ? there be nothing essentially horrible in terrier , or in a bright lively girl run race with they . you make a very pretty picture in the sunlight , with your hat hang on your shoulder , and your curly brown hair and dance hazel eye . if I have not be deep in love with Lesbia 's peerless complexion and grecian feature , I should have look below the surface of that Gainsborough picture , and discover what treasure of goodness , and courage , and truth and purity those frank brown eye and that wide forehead betoken . I be sow my wild oats last summer , Mary , and they bring I a crop of sorrow . but I be wise now wise and happy . 

 ' but if you be to see Lesbia again would not the old love revive ? ' 

 ' the old love be dead , Mary . there be nothing leave of it but a handful of ash , which I scatter thus to the four wind , ' with a wave of his hand towards the open casement . ' the new love absorb and master my being . if Lesbia be to re - appear at Fellside this evening , I could offer she my hand in all brotherly frankness , and ask she to accept I as a brother . here come the coach . we shall be at Fellside just in time for dinner . ' 

 CHAPTER XXII . 

 WISER than LESBIA . 


 Lady Mary and Mr. Hammond be back at Fellside at a quarter before eight , by which time the star be shin on pine wood and Fell . they manage to be in the drawing - room when dinner be announce , after the hasty of toilet ; yet her lover think Mary have never look pretty than she look that night , in her limp white cashmere gown , and with her brown hair brush into a large loose knot on the top of her head . there have be great uneasiness about they at Fellside when evening begin to draw in , and the expect hour of their return have go by . scout have be send in quest of they , but in the wrong direction . 

 ' I do not think you would be such idiot as to come down the north side of the hill in a temp , ' say Maulevrier ; ' we could see the cloud race over the crest of Seat Sandal , and know it be blow pretty hard up there , though it be calm enough down here . ' 

 ' blow pretty hard ; ' echo Hammond , ' I do not   think I be ever out in a bad gale ; and yet I have be across the Bay of Biscay when the wave strike the side of the steam like batter ram , and when the whole surface of the sea be white with seethe foam . ' 

 ' it be a most imprudent thing to go up Helvellyn in such weather , ' say Fršulein M ller , shake her head gloomily as she eat her fish . 

 Mary feel that the Fršulein 's manner bode ill . there be a storm brew . a scolding be inevitable . Mary feel quite capable of do battle with the Fršulein ; but her feeling be altogether different when she think of face that stern old lady upstairs , and of the confession she have to make . it be not that her courage falter . so far as resolution go she be as firm as a rock . but she feel that there be a terrible ordeal to be go through ; and it seem a mockery to be sit there and pretend to eat her dinner and take thing lightly , with that ordeal before she . 

 ' we do not go up the hill in bad weather , Miss M ller , ' say Mr. Hammond . ' the sun be shin and the sky be blue when we start . we could not foresee darkness and storm at the top of the hill . that be the fortune of war . ' 

 ' I be very sorry Lady Mary have not more good sense , ' reply Fršulein with unabated gloom ; but on this Maulevrier take up the cudgel . 

 ' if there be any want of sense in the business , that be my look - out , Fršulein , ' he say , glare angrily at the governess . ' it be I who advise Hammond and Lady Mary to climb the hill . and here they be , safe and sound after their journey . I see no reason why there should be any fuss about it . ' 

 ' People have different way of look at thing , reply Fršulein , plod steadily on with her dinner . Mary rise directly the dessert have be hand round , and march out of the room : like a warrior go to a battle in which the chance of defeat be strong . Fršulein M ller shuffle after she . 

 ' will you be kind enough to go to her ladyship 's room at once , Lady Mary , ' she say . ' she want to speak to you . ' 

 ' and I want to speak to she , ' say Mary . 

 she run quickly upstairs and arrive in the morning room , a little out of breath . the room be light by one low moderator lamp , under a dark red velvet shade , and there be the glow of the wood fire , which give a more cheerful light than the lamp . Lady Maulevrier be lie on her couch in a loose brocade tea - gown , with old Brussels collar and ruffle . she be as well dressed in her day of affliction and helplessness as she have be in her day of strength ; for she know the value of surrounding , and that her stateliness and power be in some manner dependent on detail of this kind . the one hand which she could use glitter with diamond , as she wave it with a little imperious gesture towards the chair on which she desire Lady Mary to seat herself ; and Mary sit down meekly , know that this chair represent the felon 's dock . 

 ' Mary , ' begin her grandmother , with freeze gravity , ' I have be surprise and shock by your conduct to - day . yes , surprise at such conduct even in you . ' 

 ' I do not think I have do anything very wrong , grandmother . ' 

 ' not wrong ! you have do nothing wrong ? you have do something absolutely outrageous . you , my granddaughter , well bear , well breed , rear under my roof , to go up Helvellyn and lose yourself in a fog alone with a young man . you could hardly have do bad if you be a Cockney tourist , ' conclude her ladyship , with ineffable disgust . 

 ' I could not help the fog , ' say Mary , quietly . the battle have to be fight , and she be not go to flinch . ' I have no intention of go up Helvellyn alone with Mr. Hammond . Maulevrier be to have go with we ; but when we get to dolly Waggon he be tired , and would not go any far . he tell I to go on with Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' he tell you ! Maulevrier ! - a young man who have spend some of the good hour of his youth in the company of jockeys and trainer who have not   the faint idea of the fitness of thing . you allow Maulevrier to be your guide in a matter in which your own instinct should have guide you your womanly instinct ! but you have always be an unwomanly girl . you have put I to shame many a time by your hoydenish trick ; but I bear with you , believe that your madcap folly be at least harmless . to - day you have go a step too far , and have be guilty of absolute impropriety , which I shall be very slow to pardon . ' 

 ' perhaps you will be still more angry when you know all , grandmother , ' say Mary . 

 Lady Maulevrier flash her dark eye at the girl with a look which would have almost kill a nervous subject ; but Mary face she steadfastly , very pale , but as resolute as her ladyship . 

 ' when I know all ! what more be there for I to know ? ' 

 ' only that while we be on the top of Helvellyn , in the fog and the wind , Mr. Hammond ask I to be his wife . ' 

 ' I be not surprised to hear it , ' retort her ladyship , with a harsh laugh . ' a girl who could act so boldly and flirtingly be a natural mark for an adventurer . Mr. Hammond no doubt have be tell that you will have a little money by - and - by , and think he might do bad than marry you . and see how you have fling yourself at his head , he naturally conclude that you will not be too proud to accept your sister 's leaving . ' 

 ' there be nothing gain by make cruel speech , grandmother , ' say Mary , firmly . ' I have promise to be John Hammond 's wife , and there be nothing you nor anyone else can say which will make I alter my mind . I wish to act dutifully to you , if I can , and I hope you will be good to I and consent to this marriage . but if you will not consent , I shall marry he all the same . I shall be full of sorrow at have to disobey you , but I have promise , and I will keep my promise . ' 

 ' you will act in open rebellion against I against the kinswoman who have rear you , and educate you , and care for you in all these year ! ' 

 ' but you have never love I , ' answer Mary , sadly . ' perhaps if you have give I some portion of that affection which you lavish on my sister I might be willing to sacrifice this new deep love for your sake to lay down my broken heart as a sacrifice on the altar of gratitude . but you never love I . you have tolerate I , endure my presence as a disagreeable necessity of your life , because I be my father 's daughter . you and Lesbia have be all the world to each other ; and I have stand aloof , outside your charmed circle , almost a stranger to you . can you wonder , grandmother , recall this , that I be unwilling to surrender the love that have be give I to - day the true heart of a brave and good man ! ' 

 Lady Maulevrier look at she for some moment in scornful wonderment ; look at she with a slow , deliberate smile . 

 ' poor child ! ' she say ; ' poor ignorant , inexperienced baby ! for what a will - o - the - wisp be you ready to sacrifice my regard , and all the privilege of your position as my granddaughter ! no doubt this Mr. Hammond have say all manner of fine thing to you ; but can you be weak enough to believe that he who half a year ago be sigh and die at the foot of your sister can have one spark of genuine regard for you ? the thing be not in nature ; it be an obvious absurdity . but it be easy enough to understand that Mr. Hammond without a penny in his pocket , and with his way to make in the world , would be very glad to secure Lady Mary Haselden and her five hundred a year , and to have Lord Maulevrier for his brother in - law ? ' 

 ' have I really five hundred a year ? shall I have five hundred a year when I marry ? ' ask Mary , suddenly radiant . 

 ' yes ; if you marry with your brother 's consent . ' 

 ' I be so glad for his sake . he could hardly starve if I have five hundred a year . he need not be oblige to emigrate . ' 

 ' has he be offer you the prospect of emigration as an additional inducement ? ' 

 ' oh , no , he do not say that he be very poor , but since you say he be penniless I think we might be oblige to emigrate . but as I have five hundred a year ' 

 ' you will stay at home , and set up a lodging - house , I suppose , ' sneered Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' I will do anything my husband please . we can live in a humble way in some quiet part of London , while Mr. Hammond work at literature or politic . I be not afraid of poverty or trouble , I be willing to endure both for his sake . ' 

 ' you be a fool ! ' say her grandmother sternly . ' and I have nothing more to say to you . go away , and send Maulevrier to I . ' 

 Mary do not obey immediately . she go over to her grandmother 's couch and knelt by her side , and kiss the poor maim hand which lie on the velvet cushion . 

 ' dear grandmother , ' she say gently . ' I be very sorry to rebel against you . but this be a question of life or death with I . I be not like Lesbia . I can not barter love and truth for worldly advantage for pride of race . do not think I so weak or so vain as to be win by a few fine speech from an adventurer . Mr. Hammond be no adventurer , he have make no fine speech but , I will tell you a secret , grandmother . I have like and admire he from the first time he come here . I have look up to he and reverence he ; and I must be a very foolish girl if my judgment be so poor that I can respect a worthless man . ' 

 ' you be a very foolish girl , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , more kindly than she have speak before , ' but you have be very good and dutiful to I since I have be ill , and I do not   wish to forget that . I never say that Mr. Hammond be worthless ; but I say that he be no fit husband for you . if you be as yield and obedient as Lesbia it would be all the well for you ; for then I should provide for your establishment in life in a become manner . but as you be wilful , and bend upon take your own way well my dear , you must take the consequence ; and when you be a struggle wife and mother , old before your time , weigh down with the weary burden of petty care , do not say , " my grandmother might have save I from this martyrdom . " ' 

 ' I will run the risk , grandmother . I will be answerable for my own fate . ' 

 ' so be it , Mary . and now send Maulevrier to I . ' 

 Mary go down to the billiard room , where she find her brother and her lover engage in a hundred game . 

 ' take my cue and beat he if you can , molly , ' say Maulevrier , when he have hear Mary 's message . ' I be fifteen ahead of he , for he have be fall asleep over his shot . I suppose I be go to get a lecture . ' 

 ' I do not   think so , ' say Mary . 

 ' well , my dearest , how do you fare in the encounter ? ' ask Hammond , directly Maulevrier be go . 

 ' oh , it be dreadful ! I make the most rebellious speech to poor grandmother , and then I remember her affliction , and I ask she to forgive I , and just at the last she be ever so much kind , and I think that she will let I marry you , now she know I have make up my mind to be your wife in spite of Fate . ' 

 ' my brave and good . ' 

 ' and do you know , Jack ' she blush tremendously as she utter this familiar name ' I have make a discovery ! ' 

 ' indeed ! ' 

 ' I find that I be to have five hundred a year when I be married . it be not much . but I suppose it will help , will not   it ? we can not   exactly starve if we have five hundred a year . let I see . it be more than a pound a day . a sovereign ought to go a long way in a small house ; and , of course , we shall begin in a very wee house , like De Quincey 's cottage over there , only in London . ' 

 ' yes , dear , there be plenty of such cottage in London . in Mayfair , for instance , or Belgravia . ' 

 ' now , you be laugh at my rustic ignorance . but the five hundred pound will be a help , will not   it ? ' 

 ' yes , dear , a great help . ' 

 ' I be so glad . ' 

 she have chalk her cue while she be talk , but after take her aim , she drop her arm irresolutely . 

 ' do you know I be afraid I can not   play to - night , ' she say . 'helvellyn and the fog and the wind have quite spoil my nerve . shall we go to the drawing - room , and see if Fršulein have recover from her gloomy fit ? ' 

 ' I would rather stay here , where we be free to talk ; but I will do whatever you like well . ' 

 Mary prefer the drawing - room . it be very sweet to be alone with her lover , but she be weigh down with confusion in his presence . the novelty , the wonderment of her position overpower she . she yearn for the shelter of Fršulein M ller 's wing , albeit the company of that most prosaic person be certain death to romance . 

 Miss M ller be in her accustomed seat by the fire , knit her customary muffler . she have appropriate Lady Maulevrier 's place , much to Mary 's disgust . it irk the girl to see that stout , clumsy figure in the chair which have be fill by her grandmother 's imperial form . the very room seem vulgarise by the change . 

 Fršulein look up with a surprised air when Mary and Hammond enter together , the girl smile and happy . she have expect that Mary would have leave her ladyship 's room in tear , and would have retire to her own apartment to hide her swollen eyelid and humiliate aspect . but here she be , after the fiery ordeal of an interview with her offend grandmother , not in the least crestfallen . 

 ' be we not to have any tea to - night ? ' ask Mary , look round the room . 

 ' I think you be unconscious of the progress of time , Lady Mary , ' answer Fršulein , stiffly . ' the tea have be bring in and take out again . ' 

 ' then it must be bring again , if Lady Mary want some , ' say Hammond , ring the bell in the cool manner . 

 Fršulein feel that thing be come to a pretty pass , if Maulevrier 's humble friend be go to give order in the house . quiet and commonplace as the Hanoverian be , she have her ambition , and that be to grasp the household sceptre which Lady Maulevrier must need in some wise resign , now that she be a prisoner to her room . but so far Fršulein have meet with but small success in this endeavour . her ladyship 's authority still rule the house . her ladyship 's keen intellect take cognisance even of trifle : and it be only in the most insignificant detail that Fršulein feel herself a power . 

 ' well , your ladyship , what be the row ? ' say Maulevrier march into his grandmother 's room with a free and easy air . he be prepare for a skirmish , and he mean to take the bull by the horn . 

 ' I suppose you know what have happen to - day ? ' say her ladyship . 

 ' molly and Hammond 's expedition , yes , of course . I go part of the way with they , but I be out of training , get pump out after a couple of mile , and be not   such a fool as to go to the top . ' 

 ' do you know that Mr. Hammond make Mary an offer , while they be on the hill , and that she accept he ? ' 

 ' a queer place for a proposal , be not   it ? the wind blow great gun all the time . I should have choose a more tranquil spot . ' 

 ' Maulevrier , can not you be serious ? do you forget that this business of to - day must affect your sister 's welfare for the rest of her life ? ' 

 ' no , I do not . I will be as serious as a judge after he have put on the black cap , ' say Maulevrier , seat himself near his grandmother 's couch , and alter his tone altogether . ' seriously I be very glad that Hammond have ask Mary to be his wife , and still more glad that she be tremendously in love with he . I tell you some time ago not to put your spoke in that wheel . there could not be a happy or a well marriage for Mary . ' 

 ' you must have rather a poor opinion , of your sister 's attraction , personal or otherwise , if you consider a penniless young man of no family good enough for she . ' 

 ' I do not consider my sister a piece of merchandise to be sell to the high bidder . grant that Hammond be poor and a nobody . he be an honourable man , highly gifted , brave as a lion , and he be my dear friend . can you wonder that I rejoice at my sister 's have win he for her adore lover ? ' 

 ' can he really care for she , after have love Lesbia ? ' 

 ' that be the desire of the eye , this be the love of the heart . I know that he love Mary ever so much well than he love Lesbia . I can assure your ladyship that I be not such a fool as I look . I be very fond of my sister Mary , and I have not be blind to her interest . I tell you on my honour that she ought to be very happy as John Hammond 's wife . ' 

 ' I be oblige to believe what you say about his character , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' and I be willing to admit that the husband 's character have a great deal to do with the wife 's happiness , from a moral point of view ; but still there be material question to be consider . have your friend any mean of support a wife ? ' 

 ' yes , he have mean ; quite sufficient mean for Mary 's view , which be very simple . ' 

 ' you mean to say he would keep she in decent poverty ? can not you be explicit , Maulevrier , and say what mean the man have , whether an income or none ? if you can not tell I I must question Mr. Hammond himself . ' 

 ' pray do not do that , ' exclaim her grandson urgently . ' do not take all the flavour of romance out of Molly 's love story , by go into pound , shilling , and penny . she be very young . you would hardly wish she to marry immediately ? ' 

 ' not for the next year , at the very least . ' 

 ' then why enter upon this sordid question of way and mean . make Hammond and Mary happy by consent to their engagement , and trust the rest to Providence , and to I . take my word for it , Hammond be not a beggar , and he be a man likely to make his mark in the world . if a year hence his income be not enough to allow of his marrying , I will double Mary 's allowance out of my own purse . Hammond 's friendship have steady I , and save I a good deal more than five hundred a year . ' 

 ' I can quite believe that . I believe Mr. Hammond be a worthy man , and that his influence have be very good for you ; but that do not make he a good match for Mary . however , you seem to have settle the business among you , and I suppose I must submit . you have well all drink tea with I to morrow afternoon ; and I will receive your friend as Mary 's future husband . ' 

 ' that be the good and kind of grandmother . ' 

 ' but I should like to know more of his antecedent and his relation . ' 

 ' his antecedent be altogether creditable . he take honour at the University ; he have be like and respect everywhere . he be an orphan , and it be well not to talk to he of his family . he be sensitive on that point , like most man who stand alone in the world . ' 

 ' well , I will hold my peace . you have take this business into your hand , Maulevrier ; and you must be responsible for the result . ' 

 Maulevrier leave his grandmother soon after this , and go downstairs , whistle for very joyousness . find the billiard - room desert he repair to the drawing - room , where he find Mary play scrap of melody to her lover at the shadowy end of the room , while Fršulein sit by the fire weave her web as steadily as one of the Fatal Sisters , and with a brow prophetic of evil . 

 Maulevrier creep up to the piano , and come stealthily behind the lover . 

 ' bless you , my child , ' he say , hover over they with outspread hand . ' I be the dove come back to the ark . I be the bearer of happy tiding . Lady Maulevrier consent to your acquire the legal right to make each other miserable for the rest of your life . ' 

 ' God bless you , Maulevrier , ' say Hammond , clasp he by the hand . 

 ' only as this sister of mine be hardly out of the nursery you will have to wait for she at least a year . so say the dowager , whose word be like the law of the Medes and Persians , and altereth not . ' 

 ' I would wait for her twice seven year , as Jacob wait , and toil for she , as Jacob toil , ' answer Hammond , ' but I should like to call she my own to - morrow , if it be possible . ' 

 nothing could be happy or gayer than the tea - drinking in Lady Maulevrier 's room on the following afternoon . her ladyship have once give way upon a point know how to make her concession gracefully . she extend her hand to Mr. Hammond as frankly as if he have be her own particular choice . 

 ' I can not refuse my granddaughter to her brother 's dear friend , ' she say , ' but I think you be two most imprudent young people . ' 

 ' Providence take care of imprudent lover , just as it do of the bird in their nest , ' answer Hammond , smile . 

 ' just as much and no more , I fear . providence do not keep off the cat or the tax - gatherer . ' 

 ' bird must take care of their nest , and husband must work for their home , ' argue Hammond . ' Heaven give sweet air and sunlight , and a beautiful world to live in . ' 

 ' I think , ' say Lady Maulevrier , look at he critically , ' you be just the kind of person who ought to emigrate . you have idea that would do for the Bush or the Yosemite Valley , but which be too primitive for an over - crowded country . ' 

 ' no , Lady Maulevrier , I be not go to steal your granddaughter . when she be my wife she shall live within call . I know she love her native land , and I do not   think either of we would care to put an ocean between we and rugge old Helvellyn . ' 

 ' of course have make idiot of yourself up there in the fog and the storm you be go to worship the mountain for ever afterwards , ' say her ladyship laugh . 

 never have she seem gayer or bright . perhaps in her heart of heart she rejoice at get Mary engage , even to so humble a suitor as fortuneless John Hammond . ever since the visit of the so - call Rajah she have live as Damocles live , with the sword of destiny the avenge sword hang over she by the fine hair . every time she hear carriage wheel in the drive every time the hall - door bell ring a little loud than usual , her heart seem to stop beat and her whole be to hang suspend on a thread . if the thread be to snap , there would come darkness and death . the blow that have paralyse one side of her body must need , if repeat , bring total extinction . she who believe in no after life see in her maim and waste arm the beginning of death . she who recognise only the life of the body feel that one half of she be already dead . but month have go by , and Louis Asoph have make no sign . she begin to hope that his boasted document and witness be altogether mythical . and yet the engine of the law be slow to put in motion . he might be work up his case , line upon line , with some hard - head London lawyer ; arrange and marshal his fact ; prepare his witness ; wait for affidavit from India ; work slowly but surely , underground like the mole ; and all at once , in an hour , his case might be before the law court . his story and the story of Lord Maulevrier 's infamy might be town talk again ; as it have be forty year ago , when the true story of that crime have be happily unknown . 

 yes , with the present fear of this Louis Asoph 's revelation , of a new scandal , if not a calamity , Lady Maulevrier feel that it be a good thing to have her young granddaughter 's future in some measure secure . John Hammond have say of himself to Lesbia that he be not the kind of man to fail , and look at he critically to - day Lady Maulevrier see the stamp of power and dauntless courage in his countenance and bearing . it be the inner mind of a man which mould the line of his face and figure ; and a man 's character may be read in the way he walk and hold himself , the action of his hand , his smile , his frown , his general outlook , as clearly as in any phrenological development . John Hammond have a noble outlook : bold , without impudence or self - assertion ; self - possess , without vanity . yes , assuredly a man to wrestle with difficulty , and to conquer fate . 

 when that little tea - drinking be over and Maulevrier and his friend be go away to dress for dinner , Lady Maulevrier detain Mary for a minute or two by her couch . she take she by the hand with unaccustomed tenderness . 

 ' my child , I congratulate you , ' she say . ' last night I think you a fool , but I begin to think that you be wise than Lesbia . you have win the heart of a noble young man . ' 

 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 ' a young LAMB 's heart among the FULL - grown flock . ' 


 for three most happy day Mary rejoice in her lover 's society , Maulevrier be with they everywhere , by brookside and fall , on the lake , in the garden , in the billiard - room , play propriety with admirable patience . but this could not last for ever . a man who have to win name and fortune and a home for his young wife can not spend all his day in the primrose path . fortune and reputation be not make in dawdling beside a mountain stream , or watch the play of sunlight and shadow on a green hill - side ; unless , indeed , one be a new Wordsworth , and even then fortune and renown be not quickly make . 

 and again , Maulevrier , who have be a marvel of good - nature and contentment for the last eight week , be begin to be tired of this lovely Lakeland . just when Lakeland be daily develop into new beauty , Maulevrier begin to feel an itching for London , where he have a comfortable nest in the Albany , and which be to his mind a metropolis expressly create as a centre or starting point for Newmarket , Epsom , Ascot and Goodwood . 

 so there come a morning upon which Mary have to say good - bye to those two companion who have so bl and gladden her life . it be a bright sunshiny morning , and all the world look gay ; which seem very unkind of nature , Mary think . and yet , even in the sadness of this parting , she have much reason to be glad . as she stand with her lover in the library , in the three minute of tete - a - tete steal from the argus - eyed Fršulein , fold in his arm , look up at his manly face , it seem to she that the mere knowledge that she belong to he and be belove by he ought to sustain and console she even in long year of severance . yes , even if he be one of the knight of old , go to the Holy Land on a crusade full of peril and uncertainty . even then a woman ought to be brave , have such a lover . 

 but her parting be to be only for a few month . Maulevrier promise to come back to Fellside for the August sport , and Hammond be to come with he . three month or a little more and they be to meet again . 

 yet in spite of these argument for courage , Mary 's face blanch and her eye grow unutterably sad as she look up at her lover . 

 ' you will take care of yourself , Jack , for my sake , will not   you , dear ? ' she murmur . ' if you should be ill while you be in London ! if you should die ' 

 ' life be very uncertain , love , but I do not   feel like sickness or death just at present , ' answer Hammond cheerily . ' indeed , I feel that the present be full of sweetness , and the future full of hope . do not   suppose , dear , that I be not grieve at this good - bye ; but before we be a year old I hope the time will have come when there will be no more farewell for you and I . I shall be a very exact husband , Molly . I shall want to spend all the day and hour of my life with you ; to have not a fancy or a pursuit in which you can not share , or with which you can not sympathise . I hope you will not grow tired of I ! ' 

 ' tired ! ' 

 then come silence , and a long farewell kiss , and then the voice of Maulevrier shout in the hall , just in time to warn the lover , before Miss M ller open the door and exclaim , 

 ' oh , Mr. Hammond , we have be look for you everywhere . the luggage be all in the carriage , and Maulevrier say there be only just time to get to windermere ! ' 

 in another minute or so the carriage be drive down the hill ; and Mary stand in the porch look after the traveller . 

 ' it seem as if it be my fate to stand here and see everybody drive away , ' she say to herself . 

 and then she look round at the lovely garden , bright with spring flower , the tree glorious with their young , fresh foliage , and the vast panorama of hill and dale , and feel that it be a wicked thing to murmur in the midst of such a world . and she remember the great unhoped - for bliss that have come to she within the last four day , and the cloud upon her brow vanish , as she clasp her hand in child - like joyousness . 

 ' God bless you , dear old Helvellyn , ' she exclaim , look up at the sombre crest of the mountain . ' perhaps if it have not be for you he would have never propose . ' 

 but she be oblige to dismiss this idea instantly ; for to suppose John Hammond 's avowal of his love an accident , the mere impulse of a weak moment , would be despair . have he not tell she how she have grow nearer and near to his heart , day by day , and hour by hour , until she have become part of his life ? he have tell she this he , in whom she believe as in the very spirit of truth . 

 she wander about the garden for an hour after the carriage have start for windermere , revisit every spot where she and her lover have walk together within the last three day , live over again the rapture of those hour , repeat to herself his word , recall his look , with the fatuity of a first girlish love . and yet amidst the silliness inseparable from love 's young dream , there be a depth of true womanly feeling , thoughtful , unselfish , forecast a future which be not to travel always along the primrose path of dalliance a future in which the rose be not always to be thornless . 

 John Hammond be go to London to work for a position in the world , to strive and labour among the seething mass of struggler , all press onward for the same goal independence , wealth , renown . little as Mary know of the world by experience , she have at least hear the wiseacre talk ; and that which she have hear be calculate to depress rather than to inspire industrious youth . she have hear how the profession be all over - crowd : how a mighty army of young man be walk the hospital , all intent on feel the pulse and pick the pocket of the rise generation : how at the Bar man be grow old and grey before they see their first brief : how competitor be elbow and hustle each other upon every road , throng at every gate . and while masculine youth strove and wrestle for place in the race , aunt and sister and cousin be press into the same arena , do their good to crowd out the uncle and the brother and the nephew . 

 ' Poor Jack , ' sigh Mary , ' at the bad we can go to the Red River country and grow corn . ' 

 this be her favourite fancy , that she and her lover should find their first dwelling in the new world , live as humbly as the peasant live round grasmere , and patiently wait upon fortune . and yet that would not be happiness , unless Maulevrier be to come and stay with they every autumn . nothing could reconcile Mary to be separate from Maulevrier for any lengthened period . 

 there be hour in which she be more hopeful , and defy the wiseacre . clever young man have succeed in the past clever man whose hair be not yet grey have come to the front in the present . grant that these be the exceptional man , the fine flower of humanity . do she not know that John Hammond be as far above average youth as Helvellyn be above yonder mound in her grandmother 's shrubbery ? 

 yes , he would succeed in literature , in politic , in whatever career he have choose for himself . he be a man to do the thing he set himself to do , be it ever so difficult . to doubt his success would be to doubt his truth and his honesty ; for he have swear to she he would make her life bright and happy , and that evil day should never come to she ; and he be not the man to promise that which he be not able to perform . 

 the house seem terribly dull now that the two young man be go . there be an oppressive silence in the room which have lately resound with Maulevrier 's frank , boyish laughter , and with his friend 's deep , manly tone a silence break only by the click of Fršulein M ller 's needle . 

 the Fršulein be not disposed to be sympathetic or agreeable about Lady Mary 's engagement . firstly , she have not be consult about it . the thing have be do , she consider , in an underhand manner ; and Lady Maulevrier , who have begin by strenuously oppose the match , have be talk over in a way that prove the latent weakness of that great lady 's character . secondly , Miss M ller , have herself for some reason miss such joy as be involve in be woo and win , be disposed to look sourly upon all love affair , and to take a despondent view of all matrimonial engagement . 

 she do not say anything openly uncivil to Mary Haselden ; but she let the damsel see that she pity she and despise her infatuated condition ; and this be so unpleasant that Mary be fain to fall back upon the society of pony and terrier , and to take up her pilgrim 's staff and go wander over the hill , carry her happy thought into solitary place , and sit for hour in a heathery hollow , steep in a sea of summer light , and try to paint the mountain side and the rush of the waterfall . her sketch - book be an excuse for hour of solitude , for the indulgence of an endless day - dream . 

 sometimes she go among her humble friend in the Grasmere cottage , or in the village of Great and Little Langdale ; and she have now a new interest in these visit , for she have make up her mind that it be her solemn duty to learn housekeeping not such housekeeping as might have be learn at Fellside , suppose she have muster the courage to ask the dignified upper - servant in that establishment to instruct she ; but such domestic art as be need in the dwelling of the poor . the art of make a very little money go a great way ; the art of give grace , neatness , prettiness to the small room and the shabby furniture ; the art of pack all the ugly appliance and base necessity of daily life , the pot and kettle and broom and pail , into the narrow compass , and hide they from the asthetic eye . Mary think that if she begin by learn the homely device of the villager the very a b c of cookery and housewifery she might gradually enlarge upon this simple basis to suit an income of from five to seven hundred a year . the house - mother from whom she seek information be puzzle at this sudden curiosity about domestic matter . they look upon the thing as a freak of girlhood which drift into eccentricity , from sheer idleness ; yet they be not the less ready to teach Mary anything she desire to learn . they tell she those secret art by which copper and brass be make thing of beauty , and meet adornment for an old oak mantelshelf . they allow she to look on at the milking of the cow , and at the churning of the butter ; and at bread making , and cake making , and pie and pudding making ; and some pleasant hour be spend in the acquirement of this useful knowledge . Mary do not neglect the invalid during this new phase of her existence . Lady Maulevrier be a lover of routine , and she like her granddaughter to go to she at the same hour every day . from eleven to twelve be the time for Mary 's duty as amanuensis . sometimes there be no letter to be write . sometimes there be several ; but her ladyship rarely allow the task to go beyond the stroke of noon . at noon Mary be free , and free till five o'clock , when she be generally in attendance , ready to give Lady Maulevrier her afternoon tea , and sit and talk with she , and tell she any scrap of local news which she have gather in the day . 

 there be day on which her ladyship prefer to take her tea alone , and Mary be leave free to follow her own device till dinner - time . 

 ' I do not feel equal even to your society to - day , my dear , ' her ladyship would say ; ' go and enjoy yourself with your dog and your tennis ; ' forget that there be very seldom anybody on the premise with whom Lady Mary could play tennis . 

 but in these lonely day of Mary Haselden 's life there be one crown bliss which be almost enough to sweeten solitude , and take away the sting of separation ; and that be the delight of expect and receive her lover 's letter . busily as Mr. Hammond must be engage in fight the battle of life , he be in no way want in his duty as a lover . he write to Mary every other day ; but though his letter be long , they tell she hardly anything of himself or his occupation . he write about picture , book , music , such thing as he know must be interesting to she ; but of his own struggle not a word . 

 ' poor fellow , ' think Mary . ' he be afraid to sadden I by tell I how hard the struggle be . ' 

 her own letter to her betrothed be simple outpouring of girlish love , breathe that too flattering - sweet idolatry which an innocent girl give to her first lover . Mary write as if she herself be of the least possible value among create thing . 

 with one of Mr. Hammond 's early letter come the engagement ring ; no half - hoop of brilliant or sapphire , ruby or emerald , no gorgeous triple circlet of red , white , and green ; but only a massive band of dead gold , on the inside of which be engrave this posy ' for ever . ' 

 Mary think it the lovely ring she have ever see in her life . 

 may be half over and the last patch of snow have vanish from the crest of Helvellyn , from Eagle 's Crag and Raven 's Crag , and Coniston Old Man . spring slow to come along these shadowy gorge have come in real earnest now , spring that be almost summer ; and Lady Maulevrier 's garden be as lovely as dreamland . but it be an unpeopled paradise . Mary have the ground all to herself , except at those state time when the Fršulein , who be grow lazier and large day by day in her leisurely and placid existence , take her morning and afternoon constitutional on the terrace in front of the drawing - room , or solemnly perambulate the shrubbery . 

 on fine day Mary live in the garden , save when she be far afield learn the domestic art from the cottager . she read french and german , and work conscientiously at her intellectual education , as well as at domestic economy . for she tell herself that accomplishment and culture might be useful to she in her married life . she might be able to increase her husband 's mean by give lesson abroad , or take pupil at home . she be ready to do anything . she would teach the stupid child , or scrub floor , or bake bread . there be no service she would deem degrade for his sake . she mean when she marry to drop her courtesy title . she would not be Lady Mary Hammond , a poor sprig of nobility , but plain Mrs. Hammond , a work man 's wife . 

 Lesbia 's presentation be over , and have realise all Lady Kirkbank 's expectation . the Society paper be unanimous in pronounce Lord Maulevrier 's sister the prettiest dťbutante of the season . they praise her classical feature , the admirable poise of her head , her peerless complexion . they describe her dress at the drawing - room ; they describe she ' frock ' in the Park and at Sandown . they expatiate on the impression she have make at great assembly . they hint at even royal admiration . all this , frivolous fribble though it might be , Lady Maulevrier read with delight , and she be still more gratified by Lesbia 's own account of her success . but as the season advance Lesbia 's letter to her grandmother grow briefer mere hurry scrawl dash off while the carriage be at the door , or while her maid be brush her hair . Lady Maulevrier divine , with the keen instinct of love , that she count for very little in Lesbia 's life , now that the whirligig of society , the fret and fever of fashion , have begin . 

 one afternoon in May , at that hour when Hyde Park be full , and the carriage move slowly in triple rank along the Lady 's Mile , and the mount constable jog up and down with a business - like air which set every one on the alert for the advent of the Princess of Wales , just at that hour when Lesbia sit in Lady Kirkbank 's barouche , and distribute gracious bow and enthral smile to her numerous acquaintance , Mary ride slowly down the Fell , after a ramble ride on the safe and most venerable of mountain pony . the pony be grey , and Mary be grey , for she wear a neat little homespun habit make by the local tailor , and a neat little feel hat with a ptarmigan 's feather . 

 all be very quiet at Fellside as she go in at the stable gate . there be not an underle stir in the large old stable - yard which have remain almost unaltered for a century and a half ; for Lady Maulevrier , whilst spend thousand on the new part of the house , have deem the exist stable good enough for her stud . they be spacious old stable , build as solidly as a Norman castle , and with all the virtue and all the vice of their age . 

 Mary look round she with a sigh . the stillness of the place be oppressive , and within door she know there would be the same stillness , make still more oppressive by the society of the Fršulein , who grow dull and duller every day , as it seem to Mary . 

 she take her pony into the dusky old stable , where four other pony begin rattle their halter in the gloom , by way of greeting . a bundle of purple tare lie ready in a corner for Mary to feed her favourite ; and for the next ten minute or so she be happily employ go from stall to stall , and gratify that inordinate appetite for green meat which seem natural to all horse . 

 not a groom or stable - boy appear while she be in the stable ; and she be just go away , when her attention be catch by a flood of sunshine stream into an old disused harness - room at the end of the stable a room with one small window face the Fell . 

 whence could that glow of western light come ? assuredly not from the low - lattice window which face eastward , and be generally obscure by a screen of cobwebs . the room be only use as a storehouse for lumber , and it be nobody 's business to clean the window . 

 Mary look in , curious to solve the riddle . a door which she have often notice , but never see open , now stand wide open , and the old quadrangular garden , which be James Steadman 's particular care , smile at she in the golden evening light . see thus , this little old dutch garden seem to Mary the prettiest thing she have ever look upon . there be bed of tulip and hyacinth , ranunculus , narcissus , tuberose , make a blaze of colour against the old box border , a foot high . the crumble old brick wall of the outbuilding , and that dungeon - like wall which form the back of the new house , be clothe with clematis and wistaria , woodbine and magnolia . all that love labour could do have be do day by day for the last forty year to make this confine space a thing of beauty . Mary go out of the dark stable into the sunny garden , and look round she , full of admiration for James Steadman 's work . 

 ' if ever Jack and I can afford to have a garden , I hope we shall be able to make it like this , ' she think . ' it be such a comfort to know that so small a garden can be pretty : for of course any garden we could afford must be small . ' 

 Lady Mary have no idea that this quadrangle be spacious as compare with the narrow strip allot to many a suburban villa call itself ' an eligible residence . ' 

 in the centre of the garden there be an old sundial , with a stone bench at the base , and , as she come upon an opening in the circular yew tree hedge which environ this sundial , and from which the flower bed radiate in a geometrical pattern , Lady Mary be surprised to see an old man a very old man sit on this bench , and bask in the low light of the westere sun . 

 his figure be shrink and bent , and he sit with his chin rest on the handle of a crutched stick , and his head lean forward . his long white hair fall in thin straggling lock over the collar of his coat . he have an old - fashioned , mummyfied aspect , and Mary think he must be very , very old . 

 very , very old ! in a flash there come back upon she the memory of John Hammond 's curiosity about a hoary and withered old man whom he have meet on the Fell in the early morning . she remember how she have take he to see old Sam Barlow , and how he have protest that Sam in no wise resemble the strange - look old man of the Fell . and now here , close to the Fell , be a face and figure which in every detail resemble that ancient stranger whom Hammond have describe so graphically . 

 it be very strange . could this person be the same her lover have see two month ago ? and , if so , have he be live at Fellside all the time ; or be he only an occasional visitor of Steadman 's ? 

 while she stand for a few moment meditate thus , the old man raise his head and look up at she , with eye that burn like red - hot coal under his shaggy white brow . the look scar she . there be something awful in it , like the gaze of an evil spirit , a soul in torment , and she begin to move away , with side - long step , her eye rivet on that uncanny countenance . 

 ' do not   go , ' say the man , with an authoritative air , rattle his bony finger upon the bench . ' sit down here by my side , and talk to I . do not   be frightened , child . you would not , if you know what they say of I indoor . ' he make a motion of his head towards the window of the old wing ' " harmless , " they say , " quite harmless . let he alone , he be harmless . " a tiger with his claws cut and his tooth draw an old , grey - bearded tiger , ghastly and grim , but harmless a cobra with the poison - bag pluck out of his jaw ! the venom grow again , child the snake 's venom but youth never come back . old , and helpless , and harmless ! ' 

 again Mary try to move away , but those evil eye hold she as if she be a bird rivet by the gaze of a serpent . 

 ' why do you shrink away ? ' ask the old man , frown at she . ' sit down here , and let I talk to you . I be accustomed to be obey . ' 

 old and feeble and shrink as he be , there be a power in his tone of command which Mary be unable to resist . she feel very sure that he be imbecile or mad . she know that madman be apt to imagine themselves great personage , and to take upon themselves , with a wonderful power of impersonation , the dignity and authority of their imaginary rank ; and she suppose that it must be thus with this strange old man . she struggle against her sense of terror . after all there could be no real danger , in the broad daylight , within the precinct of her own home , within call of the household . 

 she seat herself on the bench by the unknown , willing to humour he a little ; and he turn himself about slowly , as if every bone in his body be stiff with age , and look at she with a deliberate scrutiny . 

 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 ' now nothing LEFT to LOVE or HATE . ' 


 the old man sit look at Mary in silence for some moment ; not a great space of time , perhaps , as mark by the shadow on the dial behind they , but to Mary that gaze be unpleasantly prolong . he look at she as if he could read every pulsation in every fibre of her brain , and know exactly what it mean . 

 ' who be you ? ' he ask , at last . 

 ' my name be Mary Haselden . ' 

 ' Haselden , ' he repeat musingly , ' I have hear that name before . ' 

 and then he resume his former attitude , his chin rest on the handle of his crutch - stick , his eye bent upon the gravel path , their unholy brightness hide under the penthouse brow . 

 ' Haselden , ' he murmur , and repeat the name over and over again , slowly , dreamily , with a troubled tone , like some one try to work out a difficult problem . ' haselden when ? where ? ' 

 and then with a profound sigh he mutter , ' harmless , quite harmless . you may trust he anywhere . memory a blank , a blank , a blank , my lord ! ' 

 his head sink lower upon his breast , and again he sigh , the sigh of a spirit in torment , Mary think . her vivid imagination be already interested , her quick sympathy be awaken . 

 she look at he wonderingly , compassionately . so old , so infirm , and with a mind astray ; and yet there be indication in his speech and manner that tell of reason struggle against madness , like the light behind storm - cloud . he have tone that speak of a keen sensitiveness to pain , not the lunatic 's imbecile placidity . she observe he intently , try to make out what manner of man he be . 

 he do not belong to the peasant class : of that she feel assure . the shrunken , tapering hand have never work at peasant 's work . the profile turn towards she be delicate to effeminacy . the man 's clothe be shabby and old - fashioned , but they be a gentleman 's garment , the cloth of a fine texture than she have ever see wear by her brother . the coat , with its velvet collar , be of an old - world fashion . she remember have see just such a coat in an engraved portrait of Count d'Orsay , a print nearly fifty year old . no Dalesman bear and breed ever wear such a coat ; no tailor in the Dales could have make it . 

 the old man look up after a long pause , during which Mary feel afraid to move . he look at she again with inquire eye , as if her presence there have only just become known to he . 

 ' who be you ? ' he ask again . 

 ' I tell you my name just now . I be Mary Haselden . ' 

 ' haselden that be a name I know once . Mary ? I think my mother 's name be Mary . yes , yes , I remember that . you have a sweet face , Mary like my mother 's . she have brown eye , like your , and auburn hair . you do not   recollect she , perhaps ? ' 

 ' alas ! poor maniac , ' think Mary , ' you have lose all count of time . fifty year to you in the confusion of your distraught brain , be but as yesterday . ' 

 ' no , of course not , of course not , ' he mutter ; ' how should she recollect my mother , who die while I be a boy ? impossible . that must be half a century ago . ' 

 ' good evening to you , ' say Mary , rise with a great effort , so strong be her feeling of be spellbound by the uncanny old man , ' I must go indoor now . ' 

 he stretch out his withered old hand , small , semi - transparent , with the blue vein show darkly under the parchment - colour skin , and grasp Mary 's arm . 

 ' do not   go , ' he plead . ' I like your face , child ; I like your voice I like to have you here . what do you mean by go indoor ? where do you live ? ' 

 ' there , ' say Mary , point to the dead wall which face they . ' in the new part of Fellside House . I suppose you be stay in the old part with James Steadman . ' 

 she have make up her mind that this crazy old man must be a relation of Steadman 's to whom he give hospitality either with or without her ladyship 's consent . all powerful as Lady Maulevrier have ever be in her own house , it be just possible that now , when she be a prisoner in her own room , certain small liberty might be take , even by so faithful a servant as Steadman . 

 ' stay with James Steadman , ' repeat the old man in a meditative tone . ' yes , I stay with Steadman . a good servant , a worthy person . it be only for a little while . I shall be leave Westmoreland next week . and you live in that house , do you ? ' point to the dead wall . ' whose house ? ' 

 ' Lady Maulevrier 's . I be Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter . ' 

 ' Lady Mau - lev - rier . ' he repeat the name in syllable . ' a good name an old title as old as the conquest . a Norman race those maulevrier . and you be Lady Maulevrier 's granddaughter ! you should be proud . the Maulevriers be always a proud race . ' 

 ' then I be no true Maulevrier , ' answer Mary gaily . 

 she be begin to feel more at her ease with the old man . he be evidently mad , as mad as a March hare ; but his madness seem only the harmless lunacy of extreme old age . he have flash of reason , too . Mary begin to feel a friendly interest in he . to youth in its flush of life and vigour there seem something so unspeakably sad and pitiable in feebleness and age the brief weak remnant of life , the wreck of body and mind , sun itself in the decline ray of a sun that be so soon to shine upon its grave . 

 ' what , be you not proud ? ' ask the old man . 

 ' not at all . I have be teach to consider myself a very insignificant person ; and I be go to marry a poor man . it would not become I to be proud . ' 

 ' but you ought not to do that , ' say the old man . ' you ought not to marry a poor man . poverty be a bad thing , my dear . you be a pretty girl , and ought to marry a man with a handsome fortune . poor man have no pleasure in this world they might just as well be dead . I be poor , as you see . you can tell by this threadbare coat ' he look down at the sleeve from which the nap be wear in place ' I be as poor as a church mouse . ' 

 ' but you have kind friend , I dare say , ' Mary say , soothingly . ' you be well take care of , I be sure . ' 

 ' yes , I be well take care of very well take care of . how long be it , I wonder how many week , or month , or year , since they have take care of I ? it seem a long , long time ; but it be all like a dream a long dream . once I use to try and wake myself . I use to try and struggle out of that weary dream . but that be age ago . I be satisfied now I be quite content now so long as the weather be warm , and I can sit out here in the sun . ' 

 ' it be grow chilly now , ' say Mary , ' and I think you ought to go indoor . I know that I must go . ' 

 ' yes , I must go in now I be get shivery , ' answer the old man , meekly . ' but I want to see you again , Mary I like your face and I like your voice . it strike a chord here , ' touch his breast , ' which have long be silent . let I see you again , child . when can I see you again ? ' 

 ' do you sit here every afternoon when it be fine ? ' 

 ' yes , every day all day long sometimes when the sun be warm . ' 

 ' then I will come here to see you . ' 

 ' you must keep it a secret , then , ' say the old man , with a crafty look . ' if you do not   they will shut I up in the house , perhaps . they do not   like I to see people , for fear I should talk . I have hear Steadman say so . yet what should I talk about , heaven help I ? Steadman say my memory be quite go , and that I be childish and harmless childish and harmless . I have hear he say that . you will come again , will not   you , and you will keep it a secret ? ' 

 Mary deliberate for a few minute . 

 ' I do not   like secret , ' she say , ' there be generally something dishonourable in they . but this would be an innocent secret , would not   it ? well , I will come to see you somehow , poor old man ; and if Steadman see I here I will make everything right with he . ' 

 ' he must not   see you here , ' say the old man . ' if he do he will shut I up in my own room again , as he do once , year and year ago . ' 

 ' but you have not be here long , have you ? ' Mary ask , wonderingly . 

 ' a hundred year , at least . that be what it seem to I sometimes . and yet there be time when it seem only a dream . be sure you come again to - morrow . ' 

 ' yes , I promise you to come ; good - night . ' 

 ' good - night . ' 

 Mary go back to the stable . the door be still open , but how could she be sure that it would be open to - morrow ? there be no other access that she know of to the quadrangle , except through the old part of the house , and that be at time inaccessible to she . 

 she find a key a big old rusty key in the inside of the door , so she shut and lock it , and put the key in her pocket . the door she suppose have be leave open by accident ; at any rate this key make her mistress of the situation . if any question should arise as to her conduct she could have an explanation with Steadman ; but she have pledge her word to the poor mad old man , and she mean to keep her promise , if possible . 

 as she leave the stable she see Steadman rid towards the gate on his grey cob . she pass he as she go back to the house . 

 next day , and the day after that , and for many day , Mary use her key , and go into the quadrangle at sundown to sit for half an hour or so with the strange old man , who seem to take an intense pleasure in her company . the weather be grow warm as May wear on towards June , and this evening hour , between six and seven , be deliciously bright and balmy . the seat by the sundial be screen on every side by the clipped yew hedge , dense and tall , surround the circular , gravelled space , in the centre of which stand the old granite dial , with its octagonal pedestal and moss - grow step . there , as in a closely - shaded arbour , Lady Mary and her old friend be alone and unobserved . the yew - tree boundary be at least eight foot high , and Mary and her companion could hardly have be see even from the upper window of the low , old house . 

 Mary have fall into the habit of go for her walk or her ride at five o'clock every day , when she be not in attendance on Lady Maulevrier , and after her walk or ride she slip through the stable , and join her ancient friend . stable and courtyard be generally empty at this hour , the man only appear at the sound of a big bell , which summon they from their snuggery when they be want . Most of Lady Maulevrier 's servant have arrive at that respectable stage of long service in which fidelity be count as a substitute for hard work . 

 the old man be not particularly conversational , and be apt to repeat the same thing over and over again , with a sublime unconsciousness of be prosy ; but he like to hear Mary talk , and he listen with seem intelligence . he question she about the world outside his cloistered life the war and rumour of war and , although the name of the question and the man of the day seem utterly strange to he , and he have to have they repeat to he again and again , he seem to take an intelligent interest in the stir fact of the time , and listen intently when Mary give he a synopsis of her last newspaper reading . 

 when the news be exhaust , Mary hit upon a more childish form of amusement , and that be to tell the story of any novel or poem she have be lately read . this be so successful that in this manner Mary relate the story of most of Shakespeare 's play ; of Byron 's Bride of Abydos , and Corsair ; of Keats 's Lamia ; of Tennyson 's Idylls ; and of a heterogenous collection of poetry and romance , in all of which storie the old man take a vivid interest . 

 ' you be well to I than the sunshine , ' he tell Mary one day when she be leave he . ' the world grow dark when you leave I . ' 

 once at this parting moment he take both her hand , and draw she nearer to he , peer into her face in the clear evening light . 

 ' you be like my mother , ' he say . ' yes , you be very like she . and who else be it that you be like ? there be some one else , I know . yes , some one else ! I remember ! it be a face in a picture a picture at Maulevrier Castle . ' 

 ' what do you know of Maulevrier Castle ? ' ask Mary , wonderingly . 

 Maulevrier be the family seat in Herefordshire , which have not be occupy by the eld branch for the last forty year . Lady Maulevrier have let it during her son 's minority to a young branch of the family , a branch which have intermarry with the world of successful commerce , and be rich than the head of the house . this occupation of Maulevrier Castle have continue to the present time , and be likely still to continue , Maulevrier have no desire to set up housekeeping in a feudal castle in the march . 

 ' how come you to know Maulevrier Castle ? ' repeat Mary . 

 ' I be there once . there be a picture by Lely , a portrait of a Lady Maulevrier in Charles the Second 's time . the face be your , my love . I have hear of such hereditary face . my mother be proud of resemble that portrait . ' 

 ' what do your mother know of Maulevrier Castle ? ' 

 the old man do not answer . he have lapse into that dream - like condition into which he often sink , when his brain be not stimulate to attention and coherency by his interest in Mary 's narration . 

 Mary conclude that this man have once be a servant in the Maulevrier household , perhaps at the place in Herefordshire , and that all his old memory run in one groove the house of Maulevrier . 

 the freedom of her intercourse with he be undisturbed for about three week ; and at the end of that time she come face to face with James Steadman as she emerge from the circle of greenery . 

 ' you here , Lady Mary ? ' he exclaim with an angry look . 

 ' yes , I have be sit talk to that poor old man , ' Mary answer , cheerily , conclude that Steadman 's look of vexation arise from his be detect in the act of harbour a contraband relation . ' he be a very interesting character . a relation of your , I suppose ? ' 

 ' yes , he be a relation , ' reply Steadman . ' he be very old , and his mind have long be go . her ladyship be kind enough to allow I to give he a home in her house . he be quite harmless , and he be in nobody 's way . ' 

 ' of course not , poor soul . he be only a burden to himself . he talk as if his life have be very weary . have he be long in that sad state ? ' 

 ' yes , a long time . ' 

 Steadman 's manner to Lady Mary be curt at the good of time . she have always stand somewhat in awe of he , as a person delegate with authority by her grandmother , a servant who be much more than a servant . but to - day his manner be more abrupt than usual . 

 ' he speak of Maulevrier Castle just now , ' say Mary , determine not to be put down too easily . ' be he once in service there ? ' 

 ' he be . pray how do you find your way into this garden , Lady Mary ? ' 

 ' I come through the stable . as it be my grandmother 's garden I suppose I do not take an unwarrantable liberty in come , ' say Mary , draw herself up , and ready for battle . 

 ' it be Lady Maulevrier 's wish that this garden should be reserve for my use , ' answer Steadman . ' her ladyship know that my uncle walk here of an afternoon , and that , owe to his age and infirmity , he can go nowhere else ; and if only on that account , it be well that the garden should be keep private . lunatic be rather dangerous company , Lady Mary , and I advise you to give they a wide berth wherever you may meet they . ' 

 ' I be not afraid of your uncle , ' say Mary , resolutely . ' you say yourself just now that he be quite harmless : and I be really interested in he , poor old creature . he like I to sit with he a little of an afternoon and to talk to he ; and if you have no objection I should like to do so , whenever the weather be fine enough for the poor old man to be out in the garden at this hour . ' 

 ' I have a very great objection , Lady Mary , and that objection be chiefly in your interest , ' answer Steadman , firmly . ' no one who be not experience in the way of lunatic can imagine the danger of any association with they their consummate craftiness , their capacity for crime . every madman be harmless up to a certain point mild , inoffensive , perhaps , up to the very moment in which he commit some appalling crime . and then people cry out upon the want of prudence , the want of common - sense which allow such an act to be possible . no , Lady Mary , I understand the benevolence of your motive , but I can not permit you to run such a risk . ' 

 ' I be convinced that the poor old creature be perfectly harmless , ' say Mary , with suppressed indignation . ' I shall certainly ask Lady Maulevrier to speak to you on the subject . perhaps her influence may induce you to be a little more considerate to your unhappy relation . ' 

 ' Lady Mary , I beg you not to say a word to Lady Maulevrier on this subject . you will do I the great injury if you speak of that man . I entreat you ' 

 but Mary be go . she pass Steadman with her head hold high and her eye sparkle with anger . all that be generous , compassionate , womanly in her nature be up in arm against her grandmother 's steward . of all other thing , Mary Haselden most detest cruelty ; and she could see in Steadman 's opposition to her wish nothing but the most cold - hearted cruelty to a poor dependent on his charity . 

 she go in at the stable door , shut and lock it , and put the key in her pocket as usual . but she have little hope that this mode of access would be leave open to she . she know enough of James Steadman 's character , from hearsay rather than from experience , to feel sure that he would not easily give way . she be not surprised , therefore , on return from her ride on the following afternoon , to find the disuse harness - room half fill with truss of straw , and the door of communication completely block . it would be impossible for she to remove that barricade without assistance ; and then , how could she be sure that the door itself be not nail up , or secure in some way ? 

 it be a delicious sunny afternoon , and she could picture the lonely old man sit in his circle of greenery beside the dial , which for he have register so many dreary and solitary hour , wait for the little ray of social sunlight which her presence shed over his monotonous life . he have tell she that she be like the sunshine to he well than sunshine and she have promise not to forsake he . she picture he wait , with his hand clasp upon his crutch - stick , his chin rest upon his hand , his eye pore on the ground , as she have see he for the first time . and as the stable clock chime the quarter he would begin to think himself abandon , forget ; if , indeed , he take any count of the passage of time , of which she be not sure . his mind seem to have sink into a condition which be between dream and waking , a state to which the outside world seem only half real a phase of be in which there be neither past nor future , only the insufferable monotony of an everlasting now . 

 Pity be so near akin to love that Mary , in her deep compassion for this lonely , joyless , loveless existence , feel a regard which be almost affection for this strange old man , whose very name be unknown to she . true that there be much in his countenance and manner which be sinister and repellant . he be a be calculate to inspire fear rather than love ; but the fact that he have court her presence and look to she for consolation have touch Mary 's heart , and she have become reconcile to all that be forbid and disagreeable in the lunatic physiognomy . be he not the victim of a visitation which entitle he to respect as well as to pity ? 

 for some day Mary hold her peace , remember Steadman 's vehement entreaty that she should not speak of this subject to her grandmother . she be silent , but the image of the old man haunt she at all time and season . she see he even in her dream those happy dream of the girl who love and be belove , and before whom the pathway of the future smile like a vision of Paradise . she hear he call to she with a piteous cry of distress , and on wake from this troubled dream she fancy that he must be die , and that this sound in her dream be one of those ghostly warning which give notice of death . she be so unhappy about he , altogether so distressed at be compel to break her word , that she could not prevent her thought from dwell upon he , not even after she have pour out all her trouble to John Hammond in a long letter , in which her garden adventure and her little skirmish with Steadman be graphically describe . 

 to her intense discomfiture Hammond reply that he thoroughly approve of Steadman 's conduct in the matter . however agreeable Mary 's society might be to the lunatic , Mary 's life be far too precious to be put within the possibility of peril by any such tete - a - tete . if the person be the same old man whom Hammond have see on the Fell , he be a most sinister - look creature , of whom any evil act might be fairly anticipate . in a word Mr. Hammond take Steadman 's view of the matter , and entreat his dear Mary to be careful , and not to allow her warm heart to place she in circumstance of peril . 

 this be most disappointing to Mary , who expect her lover to agree with she upon every point ; and if he have be at Fellside the difference of opinion might have give rise to their first quarrel . but as she have a few hour ' leisure for reflection before the post go out , she have time to get over her anger , and to remember that promise of obedience give , half in jest , half in earnest , at the little inn beyond Dunmail Raise . so she write submissively enough , only with just a touch of reproach at Jack 's want of compassion for a poor old man who have such strong claim upon everybody 's pity . 

 the image of the poor old man be not to be banish from her thought , and on that very afternoon , when her letter be dispatch , Mary go on a visit of exploration to the stable , to see if by any chance Mr. Steadman 's plan for isolate his unhappy relative might be circumvent . 

 she go all over the stable into loose box , harness and saddle room , shed for wood , and shed for root , but she find no door open into the quadrangle , save that door by which she have enter , and which be securely defend by a barricade of straw that have be double by a fresh delivery of truss since she first see it . but while she be prowl about the sweet - scented stable , much disappointed at the result of her investigation , she stumble against a ladder which lead to an open trap - door . Mary mount the ladder , and find herself amidst the dusty atmosphere of a large hayloft , half in shadow , half in the hot bright sunlight . a large shutter be open in the sloping roof , the roof that slop towards the quadrangle , an open patch admit light and air . Mary , light and active as a squirrel , spring upon a truss of hay , and in another moment have swing herself in the opening of the shutter , and be stand with her foot on the wooden ledge at the bottom of the massive frame , and her figure support against the slope of thick thatched roof . perch , or half suspend , thus , she be just high enough to look over the top of the yew - tree hedge into the circle round the sundial . 

 yes , there be the unhappy victim of fate , and man 's inhumanity to man . there sit the shrunken figure , with droop head , and melancholy attitude the bent shoulder of feeble old age , the patriarchal lock so appeal to pity . there he sit with eye pore upon the ground just as she have see he the first time . and while she have sit with he and talk with he he have seem to awaken out of that dull despondency , gleam of pleasure have light up his wrinkle face he have grow animate , a sentient living instead of a corpse alive . it be very hard that this little interval of life , these stray gleam of gladness should be deny to the poor old creature , at the behest of James Steadman . 

 Mary would have feel less angrily upon the subject have she believe in Steadman 's supreme carefulness of her own safety ; but in this she do not believe . she look upon the house - steward 's prudence as a hypocritical pretence , an affectation of fidelity and wisdom , by which he contrive to gratify the evil tendency of his own hard and cruel nature . for some reason of his own , perhaps constrain thereto by necessity , he have give the old man an asylum for his age and infirmity : but while thus give he shelter he consider he a burden , and from mere perversity of mind refuse he all such consolation as be possible to his afflicted state , mew he up as a prisoner , cut he off from the companionship of his fellow - man . 

 two year ago , before Mary emerge from her Tomboyhood , she would have think very little of let herself out of the loft window and clamber down the side of the stable , which be well furnish with those projection in the way of gutter , drain - pipe , and century - old ivy , which make such a descent easy . two year ago Mary 's light figure would have swing itself down among the ivy leave , and she would have glory in the thought of circumvent James Steadman so easily . but now Mary be a young lady a young lady engage to be marry , and impress with the responsibility of her position , deeply sensible of a new dignity , for the preservation of which she be in a manner answerable to her lover . 

 ' what would he think of I if I go scramble down the ivy ? ' she ask herself ; ' and after he have approve of Steadman 's heartless restriction , it would be rank rebellion against he if I be to do it . poor old man , " thou art so near and yet so far , " as Lesbia 's song say . ' 

 she blow a kiss on the tip of her finger towards that sad solitary figure , and then drop back into the dusty duskiness of the loft . but although her new idea upon the subject of ' Anstand ' or good behaviour prevent she get the well of Steadman by foul mean , she be all the more intent upon have her own way by fair mean , now that the impression of the old man 's sadness and solitude have be renew by the sight of the droop figure by the sundial . 

 she go back to the house , and walk straight to her grandmother 's room . Lady Maulevrier 's couch have be place in front of the open window , from which she be watch the westward - slop sun above the long line of hill , dark Helvellyn , rugge Nabb Scarr , and verdant Fairfield , with its two giant arm stretch out to enfold and shelter the smile valley . 

 ' Heavens ! child , what an object you be ; ' exclaim her ladyship , as Mary draw near . ' why , your gown be all over dust , and your hair be why your hair be sprinkle with hay and clover . I think you have learn to be tidy , since your engagement . what have you be do with yourself ? ' 

 ' I have be up in the hayloft , ' answer Mary , frankly ; and , intent on one idea , she say impetuously , ' dear grandmother , I want you to do I a favour a very great favour . there be a poor old man , a relation of Steadman 's , who live with he , out of his mind , but quite harmless , and he be so sad and lonely , so dreadfully sad , and he like I to sit with he in the garden , and tell he story , and recite verse to he , poor soul , just as if he be a child , do not   you know , and it be such a pleasure to I to be a little comfort to he in his lonely wretched life , and James Steadman say I must not   go near he , because he may change at any moment into a dangerous lunatic , and do I some kind of harm , and I be not a bit afraid , and I be sure he will not   do anything of the kind , and , please grandmother , tell Steadman , that I be to be allow to go and sit with his poor old prisoner half an hour every afternoon . ' 

 carry along the current of her own impetuous thought , Mary have talk very fast , and have not once look at her grandmother while she be speak . but now at the end of her speech her eye seek Lady Maulevrier 's face in gentle entreaty , and she recoil involuntarily at the sight she see there . 

 the classic feature be distort almost as they have be in the bad period of the paralytic seizure . Lady Maulevrier be ghastly pale , and her eye glare with an awful fire as they gaze at Mary . her whole frame be convulse , and she , the cripple , whose right limb lie numbed and motionless upon the couch , make a struggle motion as she raise herself a little with the left arm , as if , by very force of angry will , she would have lift herself up erect before the girl who have offend she . 

 for a few moment her lip move dumbly ; and there be something unspeakably awful in those convulse feature , that livid countenance , and those voiceless syllable tremble upon the white dry lip . 

 at last speech come . 

 ' girl , you be create to torment I ; ' she exclaim . 

 ' dear grandmother , what harm have I do ? ' falter Mary . 

 ' what harm ? you be a spy . your very existence be a torment and a danger . would to God that you be marry . yes , marry to a chimney - sweep , even and out of my way . ' 

 ' if that be your only difficulty , ' say Mary , haughtily , ' I dare say Mr. Hammond would be kind enough to marry I to - morrow , and take I out of your ladyship 's way . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier 's head sink back upon her pillow , those velvet and satin pillow , rich with delicate point lace and crewel - work adornment , the labour of Mary and Fršulein , pillow which could not bring peace to the weary head , or deaden the torture of memory . the pale face recover its wonte calm , the heavy lip droop over the weary eye , and for a few moment there be silence in the room . 

 then Lady Maulevrier raise her eyelid , and look at her granddaughter imploringly , pathetically . 

 ' forgive I , Mary , ' she say . ' I do not   know what I be say just now ; but whatever it be , forgive and forget it . I be a wretched old woman , heart sick , heart sore , wear out by pain and weariness . there be time when I be beside myself ; moment when I be not much saner than Steadman 's lunatic uncle . this be one of my bad day , and you come bounce in upon I , and torture my nerve by your breathless torrent of word . pray forgive I , if I say anything rude . ' 

 ' if , ' think Mary : but she try to be charitable , and to believe that Lady Maulevrier 's attack upon she be a new phase of hysteria , so she murmur meekly , ' there be nothing for I to forgive , grandmother , and I be very sorry I disturb you . ' 

 she be go to leave the room , think that her absence would be a relief to the invalid , when Lady Maulevrier call she back . 

 ' you be ask I something something about that old man of Steadman 's , ' she say with a weary air , half indifference , half the lassitude natural to an invalid who sink under the burden of monotonous day . ' what be it all about ? I forget . ' 

 Mary repeat her request , but this time in measured tone . 

 ' my dear , I be sure that Steadman be only properly prudent . ' answer Lady Maulevrier , ' and that it would never do for I to interfere in this matter . it stand to reason that he must know his old kinsman 's temperament much well than you can , after your half - hour interview with he in the garden . pray how long have these garden scene be go on , by - the - by ? ' ask her ladyship , with a search look at Mary 's downcast face . 

 the girl have not altogether recover from the rude shock of her grandmother 's late attack . 

 ' about three week , ' falter Mary . ' but it be more than a week now since I be in the garden . it be quite by accident that I first go there . perhaps I ought to explain . ' 

 and Mary , not be gainsay , go on to describe that first afternoon when she have see the old man brood in the sun . she draw quite a pathetic picture of his joyless solitude , whilst all nature around and about he be look so glad in the spring sunshine . there be a long silence , a silence of some minute , when she have do ; and Lady Maulevrier lie with lowered eyelid , deep in thought . Mary begin to hope that she have touch her grandmother 's heart , and that her request would be grant : but she be soon undeceived . 

 ' I be sorry to be oblige to refuse you a favour , Mary , but I must stand by Steadman , ' say her ladyship . ' when I give Steadman permission to shelter his aged kinsman in my house , I make it a condition that the old man should be keep in the strict care by himself and his wife , and that nobody in this establishment should be trouble by he . this condition have be so scrupulously adhere to that the old man 's existence be know to no one in this house except you and I ; and you have discover the fact only by accident . I must beg you to keep this secret to yourself . Steadman have particular reason for wish to conceal the fact of his uncle 's residence here . the old man be not actually a lunatic . if he be we should be violate the law by keep he here . he be only imbecile from extreme old age ; the body have outlive the mind , that be all . but should any officious functionary come down upon Fellside , this imbecility might be call madness , and the poor old creature whom you regard so compassionately , and whose case you think so pitiable here , would be carry off to a pauper lunatic asylum , which I can assure you would be a much bad imprisonment than Fellside Manor . ' 

 ' yes , indeed , grandmother , ' exclaim Mary , whose vivid imagination conjure up a vision of padded cell , strait - waist - coat , murderously - incline keeper , chain , handcuff , and bread and water diet , ' now I understand why the poor old soul have be keep so close why nobody know of his existence . I beg Steadman 's pardon with all my heart . he be a much well fellow than I think he . ' 

 ' Steadman be a thoroughly good fellow , and as true as steel , ' say her ladyship . ' no one can know that so well as the mistress he have serve faithfully for nearly half a century . I hope , Mary , you have not be chatter to Fršulein or any one else about your discovery . ' 

 ' no , grandmother , I have not say a word to a mortal , but - - ' 

 ' oh , there be a " but , " be there ? I understand . you have not be so reticent in your letter to Mr. Hammond . ' 

 ' I tell he all that happen to I . there be very little to write about at Fellside ; yet I contrive to send he volume . I often wonder what poor girl do in the day of Miss Austen 's novel , when letter cost a shilling or eighteen penny for postage , and have to be pay for by the recipient . it must have be such a terrible check upon affection . ' 

 ' and upon twaddle , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' well you tell Mr. Hammond about Steadman 's old uncle . what do he say ? ' 

 ' he thoroughly approve Steadman 's conduct in forbid I to go and see he , ' answer Mary . ' I could not   help think it rather unkind of he ; but , of course , I feel that he must be right , ' conclude Mary , as much as to say that her lover be necessarily infallible . 

 ' I always think Mr. Hammond a sensible young man , and I be glad to find that his conduct do not belie my good opinion , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' and now , my dear , you have well go and make yourself decent before dinner . I be very weary this afternoon , and even our little talk have exhaust I . ' 

 ' yes , dear grandmother , I be go this instant . but let I ask one question : what be the poor old man 's name ? ' 

 ' his name ! ' say her ladyship , look at Mary with a puzzled air , like a person whose thought be far away . ' his name oh , Steadman , I suppose , like his nephew 's ; but if I ever hear the name I have forget it , and I do not   know whether the kinship be on the father 's or the mother 's side . Steadman ask my permission to give shelter to a helpless old relative , and I give it . that be really all I remember . ' 

 ' only one other question , ' plead Mary , who be brimful of curiosity upon this particular subject . ' have he be at Fellside very long ? ' 

 ' oh , I really do not   know ; a year , or two , or three , perhaps . life in this house be all of a piece . I hardly keep count of time . ' 

 ' there be one thing that puzzle I very much , ' say Mary , still linger near her grandmother 's couch , the balmy evening air caress she as she lean against the embrasure of the wide Tudor window , the sun draw near to the edge of the hill , an orb of yellow flame , soon to change to a gigantic disk of lurid fire . ' I think from the old man 's talk that he , too , must be an old servant in our family . he talk of Maulevrier Castle , and say that I remind he of a picture by Lely , a portrait of a Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' it be quite possible that he may have be in service there , though I do not remember to have hear anything about it , ' answer her ladyship , carelessly . ' the Steadmans come from that part of the country , and theirs be a hereditary service . good - night , Mary , I be utterly weary . look at that glorious light yonder , that mighty world of fire and flame , without which our little world would be dark and dreary . I often think of that speech of Macbeth 's , " I ' gin to be aweary of the sun . " there come a time , Mary , when even the sun be a burden . ' 

 ' only for such a man as Macbeth , ' say Mary , ' a man steep in crime . who can wonder that he want to hide himself from the sun ? but , dear grandmother , there ought to be plenty of happiness leave for you , even if your recovery be slow to come . you be so clever , you have such resource in your own mind and memory , and you have your grandchild , who love you dearly , ' add Mary , tenderly . 

 her nature be so full of pity that an entirely new affection have grow up in her mind for Lady Maulevrier since that terrible evening of the paralytic stroke . 

 ' yes , and whose love , as exemplify by Lesbia , be show in a hurried scrap of a letter scrawl once a week a bone throw to a hungry dog , ' say her ladyship , bitterly . 

 ' Lesbia be so lovely , and she be so surround by flatterer and admirer , ' murmur Mary , excusingly . 

 ' oh , my dear , if she have a heart she would not forget I , even in the midst of her flatterer . good - night again , Mary . do not   try to console I . for some nature consolation and soothe suggestion be like flower throw upon a granite tomb . they do just as much and just as little good to the heart that lie under the stone . good - night . ' 

 Mary stoop to kiss her grandmother 's forehead , and find it cold as marble . she murmur a love good - night , and leave the mistress of Fellside in her loneliness . 

 a footman would come in and light the lamp , and draw the velvet curtain , presently , and shut out the later glory of sunset . and then the butler himself would come and arrange the little dinner table by her ladyship 's couch , and would himself preside over the invalid 's simple dinner , which would be serve exquisitely , with all that be dainty and most costly in Salviati glass and antique silver . yet well the dinner of herb , and love and peace withal , than the choice fare or the most perfect service . 

 before the coming of the servant and the lamp there be a pause of silence and loneliness , an interval during which Lady Maulevrier lie gaze at the decline orb , the low rim of which now rest on the edge of the hill . it seem to grow large and more dazzling as she look at it . 

 suddenly she clasp her left hand across her eye , and say aloud 

 ' oh , what a hateful life ! almost half a century of lie and hypocricie and prevarication and meanness ! for what ? for the glory of an empty name ; and for a fortune that may slip from my dead hand to become the prey of rogue and adventurer . who can forecast the future ? ' 

 CHAPTER XXV . 

 CARTE BLANCHE . 


 Lady Kirkbank 's house in Arlington Street be know to half fashionable London as one of the pleasant house in town ; and it be know by repute only , to the other half of fashionable London , as a house whose threshold be not to be cross by person with any regard for their own dignity and reputation . it be not that Lady Kirkbank have ever actually forfeit her right to be consider an honest woman and a faithful wife . People who talk of the lady and she set with a contemptuous shrug of the shoulder and a dubious elevation of the eyebrow be ready , when hard push in argument , to admit that they know of no actual harm in Lady Kirkbank , no overt bad behaviour . 

 ' but well , ' say the punctilious half of society , the Pejinks and Pernickitys , the Picksomes and Unco - Goods , ' Lady Kirkbank be Lady Kirkbank ; and I would not allow my girl to visit she , do not   you know . ' ' Lady Kirkbank be receive , certainly , ' say a severe dowager . ' she go to very good house . she get ticket for the Royal enclosure . she be always at private view , and privileged show of all kind ; and she contrive to squeeze herself in at a State ball or a concert about once in two year ; but any one who can consider Lady Kirkbank good style must have a very curious idea of what a lady ought to be . ' ' Lady Kirkbank be a warm - hearted , nice creature , ' say a diplomatist of high rank , and one of her particular friend , ' but her manner be decidedly continental ! ' 

 about Sir George , society , adverse or friendly , be without strong opinion . his friend , the man who shoot over his Scotch moor , and fill the spare room in his villa at Cannes , and load his drag for Sandown or Epsom , and sponge upon he all the year round , talk of he as ' an inoffensive old party , ' ' a cheery soul , ' ' a genial old boy , ' and in like term of approval . that half of society which do not visit in Arlington Street , in whose nostril the semi - aristocratic , semi - artistic , altogether bohemian little dinner , the supper after the play , the small hour devote to Nap or Poker , have an odour as of sulphur , the reek of Tophet even this half of the great world be fain to admit that Sir George be harmless . he have never have an idea beyond the realm of sport ; he have never have a will of his own outside his stable . to shoot pigeon at Hurlington or Monaco , to keep half a dozen leather - plater , and attend every race from the Craven to the Leger , to hunt four day a week , when he be allow to spend a winter in England , and to saunter and sleep away all the hour which could not be give to sport , comprise Sir George 's idea of existence . he have never trouble himself to consider whether there might not possibly be a well way of get rid of one 's life . he be as God have make he , and be perfectly satisfied with himself and the universe ; save at such time as when a favourite horse go lame , or his banker write to tell he that his account be overdrawn . 

 Sir George have no child ; he have never have a serious care in his life . he never think , he never read . Lady Kirkbank declare that she have never see he with a book in his hand since their marriage . 

 ' I do not   believe he would know at which end to begin , ' she say . 

 what be the specific charge which the very particular people bring against Lady Kirkbank ? such charge rarely be specific . the idea that the lady belong to the fast and furious section of society , the Bohemia of the upper ten , be an idea in the air . everybody know it . no one could quite adequately explain it . 

 from thirty to fifty Lady Kirkbank have be know as a flirty matron . wherever she go , a train of man go with she ; man young and middle - aged and elderly ; handsome youth from the public office ; War , Admiralty , Foreign Office , Somerset House young man ; attractive man of mature year , with grey moustachios , military , diplomatic , horsey , what you will , but always agreeable . at home , abroad , Lady Kirkbank be never without her court ; but the court be entirely masculine . in those day the fair Georgie do not scruple to say that she hat woman , and that girl be her particular abomination . but as the year roll on Lady Kirkbank begin to find it very difficult to muster her little court , to keep she train in attendance upon she . ' the bird be wild , ' Sir George say . her young adorer find their official duty more oppressive than hitherto ; her elderly swain have threatening of gout or rheumatism which prevent their flocking round she as of old at race meeting or polo match . they be loyal enough in keep their engagement at the dinner table , for Lady Kirkbank 's cook be one of the good in London ; and the invite guest be rarely miss at the little supper after opera or play : but Georgia 's box be no long crowd with man who drop in between the act to see what she think of the singer or the piece , and her swain be no long content to sit behind her chair all the evening , see an empty corner of the stage across Georgia 's ivory shoulder , and hear the voice of invisible actor in the brief pause of Georgie 's subdued babble . 

 at fifty - five , Georgina Kirkbank tell herself sadly enough that her day , as a bright particular star , all - sufficient in her own radiance , be go . she could not live without her masculine circle , man who could bring she all the news , the gossip of the club ; where everything seem to become know as quickly as if each club have its own Asmodeus , unroofe all the housetop of the West end for inspection every night . she could not live without her courtier ; and to keep they about she she know that she must make her house pleasant . it be not enough to give good dinner , elegant little supper wash down by choicest wine ; she must also provide fair face to smile upon the feast , and bright eye to sparkle in the subdue light of low shade lamp , and many candle twinkle under coloured shade . 

 ' I be an old woman now , ' Lady Kirkbank say to herself with a sigh , ' and my own attraction will not   keep my friend about I . C'est trop connu Áa . ' 

 and now the house in Arlington Street in which feminine guest have be as one in ten , open its door to the young and the fair . pretty widow , lively girl , young wife who be not too absurdly devoted to their husband , actress of high standing and good look , these begin to be welcome effusively in Arlington Street . Lady Kirkbank begin to hunt for beauty to adorn her room , as she have hitherto hunt lion to roar at her party . she pride herself on be the first to discover this or that new beauty . that lovely girl from Scotland with the large eye that sweet young creature from Ireland with the long eyelash . she be always invent new divinity . but even this change of plan , this more feminine line of politic fail to reconcile the strict and the stern , the Queen Charlotte - ish elderly lady , and the impeccable matron , to Lady Kirkbank and her set . the girl who be launch by Lady Kirkbank never take high rank in society . when they make good marriage it be generally to be observe that they drop Lady Kirkbank soon afterwards . it be not their fault , these ingrate plead piteously ; but Edward , or Henry , or Theodore , as the case might be , have a most cruel prejudice against dear Lady Kirkbank , and the young wife be oblige to obey . 

 other there be , however , the loyal few , who have win the prize matrimonial in Lady Kirkbank 's happy hunting ground , remain true to their friend ever afterwards , and defend her character against every onslaught . 

 when Lady Maulevrier tell her grandson that she have entrust Lady Kirkbank with the duty of introduce Lesbia to society , Maulevrier shrug his shoulder and hold his peace . he know no actual harm in the matter . Lady Kirkbank 's be rather a fast set ; and have he be allow to choose it be not to Lady Kirkbank that he would have delegate his grandmother 's duty . in Maulevrier 's own phrase it be ' not good enough ' for Lesbia . but it be not in his power to interfere . he be not tell of the plan until everything have be settle . the thing be accomplish ; and against accomplished fact Maulevrier be the last to protest . 

 his friend John Hammond have not be silent . he know nothing of Lady Kirkbank personally ; but he know the position which she hold in London society , and he urge his friend strongly to enlighten Lady Maulevrier as to the kind of circle into which she be about to entrust her young granddaughter , a girl bring up in the Arcadia of England . 

 ' not for world would I undertake such a task , ' say Maulevrier . ' her ladyship never have any opinion of my wisdom , and this Lady Kirkbank be a friend of her own youth . she would cut up rough if I be to say a word against an old friend . besides what be the odd , if you come to think of it ? all society be fast nowadays , or at any rate all society worth live in . and then again , Lesbia be just one of those cool - head girl who would keep herself head uppermost in a maelstrom . she know on which side her bread be butter . look how easily she chuck you up because she do not think you good enough . she will make use of this Lady Kirkbank , who be a good soul , I be tell , and will make the good match of the season . ' 

 and now the season have begin , and Lady Lesbia Haselden be circulate with other aristocratic atom in the social vortex , with her head apparently uppermost . 

 ' Old Lady K have nobble a real beauty , this time , ' say one of the Arlington Street set to his friend as they loll on the railing in the park , ' a long way above any of those plain - head one she try to palm off upon we last year : the south american girl with the big eye and a complexion like a toad , the Forfarshire girl with freckle and unsophisticated carrot . " those lovely spanish eye , " say Lady K - - , " that titianesque auburn hair ! " but it do not   answer . both the girl be plain , and they have go back to their native obscurity spinster still . but this be a real thorough - breed one blood , form , pace , all there . ' 

 ' who be she ? ' drawl his friend . 

 ' Lord Maulevrier 's sister , Lady Lesbia Haselden . have money , too , I believe ; rich grandmother ; old lady bury alive in Westmoreland ; horrid old miser . ' 

 ' I should not   mind marry a miser 's granddaughter , ' say the other . ' so nice to know that some wretched old idiot have scrap and hoard through a lifetime of deprivation and self - denial , in order that one may spend his money when he be under the sod . ' 

 Lady Lesbia be accept everywhere , or almost everywhere , as the beauty of the season . there be six or seven other girl who aspire to the same proud position , who be assert by their own particular friend to have win it ; just as there be generally four or five horse which claim to be first favourite ; but the betting be all in favour of Lady Lesbia . 

 Lady Kirkbank tell she that she be turn everyone 's head , and Lesbia be quite willing to believe she . but be Lesbia 's own head quite steady in this whirlpool ? that be a question which she do not take the trouble to ask herself . 

 her heart be tranquil enough , cold as marble . no shield and safeguard so secure against the fire of new love as an old love hardly cold . Lesbia tell herself that her heart be a sepulchre , an urn which hold a handful of ash , the ash of her passion for John Hammond . it be a fire quite burn out , she think ; but that extinguish flame have leave death - like coldness . 

 this be Lesbia 's own diagnosis of her case : but the real truth be that among the herd of man she have meet , almost all of they ready to fall down and worship she , there be not one who have catch her fancy . her nature be shallow enough to be pass fickle ; the passion which she have take for love be little more than a girl 's fancy ; but the man who have power to awaken that fancy as John Hammond have do have not yet appear in Lady Kirkbank 's circle . 

 ' what a cold - hearted creature you must be , ' say Georgie . ' you do not   seem to admire any of my favourite man . ' 

 ' they be very nice , ' Lesbia answer languidly ; ' but they be all alike . they say the same thing wear the same clothe sit in the same attitude . one would think they be all drill in a body every morning before they go out . Mr. Nightshade , the actor , who come to supper the other night , be the only man I have see who have a spark of originality . ' 

 ' you be right , ' answer Lady Kirkbank , ' there be an appalling sameness in man : only it be odd you should find it out so soon . I never discover it till I be an old woman . how I envy Cleopatra her Casar and her Antony . no mistake one of those for the other . Mary Stuart too , what mark variety of character she have an opportunity of study in Rizzio and Chastelard , Darnley and Bothwell . ah , child , that be what it be to live . ' 

 ' Mary be very interesting , ' sigh Lesbia ; ' but I fear she be not a correct person . ' 

 ' my love , what correct person ever be interesting ? history draw a misty halo round a sinner of that kind , till one almost believe she a saint . I think Mary Stuart , Froude 's Mary , simply perfect . ' 

 Lesbia have begin by blush at Lady Kirkbank 's opinion ; but she be now use to the audacity of the lady 's sentiment , and the almost infantile candour with which she give utterance to they . Lady Kirkbank like to make her friend laugh . it be all she could do now in order to be admire . and there be nothing like audacity for make people laugh nowadays . Lady Kirkbank be a close student of all those delightful book of french memoir which bring the tittle - tattle of the Regency and the scandal of Louis the Fifteenth 's reign so vividly before we : and she have unconsciously found her manner and her way of think and talk upon that easy - go but elegant age . she do not want to seem well than woman who have be so altogether charming . she fortify the frivolity of historical parisian manner by a dash of the british sporting character . she drive , shot , jump over five - bar gate , contrive on the verge of seventy to be as active we a young woman ; and she flatter herself that the mixture of wit , audacity , sport , and good - nature be full of fascination . 

 however this might be , it be certain that a good many people like she , chiefly perhaps because she be good - natured , and a little on account of that admirable cook . 

 to Lesbia , who have be weary to loathing of her old life amidst the hill and waterfall of Westmoreland , this new life be one perpetual round of pleasure . she fling herself with all her heart and mind into the amusement of the moment ; she know neither weariness nor satiety . to ride in the park in the morning , to go to a luncheon party , a garden party , to drive in the park for half an hour after the garden party , to rush home and dress for the fourth or fifth time , and then off to a dinner , and from dinner to drum , and from drum to big ball , at which rumour say the Prince and Princess be to be present ; and so , from eleven o'clock in the morning till four or five o'clock next morning , the giddy whirl go on ; and every hour be so occupy by pleasure engagement that it be difficult to squeeze in an occasional morning for shop necessary to go to the shop sometimes , or one would not know how many thing one really want or for an indispensable interview with the dressmaker . those morning at the shop be hardly the least agreeable of Lesbia 's hour . to a girl bring up in one perpetual tete - a - tete with green hill - side and silvery watercourse , the West end shop be as garden of Eden , as Aladdin Caves , as anything , everything that be rapturous and intoxicating . Lesbia , the clear - head , the cold - hearted , fairly lose her sens when she go into one of those exquisite shop , where a confusion of brocade and satin lay about in dazzle mass of rich colour , with here and there a bunch of lily , a cluster of rose , a tortoise - shell fan , an ostrich feather , or a flounce of peerless Point d'AlenÁon fling carelessly athwart the sheen of a wine - dark velvet or golden - hue satin . 

 Lady Maulevrier have say Lesbia be to have carte blanche ; so Lesbia buy everything she want , or fancy she want , or that the shop - people think she must want , or that Lady Kirkbank happen to admire . the shop - people be so obliging , and so deeply oblige by Lesbia 's patronage . she be exactly the kind of customer they like to serve . she flit about their showroom like a beautiful butterfly hover over a flower - bed her eye catch by every novelty . she never ask the price of anything ; and Lady Kirkbank inform they , in confidence , that she be a great heiress , with a millionaire grandmother who indulge she every whim . other high bear young lady , shop upon fix allowance , and sorely perplex to make both end meet , look with eye of envy upon this girl . 

 and then come the visit to the dressmaker . it happen after all that Kate Kearney be not intrust with Lady Lesbia 's frock . Miss Kearney be the fashion , and could pick and choose her customer ; and as she be a young lady of good business aptitude , she have a liking for ready money , or at least half - yearly settlement ; and , find that Lady Kirkbank be much more willing to give new order than to pay old account , she have respectfully inform her ladyship that a pressure of business would prevent she execute any further demand from Arlington Street , while the necessity of post her ledger oblige she to request the favour of an immediate cheque . 

 the little skirmish per letter occur while Lady Kirkbank be at Cannes , and Miss Kearney 's conduct be stigmatise as insolent and ungrateful , since have not she , Lady Kirkbank by the mere fact of her patronage , give this young person her chief claim to fashion ? 

 ' I shall drop she , ' say Georgie , ' and go back to poor old Seraphine , who be worth a cartload of such irish adventuress . ' 

 so to Madame Seraphine , of Clanricarde Place , Lady Lesbia be take as a lamb to the slaughter - house . 

 Seraphine have make Lady Kirkbank 's clothe , off and on for the last thirty year . Seraphine and Georgia have grow old together . Lady Kirkbank be always drop Seraphine and take she up again , quarrel and make friend with she . they write each other little note , in which Lady Kirkbank call the dressmaker her cher ange her bonne chatte , her chere vielle sotte and all manner of affectionate name and in which Seraphine occasionally threaten the lady with the dire engine of the law , if money be not forthcoming before Saturday evening . 

 Lady Kirkbank within those thirty year have pay Seraphine many thousand ; but she have never once get herself out of the dear creature 's debt . all her payment be payment on account . a hundred pound ; or fifty or an occasional cheque for two hundred and fifty , when Sir George have be lucky at Newmarket and Doncaster . but the rolling nucleus of debt go roll on , grow big every year until the payment on account need to be large or more numerous than of old to keep Seraphine in good humour . 

 Seraphine be a woman of genius and versatility and have more than one art at her finger ' end those skinny and claw - shape finger , the nail whereof be not always clean . she take charge of her customer 's figure , and make their corset , and lecture they if they allow nature to get the upper hand . 

 ' if Madame 's waist get one quarter of an inch thick it must be that I renounce to make her gown , ' she would tell a ponderous matron , with cool insolence , and the matron would stand abash before the little sallow , hooked - nose , keen eyed Jewess , like a child before a severe mother . 

 ' oh , Seraphine , do you really think that I be stouter ? ' the customer would ask feebly , pant in her tightened corset . 

 ' be it that I think so ? why that jump to the eye . Madame have always that little air of Rubens , even in the flower of her youth but now it be a Rubens of the Faubourg du Temple . ' 

 and horrify at the idea of her vulgarise charm the meek matron would consent to encase herself in one of Seraphine 's severe corset , call in bitter mockery a la santť at five guineas in order that the dressmaker might measure she for a forty - guinea gown . 

 ' a plain satin gown , my dear , with an eighteenpenny frilling round the neck and sleeve , and not so much trimming as would go round my little finger . it be positive robbery , ' the matron tell her friend afterwards , not the less proud of her skin - tight high shoulder sleeve and the peerless flow of her train . 

 Seraphine be an artist in complexion , and it be she who provide her middle - aged and elderly customer with the lily and rose of youth . Lady Kirkbank 's town complexion be superintend by Seraphine , sometimes even manipulate by those harpy - like claw . the eyebrow of which Lesbia complain be only eyebrow de province eyebrow de voyage . in London Georgie be much more particular ; and Seraphine be often in Arlington Street with her little morocco bag of wash and cream , and brush and sponge , to prepare Lady Kirkbank for some great party , and to instruct Lady Kirkbank 's maid . at such time Georgie be all affection for the little dressmaker . 

 ' Ma chatte , you have make I positively adorable , ' she would say , peer at her reflection in the ivory hand - mirror , a dazzle image of rouge and bismuth , carmine lip , diamond , and frizzy yellow hair ; ' I verily believe I look under thirty but do not you think this gown be a thought too dťcolletťe un peu trop de peau , hein ? ' 

 ' not for you , Lady Kirkbank , with your fine shoulder . shoulder be of no age les ťpaule sont la vraie fontaine de jouvence pour les jolie femme . ' 

 ' you be such a witty creature , Seraphine , Fifine . you ought to be a descendant of that wicked old Madame du Deffand . Rilboche , give Madame some more chartreuse . ' 

 and Lady Kirkbank and the dressmaker would chink their liqueur glass in amity before the lady gather up her satin train and allow her peerless shoulder to be muffle in a plush mantle to go down to her carriage , fortify by that last glass of green chartreuse . 

 there be always the fine chartreuse and curaÁoa in a liqueur cabinet on Lady Kirkbank 's dressing - table . the cabinet form a companion to the dressing - case , which contain all those creamy and rose - hue cosmetic , powder , brush , and medicament , which be necessary for the manufacture of Georgie 's complexion . the third bottle in the liqueur case hold cognac , and this , as Rilboche the maid know , be oftenest replenish . yet nobody could accuse Lady Kirkbank of intemperate habit . the liqueur box only supply the peg that be occasionally want to screw the superior mind to concert pitch . 

 ' one must always be at concert pitch in society , do not   you know , my dear , ' say Georgie to her young protťgťe . 

 thus it happen that , Miss Kearney have behave badly , Lesbia be carry off to dear old Seraphine , and deliver over to that modern witch , as a sacrifice tie to the horn of the altar . 

 Clanricarde Place be a little nook of Queen Anne house genuine Queen Anne , be it understand between Piccadilly and St. James 's Palace , and hardly five minute ' walk from Arlington Street . it be a quiet little cul de sac in the very heart of the fashionable world ; and here of an afternoon might be see the carriage of Madame Seraphine 's customer , block the whole of the carriage way , and choke up the narrow entrance to the street , which widen considerably at the inner end . 

 Madame Seraphine 's house be at the end , a narrow house , with tall old - fashioned window curtain with amber satin . it be a small , dark house , and exhale occasional odour of garlic and main sewer ; but the staircase be a gem in old oak , and the furniture in the triple telescopic drawing room , dwindle to a closet at the end , be genuine Louis Seize . 

 Seraphine herself be the only shabby thing in the house a wizene little woman , with a wicked old jewish face , and one shoulder high than the other , dress in a shiny black moire gown , year after moire have be explode , and with a rag of old lace upon her sleek black hair raven black hair , and the only good thing about her appearance . 

 one ornament , and one only , have Seraphine ever be guilty of wear , and that be an old - fashioned half - hoop ring of brazilian diamond , brilliant of the first water . this ring she call her yard measure ; and she be in the habit of use it as her Standard of purity , and compare it with any diamond which her customer submit to her inspection . for the clever little dressmaker have a feeling heart for a lady in difficulty , and be in the habit of lend money on good security , and on term that be almost reasonable as compare with the usurious rate one read of in the newspaper . 

 Lesbia 's first sensation upon have this accomplished person present to she be one of shrinking and disgust . there be something sinister in the sallow face , the small shrewd eye , and long hooked nose , the crooked figure , and claw - shape hand . but when Madame Seraphine begin to talk about gown , and bade her acolyte smartly - dress young woman with pleasing countenance bring forth marvel of brocade and satin , embroidery , stamp velvet , bullion fringe , and ostrich feather flouncing , Lesbia become interested , and forget the unholy aspect of the high priestess . 

 Lady Kirkbank and the dressmaker discuss Lesbia 's charm as calmly as if she have be out of the room . 

 ' what do you think of her figure ? ' ask Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' one can not criticise what do not exist , ' reply the dressmaker , in French . ' the young lady have no figure . she have evidently be bring up in the country . ' 

 and then with rapid bird - like movement , and with her head on one side , Seraphine measure Lesbia 's waist and bust , mutter little argotic expression sotto voce as she do so . 

 ' waist three inch too large , shoulder six inch too narrow , ' she say decisively , and she dictate some figure to one of the damsel , who write they down in an order - book . 

 ' what do that mean ? ' ask Lesbia , not at all approve of such cavalier treatment . 

 ' only that Seraphine will make your corset the right size , ' answer Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' what ? three inch too small for my waist , and six too wide for my shoulder ? ' 

 ' my love , you must have a figure , ' reply Lady Kirkbank , conclusively . ' it be not what you be , but what you ought to be that have to be consider . ' 

 so Lesbia , the cool - head , who be also the weak - minded , consent to have her figure adjust to the regulation mark of absolute beauty , as understand by Madame Seraphine . it be only when her complexion come under discussion , and Seraphine venture to suggest that she would be all the well for a little accentuation of her eyebrow and darken of her lash , that Lesbia make a stand . 

 ' what would my grandmother think of I if she hear I paint ? ' she ask , indignantly . 

 Lady Kirkbank laugh at her naivetť . 

 ' my dear child , your grandmother be just half a century behind the age , ' she say . ' I hope you be not go to allow your life in London to be regulate by an oracle at Grasmere ? ' 

 ' I be not go to paint my face , ' reply Lesbia , firmly . 

 ' well , perhaps you be right . the eyebrow be a little weak and undecided , Seraphine , as you say , and the lash would be all the well for your famous cosmetic ; but after all there be a charm in what the painter call ' sincerity , " and any little error of detail will prove the genuineness of Lady Lesbia 's beauty . one may be too artistic . ' 

 and Lady Kirkbank give a complacent glance at her own image in one of the Marie Antoinette mirror , please with the general effect of arched brow , darken eyelid , and a daisy bonnet . the fair Georgie generally affect field - flower and other simplicity , which would have be become to a beauty of eighteen . 

 ' one be oblige to smother one 's self in satin and velvet for ball and dinner , ' say Lady Kirkbank , when she discuss the great question of gown ; ' but I know I always look my good in my cotton frock and straw hat . ' 

 that first visit to Seraphine 's den den as terrible , do one but know it , as that antediluvian hyena - cave at Torquay , where the threshold be wear by the body of beast drag across it , and the ground pave with their bone that first visit be a serious business . later interview might be mere frivolity , half - an - hour waste in look at new fashion , an order give carelessly on the spur of the moment ; but upon this occasion Lady Kirkbank have to arm her young protťgťe for the come campaign , and the question be to the last degree serious . 

 the chaperon and the dressmaker put their head together , look at fashion plate , talk solemnly of Worth and his compeer , of the gown that be be wear by Bernhardt , and Pierson , and Croisette , and other star of the parisian stage ; and then Lady Kirkbank give her order , Lesbia listening and assenting . 

 nothing be say about price ; but Lesbia have a vague idea that some of the thing would be rather expensive , and she venture to ask Lady Kirkbank if she be not order too many gown . 

 ' my dear , Lady Maulevrier say you be to have carte blanche , ' reply Georgie , solemnly . ' your dear grandmother be as rich as Croesus , and she be generosity itself ; and how should I ever forgive myself if I allow you to appear in society in an inadequate style . you have to take a high place , the very high place , Lesbia ; and you must be dress in accordance with that position . ' 

 Lesbia say no more . after all it be Lady Kirkbank 's business and not her . see have be entrust to Lady Kirkbank as to a person who thoroughly know the great world , and she must submit to be govern by the wisdom and experience of her chaperon . if the bill be heavy , that would be Lady Kirkbank 's affair ; and no doubt dear grandmother be rich enough to afford anything Lesbia want . she have be tell that she be to take rank among heiress . 

 Lady Maulevrier have give her granddaughter some old - fashioned ornament , topaz , amethyst , turquoise jewel that have belong to dead and go Talmashes and Angersthorpes to be reset . this entail a visit to a Bond Street jeweller , and in the dazzle glass - case on the counter of the Bond Street establishment Lesbia see a good many thing which she feel be real necessity to her new phase of existence , and these , with Lady Kirkbank 's approval , she order . they be not important matter . half - a - dozen gold bangle of real oriental workmanship , three or four jewel arrow , fly and beetle , and caterpillar , to pin on her lace and flower , a diamond clasp for her pearl necklace , a dear little gold hunter to wear when she ride in the park , a diamond butterfly to light up that old - fashioned amethyst parure which the jeweller be to reset with an artistic admixture of brilliant . 

 ' I be sure you would not like the effect without diamond , ' say the jeweller . ' your amethyst be very fine , but they be dark and heavy in tone , and want a good deal of lighting - up , especially for the present fashion of half - light room . if you will allow I to use my own discretion , and mix in a few brilliant , I shall be able to produce a really artistic parure ; otherwise I would not recommend you to touch they . the present setting be clumsy and inelegant ; but I really do not know that I could improve upon it , without an admixture of brilliant . ' 

 ' will the diamond add very much to the expense ? ' Lesbia inquire , timidly . 

 ' my dear child , you be perfectly safe in leave the matter in Mr. Cabochon 's hand , ' interpose Lady Kirkbank , who have particular reason for wish to be on good term with the head of the establishment . ' your dear grandmother give you the amethyst to be reset ; and of course she would wish it to be do in an artistic manner . otherwise , as Mr. Cabochon judiciously say , why have the stone reset at all ? well wear they in all their present hideousness . ' 

 of course , after this Lesbia consent to the amethyst be deal with accord to Mr. Cabochon 's taste . 

 ' which be simply perfect , ' interject Lady Kirkbank . 

 and now Lesbia 's campaign begin in real earnest a life of pleasure , a life of utter selfishness and self - indulgence , which would go far to pervert the strong mind , tarnish the pure nature . to dress and be admire that be what Lesbia 's life mean from morning till night . she have no high or nobler aim . even on Sunday morning at the fashionable church , where the woman sit on one side of the nave and the man on the other , where divinest music be as a pair of wing , on which the enraptured soul fly heavenward even here Lesbia think more of her bonnet and glove the chic or non - chic of her whole costume , than of the service . she might kneel gracefully , with her bent head , just reveal the ivory whiteness of a lovely throat , between the edge of her lace frille and the flower in her bonnet . she might look the fairest image of devotion ; but how could a woman pray whose heart be a milliner 's shop , whose high ambition be to be pretty and well dress than other woman ? 

 the season be six week old . it be Ascot week , the crown glory of the year , and Lesbia and her chaperon have secure ticket for the Royal enclosure or it may be say rather that Lesbia have secure they for the Master of the Royal Buckhounds might have omit poor old Lady Kirkbank 's familiar name from his list if it have not be for that lovely girl who go everywhere under the veteran 's wing . 

 six week , and Lesbia 's appearance in society have be one perpetual triumph ; but as yet nothing serious have happen . she have have no offer . half a dozen man have try their hard to propose to she have sit out dance , have waylay she in conservatory and in back drawing - room , in lobby while she wait for her carriage have look at she piteously with tender declaration tremble on their lip ; but she have contrive to keep they at bay , to strike they dumb by her coldness , or confound they by her coquetry ; for all these be ineligible , whom Lady Lesbia Haselden do not want to have the trouble of refuse . 

 Lady Kirkbank be in no haste to marry her protťgťe nay , it be much more to her interest that Lesbia should remain single for three or four season , and that she , Lady Kirkbank , might have the advantage of close association with the young beauty , and the privilege of spend Lady Maulevrier 's money . but she would have like to be able to inform Lesbia 's grandmother of some tremendous conquest the subjugation of a worthy victim . this herd of nobody young son with courtesy title and empty pocket , ruin Guardsmen , briefless barrister what be the use of tell Lady Maulevrier about such barren victory ? Lady Kirkbank therefore content herself with expatiate upon Lesbia 's triumph in a general way : how graciously the Princess speak to she and about she ; how she have be ask to sit on the dai at the ball at Marlborough House , and have dance in the Royal quadrille . 

 ' has Lesbia happen to meet Lord Hartfield ? ' Lady Maulevrier ask , incidentally , in one of her letter . 

 no . Lord Hartfield be in London , for he have make a great speech in the Lords on a question of vital interest ; but he be not go into society , or at any rate into society of a frivolous kind . he have give himself up to politic , as so many young man do nowadays , which be altogether horrid of they . his name have appear in the list of guest at one or two cabinet dinner ; but the world of polo match and afternoon tea , dance and drum , private theatrical , and Orleans House suppers , know he not . as a competitor on the fashionable race - course , Lord Hartfield be , in common parlance , out of the running . 

 and now on this glorious June day , this Thursday of Thursdays , the Ascot Cup day , for the first time since Lesbia 's dťbut , Lady Kirkbank have occasion to smile upon an admirer whose pretension be worthy of the high consideration . 

 Mr. Smithson , of Park Lane , and Rood Hall , near Henley , and Formosa , Cowes , and Le Bouge , Deauville , and a good many other place too numerous to mention , be repute to be one of the rich commoner in England . he be a man of that uncertain period of life which enemy call middle age , and friend call youth . that he would never see a five - and - thirtieth birthday again be certain ; but whether he have pass the Rubicon of forty be open to doubt . it be possible that he be enjoy those few golden year between thirty - five and forty , which for the wealthy bachelor constitute verily the prime and summer - tide of life . Wisdom have come , experience have be buy , taste have be cultivate , the man have educate himself to the uttermost in the great school of daily life . he know his world thoroughly , whatever that world be , and he know how to enjoy every gift and every advantage which Providence have bestow upon he . 

 Mr. Smithson be a great authority on the Stock Exchange , though he have cease for the last three or four year to frequent the ' House , ' or to be see in the purlieus of Throgmorton Street . indeed he have an air of hardly know his way to the City , of be acquaint with that part of London only by hearsay . he complain that his horse shy at pass Temple Bar . and yet a few year ago Mr. Smithson 's city operation have be on a very extensive scale : it be in the rise and fall of commodity rather than of stock and share that Horace Smithson have make his money . he have exercise occult influence upon the trade of the great city , of the world itself , whereof that city be in a manner the keystone . Iron have rise or fall at his beck . at the breath of his nostril cochineal have go up in the market at an almost magical rate , as if the whole civilised world have become suddenly intent upon dye its garment red , nay , as if even the naked savage of the Gold Coast and the tribe of Central Africa be bent on stain their dusky skin with the body of the female coccus . 

 favour by a hint from Smithson , his particular friend follow his lead , and rush into the market to buy all the cochineal that could be have ; to buy at any price , since the market be rise hourly . and then , all in a moment , as the sky cloud over on a summer day , there come a dulness in the cochineal market , and the female coccus be be sell at an enormous sacrifice . and anon it leak out that Mr. Smithson have grow tired of cochineal , and have be sell for the last week or two ; and it be noise abroad that this rise and fall in cocci have bring Mr. Smithson seventy thousand pound . 

 Mr. Smithson be say to have commence life in a very humble capacity . there be some who declare he be the very youth who stoop to pick up a pin in a parisian banker 's courtyard , after his service as clerk have just be reject by the firm , and who be thereupon recognise as a youth worthy of favour and take into the banker 's office . but this touching incident of the pin be too ancient a tradition to fit Mr. Smithson , still under forty . 

 some there be who remember he eighteen year ago as an adventurer in the great wilderness of London , penniless , friendless , a Jack - of - all - trade , live as the bird of the air live , and with as little certainty of future maintenance . and then Mr. Smithson disappear for a space he go under , as his friend call it ; to re - appear fifteen year later as Smithson the millionaire . he have be in Peru , Mexico , California . he have trade in hide , in diamond , in silver , in stock and share . and now he be the great Smithson , whose voice be the voice of an oracle , who be suppose to be able to make the fortune of other man by a word , or a wink , a nod , or a little look across the crowd , and whom all the man and woman in London society short of that exclusive circle which do not open its rank to smithson be ready to cherish and admire . 

 Mr. Smithson have be in Petersburg , Paris , Vienna , all over civilised Europe during the last five week , whether on business or on pleasure bent , nobody know . he affect to be an elegant idler ; but it be say by the initiate that wherever Smithson go the market rise or fall , and hide , iron , copper , or tin , feel the influence of his presence . 

 he come back to London in time for the Cup Day , and in time to fall desperately in love with Lesbia , whom he meet for the first time in the Royal enclosure . 

 she be dress in white , purest ivory white , from top to toe radiant , dazzle , under an immense sunshade fringe with creamy marabout . her complexion untouche by Seraphine her dark and glossy hair , her large violet eye , luminous , dark almost to blackness , be all set off and accentuate by the absence of colour in her costume . even the cluster of exotic on her shoulder be of the same pure tint , gardenia and lily of the valley . 

 Mr. Smithson be formally present to the new beauty , and receive with a cool contempt which rivet his chain . he be so accustomed to be run after by woman , that it be a new sensation to meet one who be not in the least impressed by his superior merit . 

 ' I do not   suppose the girl know who I be , ' he say to himself , for although he have a very good idea of his intrinsic worth , he know that his wealth rank first among his merit . 

 but on after occasion when Lesbia have be tell all that could be tell to the advantage of Mr. Smithson , she accept his homage with the same indifference , and treat he with less favour than she accord to the ruin guardsmen and young son who be die for she . 

 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 ' proud can I never be of what I hate . ' 


 it be a Saturday afternoon , and even in that great world which have no occupation in life except to amuse itself , whose day be all holiday , there be a sort of exceptional flavour , a kind of extra excitement on Saturday afternoon , distinguish by polo match at Hurlingham , just as Saturday evening be by the production of new play at fashionable theatre . there be a great military polo match for this particular Saturday Lancers against Dragoons . it be a lovely June afternoon , and Hurlingham would be at its good . the cool greensward , the branching tree , the flow river , would afford an unspeakable relief after the block of carriage in Bond Street and the heated air of London , where even the park feel baked and arid ; and to Hurlingham Lady Kirkbank drive directly after luncheon . 

 Lesbia lean back in the barouche listen calmly , while her chaperon expatiate upon the wealth and possession of Horace Smithson . it be now ten day since the meeting at Ascot , and Mr. Smithson have contrive to see a great deal of Lesbia in that short time . he be invite almost everywhere , and he have haunt she at afternoon and evening party ; he have sup in Arlington Street after the opera ; he have play card with Lesbia , and have enjoy the felicity of win her money . his admiration be obvious , and there be a seriousness in his manner of pursue she which show that , in Lady Kirkbank 's unromantic phraseology , ' the man mean business . ' 

 ' Smithson be catch at last , and I be glad of it , ' say Georgie . 

 ' the creature be an abominable flirt , and have break more heart than any man in London . he be all but the death of one of the dear girl I know . ' 

 ' Mr. Smithson break heart ! ' exclaim Lesbia , languidly . ' I should not have think that be in his line . Mr. Smithson be not an Adonis , nor be his manner particularly fascinating . ' 

 ' my child how fresh you be ! do you suppose it be the handsome man or the fascinating man for whom woman break their heart in society ? it be the rich man they all want to marry man like Smithson , who can give they diamond , and yacht , and a hunting stud , and half a dozen fine house . those be the prize the blue ribbon of the matrimonial race - course man like Smithson , who pretend to admire all the pretty woman , who dangle , and dangle , and keep off other offer , and give ten guinea bouquet , and then at the end of the season be off to Hombourg or the Scotch moor , without a word . do you think that kind of treatment be not hard enough to break a penniless girl 's heart ? she see the golden prize within her grasp , as she believe ; she think that she and poverty have part company for ever ; she imagine herself mistress of town house and country house , yacht and stable ; and then one fine morning the gentleman be off and away ! do not you think that be enough to break a girl 's heart ? ' 

 ' I can imagine that a girl steep to the lip in poverty might be willing to marry Mr. Smithson 's house and yacht , ' answer Lesbia , in her low sweet voice , with a faint sneer even amidst the sweetness , ' but , I think it must have be a happy release for any one to be let off the sacrifice at the last moment . ' 

 ' Poor Belle Trinder do not think so . ' 

 ' who be Belle Trinder ? ' 

 ' an Essex parson 's daughter whom I take under my wing five year ago a splendid girl , large and fair , and just a trifle coarse not to be speak of in the same day with you , dearest ; but still a decidedly handsome creature . and she take remarkably well . she be a very lively girl , " never run mute , " Sir George use to say . Sir George be very fond of she . she amuse he , poor girl , with her rather brainless rattle . ' 

 ' and Mr. Smithson admire she ? ' 

 ' follow she about everywhere , send her whole flower garden in the way of bouquet and japanese basket , and floral parure for her gown , and opera box and concert ticket . their name be always couple . People use to call they Bel and the Dragon . the poor child make up her mind she be to be Mrs. Smithson . she use to talk of what she would do for her own people the poor old father , bury alive in a damp parsonage , and struggle every winter with chronic bronchitis ; the four young sister pin in dulness and penury ; the mother who hardly know what it be to rest from the continual worry of daily life . ' 

 ' poor thing ! ' sigh Lesbia , gaze admiringly at the handle of her last new sunshade . 

 ' Belle use to talk of what she would do for they all , ' pursue Lady Kirkbank . ' Father should go every year to the villa at Monte Carlo ; mother and the girl should have a month in Park Lane every season , and their autumn holiday at one of Mr. Smithson 's country house . I know the world well enough to be sure that this kind of thing would never answer with a man like Smithson . it be only one man in a thousand the modern Arthur , the modern Quixote who will marry a whole family . I tell Belle as much , but she laugh . she feel so secure of her power over the man . " he will do anything I ask he , " she say . ' 

 ' Miss Trinder must be an extraordinary young person , ' observe Lesbia , scornfully . ' the man have not propose , have he ? ' 

 ' no ; the actual proposal hung fire , but Belle think it be a settle thing all the same . everybody talk to she as if she be engage to Smithson , and those poor , ignorant vicarage girl use to write her long letter of congratulation , envy her good fortune , speculate about what she would do when she be marry . the girl be too open and candid for London society talk too much , " give the view before she be sure of her fox , " Sir George say . all this silly talk come to Smithson 's ear , and one morning we read in the post that Mr. Smithson have start the day before for Algiers , where he be to stay at the house of the English Consul , and hunt lion . we wait all day , hop for some letter of explanation , some friendly farewell which would mean a revoir . but there be nothing , and then poor Belle give way altogether . she shut herself up in her room , and go out of one hysterical fit into another . I never hear a girl sob so terribly . she be not fit to be see for a week , and then she go home to her father 's parsonage in the flat swampy country on the border of Suffolk , and eat her heart , as Byron call it . and the bad of it be that she have no actual justification for consider herself jilt . she have talk , and other people have talk , and among they they have settle the business . but Smithson have say hardly anything . he have only flirt to his heart 's content , and have spend a few hundred upon flower , glove , fan , and opera ticket , which perhaps would not have be accept by a girl with a strong sense of her own dignity . ' 

 ' I should think not , indeed , ' interject Lesbia . 

 ' but which poor Belle be only too delighted to get . ' 

 ' Miss Trinder must be very bad style , ' say Lesbia , with languid scorn , ' and Mr. Smithson be an execrable person . do she die ? ' 

 ' no , my dear , she be alive poor soul ! ' 

 ' you say she break her heart . ' 

 ' " the heart may break , yet brokenly live on , " ' quote Lady Kirkbank . ' the disappointed young woman do not   all die . they take to district visiting , or rational dressing , or china painting , or an ambulance brigade . the lucky one marry well - to - do widower with large family , and so slip into a comfortable groove by the time they be five - and - thirty . Poor Belle be still single , still bury in the damp parsonage , where she paint plate and teacup , and wear out my old gown , just as she be wear out her own life , poor creature ! ' 

 ' the idea of any one want to marry Mr. Smithson , ' say Lesbia . ' it seem too dreadful . ' 

 ' a case of real destitution , you think . wait till you have see Smithson 's house in Park Lane his team , his yacht , his orchid house in Berkshire . ' 

 Lesbia sigh . her knowledge of London society be only seven week old ; and yet already the day of disenchantment have begin ! she be have her eye open to the stern reality of life . a year ago when her appearance in the great world be still only a dream of the future , she have picture to herself the crowd of suitor who would come to woo , and she have resolve to choose the worthy . 

 what would he be like , that worthiest among the wooer , that King Arthur among her knight ? 

 first and foremost , he would be of rank high than she own a duke , a marquis , or one of the first and old among earl . title and lofty lineage be indispensable . it would be a fall , a failure , a disappointment , be she to marry a commoner , however distinguish . 

 the worthy one must be noble , therefore , and of the old nobility . he must be young , handsome , intellectual . he must stand out from among his peer by his gift of mind and person . he must have win distinction in the arena of politic or diplomacy , arm or letter . he must be ' somebody . ' 

 she have be seven week in society , and this modern Arthur have not appear . so far as she have be able to discover , there be no such person . the duke and marquis be mostly man of advanced year . the young unmarried nobility be give over to sport , play , and foolishness . she have hear of only one man who at all correspond with her ideal , and he be Lord Hartfield . but Lord Hartfield have give himself up to politic , and be no doubt a prig . Lady Kirkbank speak of he with contempt , as an intolerable person . but then Lord Hartfield be not in Lady Kirkbank 's set . he belong to that serious circle to which Lady Kirkbank 's house appear about as reputable a place of gathering as a booth on a race - course . 

 and now Lady Kirkbank tell Lesbia that this Mr. Smithson , a nobody with a great fortune , be a man whose address she , the sister of Lord Maulevrier , ought to welcome . Mr. Smithson , who claim to be a lineal descendant of that Sir Michael Carrington , standard - bearer to Coeur de Lion in the Holy Land , whose descendant change their name to Smith during the Wars of the Roses . Mr. Smithson bodily proclaim himself a scion of this good old county family , and bore on his plate and his coach panel the elephant 's head and the three demi - griffin of the Hertfordshire Smiths , who only smile and shrug their shoulder when they be compliment upon the splendid surrounding of their cousin . who could tell ? some lateral branch of the standard - bearer 's family tree might have bear this illustrious twig . 

 Lady Kirkbank and all Lady Kirkbank 's friend seem to have conspire to teach Lesbia Haselden one lesson , and that lesson mean that money be the first prize in the great game of life . money rank before everything before title , before noble lineage , genius , fame , beauty , courage , honour . money be Alpha and Omega , the beginning and the end . Mr. Smithson , whose antecedent be as cloudy as those of Aphrodite , be a great man than a peer whose broad acre only bring he two per cent . , or half of whose farm be tenantless , and his field grow cockle instead of barley . 

 yes , one by one , Lady Lesbia 's illusion be reave from she . a year ago she have fancy beauty all - powerful , a gift which must ensure to its possessor dominion over all the kingdom of the earth . rank , intellect , fame would bow down before that magical diadem . and , behold , she have be shin upon London society for seven week , and only empty head and empty pocket have bow down the frivolous , the ineligible , and Mr. Smithson . 

 another illusion which have be dispel be Lesbia 's comfortable idea of her own expectation . her grandmother have tell she that she might take rank among heiress ; and she have hold herself accordingly , deem that her place be among the wealthy . and now , since Mr. Smithson 's appearance upon the scene , Lady Kirkbank have inform her young friend with noble candour that Lady Maulevrier 's fortune , however large it might seem at Grasmere , would be a poor thing in London ; and that Lady Maulevrier 's idea about money be as old - fashioned as her notion about moral . 

 ' life be about six time as expensive as it be in your grandmother 's time . ' say Lady Kirkbank , as the carriage roll softly along the shabby road between Knightsbridge and Fulham . ' it be the pace that kill . Society , which use to jog along comfortably , like the old Brighton stage , at ten mile an hour , now go as fast as the Brighton express . in my mother 's time poor Lord Byron be hold up to the execration of respectable people as the type of cynical profligacy ; in my own time people talk about Lord Waterford ; but , my dear , the young man now be all Byrons and Waterfords , without the genius of the one or the generosity of the other . we be all go at steeplechase rate . social success without money be impossible . the rich Americans , the successful Jews , will crowd we out unless we keep pace with they . ah , Lesbia , my dear girl , there would be a great future before you if you could only make up your mind to accept Mr. Smithson . ' 

 ' how do you know that he mean to propose to I ? ' ask Lesbia , mockingly . ' perhaps he be only go to behave as he do to Miss Trinder . ' 

 ' Lady Lesbia Haselden be a very different person from a country parson 's daughter , ' answer her chaperon ; ' Smithson tell I all about it afterwards . he be really take with Belle 's fine figure and good complexion ; but one of her particular friend tell he of her foolish talk about her sister , and how well she mean to get they married when she be Mrs. Smithson . this disgust he . he go down to Essex , reconnoiter the parsonage , see one of the sister hang out cuff and collar in the orchard another feed the fowl both in shabby gown and country - make boot ; one of they with red hair and freckle . the mother be bargaining for fish with a hawker at the kitchen door . and these be the people he be expect to import into Park Lane , under ceiling paint by Leighton . these be the people he be to exhibit on board his yacht , to cart about on his drag . " I have half make up my mind to marry the girl , but I would soon have hang myself than marry her mother and sister so I take the first train for Dover , en route for Algiers , " say Smithson , and upon my word I could hardly blame the man , ' conclude Lady Kirkbank . 

 they be drive up the narrow avenue to the gate of Hurlingham by this time . Lesbia shake out her frock and look at her glove , tan - colour mousquetaire , reach up to the elbow , and embroider to match her frock . 

 to - day she be a study in brown and gold . Brown satin petticoat embroider with marsh marigold ; little bronze shoe , with marsh marigold tie on the latchet ; brown stocking with marsh marigold clock ; tunic brown foulard smother with quilling of soft brown lace ; Princess bonnet of brown straw , with a wreath of marsh marigold and a neat little buckle of brown diamond ; parasol brown satin , with an immense bunch of marsh marigold on the top ; fan to match parasol . 

 the seat in front of the field be nearly all full when Lady Kirkbank and Lesbia leave their carriage ; but their interest have be protect by a gentleman who have turn down two chair and sit between they on guard . this be Mr. Smithson . 

 ' I have be sit here for an hour keep your chair , ' he say , as he rise to greet they . ' you have no idea what work I have have , and how ferociously all the woman have look at I . ' 

 the match be go on . the Lancers be scuffle for the ball , and afford a fine display of hog - man pony and close - cropped young man in ideal boot . but Lesbia care very little about the match . she be look along the serrie rank of youth and beauty to see if anybody 's frock be smart than her own . 

 no . she could see nothing she like so well as her brown satin and buttercup . she sit down in a perfectly content frame of mind , please with herself and with Seraphine please even with Mr. Smithson , who have show himself devote by his patient attendance upon the empty chair . 

 after the match be over the two lady and their attendant stroll about the garden . other man come and flutter round Lesbia , and woman and girl exchange endear smile and pretty little word of greet with she , and envy she the brown frock and buttercup and Mr. Smithson at her chariot wheel . and then they go to the lawn in front of the club - house , which be so crowded that even Mr. Smithson find it difficult to get a tea - table , and would hardly have succeed so soon as he do if it have not be for the assistance of a couple of Lesbia 's devoted Guardsmen , who run to and fro and badger the waiter . 

 after much skirmishing they be seat at a rustic table , the blue river gleaming and glance in the distance , the good old tree spread their broad shadow over the grass , the company crowd and chatter and laugh an animate picture of pretty face , smart gown , big parasol , japanese fan . 

 Lesbia pour out the tea with the prettiest air of domesticity . 

 ' can you really pour out tea ? ' gasp a callow lieutenant , gaze upon she with goggling , enraptured eye . ' I do not think you could do anything so earthly . ' 

 ' I can , and drink it too , ' answer Lesbia , laugh . ' I adore tea . cream and sugar ? ' 

 ' I I beg your pardon how many ? ' murmur the youth , who have lose himself in gaze , and no long understand plain English . 

 Mr. Smithson frown at the intruder , and contrive to absorb Lesbia 's attention for the rest of the afternoon . he have a good deal more to say for himself than her military admirer , and be altogether more amusing . he have a little cynical air which Lesbia 's recent education have teach she to enjoy . he depreciate all her female friend abuse their gown and bonnet , and give she to understand , between the line , as it be , that she be the only woman in London worth think about . 

 she look at he curiously , wonder how Belle Trinder have be able to resign herself to the idea of marry he . 

 he be not absolutely bad look but he be in all thing unlike a girl 's ideal lover . he be short and stout , with a pale complexion , and sink faded eye , as of a man who have spend the great part of his life by candle light , and have pore much over ledger and bank book , share list and prospectus . he dress well , or allow himself to be dress by the most correct of tailor the Prince 's tailor but he never attempt to lead the fashion in his garment . he have no originality . such sublime flight as that of the man who revive corduroy , or of that daring genius who resuscitate the half - forget inverness coat , be unknown to he . he could only follow the lead of the high . he have small foot , of which he be intensely proud , podgy white hand on which he wear the most exquisite ring . he change his ring every day , like a Roman Emperor ; be report to have summer and winter ring onyx and the cool look intaglio set in filagree for warm weather fiery ruby and diamond in massive band of dull gold for winter . he be say to devote half - an - hour every morning to the treatment of his nail , which be perfect . all the inkstain of his youth have be obliterate , and those nail which have once be bite to the quick during the throe of financial study be now thing of beauty . 

 Lady Lesbia survey Mr. Smithson critically , and shudder at the thought that this person be the good substitute which the season have yet offer she for her ideal knight . she think of John Hammond , the tall , strong figure , straight and square ; the head so proudly carry on a neck which would have grace a greek arena . the straight , clearly - cut feature , the flash eye , bright with youth and hope and the promise of all good thing . yes , there be indeed a man a man in all the nobility of manhood , as God make he , an Adam before the Fall . 

 ah , if John Hammond have only possess a quarter of Mr. Smithson 's wealth how gladly would Lesbia have defy the world and marry he . but to defy the world upon nothing a year be out of the question . 

 ' why do not   he go on the Stock Exchange and make his fortune ? ' think Lesbia , pettishly , ' instead of talk vaguely about politic and literature . ' 

 she feel angry with she reject lover for have come to her empty - handed . she have see no man in London who be , or who seem to she , his equal . and yet she do not repent of have reject he . the more she know of the world and the more she know of herself the more deeply be she convince that poverty be an evil thing , and that she be not the right kind of person to endure it . 

 she be inwardly make these comparison as they stroll back to the carriage , while Mr. Smithson and Lady Kirkbank talk confidentially at her side . 

 ' do you know that Lady Kirkbank have promise and vow three thing for you ? ' say Mr. Smithson . 

 ' indeed ! I think I be past the age at which one can be compromise by other people 's promise . pray what be those three thing ? ' 

 ' first , that you will come to breakfast in Park Lane with Lady Kirkbank next Wednesday morning . I say Wednesday because that will give I time to ask some nice people to meet you ; secondly , that you will honour I by occupy my box at the Lyceum some evening next week ; and thirdly , that you will allow I to drive you down to the Orleans for supper after the play . the drive only take an hour , and the moonlight night be delicious at this time of the year . ' 

 ' I be in Lady Kirkbank 's hand , ' answer Lesbia , laugh . ' I be her good , her chattel ; she take I wherever she like . ' 

 ' but would you refuse to do I this honour if you be a free agent ? ' 

 ' I can not   tell . I hardly know what it be to be a free agent . at Grasmere I do whatever my grandmother tell I ; in London I obey Lady Kirkbank . I be transfer from one master to another . why should we breakfast in Park Lane instead of in Arlington Street ? what be the use of cross Piccadilly to eat our breakfast ? ' 

 this be a cool - head style of treatment to which Mr. Smithson be not accustom , and which charm he accordingly . young woman usually throw themselves at his head , as it be ; but here be a girl who talk to he as indifferently as if he be a tradesman offer his ware . 

 ' what a dreadfully practical person you be ! ' he exclaim . ' what be the use of cross Piccadilly ? well , in the first place , you will make I ineffably happy . but perhaps that do not   count . in the second place , I shall be able to show you some rather good picture of the french school ' 

 ' I hate the french school ! ' interject Lesbia . ' Tricky , flashy , chalky , shallow , smell of the footlight and the studio . ' 

 ' well , sink the picture . you will meet some very charming people , belong to that artist world which be not to be meet everywhere . ' 

 ' I will go to Park Lane to meet your people , if Lady Kirkbank like to take I , ' say Lesbia ; and with this answer Mr. Smithson be bind to be content . 

 ' my pet , if you have make it the study of your life how to treat that man you could not do it well , ' say Lady Kirkbank , when they be drive along the dusty road between dusty hedge and dusty tree , past that last remnant of country which be daily be debase into London . ' upon my word , Lesbia , I begin to think you must be a genius . ' 

 ' do you see any gown you like well than mine ? ' ask Lesbia , recline reposefully , with her little bronze shoe upon the opposite cushion . 

 ' not one Seraphine have surpass herself . ' 

 ' you be always say that . one would suppose you be a sleeping partner in the firm . but I really think this brown and buttercup be rather nice . I see that odious american girl just now Miss Miss Milwaukee , that mop - stick girl people rave about at Cannes . she be in pale blue and cream colour , a milk and water mixture , and look positively plain . ' 

 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 LESBIA CROSSES PICCADILLY . 


 Lady Kirkbank and Lady Lesbia drive across Piccadilly at eleven o'clock on Wednesday morning to breakfast with Mr. Smithson , and although Lesbia have question whether it be worth while cross Piccadilly to eat one 's breakfast , she have subsequently consider it worth while order a new gown from Seraphine for the occasion ; or , it may be , rather that the breakfast make a plausible excuse for a new gown , the pleasure of ordering which be one of those joy of a London life that have not yet lose their savour . 

 the gown , devise especially for the early morning , be simplicity itself rusticity , even . it be a Dresden shepherdess gown , make of a soft flower stuff , with rose and forget - I - not on a creamy ground . there be a great deal of creamy lace , and innumerable yard of pale azure and palest rose ribbon in the confection , and there be a coquettish little hat , the regular Dresden hat , with a wreath of rosebuds . 

 ' Dresden china incarnate ! ' exclaim Smithson , as he welcome Lady Lesbia on the threshold of his marble hall , under the glass marquise which shelter arrival at his door . ' why do you make yourself so lovely ? I shall want to keep you in one of my Louis Seize cabinet , with the rest of my Dresden ! ' 

 Lady Kirkbank have consider the occasion suitable for one of her favourite cotton frock and rustic hat a Leghorn hat , with cluster of dog - rose and honeysuckle , and a trail of the same hedge - flower to fasten her muslin fichu . 

 Mr. Smithson 's house in Park Lane be simply perfect . it be wonderful what good use a parvenu can make of his money nowadays , and how rarely he disgrace himself by any marked offence against good taste . there be so many people at hand to teach the parvenu how to furnish his house , or how to choose his stud . if he go wrong it must be by sheer perversity , an arrogant insistence upon be govern by his own ignorant inclination . 

 Mr. Smithson be too good a tactician to go wrong in this way . he have take the trouble to study the market before he go out to buy his good . he know that taste and knowledge be to be buy just as easily as chair and table , and he go to the right shop . he employ a clever Scotchman , an artist in domestic furniture , to plan his house , and make drawing for the decoration and furniture of every room and for six month he give himself up to the task of furnish . 

 money be spend like water . painter , decorator , cabinet - maker have a merry time of it . Royal Academicians be impress into the service by large offer , and the final result of Mr. MacWalter 's taste and Mr. Smithson 's bullion be a palace in the style of the italian Renaissance , frescoed ceiling , paint panel , a staircase of sculptured marble , as beautiful as a dream , a conservatory as exquisite as a jewel casket by Benvenuto Cellini , a picture gallery which be the admiration of all London , and of the enlightened foreigner , and of the inquire American . this be the house which Lesbia have be bring to see , and through which she walk with the calmly critical air of a person who have see so many palace that one more or less could make no difference . 

 in vain do Mr. Smithson peruse her countenance in the hope of see that she be impress by the splendour of his surrounding , and by the power of the man who command such splendour . Lesbia be as cold as the italian sculptor 's Reading Girl in an alcove of Mr. Smithson 's picture gallery ; and the stockbroker feel very much as Aladdin might have do if the fair Badroulbadour have show herself indifferent to the hall of the jewel window , in that magical palace which spring into be in a single night . 

 Lesbia have be impress by that story of poor Belle Trinder and by Lady Kirkbank 's broad assertion that half the young woman in London be run after Mr. Smithson ; and she have make up her mind to treat the man with supreme scorn . she do not want his house or his yacht . nothing could induce she to marry such a man , she tell herself ; but her vanity feed upon the idea of his subjugation , and her pride be gratify by the sense of her power over he . 

 the guest be few and choice . there be Mr. Meander , the poet , one of the lead light in that new sect which pride itself upon the cultivation of abstract beauty , and occasionally touch the verge of concrete ugliness . there be a newspaper man the editor of a fashionable journal and a middle - aged man of letter , playwright , critic , humourist , a man whose society be in demand everywhere , and who say sharp thing with the most supreme good - nature . the only lady whose society Mr. Smithson have deem worthy the occasion be a fashionable actress , with her young sister , the young a pretty copy of the elder , both dress picturesquely in flow cashmere gown of faint sea - green , with old lace fichu , leghorn hat , and a general limpness and simplicity of style which suit their cast of feature and delicate colouring . Lesbia wonder to see how good an effect could be produce by a costume which could have cost so little . Mr. Nightshade , the famous tragedian , have be also ask to grace the feast , but the early hour make the invitation a mockery . it be not to be suppose that a man who go to bed at daybreak would get up again before the sun be in the zenith , for the sake of Mr. Smithson 's society , or Mr. Smithson 's Strasbourg pie , for the manufacture whereof a particular breed of geese be suppose to be set apart , like sacred bird in Egypt , while a particular vineyard in the Gironde be suppose to be devote wholly and solely to the production of Mr. Smithson 's claret . it be a cabinet wine , like those rare vintage of the Rhineland which be reserve exclusively for german prince . 

 Breakfast be serve in Mr. Smithson 's small dining - room there be three apartment give up to feasting , begin with a spacious banqueting - room for great dinner , and dwindle down to this snuggery , which hold about a dozen comfortably , with ample room and verge enough for the attendant . the wall be old gold silk , the curtain a tawny velvet of deep tone , the cabinet and buffet of dark italian walnut , inlay with lapis - lazuli and amber . the fireplace be a masterpiece of cabinet work , with high narrow shelf , and curious recess hold priceless jar of oriental enamel . the deep hearth be fill with arum lily and azalia , like a font at Easter . 

 Lady Kirkbank , who pretend to adore genius , be affectionately effusive to Miss Fitzherbert , the popular actress , but she rather ignore the sister . Lesbia be less cordial , and be not enchant at find that Miss Fitzherbert shine and sparkle at the breakfast table by the gaiety of her spirit and the brightness of her conversation . there be something frank and joyous , almost to childishness , in the actress 's manner , which be full of fascination ; and Lesbia feel herself at a disadvantage almost for the first time since she have be in London . 

 the editor , the wit , the poet , the actress , have a language of their own ; and Lesbia feel herself out in the cold , unable to catch the ball as it glance past she , not quick enough to follow the wit that evoke those ripple of silvery laughter from the two fair - haired , pale - face girl in sea - green cashmere . she feel as an Englishman may feel who have make himself master of academical French , and who take up one of Zola 's novel , or go into artistic society , and find that there be another French , a complete and copious language , of which he know not a word . 

 Lesbia begin to think that she have a great deal to learn . she begin to wonder even whether , in the event of she have make rather too free use of Lady Maulevrier 's carte blanche , it might not be well to make a new departure in the art of dressing , and to wear untrimmed cashmere gown , and rag of limp lace . 

 after breakfast they all go to look at Mr. Smithson 's picture gallery . his picture be , as he have tell Lesbia , chiefly of the french school , and there may have be a remote period say , in the time of good Queen Charlotte when such picture would hardly have be exhibit to young lady . his picture be Mr. Smithson 's own unaided choice . here the individual taste of the man stand reveal . 

 there be two or three Geromes ; and in the place of honour at the end of the gallery there be a grand Delaroche , Anne Boleyn 's last letter to the king , the hapless girl - queen sit at a table in her gloomy cell in the Tower , a shaft of golden light from the narrow window streaming on the fair , disorder hair , the face bleach with unutterable woe , a sublime image of despair and self - abandonment . 

 the large picture be historical , classic , grand ; but the small picture the lively little bit of colour dot in here and there be of that new school which Mr. Smithson affect . they be of that school which be call Impressionist , in which ballet dancer and jockey , burlesque actress , mask ball , and all the humour of the side scene be represent with the sublime audacity of an art which disdain finish , and rely on chic , fougue , chien , flou , ťlan , the inspiration of the moment . Lesbia blush as she look at the ballet girl , the masker in their scanty raiment , the demi - mondaine loll out of their opera box , and half out of their gown , with false smile and frizzled hair . and then there come the work of that other school which lavish the finish of a Meissonier on the most meretricious composition . a woman in a velvet gown warm her dainty little foot on a gild fender , in a boudoir all aglow with colour and lamplight ; a cavalier in satin raiment buckle his sword - belt before a venetian mirror ; a pair of lover kiss in a sunlit corridor ; a girl in a hansom cab ; a milliner 's shop ; and so on , and so on . 

 then come the classical subject of the last new school . weak imitation of Alma Tadema . Nero admire his mother 's corpse ; Claudius interrupt Messalina 's marriage with her lover Silus ; Clodius disguise among the woman of Casar 's household ; Pyrrha 's grotto . Lady Kirkbank expatiate upon all the picture , and generally make unlucky guess at the subject of they . classical literature be not her strong point . 

 Mr. Meander , the poet , discover that all the beautiful head be like Miss Fitzherbert . ' it be the same line , ' he exclaim , ' the line of lily and flowing water the gracious ineffable upward return ripple of the true retroussť nose , the divine flou , the loveliness which have lie dormant for century nay , be at one period of debase art scorn and trample under foot by the porcine multitude , as akin to the pug and the turn - up , until discover and enshrine on the altar of the beautiful by the Boticelli Revivalists . ' 

 Miss Fitzherbert simper , and accept these remark as mere statement of obvious fact . she be accustom to hear of Boticelli and the early italian painter in connection with her own charm of face and figure . 

 Lesbia , whose faultless feature be of the aquiline type , regard the bard 's rhapsody as insufferable twaddle , and begin to think Mr. Smithson almost a wit when he make fun of the bard . 

 Smithson be enchant when she laugh at his jokelet , even although she do not scruple to tell he that she think his favourite picture detestable , and look with the eye of indifference on a collection of jade that be worth a small fortune . 

 Mr. Meander fall into another rhapsody over those classic cup and shallow little bowl of absinthe - colour jade . 

 ' here if you like , be colour and beauty , ' he murmur , caress one of the little cup with the roseate tip of his supple finger . ' these , dear Smithson , be worth all the rest of your collection ; worth vanload of your cloisonnť enamel , your dragon - jar in blood - colour and blue . this cloudy indefinable substance , not crudely transparent nor yet distinctly opaque , a something which touch the boundary line of two world the real and the ideal . and then the colour ! great heaven , can anything be lovely than this shadowy tint which be neither yellow nor green ; faint , faint as the dawn of newly - awakened day ? after the siege of blood - bedabble Delhi , Baron Rothschild send a special agent to India to buy he a little jade tea - pot which have be the joy of Eastern king . only a tea - pot . yet Rothschild deem it worth a voyage from England to India . that be what the love of the beautiful mean , in Jew or Gentile , ' conclude the bard , smile on the company , as they gather round the florentine table on which the jade specimen be set out , Lady Kirkbank look at the little cup and basin as if she think they be go to do something , after all this fuss have be make about they . it seem hardly credible that any reasonable being could have give thirty guineas for one of those bit of greenish - yellow clouded glass , unless the thing have some peculiar property of expansion or contraction . 

 after this breakfast in Park Lane Lady Lesbia and her admirer meet daily . he go to all her party ; he sit out waltz with she , in conservatory , and on staircase ; for Horace Smithson be much too shrewd a man to enter himself in the race for dance man , handicap by his forty year and his fourteen stone . he contrive to amuse Lesbia by his conversation , which be essentially mundane , depreciate people whom all the rest of the world admire , or pretend to admire , tell she of the secret spring by which the society she see around she be move . he be judicious in his revelation of hide evil , and careful to say nothing which should offend Lady Lesbia 's modesty ; yet he contrive in a very short time to teach she that the world in which she live be an utterly corrupt world , whose high priest be Satan ; that all lofty aspiration and noble sentiment be out of place in society ; and that the bad among the people she meet be the people who lay any claim to be well than their neighbour . 

 ' that be why I adore Lady Kirkbank , ' he say , confidentially . ' the dear soul never pretend to be any well than the rest of we . she gamble , and we all know she gamble ; she peg , and we all know she peg ; and she make rather a boast of be up to her eye in debt . no humbug about dear old georgie . ' 

 Lesbia have see enough of her chaperon by this time to know that Mr. Smithson 's description of the lady be correct , and , this be so , she suppose that the fact and trait of character which he tell she about in other people be also true . she thus adopt the Smithsonian , or fashionable - pessimist view of society in general , and resign herself to the idea that the world be a very wicked world , as well as a very pleasant world , that the wicked people be generally the pleasant , and that it do not much matter . 

 the fact that Mr. Smithson be at Lesbia Haselden 's foot be obvious to everybody . 

 Lesbia , who have at first treat he with supreme hauteur , have grow more civil as she begin to understand the place he hold in the world , and how much social influence go along with unlimited wealth . she be civil , but she have quite make up her mind that nothing could ever induce she to become Horace Smithson 's wife . that offer which have hang fire in the case of poor Belle Trinder , be not too long delay on this occasion . Mr. Smithson call in Arlington Street about ten day after the breakfast in Park Lane , before luncheon , and before Lady Kirkbank have leave her room . he bring ticket for a matinťe d'invitation in Belgrave Square , at which a new and wonderful russian pianiste be to make a kind of semi - official dťbut , before an audience of critic and distinguished amateur , and the elect of the musical world . they be ticket which money could not buy , and be thus a meet offer for Lady Lesbia , and a plausible excuse for an early call . 

 Mr. Smithson succeed in see Lesbia alone , and then and there , with very little circumlocution , ask she to be his wife . 

 her social education have advance considerably since that summer day in the pine - wood , when John Hammond have woo she with passionate wooing . Mr. Smithson be a much less ardent suitor , and make his offer with the air of a man who expect to be accept . 

 Lesbia 's beautiful head bend a little , like a lily on its stalk , and a faint blush deepen the pale rise tint of her complexion . her reply be courteous and conventional . she be flatter , she be grateful for Mr. Smithson 's high opinion of she ; but she be deeply grieve if anything in her manner have give he reason to think that he be more to she than a friend , an old friend of dear Lady Kirkbank 's , whom she be naturally predispose to like , as Lady Kirkbank 's friend . 

 Horace Smithson turn pale as death , but if he be angry , he give no utterance to his angry feeling . he only ask if Lady Lesbia 's answer be final and on be tell that it be so , he dismiss the subject in the easy manner , and with a gentlemanlike placidity which very much astonish the lady . 

 ' you say that you regard I as your friend , ' he say . ' do not withdraw that privilege from I because I have ask for a high place in your esteem . forget all I have say this morning . be assure I shall never offend you by repeat it . ' 

 ' you be more than good , ' murmur Lesbia , who have expect a wild outbreak of despair or fury , rather than this friendly calm . 

 ' I hope that you and Lady Kirkbank will go and hear Madame Metzikoff this afternoon , ' pursue Mr. Smithson , return to the subject of the matinťe . ' the duchess 's room be lovely ; but no doubt you know they . ' 

 Lesbia blush , and confess that the Duchess of Lostwithiel be one of those select few who be not on Lady Kirkbank 's visit list . 

 ' there be people Lady Kirkbank can not get on with , ' she say . ' perhaps she will hardly like to go to the duchess 's , as she do not visit she . ' 

 ' oh , but this affair count for nothing . we go to hear Metzikoff , not to bow down to the duchess . all the people in town who care for music will be there , and you who play so divinely must enjoy fine professional playing . ' 

 ' I worship a really great player , ' say Lesbia , ' and if I can drag Lady Kirkbank to the house of the enemy , we will be there . ' 

 on this Mr. Smithson discreetly murmur ' au revoir , ' take up his hat and cane , and depart , without , in Sir George 's parlance , have turn a hair . 

 ' refusal number one , ' he say to himself , as he go downstairs , with his leisurely catlike pace , that velvet step by which he have gradually creep into society . ' we may have to go through refusal number two and number three ; but she mean to have I . she be a very clever girl for a countrybred one ; and she know that it be worth she while to be Lady Lesbia Smithson . ' 

 this soliloquy may be take to prove that Horace Smithson know Lesbia Haselden well than she know herself . she have refuse he in all good faith ; but even to - day , after he have leave she , she fall into a day - dream in which Mr. Smithson 's house and yacht , drag and hunter , form the shift picture in a dissolve view of society ; and Lesbia wonder if there be any other young woman in London who would refuse such an offer as that which she have quietly reject half - an - hour ago . 

 Lady Kirkbank surprise she while she be still absorb in this dreamy review of the position . it be just possible that the fair Georgie may have have notice of Mr. Smithson 's morning visit , and may have keep out of the way on purpose , for she be not a person of lazy habit , and be generally ready for her nine o'clock breakfast and her morning stroll in the park , however late she might have be out overnight . 

 ' Mr. Smithson have be here , I understand , ' say Lady Kirkbank , settle herself in an arm - chair by the open window , after she have kiss her protťgťe . ' Rilboche pass he on the stair . ' 

 ' Rilboche be always pass people on the stair , ' answer Lesbia rather pettishly . ' I think she must spend her life on the landing , listen for arrival and departure . ' 

 ' I have a kind of vague idea that Smithson would call to - day . he be so fussy about those ticket for the Metzikoff recital . I hate pianoforte recital , and I detest that starch old duchess , but I suppose I shall have to take you there or poor Smithson will be miserable , ' say Lady Kirkbank , watch Lesbia keenly over the top of the newspaper . 

 she expect Lesbia to confide in she , to announce herself blushingly as the betrothed of one of the rich commoner in England . but Lesbia sit gaze dreamily across the flower in the balcony at the house over the way , and say never a word ; so Lady Kirkbank 's curiosity burst into speech . 

 ' well , my dear , have he propose ? there be something in his manner last night when he put on your wrap that make I think the crisis be near . ' 

 ' the crisis be come and be past , and Mr. Smithson and I be just as good friend as ever . ' 

 ' what ! ' scream Lady Kirkbank . ' do you mean to tell I that you have refuse he ? ' 

 ' certainly . you know I never mean to do anything else . do you think I be like Miss Trinder , bent upon marry town and country house , stable and diamond ? ' 

 ' I do not think you be a fool , ' cry Lady Kirkbank , almost beside herself with vexation , for it have be bear in upon she , as the Methodists sometimes say , that if Mr. Smithson should prosper in his wooing it would be well for she , Lady Kirkbank , who would have a claim upon his kindness ever after . ' what can be your motive in refuse one of the very good match of the season or of ever so many season ? you think , perhaps , you will marry a duke , if you wait long enough for his grace to appear ; but the number of marry duke be rather small , Lady Lesbia , and I do not   think any of those would care to marry Lord Maulevrier 's granddaughter . ' 

 Lesbia start to her foot , pale as ash . 

 ' why do you fle my grandfather 's name in my face and with that diabolical sneer ? ' she exclaim . ' when I have ask you about he you have always evade my question . why should a man of the high rank shrink from marry Lord Maulevrier 's granddaughter ? my grandfather be a distinguished man Governor of Madras . such post be not give to nobody . how can you dare to speak as if it be a disgrace to I to belong to he ? ' 

 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 ' CLUBS , diamond , HEARTS , in WILD DISORDER see . ' 


 Lady Kirkbank have considerable difficulty in smooth Lesbia 's ruffled plumage . she do all in her power to undo the effect of her rash word declare that she have be carry away by temper she have speak she know not what word of no meaning . of course Lesbia 's grandfather have be a great man Governor of Madras ; altogether an important and celebrated person and Lady Kirkbank have mean nothing , could have mean nothing to his disparagement . 

 ' my dear girl , I be beside myself , and talk sheer nonsense , ' say Georgie . ' but you know really now , dearest , any woman of the world would be provoke at your foolish refusal of that dear good Smithson . only think of that too lovely house in Park Lane , a palace in the style of the italian Renaissance such a house be in itself equivalent to a peerage and there be no doubt Smithson will be offer a peerage before he be much old . I have hear it confidently assert that when the present Ministry retire Smithson will be make a peer . you have no idea what a useful man he be , or what henchman 's service he have do the Ministry in financial matter . and then there be his villa at Deauville you do not   know Deauville a positively perfect place , the villa , I mean , build by the Duke de Morny in the golden day of the Empire and another at Cowes , and his palace in Berkshire , a manor , my love , with a glorious old Tudor manor - house ; and he have a pie a terre in Paris , in the Faubourg , a ground - floor furnish in the pompeian style , half - a - dozen room open one out of the other , and surround a small garden , with a fountain in the middle . some of the great people in Paris occupy the upper part of the house , and their room of course be splendid ; but Smithson 's ground - floor be the gem of the Faubourg . however , I suppose there be no use in talk any more ; for there be the gong for luncheon . ' 

 Lesbia be in no humour for luncheon . 

 ' I would rather have a cup of tea in my own room , ' she say . ' this Smithson business have give I an abominable headache . ' 

 ' but you will go to hear Metzikoff ? ' 

 ' no , thank . you detest the Duchess of Lostwithiel , and you do not   care for pianoforte recital . why should I drag you there ? ' 

 ' but , my dear Lesbia , I be not such a selfish wretch as to keep you at home , when I know you be passionately fond of good music . forget all about your headache , and let I see how that lovely little Catherine of Aragon bonnet suit you . I be so glad I happen to see it in Seraphine 's hand yesterday , just as she be go to send it to Lady Fonvielle , who give herself such intolerable air on the strength of a pretty face , and always want to get the primeure in bonnet and thing . ' 

 ' another new bonnet ! ' reply Lesbia . ' what an infinity of thing I seem to be have from Seraphine . I be afraid I must owe she a good deal of money . ' 

 this be a vague way of speak about actual fact . Lady Lesbia might have speak with more certainty . her wardrobe and old - fashioned hang closet and chest of drawer in Arlington Street be cram to overflow with finery ; and then there be all the thing that she have grow tired of , or have think unbecoming , and have give away to Kibble , her own maid , or to Rilboche , who have in a great measure supersede Kibble on all important occasion ; for how could a Westmoreland girl know how to dress a young lady for London ball and drawing - room ? 

 ' if you have only accept Mr. Smithson it would not matter how much money you owe people , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' you have well come down to lunch . a glass of Heidseck will bring you up to concert pitch . ' 

 Champagne be Lady Kirkbank 's idea of a universal panacea ; and she have gradually succeed in teach Lesbia to believe in the sovereign power of Heidseck as a restorative for shattered nerve . at Fellside Lesbia have drunk only water ; but then at Fellside she have never know that feeling of exhaustion and prostration which follow day and night spend in society , the wear and tear of a mind forever on the alert , and brilliant spirit which be more often force than real . for her chief stimulant Lesbia have recourse to the teapot ; but there be occasion when she find that something more than tea be need to maintain that indispensable vivacity of manner which Lady Kirkbank call concert pitch . 

 to - day she allow herself to be persuade . she go down to luncheon , and take a couple of glass of dry champagne with her cutlet , and , thus restore , be equal to put on the new bonnet , which be so become that her spirit revive as she contemplate the effect in her glass . so Lady Kirkbank carry she off to the musical matinťe , beaming and radiant , have forget all about that dark hint of evil glancing at the name of her long dead grandfather . 

 the duchess be not on view when Lady Kirkbank and her protťgťe arrive , and a good many people belong to Georgie 's own particular set be scatter like flower among those real music - lover who have come solely to hear the new pianiste . the music - lover be mostly dowdy in their attire , and seem a race apart . among they be several young woman of the Blessed Damozel school , who wear flow garment of sap - green or ochre , or puff raiment of venetian red , and among whom the cartwheel hat , the Elizabethan sleeve , and the Toby frill be conspicuous . 

 there be very few man except the musical critic in this select assemblage , and Lesbia begin to think that it be go to be very dreary . she have live in such an atmosphere of masculine adulation while under Lady Kirkbank 's wing that it be a new thing to find herself in a room where there be none to love and very few to praise she . she feel out in the cold , as it be . those ungloved critic , with their shabby coat and dubious shirt , snuffy , smoky , everything they ought not to be , seem to she a race of barbarian . 

 find herself thus cold and lonely in the midst of the duchess 's splendour of peacock - blue velvet and peacock - feather decoration , Lesbia be almost glad when in the middle of Madame Metzikoff 's opening gondolied airy , fairy music , execute with surpass delicacy Mr. Smithson creep gently into the fauteuil just behind her , and leant over the back of the chair to whisper an inquiry as to her opinion of the pianist 's style . 

 ' she be exquisite , ' Lesbia murmur softly , but the whisper question and the murmured answer , low as they be , provoke indignant look from a brace of damsel in venetian red , who shake their Toby frill with an outraged air . 

 Lesbia feel that Mr. Smithson 's presence be hardly correct . it would have be ' well form ' if he have stay away ; and yet she be glad to have he here . at the bad he be some one nay , accord to Lady Kirkbank , he be the only one amongst all her admirer whose offer be worth have . all Lesbia 's other conquest have count as barren honour ; but if she could have bring herself to accept Mr. Smithson she would have secure the very good match of the season . 

 to marry a plain Mr. Smithson a man who have make his money in iron in cochineal on the Stock Exchange have seem to her absolute degradation , the surrender of all her lofty hope , her golden dream . but Lady Kirkbank have put the question in a new light when she say that Smithson would be offer a peerage . Smithson the peer would be altogether a different person from Smithson the commoner . 

 but be Lady Kirkbank sure of her fact , or truthful in her statement ? Lesbia 's experience of her chaperon 's somewhat loose notion of truth and exactitude make she doubtful upon this point . 

 be this as it might she be inclined to be civil to Smithson , albeit she be inwardly surprised and offend at his take her refusal so calmly . 

 ' you see that I be determined not to lose the privilege of your society , because I have be foolish ! ' he say presently , in the pause after the first part of the recital . ' I hope you will consider I as much your friend to - day as I be yesterday . ' 

 ' quite as much , ' she answer sweetly , and then they talk of Raff , and Rubenstein , and Henselt , and all the composer about whom it be the correct thing to discourse nowadays . 

 before they leave Belgrave Square Lady Kirkbank have offer Mr. Smithson Sir George 's place in her box at the Gaiety that evening , and have invite he to supper in Arlington Street afterwards . 

 it be Sarah Bernhardt 's first season in London the never - to - be - forget season of the Comťdie FranÁaise . 

 ' I should love of all thing to be there , ' say Mr. Smithson , meekly . he have a couple of stall in the third row for the whole of the season . ' but how can I be sure that I shall not be turn Sir George out of door ? ' 

 ' Sir George can never sit out a serious play . he only care for Chaumont or Judie . the Demi - monde be much too prosy for he . ' 

 ' the Demi - monde be one of the fine play in the french language , ' say Smithson . ' you know it , of course , Lady Lesbia ? ' 

 ' alas ! no . at Fellside I be not allow to read french play or novel : or only a novel now and then , which my grandmother select for I . ' 

 ' and now you read everything , I suppose , include Zola ? ' 

 ' the book be lie about , and I dip into they sometimes while I be have my hair brush , ' answer Lesbia , lightly . 

 ' I believe that be the only time lady devote to literature during the season , ' say Mr. Smithson . ' well , I envy you the delight of see the Demi - monde without know what it be all about beforehand . ' 

 ' I daresay there be a good many people who would not take their girl to see a play by Dumas , ' say Lady Kirkbank , ' but I make a point of let my girl see everything . it widen their mind and awaken their intelligence . ' 

 ' and do away with a good many silly prejudice , ' reply Mr. Smithson . 

 Lady Kirkbank and Lesbia be due at a Kensington garden - party after the recital , and from the garden - party , for which any hour suffice , they go to show themselves in the Park , then back to Arlington Street to dress for the play . then a hurried dinner , and they be in their place at the theatre in time for the rise of the curtain . 

 ' if it be an english play we would not care for be punctual , ' say Lady Kirkbank ; ' but I should hate to lose a word of Dumas . in his play every speech tell . ' 

 there be royalty present , and the house be good ; but not so full as it have be on some other night , for the english public have be tell that Sarah Bernhardt be the person to admire , and have be flock sheep - like after that golden - haired enchantress , whereby many of these sheep fight greedily for Sarah 's night , and ignore all other talent lose some of the fine acting on the french stage , notably that of Croizette , Delaunay and Febvre , in this very Demi - monde . Lesbia , who , in spite of her affectation , be still fresh enough to be charm with fine acting and a powerful play , be enthral by the stage , so wrapt in the scene that she be quite unaware of her brother 's presence in a stall just below Lady Kirkbank 's box . he too have a stall at the Gaiety . he have come in very late , when the play be half over . Lesbia be surprised when he present himself at the door of the box , after the fourth act . 

 Maulevrier and his sister have meet very seldom since the young lady 's dťbut . the young Earl do not go to many party , and the society he cultivate be chiefly masculine ; and as he neither play polo nor shoot pigeon his masculine pursuit do not bring he in his sister 's way . Lady Kirkbank have ask he to her house with that wide and general invitation which be so easily evade . he have promise to go , and he have not go . and thus Lesbia and he have pursue their several way , only cross each other 's path now and then at a race meeting or in a theatre . 

 ' how d'ye do , Lady Kirkbank ? how d'ye do , Lesbia ? just catch sight of you from below as the curtain be go down , ' say Maulevrier , shake hand with the lady and salute Mr. Smithson with a somewhat supercilious nod . ' rather surprised to see you and Lesbia here to - night , Lady Kirkbank . be not   the Demi - monde rather strong meat for babe , eh ? not exactly the play one would take a young lady to see . ' 

 ' why should a young lady be forbid to see a fine play , because there be some hard and bitter truth tell in it ? ' ask Lady Kirkbank . ' Lesbia see Madame d'Ange and all her sisterhood in the Park and about London every day of her life . why should not she see they on the stage , and hear their history , and understand how cruel their fate be , and learn to pity they , if she can ? I really think this play be a lesson in christian charity ; and I should like to see that Oliver man strangle , though Delaunay play the part divinely . what a voice ! what a manner ! how polished ! how perfect ! and they tell I he be go to leave the stage in a year or two . what will the world do without he ? ' 

 Maulevrier do not attempt to suggest a solution of this difficulty . he be watch Mr. Smithson as he leant against the back of Lesbia 's chair and talk to she . the two seem very familiar , laughingly discuss the play and the actor . Smithson know , or pretend to know , all about the latter . he tell Lesbia who make Croizette 's gown the upholsterer who furnish that lovely house of hers in the Bois the sum pay for her horse , her picture , her diamond . it seem to Lesbia , when she have hear all , that Croizette be a much - to - be - envy person . 

 Mr. Smithson have unpublishe bon - mot of Dumas at his finger end ; he know Daudet , and Sarcey , and Sardou , and seem to be thoroughly at home in parisian artistic society . Lesbia begin to think that he would hardly be so despicable a person as she have at first suppose . no wonder he and his wealth have turn poor Belle Trinder 's head . how could a rural vicar 's daughter , accustom to poverty , help be dazzle by such magnificence ? 

 Maulevrier stay in the box only a short time , and refuse Lady Kirkbank 's invitation to supper . she do not urge the point , as she have surprise one or two very unfriendly glance at Mr. Smithson in Maulevrier 's honest eye . she do not want an antagonistic brother to interfere with her plan . she have make up her mind to ' run ' Lesbia accord to her own idea , and any counter influence might be fatal . so , when Maulevrier say he be due at the Marlborough after the play she let he go . 

 ' I might as well be at Fellside and you in London , for anything I see of you , ' say Lesbia . 

 ' you be up to your eye in engagement , and I do not   suppose you want to see any more of I . ' Maulevrier answer , bluntly . ' but I will call to - morrow morning , if I be likely to find you at home . I have   some news for you . ' 

 ' then I will stay at home on purpose to see you . news be always delightful . be it good news , by - the - bye ? ' 

 ' very good ; at least , I think so . ' 

 ' what be it about ? ' 

 ' oh ! that be a long story , and the curtain be just go up . the news be about Mary . ' 

 ' about Mary ! ' exclaim Lesbia , elevate her eyebrow . ' what news can there possibly be about Mary ? ' 

 ' such news as there generally be about every nice jolly girl , at least once in her life . ' 

 ' you do not   mean that she be engaged to a curate ? ' 

 ' no , not to a curate . there go the curtain . " I will see you later , " as the Yankee President use to say when people bother he , and he do not   like to say no . ' 

 engage : Mary engage ! the idea of such an altogether unexpected event distract Lesbia 's mind all through the last act of the Demi - monde . she hardly know what the actor be talk about . Mary , her young sister ! Mary , a good look girl enough , but by no mean a beauty , and with manner utterly unformed . that Mary should be engage to be marry , while she , Lesbia , be still free , seem an obvious absurdity . 

 and yet the fact be , on reflection , easily to be account for . these unattractive girl be generally the first to bind themselves with the vow of betrothal . Lady Kirkbank have tell she of many such case . the poor creature know that their chance will be few , and therefore gratefully welcome the first wooer . 

 ' but who can the man be ? ' think Lesbia . ' Mary have be keep as seclude as a cloistered nun . there be so few family we have ever be allow to mix with . the man must be a curate , who have take advantage of grandmother 's illness to force his way into the family circle at Fellside and who have make love to Mary in some of her lonely ramble over the hill , I daresay . it be really very wrong to allow a girl to roam about in that way . ' 

 Sir George and a couple of his horsey friend be wait for supper when Lady Kirkbank and her party arrive in Arlington Street . the dining - room look a picture of comfort . the oval table , the low lamp , the cluster of candle under coloured shade , the great oriental bowl of wild flower eglantine , honeysuckle , foxglove , all the sweet hedge flower of midsummer , make a central mass of colour and brightness against the subdue and even sombre tone of wall and curtain . the room be old , the furniture old . nothing have be alter since the time of Sir George 's great grandfather ; and the whirligig of time have just now make the old thing precious . yes , those chair and table and sideboard and bookcase and wine - cooler against which Georgie 's soul have revolt in the early year of her wed life be now thing of beauty , and Georgie 's friend envy she the possession of indisputable chippendale furniture . 

 Mr. Mostyn , a distinguished owner of race - horse , with his pretty wife , make up the party . the gentleman be full of his entry for Liverpool and Chester , and discourse mysteriously with Sir George and the horsey bachelor all supper time . the lady have lately take up science as a new form of excitement , not incompatible with frock , bonnet , Hurlingham , the Ranelagh , and Sandown . she rave about Huxley and Tyndall , and be perpetually come down upon her friend with awful fact about the sun , and startling proposition about latent heat , or spontaneous generation . she know all about gas , and would hardly accept a glass of water without explain what it be make of . draw by Mr. Smithson for Lesbia 's amusement , the scientific matron be undoubtedly ' good fun . ' the race man be full of talk . Lesbia and Lady Kirkbank rave about the play they have just be see , and praise Delaunay with an enthusiasm which be calculate to make the rest of mankind burst with envy . 

 ' do you know you be make I positively wretche by your talk about that man ? ' say Colonel Delville , one of Sir George 's racing friend , and an ancient adorer of the fair Georgie 's . ' no , I tell you there be never anything offer high than five to four on the mare , ' interjectionally , to Sir George . ' there be a day when I think I be your idea of an attractive man . yes , George , a clear case of roping , ' again interjectionally . ' and to hear you rave about this play - act fellow it be too humiliating . ' 

 Lady Kirkbank simper , and then sigh . 

 ' we be get old together , ' she murmur . ' I have come to an age when one can only admire the charm of manner in the abstract the Beautiful for the sake of the Beautiful . I think if I be lie in my grave , the music of Delaunay 's voice would thrill I , under six foot of London clay . will no one take any more wine ? no . then we may as well go into the next room and begin our little Nap . ' 

 the adjoining room be Sir George 's snuggery ; and it be here that the cosy little round game after supper be always play . Sir George be not a studious person . he never read , and he never write , except an occasional cheque on account , for an importunate tradesman . his correspondence be conduct by the telegraph or telephone ; and the room , therefore , be absorb neither by book nor write desk . it be furnish solely with a view to comfort . there be a round table in the centre , under a large moderator lamp which give an exceptionally brilliant light . a divan cover with dark brown velvet occupy three side of the room . a few choice piece of old blue oriental ware in the corner enliven the dark brown wall . three or four easy chair stand about near the broad , old - fashioned fireplace , which have be improve with a modern - antique brass grate and a blue and white tile hearth . 

 ' there be not   a room in my house that look half as comfortable as this den of your , George , ' say Mr. Smithson , as he seat himself by Lesbia 's side at the card table . 

 they have agree to be partner . ' partner at card , even if we be not to be partner for life , ' Smithson have whisper , tenderly ; and Lesbia 's only reply have be a modest lowering of lovely eyelid , and a faint , faint blush . Lesbia 's blush be grow fainter every day . 

 ' that be because everything in your house be so confoundedly handsome and expensive , ' retort Sir George , who do not very much care about be call George , tout court , by a person of Mr. Smithson 's obscure antecedent , but who have to endure the familiarity for reason know only to himself and Mr. Smithson . ' no man can expect to be comfortable in a house in which every room have cost a small fortune . my wife re - arrange this den half - a - dozen year ago when we take to sittin ' here of an evenin ' . she pick up the chair and the blue pot at Bonham 's , have everythin ' cover with brown velvet nice subdue tone , suit old people hang up that yaller curtain , just for a bit of colour , and here we be . ' 

 ' it be the cosy room in town , ' say Colonel Delville , whereupon Mrs. Mostyn , while counter be be distribute , explain to the company on scientific principle why the room be comfortable , expatiate upon the effect of yellow and brown upon the retina , and some curious fact relate to the optic machinery of water - flea , as lately discover by a great naturalist . 

 unfortunately for science , the game have now begin , and the player be curiously indifferent as to the visual organ of water - flea . 

 the game go on merrily till the pearly light of dawn begin to creep through the chink of Lady Kirkbank 's yellow curtain . everybody seem gay , yet everybody could not be win . Fortune have not smile upon Lesbia 's card , or on those of her partner . the Smithson and Haselden firm have come to grief . Lesbia 's little ivory purse have be empty of its three or four half - sovereign , and Mr. Smithson have be capitalise a lose concern for the last two hour . and the play have be fast and furious , although nominally for small stake . 

 ' I be afraid to think of how much I must owe you , ' say Lesbia , when Mr. Smithson bid her good night . 

 ' oh , nothing worth speak of sixteen or seventeen pound , at most . ' 

 Lesbia feel cold and creepy , and hardly know whether it be the chill of new - bear day , or the sense of owe money to Horace Smithson . those three or four half - sovereign to - night be the end of her last remittance from Lady Maulevrier . she have have a great many remittance from that generous grandmother ; and the money have all go , somehow . it be go , and yet she have pay for hardly anything . she have account with all Lady Kirkbank 's tradesman . the money have melt away it have ooze out of her pocket at card , on the race - course , in reckless gift to servant and people , at fancy fair , for trifle buy here and there by the way - side , as it be , for the sake of buying . if she have be suddenly ask for an account of her stewardship she could not have tell what she have do with half of the money . and now she must ask for twenty pound more , and immediately , to pay Mr. Smithson . 

 she go up to her room in the clear early light , and stand like a statue , with fix thoughtful eye , while Kibble take off her finery , the pretty pale yellow gown which set off her dark brown hair , her violet eye . for the first time in her life she feel the keen pang of anxiety about money matter the necessity to think of way and mean . she have no idea how much money she have receive from her grandmother since she have begin her career in Scotland last autumn . the cheque have be send she as she ask for they ; sometimes even before she ask for they ; and she have keep no account . she think her grandmother be so rich that expenditure could not matter . she suppose that she be draw upon an inexhaustible supply . and now Lady Kirkbank have tell she that Lady Maulevrier be not rich , as the world reckon nowadays . the saving of a dowager countess even in forty year of seclusion could be but a small fund to draw upon for the expense of life at high pressure . 

 ' the sum people spend nowadays be positively appalling , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' a man with five or six thousand a year be an absolute pauper . I be sure our existence be only genteel beggary , and yet we spend over ten thousand . ' 

 enlighten thus by the lip of the worldly - wise , Lesbia think ruefully of the bill which her grandmother would have to pay for she at the end of the season , bill of the amount whereof she could not even make an approximate guess . Seraphine 's charge have never be discuss in her hearing but Lady Kirkbank have admit that the creature be dear . 

 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 ' SWIFT SUBTLE POST , carrier of GRISLY CARE . ' 


 Maulevrier call in Arlington Street before twelve o'clock next day , and find Lesbia just return from her early ride , look as fresh and fair as if there have be no such thing as Nap or late hour in the story of her life . she be repose in a large easy chair by the open window , in habit and hat , just as she have come from the row , where she have be laugh and chat with Mr. Smithson , who jog demurely by her side on his short - legged hunter , drop out envenomed little joke about the passer by . People who see he rid by her side upon this particular morning fancy there be something more than usual in the gentleman 's manner , and make up their mind that Lady Lesbia Haselden be to be mistress of the fine house in Park Lane . Mr. Smithson have flutter and flutter for the last five season ; but this time the flutterer be catch . 

 in her newly - awaken anxiety about money matter , Lesbia have forget Mary 's engagement : but the sight of Maulevrier recall the fact . 

 ' come over here and sit down , ' she say , ' and tell I this nonsense about Mary . I be expire with curiosity . the thing be too absurd . ' 

 ' why absurd ? ' ask Maulevrier , sit where she bid he , and studiously peruse the name in his hat , as if it be a revelation . 

 ' oh , for a thousand reason , ' answer Lesbia , switch the flower in the balcony with her light little whip . ' first and foremost it be absurd to think of any one so bury alive as poor Mary be find an admirer ; and secondly well I do not   want to be rude to my own sister but Mary be not particularly attractive . ' 

 ' Mary be the dear girl in the world . ' 

 ' very likely . I only say that she be not particularly attractive . ' 

 ' and do you think there be no attraction in goodness , in freshness and innocence , candour , generosity ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . but I think that if Mary 's nose have be a thought long , and if she have keep her skin free from freckle she would have be almost pretty . ' 

 ' do you really ? luckily for Mary the man who be go to marry she think her lovely . ' 

 ' I suppose he like freckle . I once hear a man say he do . he say they be so original so much character about they . and , pray , who be the man ? ' 

 ' your old adorer , and my dear friend , John Hammond . ' 

 Lesbia turn as pale as death pale with rage and mortification . it be not jealousy , this pang which rent her shallow soul . she have cease to care for John Hammond . the whirlpool of society have spin that first fancy out of her giddy brain . but that a man who have love the high , who have worship she , the peerless , the beautiful , should calmly transfer his affection to her young sister , be to the last degree exasperating . 

 ' your friend Mr. Hammond must be a fickle fool , ' she exclaim , ' who do not know his own mind from day to day . ' 

 ' oh , but it be more than a day after you reject he that he engage himself to Molly . it be all my doing , and I be proud of my work . I take the poor fellow back to Fellside last March , bruise and break by your cruel treatment , heartsore and depressed . I give he over to Molly , and molly cure he . unconsciously , innocently , she win that noble heart . ah , Lesbia , you do not   know what a heart it be which you so nearly break . ' 

 ' girl in our rank of life can not   afford to marry noble heart , ' say Lesbia , scornfully . ' do you mean to tell I that Lady Maulevrier consent to the engagement ? ' 

 ' she cut up rather rough at first ; but molly hold her own like a young lioness and the grandmother give way . you see she have a fix idea that molly be a very second - rate sort of person compare with you , and that a husband who be not nearly good enough for you might pass muster for Molly ; and so she give way , and there be not   a happy young woman in the three kingdom than Mary Haselden . ' 

 ' what be they to live upon ? ' ask Lesbia , with an incredulous air . 

 ' Mary will have she five hundred a year . and Hammond be a very clever fellow . you may be sure he will make his mark in the world . ' 

 ' and how be they to live while he be make his mark ? five hundred a year will not   do more than pay for Mary 's frock , if she go into society . ' 

 ' perhaps they will live without society . ' 

 ' in some horrid little hovel in one of those narrow street off Ecclestone Square , ' suggest Lesbia , shudderingly . ' it be too dreadful to think of a young woman doom herself to life - long penury , just because she be so foolish as to fall in love . ' 

 ' your day for fall in love be over , I suppose , Lesbia ? ' say Maulevrier , contemplate his sister with keen scrutiny . 

 the beautiful face , so perfect in line and colour , curiously recall that other face at Fellside ; the dowager 's face , with its look of marble coldness , and the half - express pain under that outward calm . here be the face of one who have not yet know pain or passion . here be the cold perfection of beauty with unawakened heart . 

 ' I do not   know ; I be too busy to think of such thing . ' 

 ' you have do with love ; and you have begin to think of marriage , of establish yourself properly . People tell I you be go to marry Mr. Smithson . ' 

 ' People tell you more about I than I know about myself . ' 

 ' come now , Lesbia , I have a right to know the truth upon this point . your brother your only brother should be the first person to be tell . ' 

 ' when I be engage , I have no doubt you will be the first person , or the second person , ' answer Lesbia , lightly . ' Lady Kirkbank , live on the premise , be likely to be the first . ' 

 ' then you be not engage to Smithson ? ' 

 ' do not   I tell you so just now ? Mr. Smithson do I the honour to make I an offer yesterday , at about this hour ; and I do myself the honour to reject he . ' 

 ' and yet you be whisper together in the box last night , and you be rid in the row with he this morning . I just meet a fellow who see you together . do you think it be right , Lesbia , to play fast and loose with the man to encourage he , if you do not   mean to marry he ? ' 

 ' how can you accuse I of encourage a person whom I flatly refuse yesterday morning ? if Mr. Smithson like my society as a friend , must I need deny he my friendship , ask Lady Kirkbank to shut her door against he ? Mr. Smithson be very pleasant as an acquaintance ; and although I do not   want to marry he , there be no reason I should snub he . ' 

 ' Smithson be not a man to be trifle with . you will find yourself entangle in a web which you will not   easily break through . ' 

 ' I be not afraid of webs . by - the - bye , be it true that Mr. Smithson be likely to get a peerage ? ' 

 ' I have hear people say as much . Smithson have spend no end of money on electioneering , and be a power in the House , though he very rarely speak . his Berkshire estate give he a good deal of influence in that county ; at the last general election he subscribe twenty thou to the conservative cause ; for , like most man who have rise from nothing , your friend Smithson be a fine old tory . he be specially elect at the Carlton six year ago , and have make himself uncommonly useful to his party . he be suppose to be great on financial question , and come out tremendously on colonial railway or drainage scheme , about which the House in general be in profound ignorance . on those occasion Smithson score high . a man with immense wealth have always chance . no doubt , if you be to marry he , the peerage would be easily manage . Smithson 's money , back by the Maulevrier influence , would go a long way . my grandmother would move heaven and earth in a case of that kind . you have well take pity on Smithson . ' 

 Lesbia laugh . that idea of a possible peerage elevate Smithson in her eye . she know nothing of his political career , as she live in a set which ignore politic altogether . Mr. Smithson have never talk to she of his parliamentary duty ; and it be a new thing for she to hear that he have some kind of influence in public affair . 

 ' suppose I be inclined to accept he , would you like he as a brother - in - law ? ' she ask lightly . ' I think from your manner last night that you rather dislike he . ' 

 ' I do not   quite like he or any of his breed , the newly rich , who go about in society swell with the sense of their own importance , perspire gold , as it be . and one have always a faint suspicion of man who have get rich very quickly , an idea that there must be some kind of juggling . not in the case of a great contractor , perhaps , who can point to a viaduct and dock and railway , and say , " I build that , and that , and that . these be the source of my wealth . " but a man who get enormously rich by mere ciphering ! where can his money come from , except out of other people 's pocket ? I know nothing against your Mr. Smithson , but I always suspect that class of man , ' conclude Maulevrier shake his head significantly . 

 Lesbia be not much influence by her brother 's notion , she have never be teach to think he an oracle . on the contrary , she have be tell that his life hitherto have be all foolishness . 

 ' when be Mary and Mr. Hammond to be marry ? ' she ask , ' Grandmother say they must wait a year . Mary be much too young and so on , and so forth . but I see no reason for wait . ' 

 ' surely there be reason financial reason . Mr. Hammond can not be in a position to begin housekeeping . ' 

 ' oh , they will risk all that . molly be a daring girl . he propose to she on the top of Helvellyn , in a storm of wind and rain . ' 

 ' and she never write I a word about it . how very unsisterly ! ' 

 ' she be as wild as a hawk , and I daresay she be too shy to tell you anything about it . ' 

 ' pray when do it all occur ? ' 

 ' just before I come to London . ' 

 ' two month ago . how absurd for I to be in ignorance all this time ! well , I hope Mary will be sensible , and not marry till Mr. Hammond be able to give she a decent home . it would be so dreadful to have a sister muddle in poverty , and clamour for one 's cast - off gown . ' 

 Maulevrier laugh at this gloomy suggestion . 

 ' it be not easy to foretell the future , ' he say , ' but I think I may venture to promise that Molly will never wear your cast - off gown . ' 

 ' oh , you think she would be too proud . you do not   know , perhaps , how poverty genteel poverty lower one 's pride . I have hear story from Lady Kirkbank that would make your hair stand on end . I be begin to know the world . ' 

 ' I be glad of that . if you be to live in the world it be well that you should know what it be make of . but if I have a voice or a choice in the matter I have rather my sister stay at Grasmere , and remain ignorant of the world and all its way . ' 

 ' while you enjoy your life in London . that be just like the selfishness of a man . under the pretence of keep his sister or his wife secure from all possible contact with evil , he bury they alive in a country house , while he have all the wickedness for his own share in London . oh , I be begin to understand the creature . ' 

 ' I be afraid you be begin to be wise . remember that knowledge of evil be the prelude to the Fall . well , good - bye . ' 

 ' will not   you stay to lunch ? ' 

 ' no , thank , I never lunch frightful waste of time . I shall drop in at the Haute Gomme and take a cup of tea later on . ' 

 the Haute Gomme be a new club in Piccadilly , which Maulevrier and some of his friend affect . 

 Lesbia go towards the drawing - room door with her brother , and just as he reach the door she lay her hand caressingly upon his shoulder . he turn and star at she , somewhat surprised , for he and she have never be give to demonstration of affection . 

 ' Maulevrier , I want you to do I a favour , ' she say , in a low voice , blush a little , for the thing she be go to ask be a new thing for she to ask , and she have a deep sense of shame in make her demand . ' I I lose money at Nap last night . only seventeen pound . Mr. Smithson and I be partner , and he pay my loss . I want to pay he immediately , and - - ' 

 ' and you be too hard up to do it . I will write you a cheque this instant , ' say Maulevrier goodnaturedly ; but while he be write the cheque he take occasion to remonstrate with Lesbia on the foolishness of card playing . 

 ' I be oblige to do as Lady Kirkbank do , ' she answer feebly . ' if I be to refuse to play it would be a kind of reproach to she . ' 

 ' I do not   think that would kill Lady Kirkbank , ' reply Maulevrier , with a touch of scorn . ' she have have to endure a good many imply reproach in her day , and they do not   seem to have hurt she very much . I wish to heaven my grandmother have choose any one else in London for your chaperon . ' 

 ' I be afraid Lady Kirkbank 's be rather a rowdy set , ' answer Lesbia , coolly ; ' and I sometimes feel as if I have throw myself away . we go almost everywhere at least , there be only just a few house to which we be not ask . but those few make all the difference . it be so humiliating to feel that one be not in quite the good society . however , Lady Kirkbank be a dear , good old thing , and I be not go to grumble about she . ' 

 ' I have   make the cheque for five - and - twenty . you can cash it at your milliner 's , ' say Maulevrier . ' I should not like Smithson to know that you have be oblige to ask I for the money . ' 

 ' apropos to Mr. Smithson , do you know if he be in quite the good society ? ' ask Lesbia . 

 ' I do not   know what you mean by quite the good . a man of Smithson 's wealth can generally poke his nose in anywhere , if he know how to behave himself . but of course there be people with whom money and fine house have no weight . the Conservatives be all civil to Smithson because he come down handsomely at General Elections , and be useful to they in other way . I believe that Smithson 's wife , if she be a thorough - breed one , could go into any society she like , and make her house one of the most popular in London . perhaps that be what you really want to ask . 

 ' no , it be not , ' answer Lesbia , carelessly ; ' I be only talk for the sake of talk . a thousand thank for the cheque , you good of brother . ' 

 ' it be not worth talk about ; but , Lesbia , do not   play card any more . believe I , it be not good form . ' 

 ' well , I will try to keep out of it in future . it be horrid to see one 's sovereign melt away ; but there be a delightful excitement in win . ' 

 ' no doubt , ' answer Maulevrier , with a remorseful sigh . 

 he speak as a reform plunger , and with many a bitter experience of the race - course and the card - room . even now , though he have steady himself wonderfully , he could not get on without a little mild gambling half - crown pool , whist with half - guinea point but when he condescend to such small stake he feel that he have settle down into a respectable middle - aged player , and have a right to rebuke the folly of youth . 

 Lesbia fly to the piano and sing one of her little german ballad directly Maulevrier be go . she feel as if a burden have be lift from her soul , now that she be able to pay Mr. Smithson without wait to ask Lady Maulevrier for the money . and as she sing she meditate upon Maulevrier 's remark about Smithson . he know nothing to the man 's discredit , except that he have grow rich in a short space of time . surely no man ought to be blame for that . and he think that Mr. Smithson 's wife might make her house the most popular in London . Lesbia , in her mind 's eye , beheld an imaginary Lady Lesbia Smithson give dance in that magnificent mansion , entertain royal personage . and the doorway would be festoon with rose , as she have see they the other night at a ball in Grosvenor Square ; but the house in Grosvenor Square be a hovel compare with the Smithsonian Palace . 

 Lesbia be begin to be a little tired of Lady Kirkbank and her surrounding . life take prestissimo be apt to pall . Lesbia sigh as she finish her little song . she be begin to look upon her existence as a problem which have be give to she to solve , and the solution just at present be all dark . 

 as she rise from the piano a footman come in with two letter on a salver bulky letter , such package as Lesbia have never see before . she wonder what they could be . she open the thick envelope first . it be Seraphine 's bill such a bill , page after page on creamy Bath post , write in an elegant italian hand by one of Seraphine 's young woman . 

 Lesbia look at it aghast with horror . the total at the foot of the first page be appalling , ever so much more than she could have suppose the whole amount of her indebtedness ; but the total go on increase at the foot of every page , until at sight of the final figure Lesbia give a wild shriek , like a wretched creature who have receive a telegram announce bitterest loss . 

 the final total be twelve hundred and ninety - three pound seventeen and sixpence ! 

 Thirteen hundred pound for clothe in eight week ! 

 no , the thing be a cheat , a mistake . they have send she somebody else 's bill . she have not have half these thing . 

 she read the first page , her heart beat violently as she pore over the figure , her eye dim and cloud with the trouble of her brain . 

 yes , there be her court dress . the description be too minute to be mistake ; and the court dress , with feather , and shoe , and glove , and fan , come to a hundred and thirty pound . then follow innumerable item . the very simple of her gown cost five - and - twenty pound frock about which Seraphine have talk so carelessly , as if two or three more or less could make no difference . bonnet and hat , at five or seven guineas apiece , swell the account . parasol and fan be of fabulous price , as it seem to Lesbia ; and the shoe and stocking to match her various gown occur again and again between the more important item , like the refrain of an old ballad . all the useless and unnessary thing which she have order , because she think they pretty or because she be tell they be fashionable , rise up against she in the figure of the bill , like the record of forget sin at the Day of Judgment . 

 she sink into a chair , pallid with consternation , and sit with the bill in her lap , turn the page listlessly , and star at the figure . 

 ' it can not be so much , ' she cry to herself . ' it must be add up wrong ; ' and then she feebly try to cast up a column ; but arithmetic not be one of those accomplishment which Lady Maulevrier deem necessary to a patrician beauty 's success in life , Lesbia 's education have be somewhat neglect upon this point , and she fling the bill from she in a rage , unable to hold the figure in her brain . 

 she open the second envelope , her jeweller 's account . at the very first item she give another scream , fainter than the first , for her mind be get harden against such shock . 

 ' to re - set a suite of amethyst , with forty - four fine brazilian brilliant , three hundred and fifteen pound . ' 

 then follow the trifle she have buy at different visit to the shop casual purchase , buy on the impulse of the moment . these swell the account to a little over eight hundred pound . Lesbia sit like a statue , numb by despair , appal at the idea of owe over two thousand pound . 

 CHAPTER XXX . 

 ' ROSES choked among THORNS and THISTLES . ' 


 Lady Lesbia eat no luncheon that day . she go to her own room and have a cup of tea to steady her nerve , and send to ask Lady Kirkbank to go to she as soon as she have finish luncheon . Lady Kirkbank 's luncheon be a serious business , a substantial leisurely meal with which she fortify herself for the day 's work . it enable she to endure all the fatigue of visit and park , and to be airily indifferent to the charm of dinner ; for Lady Kirkbank be not one of those matron who with advanced year take to gourmandise as a kind of fine art . she give good dinner , because she know people would not come to Arlington Street to eat bad one ; but she be not a person who live only to dine . at luncheon she give her healthy appetite full scope , and eat like a ploughman . 

 she find Lesbia in her white muslin dressing - gown , with cheek as pale as the gown she wear . she be sit in an easy chair , with a low tea - table at her side , and the two bill be in the tray among the tea - thing . 

 ' have you any idea how much I owe Seraphine and Cabochon ? ' she ask , look up despairingly at Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' what , have they send in their bill already ? ' 

 ' already ! I wish they have send they before . I should have know how deeply I be get into debt . ' 

 ' be they very heavy ? ' 

 ' they be dreadful ! I owe over two thousand pound . how can I tell Lady Maulevrier that ? two thousand one hundred pound ! it be awful . ' 

 ' there be woman in London who would think very little of owe twice as much , ' say Lady Kirkbank , in a comfort tone , though the fact , seriously consider , could hardly afford comfort . ' your grandmother say you be to have carte blanche . she may think that you have be just a little extravagant ; but she can hardly be angry with you for have take she at her word . two thousand pound ! yes , it certainly be rather stiff . ' 

 ' Seraphine be a cheat ! ' exclaim Lesbia , angrily . ' her price be positively exorbitant ! ' 

 ' my dear child , you must not say that . Seraphine be positively moderate in comparison with the new people . ' 

 ' and Mr. Cabochon , too . the idea of his charge I three hundred guineas for re - set those stupid old amethyst . ' 

 ' my dear , you would have diamond mix with they , ' say Lady Kirkbank , reproachfully . 

 Lesbia turn away her head with an impatient sigh . she remember perfectly that it be Lady Kirkbank who have persuade she to order the diamond setting ; but there be no use in talk about it now . the thing be do . she be two thousand pound in debt two thousand pound to these two people only and there be ever so many shop at which she have account glover , bootmaker , habit - maker , the tailor who make her Newmarket coat and cloth gown , the stationer who supply she with note - paper of every variety , monogramme , floral ; sporting , illuminate with this or that device , the folly of the pass hour , hatch by penniless Invention in a garret , pander to the vanity of the idle . 

 ' I must write to my grandmother by this afternoon 's post , ' say Lesbia , with a heavy sigh . 

 ' impossible . we have to be at the Ranelagh by four o'clock . Smithson and some other man be to meet we there . I have promise to drive Mrs. Mostyn down . you have well begin to dress . ' 

 ' but I ought to write to - day . I have well ask for this money at once , and have do with it . two thousand pound ! I feel as if I be a thief . you say my grandmother be not a rich woman ? ' 

 ' not rich as the world go nowadays . nobody be rich now , except your commercial magnate , like Smithson . great peer , unless their money be in London ground - rent , be great pauper . to own land be to be destitute . I do not   suppose two thousand pound will break your grandmother 's bank ; but of course it be a large sum to ask for at the end of two month ; especially as she send you a good deal of money while we be at Cannes . if you be engage about to make a really good match you could ask for the money as a matter of course ; but as it be , although you have be tremendously admire , from a practical point of view you be a failure . ' 

 a failure . it be a hard word , but Lesbia feel it be true . she , the reign beauty , the cynosure of every eye , have make no conquest worth talk about , except Mr. Smithson . 

 ' do not   tell your grandmother anything about the bill for a week or two , ' say Lady Kirkbank , soothingly . ' the creature can wait for their money . give yourself time to think . ' 

 ' I will , ' answer Lesbia , dolefully . 

 ' and now make haste , and get ready for the Ranelagh . my love , your eye be dreadfully heavy . you must use a little belladonna . I will send Rilboche to you . ' 

 and for the first time in her life , Lesbia , too depressed to argue the point , consent to have her eye doctor by Rilboche . 

 she be gay enough at the Ranelagh , and look she lovely at a dinner party that evening , and go to three party after the dinner , and go home in the faint light of early morning , after sit out a late waltz in a balcony with Mr. Smithson , a balcony bank round with hot - house flower which be begin to droop a little in the chilly morning air , just as beauty droop under the search eye of day . 

 Lesbia put the bill in her desk , and give herself time to think , as Lady Kirkbank advise she . but the thinking progress result in very little good . all the thought of which she be capable would not reduce the total of those two dreadful account . and every day bring some fresh bill . the stationer , the bootmaker , the glover , the perfumer , people who have court Lady Lesbia 's custom with an air which imply that the honour of serve fashionable beauty be the first consideration , and the question of payment quite a minor point these now begin to ask for their money in the most prosaic way . every straw add to Lesbia 's burden ; and her heart grow heavy with every post . 

 ' one can see the season be wan when these people begin to pester with their account , ' say Lady Kirkbank , who always talk of tradesman as if they be her natural enemy . 

 Lesbia accept this explanation of the avalanche of bill , and never suspect Lady Kirkbank 's influence in the matter . it happen , however , that the chaperon , have her own reason for wish to bring Mr. Smithson 's suit to a successful issue , have tell Seraphine and the other people to send in their bill immediately . Lady Lesbia would be leave London in a week or so , she inform these purveyor , and would like to settle everything before she go away . 

 Mr. Smithson appear in Arlington Street almost every day , and be full of scheme for new pleasure or pleasure as nearly new as the world of fashion can afford . he be particularly desirous that Sir George and Lady Kirkbank , with Lady Lesbia , should stay at his Berkshire place during the Henley week . he have a large steam launch , and the regatta be a kind of carnival for his intimate friend , who be not too proud to riot and batten upon the parvenu 's luxurious hospitality , albeit they be apt to talk somewhat slightingly of his antecedent . 

 Lady Kirkbank feel that this invitation be a turning point , and that if Lesbia go to stay at Rood Hall , her acceptance of Mr. Smithson be a certainty . she would see he at his place in Berkshire in the most flattering aspect ; his surrounding as lord of the manor , and owner of one of the fine old place in the county , would lend dignity to his insignificance . Lesbia at first express a strong disinclination to go to Rood Hall . there would be a most unpleasant feeling in stop at the house of a man whom she have refuse , she tell Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' my dear , Mr. Smithson have forgive you , ' answer her chaperon . ' he be the soul of good nature . ' 

 ' one would think he be accustomed to be refuse , ' say Lesbia . ' I do not   want to go to Rood Hall , but I do not   want to spoil your Henley week . could not I run down to Grasmere for a week , with Kibble to take care of I , and see dear grandmother ? I could tell she about those dreadful bill . ' 

 ' bury yourself at Grasmere in the height of the season ! not to be think of ! besides , Lady Maulevrier object before to the idea of your travel alone with Kibble . no ! if you can not   make up your mind to go to Rood Hall , George and I must make up our mind to stay away . but it will be rather hard line ; for that Henley week be quite the jolly thing in the summer . ' 

 ' then I will go , ' say Lesbia , with a resign air . ' not for world would I deprive you and Sir George of a pleasure . ' 

 in her heart of heart she rather wish to see Rood Hall . she be curious to behold the extent and magnitude of Mr. Smithson 's possession . she have see his italian villa in Park Lane , the perfection of modern art , modern skill , modern taste , revive the old eternally beautiful form , recreate the Pitti Palace the home of the Medici the hall of dead and go Doges and now she be tell that Rood Hall a genuine old English manor - house , in perfect preservation be even more interesting than the villa in Park Lane . at Rood Hall there be ideal stable and farm , hot - house without number , rise garden , lawn , the river , and a deer park . 

 so the invitation be accept , and Mr. Smithson immediately lay himself at Lesbia 's foot , as it be , with regard to all other invitation for the Henley festival . whom should he ask to meet she ? whom would she have ? 

 ' you be very good , ' she say , ' but I have really no wish to be consult . I be not a royal personage , remember . I could not presume to dictate . ' 

 ' but I wish you to dictate . I wish you to be imperious in the expression of your wish . ' 

 ' Lady Kirkbank have a well right than I , if anybody be to be consult , ' say Lesbia , modestly . 

 ' Lady Kirkbank be an old dear , who get on delightfully with everybody . but you be more sensitive . your comfort might be mar by an obnoxious presence . I will ask nobody whom you do not like who be not thoroughly simpatico . have you no particular friend of your own choosing whom you would like I to ask ? ' 

 Lesbia confess that she have no such friend . she like everybody tolerably ; but she have not a talent for friendship . perhaps it be because in the London season one be too busy to make friend . 

 ' I can fancy two girl get quite attach to each other , out of the season , ' she say , ' but in May and June life be all a rush and a scramble - - ' 

 ' and one have no time to gather wayside flower of friendship , ' interject Mr. Smithson . ' still , if there be no people for whom you have an especial liking , there must be people whom you detest . ' 

 Lesbia own that it be so . detestation come of itself , naturally . 

 ' then let I be sure I do not ask any of your pet aversion , ' say Mr. Smithson . ' you meet Mr. Plantagenet Parsons , the theatrical critic , at my house . shall we have he ? ' 

 ' I like all amusing people . ' 

 ' and Horace Meander , the poet . shall we have he ? he be brimful of conceit and affectation , but he be a tremendous joke . ' 

 ' Mr. Meander be charming . ' 

 ' suppose we ask Mostyn and his wife ? her scrap of science be rather good fun . ' 

 ' I have not   the faint objection to the Mostyns , ' reply Lesbia . ' but who be " we " ? ' 

 ' we be you and I , for the nonce . the invitation will be issue ostensibly by I , but they will really emanate from you . ' 

 ' I be to be the shadow behind the throne , ' say Lesbia . ' how delightful ! ' 

 ' I would rather you be the sovereign ruler , on the throne , ' answer Smithson , tenderly . ' that throne shall be empty till you fill it . ' 

 ' please go on with your list of people , ' say Lesbia , check this gush of sentiment . 

 she begin to feel somehow that she be drift from all her mooring , that in accept this invitation to Rood Hall she be allow herself to be ensnare into an alliance about which she be still doubtful . if anything well have appear in the prospect of her life if any worthy suitor have come forward , she would have whistle Mr. Smithson down the wind ; but no worthy suitor have offer himself . it be Smithson or nothing . if she do not accept Smithson , she would go back to Fellside heavily burden with debt , and an obvious failure . she would have run the gauntlet of a London season without definite result ; and this , to a young woman so impressed with her own transcendent merit , be a most humiliating state of thing . 

 other people 's name be suggest by Mr. Smithson and approve by Lesbia , and a house party of about fourteen in all be make up . Mr. Smithson 's steam launch would comfortably accommodate that number . he have a couple of barge for chance visitor , and keep an open table on board they during the regatta . 

 the visit arrange , the next question be gown . Lesbia have gown enough to have stock a draper 's shop ; but then , as she and Lady Kirkbank deplore , the difficulty be that she have wear they all , some as many as three or four time . they be doubtless all marked and know . some of they have be describe in the society paper . at Henley she would be expect to wear something distinctly new , to introduce some new fashion of gown or hat or parasol . no matter how ugly the new thing might be , so long as it be startling ; no matter how eccentric , provide it be original . 

 ' what be I to do ? ' ask Lesbia , despairingly . 

 ' there be only one thing that can be do . we must go instantly to Seraphine and insist upon she invent something . if she have no idea ready she must telegraph Worth and get he to send something over . your old thing will do very well for Rood Hall . you have no end of pretty gown for morning and evening ; but you must be original on the race day . your gown will be in all the paper . ' 

 ' but I shall be only get deep into debt , ' say Lesbia , with a sigh . 

 ' that can not   be help . if you go into society you must be properly dress . we will go to Clanricarde Place directly after luncheon , and see what that old harpy have to show we . ' 

 Lesbia have a rather uncomfortable feeling about face the fair Seraphine , without be able to give she a cheque upon account of that dreadful bill . she have quite accept Lady Kirkbank 's idea that bill never need be discharge in full , and that the true system of finance be to give an occasional cheque on account , as a sop to Cerberus . true , that while Cerberus fatten on the sop the bill seem always grow ; and the final crash , when Cerberus grow savage and sop could be no more accept , be too awful to be think about . 

 Lesbia enter Seraphine 's Louis - seize drawing - room with a faint expectation of unpleasantness ; but after a little whispering between Lady Kirkbank and the dressmaker , the latter come to Lesbia smile graciously , and seemingly full of eagerness for new order . 

 ' miladi say you want something of the most original tant soit peu risquť for ' Enley , ' she say . ' let we see now , ' and she tap her forehead with a gold thimble which nobody have ever see her use , but which look respectable . ' there be ze dress that Chaumont wear in zis new play , Une Faute dan le Passť . yes , zere be the watare dress a boat party at Bougival , a toilet of the most new , striking , ťcrasant , what you English call a ' screamer . " ' 

 ' what a genius you be , Fifine , ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , rapturously . ' the Faute dan le Passť be only produce last week . no one will have think of copy Chaumont 's gown yet awhile . the idea be an inspiration . ' 

 ' what be the boat costume like ? ' ask Lady Lesbia , faintly . 

 ' an exquisite combination of simplicity with ťlan , ' answer the dressmaker . ' a skin - tight indigo silk Jersey bodice , closely stud with dark blue bead , a flounced petticoat of indigo and amber foulard , an amber scarf draw tightly round the hip , and a dark blue toque with a large bunch of amber poppy . Tan - colour mousquetaire glove , and hessian boot of tan - coloured kid . ' 

 ' hessian boot ! ' ejaculate Lesbia . 

 ' but , yes , Miladi . the petticoat be somewhat short , you comprehend , to escape the damp of the deck , and , after all , Hessians be much less indelicate than silk stocking , leg a cru , as one may say . ' 

 ' Lesbia , you will look enchant in yellow Hessians , ' say Lady Kirkbank , ' let the dress be put in hand instantly , Seraphine . ' 

 Lesbia be incline to remonstrate . she do not admire the description of the costume , she would rather have something less outrageous . 

 ' outrageous ! it be only original , ' exclaim her chaperon . ' if Chaumont wear it you may be sure it be perfect . ' 

 ' but on the stage , by gaslight , in the midst of unreality , ' argue Lesbia . ' that make such a difference . ' 

 ' my dear , there be no difference nowadays between the stage and the drawing - room . whatever Chaumont wear you may wear . and now let we think of the second day . I think as your first costume be to be nautical , and rather masculine , your second should be somewhat languishing and vaporeux . Creamy indian muslin , wild flower , a large leghorn hat . ' 

 ' and what will Miladi herself wear ? ' ask the french woman of Lady Kirkbank . ' she must have something of new . ' 

 ' no , at my age , it do not   matter . I shall wear one of my cotton frock , and my Dunstable hat . ' 

 Lesbia shudder , for Lady Kirkbank in her cotton frock be a spectacle at which youth laugh and age blush . but after all it do not matter to Lesbia . she would have like a less rowdy chaperon ; but as a foil to her own fresh young beauty Lady Kirkbank be admirable . 

 they drive down to Rood Hall early next week , Sir George convey they in his drag , with a change of horse at Maidenhead . the weather be peerless ; the country exquisite , approach from London . how different that river landscape look to the eye of the traveller return from the wild West of England , the woode gorge of Cornwall and Devon , the Tamar and the Dart . then how small and poor and mean seem silvery Thames , glide peacefully between his willowy bank , sing his lullaby to the whispering sedge ; a poor little river , a flat commonplace landscape , say the traveller , fresh from moorland and tor , from the rocky shore of the Atlantic , the deep cleft of the great , red hill . 

 to Lesbia 's eye the placid stream and the green pasture , breathing odour of meadow - sweet and clover , seem pass lovely . she be pleased with her own hat and parasol too , which make she graciously dispose towards the landscape ; and the last packet of glove from North Audley Street fit without a wrinkle . the glovemaker be begin to understand her hand , which be a study for a sculptor , but which have its little peculiarity . 

 nor be she ill - disposed to Mr. Smithson , who have come up to town by an early train , in order to lunch in Arlington Street and go back by coach , seat just behind Lady Lesbia , who have the box seat beside Sir George . 

 the drive be delightful . it be a few minute after five when the coach drive past the picturesque old gate - house into Mr. Smithson 's Park , and Rood Hall lie on the low ground in front of they , with its back to the river . it be an old red brick house in the Tudor style , with an advanced porch , and four project wing , three story high , with picturesque spire roof overtop the main building . around the house run a boldly - carve stone parapet , bear the heron and bulrush which be the cognisance of the noble race for which the mansion be build . numerous projecting mullione window break up the line of the park front . Lesbia be fain to own that Rood Hall be even well than Park Lane . in London Mr. Smithson have create a palace ; but it be a new palace , which still have a faint flavour of brick and mortar , and which be apt to remind the spectator of that wonderful erection of Aladdin , the famous Parvenu of Eastern story . here , in Berkshire , Mr. Smithson have drop into a nest which have be keep warm for he for three century , air and beautify by generation of a noble race which have obligingly decay and dwindle in order to make room for Mr. Smithson . here the Parvenu have buy a home mellow by the slow growth of year , touch into poetic beauty by the chasten finger of time . his artist friend tell he that every brick in the red wall be ' precious , ' a mystery of colour which only a painter could fitly understand and value . here he have buy association , he have buy history . he have buy the dust of Elizabeth 's senator , the bone of her court beauty . the coffin in the Mausoleum yonder in the ferny depth of the Park , the village church just outside the gate these have all go with the property . 

 Lesbia go up the grand staircase , through the long corridor , in a dream of wonder . bring up at Fellside , in that new part of the Westmoreland house which have be build by her grandmother and have no history , she feel thrill by the sober splendour of this fine old manorial mansion . all be sound and substantial , as if create yesterday , so well preserve have be the good and chattel of the noble race ; and yet all wear such unmistakeable mark of age . the deep rich colouring of the wainscot , the fade hue of the tapestry , the drapery of costly velvet and brocade , be all sober by the passing of year . 

 Mr. Smithson have show his good taste in have keep all thing as Sir Hubert Heronville , the last of his race , have leave they ; and the Heronvilles have be one of those grand old Tory race which change nothing of the past . 

 Lady Lesbia 's bedroom be the State chamber , which have be occupy by king and queen in day of yore . that grandiose four - poster , with the carve ebony column , cut velvet curtain , and plume of ostrich feather , have be build for Elizabeth , when she deign to include Rood Hall in one of her royal progress . Charles the First have rest his weary head upon those very pillow , before he go on to the Inn at Uxbridge , where he be to be lodge less luxuriously . James the Second have stay there when Duke of York , with Mistress Anne Hyde , before he acknowledge his marriage to the multitude ; and Anne 's daughter have occupy the same room as Queen of England forty year later ; and now the Royal Chamber , with adjacent dressing - room , and oratory , and spacious boudoir all in the same suite , be reserve for Lady Lesbia Haselden . 

 ' I be afraid you be spoil I , ' she tell Mr. Smithson , when he ask if she approve of the room that have be allot to she . ' I feel quite ashamed of myself among the ghost of dead and go queen . ' 

 ' why so ? surely the Royalty of beauty have as divine a right as that of an anointed sovereign . ' 

 ' I hope the Royal personage do not   walk , ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , in her girlish tone ; ' this be just the house in which one would expect ghost . ' 

 Whereupon Mrs. Mostyn hasten to enlighten the company upon the real cause of ghost - seeing , which she have lately study in Carpenter 's ' Mental Physiology , ' and favour they with a diluted version of the view of that authority . 

 this be at afternoon tea in the library , where the brass - wire bookcase , fill with mighty folio and handsome octavos in old binding , look as if they have not be open for a century . the literature of past age furnish the room , and make a delightful background . the literature of the present lie about on the table , and testify that the high intellectual flight of the inhabitant of Rood Hall be a dip into the Contemporary or the Nineteenth Century , or the perusal of the last new scandal in the shape of Reminiscences or Autobiography . one large round table be consecrate to Mudie , another to Rolandi . on the one side you have Mrs. Oliphant , on the other Zola , exemplify the genius of the two nation . 

 after tea Mr. Smithson 's visitor , most of whom have arrive in Sir George 's drag , explore the ground . these be lovely beyond expression in the low afternoon light . cedar of Lebanon spread their broad shadow on the velvet lawn , yews and Wellingtonias of mighty growth make an atmosphere of gloom in some part of the ground . one great feature be the lady ' Garden , a spot apart , a great square garden surround with a laurel wall , eight foot high , contain a rose garden , where the choice specimen grow and flourish , while in the centre there be a circular fish - pond with a fountain . there be a Lavender Walk too , another feature of the ground at Rood Hall , an avenue of tall lavender bush , much affect by the stately dame of old . 

 modern manner prefer the river terrace , as a pleasant place on which to loiter after dinner , to watch the boat flash by in the evening light , or the sun go down behind a fringe of willow on the opposite bank . this italian terrace , with its statue , and carve vas fill with rose , fuchsia , and geranium , be the great point of rendezvous at Rood Hall an ideal spot whereon to linger in the deepening twilight , from which to gaze upon the moonlit river later on in the night . 

 the window of the drawing - room , and music - room , and ballroom open on to this terrace , and the royal wing the tower - shape wing now devote to Lady Lesbia , look upon the terrace and the river . 

 ' lovely as your house be altogether , I think this river view be the good part of it , ' say Lady Lesbia , as she stroll with Mr. Smithson on the terrace after dinner , dress in indian muslin which be almost as poetical as a vapour , and with a cloud of delicate lace wrap round her head . ' I think I shall spend half of my life at my boudoir window , gloat over that delicious landscape . ' 

 Horace Meander , the poet , be discourse to a select group upon that peculiar quality of willow which cause they to shiver , and quiver , and throw little light and shadow on the river , and on the subtle , ineffable beauty of twilight , which perhaps , however utterly beautiful in the abstract , would have be more agreeable to he personally if he have not be surround by a cloud of gnat , which refuse to be buffet off his laurel - crown head . 

 while Mr. Meander poetise in his usual eloquent style , Mrs. Mostyn , as a still new light , discourse as eloquently to little a knot of woman , impart valuable information upon the anatomical structure and individual peculiarity of those various insect which be the pest of a summer evening . 

 ' you do not   like gnat ! ' exclaim the lady ; ' how very extraordinary . do you know I have spend day and week upon the study of their habit and dear little way . they be the most interesting creature far superior to we in intellect . do you know that they fight , and that they have tribe which be life - long enemy like those dreadful Corsicans and that they make little sepulchre in the bark of tree , and bury each other alive , if they can ; and they hold vestry , and have burial board . they be most absorbing creature , if you only give yourself up to the study of they ; but it be no use to be half - hearted in a study of that kind . I go without so much as a cup of tea for twenty - four hour , watch my gnat , for fear the opening of the door should startle they . another time I shall make the nursery governess watch for I . ' 

 ' how interesting , how noble of you , ' exclaim the other lady ; and then they begin to talk about bonnet , and about Mr. Smithson , to speculate how much money this house and all his other house have cost he , and to wonder if he be really rich , or if he be only one of those great financial windbag which so often explode and leave the world aghast , marvel at the ease with which it have be delude . 

 they wonder , too , whether Lady Lesbia Haselden mean to marry he . 

 ' of course she do , my dear , ' answer Mrs. Mostyn , decisively . 

 ' you do not   suppose that after have study the habit of gnat I can not read such a poor shallow creature as a silly vain girl . of course Lady Lesbia mean to marry Mr. Smithson 's fine house ; and she be only amuse herself and swell her own importance by let he dangle in a kind of suspense which be not suspense ; for he know as well as she do that she mean to have he . ' 

 the next day be give up , first to see the house , an amusement which last very well for an hour or so after breakfast , and then to wander in a desultory manner , to row and canoe , and a little sailing , and a good deal of scream and pretty timidity upon the blue bright river ; to gather wild flower and fern in rustic lane , and to an al fresco luncheon in the wood at Medmenham , and then dinner , and then music , an evening spend half within and half without the music - room , cigarette sparkle , like glowworm on the terrace , tall talk from Mr. Meander , long quotation from his own muse and that of Rossetti , a little Shelley , a little Keats , a good deal of Swinburne . the festivity be late on this second evening , as Mr. Smithson have invite a good many people from the neighbourhood , but the house party be not the less early on the following morning , which be the first Henley day . 

 it be a peerless morning , and all the brasswork of Mr. Smithson 's launch sparkle and shine in the sun , as she lie in front of the terrace . a wooden pier , a portable construction , be throw out from the terrace step , to enable the company to go on board the launch without the possibility of wet foot or damage raiment . 

 Lesbia 's Chaumount costume be a success . the woman praise it , the man star and admire . the dark - blue silken jersey , sparkle with closely studded indigo bead , fit the slim graceful figure as a serpent 's scale fit the serpent . the coquettish little blue silk toque , the careless cluster of gold - colour poppy , against the glossy brown hair , the large sunshade of old gold satin line with indigo , the flounced petticoat of soft indian silk , the dainty little tan - colour boot with high heel and point toe , be all perfect after their fashion ; and Mr. Smithson feel that the liege lady of his life , the woman he mean to marry willy nilly , would be the belle of the race - course . nor be he disappointed . everybody in London have hear of Lady Lesbia Haselden . her photograph be in all the west - end window , be enshrine in the album of South Kensington and Clapham , Maida Vale and Haverstock Hill . People whose circle be far remote from Lady Lesbia 's circle , be as familiar with her beauty as if they have know she from her cradle . and all these outsider want to see she in the flesh , just as they always thirst to behold royal personage . so when it become know that the beautiful Lady Lesbia Haselden be on board Mr. Smithson 's launch , all the people in the small boat , or on neighbouring barge , make it their business to have a good look at she . the launch be almost mob by those inquisitive little boat in the interval between the race . 

 ' what be the people all star and hustle one another for ? ' ask Lesbia , innocently . she have see the same hustling and whispering and star in the hall at the opera , when she be wait for her carriage ; but she choose to affect unconsciousness . ' what do they all want ? ' 

 ' I think they want to see you , ' say Mr. Smithson , who be sit by her side . ' a very natural desire . ' 

 Lesbia laugh , and lower the big yellow sunshade , so as to hide herself altogether from the starer . 

 ' how silly ! ' she exclaim . ' it be all the fault of those horrid photographer : they vulgarise everything and everybody . I will never be photograph again . ' 

 ' oh yes , you will , and in that frock . it be the prettiest thing I have   see for a long time . why do you hide yourself from those poor wretch , who keep row backwards and forwards in an obviously aimless way , just to get a peep at you en passant ? what happiness for we who live near you , and can gaze when we will , without all those absurd manoeuvre . there go the signal and now for a hard - fought race . ' 

 Lesbia pretend to be interested in the racing she pretend to be gay , but her heart be as heavy as lead . the burden of debt , which have be grow ever since Seraphine send in her bill , be weigh she down to the dust . 

 she owe three thousand pound . it seem incredible that she should owe so much , that a girl 's frivolous fancy and extravagance could amount to such a sum within so short a span . but thoughtless purchase , ignorant order , have run on from week to week , and the main result be an indebtedness of close upon three thousand pound . 

 three thousand pound ! the sum be continually sound in her ear like the cry of a screech owl . the very ripple of the river flow so peacefully under the blue summer sky seem to repeat the word . three thousand pound ! ' be it much ? ' she wonder , have no standard of comparison . ' be it very much more than my grandmother will expect I to have spend in the time ? will it trouble she to have to pay those bill ? will she be very angry ? ' 

 these be question which Lesbia keep ask herself , in every pause of her frivolous existence ; in such a pause as this , for instance , while the people round she be stand breathless , open - mouthed , gaze after the boat . she do not care a straw for the boat , who win , or who lose the race . it be all a hollow mockery . indeed it seem just now that the only real thing in life be those accursed bill , which would have to be pay somehow . 

 she have tell Lady Maulevrier nothing about they as yet . she have allow herself to be advise by Lady Kirkbank , and she have take time to think . but thought have give she no help . the day be glide onward , and Lady Maulevrier would have to be tell . 

 she meditate perplexedly about her grandmother 's income . she have never hear the extent of it , but have take for grant that Lady Maulevrier be rich . would three thousand pound make a great inroad on that income ? would it be a year 's income ? half a year 's ? Lesbia have no idea . life at Fellside be carry on in an elegant manner with considerable luxury in house and garden a luxury of flower , a lavish expenditure of labour . yet the expenditure of Lady Maulevrier 's existence , spend always on the same spot , must be as nothing to the money spend in such a life as Lady Kirkbank 's , which involve the keeping up of three or four house , and costly journey to and fro , and incessant change of attire . 

 no doubt Lady Maulevrier have save money ; yes , she must have save thousand during her long seclusion , Lesbia argue . her grandmother have tell she that she be to look upon herself as an heiress . this could only mean that Lady Maulevrier have a fortune to leave she ; and this be so , what could it matter if she have anticipate some of her portion ? and yet there be in her heart of heart a terrible fear of that stern dowager , of the cold scorn in those splendid eye when she should stand reveal in all her foolishness , her selfish , mindless , vain extravagance . she , who have never be reprove , shrink with a sickly dread from the idea of reproof . and to be tell that her career as a fashionable beauty have be a failure ! that would be the bitter pang of all . 

 soon come luncheon , and Heidseck , and then an afternoon which be gayer than the morning have be , inasmuch as every one babble and laugh more after luncheon . and then there be five o'clock tea on deck , under the striped japanese awning , to the jingle of banjo , enliven by the wit of black - face minstrel , amidst wherry and canoe and gondola , and ponderous houseboat , and snort launch , crowd the side of the sunlit river , in full view of the crowd yonder in front of the Red Lion , and here on this nearer bank , and all along either shore , fringe the green meadow with a gaudy border of smartly - dress humanity . 

 it be a gay scene , and Lesbia give herself up to the amusement of the hour , and talk and chaff as she have learn to talk and chaff in one brief season , hold she own against all comer . 

 Rood Hall look lovely when they go back to it in the gloaming , an Elizabethan pile crown with tower . the four wing with their conical roof , the massive project window , grey stone , ruddy brickwork , lattice reflect the sunlight , italian terrace and blue river in the foreground , cedar and yew at the back , all make a splendid picture of an english ancestral home . 

 ' nice old place , be not   it ? ' ask Mr. Smithson , see Lesbia 's admire gaze as the launch near the terrace . they two be stand in the bow , apart from all the rest . 

 ' nice ! it be simply perfect . ' 

 ' oh no , it be not . there be one thing want yet . ' 

 ' what be that ? ' 

 ' a wife . you be the only person who can make any house of mine perfect . will you ? ' he take her hand , which she do not withdraw from his grasp . he bend his head and kiss the little hand in its soft swedish glove . 

 ' will you , Lesbia ? ' he repeat earnestly ; and she answer softly , ' yes . ' 

 that one brief syllable be more like a sigh than a speak word , and it seem to she as if in the utterance of that syllable the three thousand pound have be pay . 

 CHAPTER XXXI . 

 ' kind be MY love to - DAY , TO - morrow KIND . ' 


 while Lady Lesbia be drain the cup of London folly and London care to the dreg , Lady Mary be lead her usual quiet life beside the glassy lake , where the green hill - side and sheep walk be reflect in all their summer verdure under the cloudless azure of a summer sky . a monotonous life pass dull as see from the outside and yet Mary be very happy , happy even in her solitude , with the grave deep joy of a satisfied heart , a mind at rest . all life have take a new colour since her engagement to John Hammond . a sense of new duty , an awakening earnestness have give a graver tone to her character . her spirit be less wild , yet not less joyous than of old . the joy be holy , deep . 

 her lover 's letter be the chief delight of her lonely day . to read they again and again , and ponder upon they , and then to pour out all her heart and mind in answer they . these be pleasure enough for her young life . Hammond 's letter be such as any woman might be proud to receive . they be not love - letter only . he write as friend to friend ; not descend from the proud pinnacle of masculine intelligence to the low level of feminine silliness ; not write down to a simple country girl 's capacity ; but write fully and fervently , as if there be no subject too lofty or too grave for the understanding of his betrothed . he write as one sure of be sympathise with , write as to his second self : and Mary show herself not unworthy of the honour thus render to her intellect . 

 there be one world which have newly open to Mary since her engagement , and that be the world of politic . Hammond have tell she that his ambition be to succeed as a politician to do some good in his day as one of the govern body ; and of late she have make it her business to learn how England and the world outside England be govern . 

 she have no natural lean to the study of political economy . instead , she have always imagine any question relate to the government of her country to be inherently dry - as - dust and uninviting . but have John Hammond devote his day to the study of coptic manuscript , or the arrow - head inscription upon assyrian tablet , she would have toil she hard in the endeavour to make herself a coptic scholar , or an adept in the cuneiform character . if he have be a student of Chinese , she would not have be discomfit by such a trifle as the fifty thousand character in the chinese alphabet . 

 and so , as he be to make his name in the arena of public life , she set herself to acquire a proper understanding of the science of politic ; and to this end she gorge herself with english history , Hume , Hallam , Green , Justin McCarthy , Palgrave , Lecky , from the day of Witenagemote to the Reform Bill ; the Repeal of the Corn Laws , the Disestablishment of the Irish Church , Ballot , Trade Unionism , and unreciprocate Free Trade . no question be deep enough to repel she ; for be not her lover interested in the dry thereof ; and what concern he and his welfare must need be full of interest for she . 

 to this end she read the debate religiously day by day ; and she one day venture shyly to suggest that she should read they aloud to Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' would it not be a little rest for you if I be to read your Times aloud to you every afternoon , grandmother ? ' she ask . ' you read so many book , French , English , and german , and I think your eye must get a little tired sometimes . ' 

 Mary venture the remark with some timidity , for those falcon eye be fix upon she all the time , bright and clear and steady as the eye of youth . it seem almost an impertinence to suggest that such eye could know weariness . 

 ' no , Mary , my sight hold out wonderfully for an old woman , ' reply her ladyship , gently . ' the new theory of the last oculist whose book I dip into a very amusing and interesting book , by - the - bye be that the sight improve and strengthen by constant use , and that an agricultural labourer , who hardly use his eye at all , have rarely in the decline of life so good a sight as the watchmaker or the student . I have read immensely all my life , and find myself no bad for that indulgence . but you may read the debate to I if you like , my dear , for if my eye be strong , I myself be very tired . sick to death , Mary , sick to death . ' 

 the splendid eye turn from Mary , and look away to the blue sky , to the hill in their ineffable beauty of colour and light shifting , change with every moment of the summer day . intense weariness , a settle despair , be express in that look tearless , yet sad than all tear . 

 ' it must be very monotonous , very sad for you , ' murmur Mary , her own eye brim over with tear . ' but it will not be always so , dear grandmother . I hope a time will come when you will be able to go about again , to resume your old life . ' 

 ' I do not hope , Mary . no , child , I feel and know that time will never come . my strength be ebb slowly day by day . if I live for another year , live to see Lesbia marry , and you , too , perhaps well , I shall die at peace . at peace , no ; not - - ' she falter , and the thin , semi - transparent hand be press upon her brow . ' what will be say of I when I be dead ? ' 

 Mary fear that her grandmother 's mind be wander . she come and kneel beside the couch , lay and her head against the satin pillow , tenderly , caressingly . 

 ' dear grandmother , pray be calm , ' she murmur . 

 ' Mary , do not look at I like that , as if you would read my heart . there be heart that must not be look into . mine be like a charnel - house . monotonous , yes ; my life have be monotonous . no conventual gloom be ever deep than the gloom of Fellside . my boy do nothing to lighten it for I , and his son follow in his father 's footstep . you and Lesbia have be my only consolation . Lesbia ! I be so proud of her beauty , so proud and fond of she , because she be like I , and recall my own youth . and see how easily she forget I . she have go into a new world , in which my age and my infirmity have no part ; and I be as nothing to she . ' 

 Mary change from red to pale , so painful be her embarrassment . what could she say in defence of her sister ? how could she deny that Lesbia be an ingrate , when those rare and hurried letter , so careless in their tone , express the selfishness of the writer in every syllable , tell but too plainly of forgetfulness and ingratitude ? 

 ' dear grandmother , Lesbia have so much to do her life be so full of engagement , ' she falter feebly . 

 ' yes , she go from party to party she give herself up heart and mind and soul to pleasure which she ought to consider only as the trivial mean to great end ; and she forget the woman who rear she , and care for she , and watch over she from her infancy , and who try to inspire she with a noble ambition . yes , read to I , child , read . give I new thought , if you can , for my brain be weary with grind the old one . there be a grand debate in the Lords last night , and Lord Hartfield speak . let I hear his speech . you can read what be say by the man before he ; never mind the rest . ' 

 Mary read Lord Somebody 's speech , which be pass dull , but which prepare the ground for a magnificent and exhaustive reply from Lord Hartfield . the question be an important one , affect the well - being of the mass , and Lord Hartfield speak with an eloquence which rise in force and fire as he wind himself like a serpent into the heart of his subject beginning quietly , soberly , with no opening flash of rhetoric , but rise gradually to the topmost height of oratory . 

 ' what a speech ! ' cry Lady Maulevrier , delight , her cheek glow , her eye kindling ; ' what a noble fellow the speaker must be ! oh , Mary , I must tell you a secret . I love that man 's father . yes , my dear , I love he fondly , dearly , truly , as you love that young man of your ; and he be the only man I ever really love . Fate part we . but I have never forget he never , Mary , never . at this moment I have but to close my eye and I can see his face see he look at I as he look the last time we meet . he be a young son , poor , his future quite hopeless in those day ; but it be not my fault we be part . I would have marry he yes , wed poverty , just as you be go to marry this Mr. Hammond ; but my people would not let I ; and I be too young , too helpless , to make a good fight . oh , Mary , if I have only fight hard enough , what a happy woman I might have be , and how good a wife . ' 

 ' you be a good wife to my grandfather , I be sure , ' falter Mary , by way of say something consolatory . 

 a dark frown come over Lady Maulevrier 's face , which have soften to deepest tenderness just before . 

 ' a good wife to Maulevrier , ' she say , in a mocking tone . well , yes , as good a wife as such a husband deserve . ' I be well than Casar 's wife , Mary , for no breath of suspicion ever rest upon my name . but if I have marry Ronald Hollister , I should have be a happy woman ; and that I have never be since I part from he . ' 

 ' you have never see the present Lord Hartfield , I think ? ' 

 ' never ; but I have watch his career , I have think of he . his father die while he be an infant , and he be bring up in seclusion by a widow mother , who keep he tie to her apron - string till he go to Oxford . she idolise he , and I be tell she teach herself latin and Greek , mathematic even , in order to help he in his boyish study , and , later on , read greek play and latin poetry with he , till she become an exceptional classic for a woman . she be her son 's companion and friend , sympathise with his taste , his pleasure , his friendship ; devote every hour of her life , every thought of her mind to his welfare , his interest , walk with he , ride with he , travel half over Europe , yacht with he . her friend all declare that the lad would grow up an odious milksop ; but I be tell that there never be a manly man than Lord Hartfield . from his boyhood he be his mother 's protector , help to administer her affair , acquire a premature sense of responsibility , and escape almost all those vice which make young man detestable . his mother die within a few month of his majority . he be break - hearted at lose she , and leave Europe immediately after her death . from that time he have be a great traveller . but I suppose now that he have take his seat in the House of Lords , and have speak a good many time , he mean to settle down and take his place among the foremost man of his day . I be tell that he be worthy to take such a place . ' 

 ' you must feel warmly interested in watch his career , ' say Mary , sympathetically . 

 ' I be interested in everything that concern he . I will tell you another secret , Mary . I think I be get into my dotage , my dear , or I should hardly talk to you like this , ' say Lady Maulevrier , with a touch of bitterness . 

 Mary be sit on a stool by the sofa , close to the invalid 's pillow . she clasp her grandmother 's hand and kiss it fondly . 

 ' dear grandmother , I think you be talk to I like this to - day because you be begin to care for I a little , ' she say , tenderly . 

 ' oh , my dear , you be very good , very sweet and forgiving to care for I at all , after my neglect of you , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , with a sigh . ' I have keep you out in the cold so long , Mary . Lesbia well , Lesbia have be a kind of infatuation for I , and like all infatuation mine have end in disappointment and bitterness . ambition have be the bane of my life , Mary ; and when I could no long be ambitious for myself when my own existence have become a mere death in life , I begin to dream and to scheme for the aggrandisement of my granddaughter . Lesbia 's beauty , Lesbia 's elegance seem to make success certain and so I dream my dream which may never be fulfil . ' 

 ' what be your dream , grandmother ? may I know all about it ? ' 

 ' that be the secret I speak of just now . yes , Mary , you may know , for I fear the dream will never be realise . I want my Lesbia to become Lord Hartfield 's wife . I would have bring they together myself , could I have but go to London ; but , fail that , I fancy Lady Kirkbank would have divine my wish without be tell they , and would have introduce Hartfield to Lesbia ; and now the London season be draw to a close , and Hartfield and Lesbia have never meet . he hardly go anywhere , I be tell . he devote himself exclusively to politic ; and he be not in Lady Kirkbank 's set . a terrible disappointment to I , Mary ! ' 

 ' it be a pity , ' say Mary . ' Lesbia be so lovely . if Lord Hartfield be fancy - free he ought to fall in love with she , could they but meet . I think that in London all fashionable people know each other , and be continually meet . ' 

 ' it use to be so in my day , Mary . Almack 's be a common ground , even if there have be no other . but now there be circle and circle , I believe , ring that touch occasionally , but never break and mingle . I be afraid poor Georgie 's set be not quite so nice as I could have wish . yet Lesbia write as if she be in rapture with her chaperon , and with all the people she meet . and then Georgie tell I that this Mr. Smithson whom Lesbia have refuse be a very important personage , a millionaire , and very likely to be make a peer . ' 

 ' a new peer , ' say Mary , make a wry face . ' one would rather have an old commoner . I always fancy a newly - make peer must be like a newly - build house , glaring , and star , and arid and uncongenial . ' 

 ' C'est selon , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' one would not despise a Chatham or a Wellington because of the newness of his title ; but a man who have only money to recommend he - - ' 

 Lady Maulevrier leave her sentence unfinishe , save by a shrug ; while Mary make another wry face . she have that grand contempt for sordid wealth which be common to young people who have never know the want of money . 

 ' I hope Lesbia will marry some one well than Mr. Smithson , ' she say . 

 ' I hope so too , dear ; and yet do you know I have an idea that Lesbia mean to accept Mr. Smithson , or she would hardly have consent to go to his house for the Henley week . here be a letter from Georgie Kirkbank which you will have to answer for I to - morrow a letter full of rapture about Mr. Smithson 's place in Berkshire , Rood Hall . I remember the house well . I be there nearly fifty year ago , when the Heronvilles own it ; and now the Heronvilles be all dead or ruin , and this city person be master of the fine old mansion . it be a strange world , Mary . ' 

 from that time forward Mary and her grandmother be on more confidential term , and when , two day later , Fellside be startle into life by the unexpected arrival of Lord Maulevrier and Mr. Hammond , the dowager seem almost as pleased as her granddaughter at the arrival of the young man . 

 as for Mary , she be almost beside herself with joy when she hear their voice from the lawn , and , rush to the shrubbery , see they walk up the hill , as she have see they on that first evening nearly a year ago , when John Hammond come as a stranger to Fellside . 

 she try to take her joy soberly , though her eye be dance with delight , as she go to the porch to meet they . 

 ' what extraordinary young man you be , ' she say , as she emerge breathless from her lover 's embrace . ' the idea of your descending upon we without a moment 's notice . why do you not write or telegraph , that your room might be ready ? ' 

 ' be I to understand that all the spare room at Fellside be keep as damp as at the bottom of the lake ? ' ask Maulevrier . ' I do not think any preparation be necessary ; but we can go back if we be not want , can not   we , Jack ? ' 

 ' you darle , ' cry Mary , hang affectionately upon her brother 's arm . ' you know I be only joke , you know how enraptured I be to have you . ' 

 ' to have I , only I , ' say Maulevrier . ' Jack do not   count , I suppose ? ' 

 ' you know how glad I be , and that I want to hide my gladness , ' answer Mary , radiant and blushing like the rich red rose in the porch . ' you man be so vain . and now come and see grandmother , she will be cheer by your arrival . she have be so good to I just lately , so sweet . ' 

 ' she might have be good and sweet to you all your life , ' say Hammond . ' I be not prepared to be grateful to she at a moment 's notice for any crumb of affection she may throw you . ' 

 ' oh but you must be grateful , sir ; and you must love she and pity she , ' retort Mary . ' think how sadly she have suffer . we can not be too kind to she , or too fond of she , poor dear . ' 

 ' Mary be right , ' say Hammond , half in jest and half in earnest . ' what wonderful instinct these young woman have . ' 

 ' come and see her ladyship ; and then you must have dinner , just as you have that first evening , ' say Mary . ' we will act that first evening over again , Jack ; only you can not   fall in love with Lesbia , as she be not   here . ' 

 ' I do not   think I surrender that first evening , Mary . though I think your sister the lovely girl I have ever see . ' 

 ' and what do you think of I , sir ? tell I that , ' say Mary . 

 ' shall I tell you the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth ? ' 

 ' of course . ' 

 ' then I freely confess that I do not think about you at all . you be there a pretty , innocent , bright young maiden , with big brown eye and auburn hair ; but I think no more about you than I do about the Gainsborough on the wall , which you very much resemble . ' 

 ' that be most humiliating , ' say Mary , pout a little in the midst of her bliss . 

 ' no , dearest , it be only natural , ' answer Hammond . ' I believe if all the happy lover in this world could be question , at least half of they would confess to have think very little about each other at first meeting . they meet , and touch hand , and part again , and never guess the mystery of the future , which wrap they round like a cloud , never say of each other . there be my fate ; and then they meet again , and again , as hazard will , and never know that they be drift to their doom . ' 

 Mary rang bell and give order , just as she have do in that summer gloame a year ago . the young man have arrive just at the same hour , on the stroke of nine , when the eight o'clock dinner be over and do with ; for a tete - a - tete meal with Fršulein M ller be not a feast to be prolong on account of its felicity . perhaps they have so contrive as to arrive exactly at this hour . 

 Lady Maulevrier receive they both with extreme cordiality . but the young man see a change for the bad in the invalid since the spring . the face be thin , the eye too bright , the flush upon the hollow cheek have a hectic tinge , the voice be feebler . Hammond be remind of a falcon or an eagle pining and waste in a cage . 

 ' I be very glad to see you , Mr. Hammond , ' say Lady Maulevrier , give he her hand , and address he with unwonted cordiality . ' it be a happy thought that bring you and Maulevrier here . when an old woman be as near the grave as I be her relative ought to look after she . I shall be glad to have a little private conversation with you to - morrow , Mr. Hammond , if you can spare I a few minute . ' 

 ' as many hour , if your ladyship please , ' say Hammond . ' my time be entirely at your service . ' 

 ' oh , no , you will want to be roam about the hill with Mary , discuss your plan for the future . I shall not encroach too much on your time . but I be very glad you be here . ' 

 ' we shall only trespass on you for a few day , ' say Maulevrier , ' just a flying visit . ' 

 ' how be it that you be not both at Henley ? ' ask Mary . ' I think all the world be at Henley . ' 

 ' who be Henley ? what be Henley ? ' demand Maulevrier , pretend ignorance . 

 ' I believe Maulevrier have lose so much money back his college boat on previous occasion that he be glad to run away from the regatta this year , ' say Hammond . 

 ' I have a sister there , ' reply his friend . ' that be an all - sufficient explanation . when a fellow 's woman - kind take to go to race and regatta it be high time for he to stop away . ' 

 ' have you see Lesbia lately ? ' ask his grandmother . 

 ' about ten day ago . ' 

 ' and do she seem happy ? ' 

 Maulevrier shrug his shoulder . 

 ' she be vacillate between the refusal or the acceptance of a million of money and four or five fine house . I do not   know whether that condition of mind mean happiness . I should call it an intermediate state . ' 

 ' why do you make silly joke about serious question ? do you think Lesbia mean to accept this Mr. Smithson ? ' 

 ' all London think so . ' 

 ' and be he a good man ? ' 

 ' good for a hundred thousand pound at half an hour 's notice . ' 

 ' be he worthy of your sister ? ' 

 Maulevrier pause , look at his grandmother with a curious expression , and then reply 

 ' I think he be quite . ' 

 ' then I be content that she should marry he , ' say Lady Maulevrier , ' although he be a nobody . ' 

 ' oh , but he be a very important nobody , a nobody who can get a peerage next year , back by the Maulevrier influence , which I suppose would count for something . ' 

 ' Most of my friend be dead , ' say Lady Maulevrier , ' but there be a few survivor of the past who might help I . ' 

 ' I do not   think there will be any difficulty or doubt about the peerage . Smithson stump up very handsomely at the last General Election , and the Conservatives be not strong enough to be ungrateful . " these have no master . " ' 

 CHAPTER XXXII . 

 WAYS and MEANS . 


 the three day that follow be among the happy day of Mary Haselden 's young life . Lady Maulevrier have become strangely indulgent . a soften influence of some kind have work upon that haughty spirit , and it seem as if her whole nature be change or it might be , Mary think , that this soft side of her character have always be turn to Lesbia , while to Mary herself it be altogether new . Lesbia have be the peach on the sunny southern wall , ripen and redden in a flood of sunshine ; Mary have be the stunt fruit grow in a north - east corner , hide among leaf , blow upon by cold wind green and hard and sour for lack of the warm bright light . and now Mary feel the sunshine , and grow glad and gay in those glowing beam . 

 ' dear grandmother , I believe you be begin to love I , ' she say , bend over to arrange the invalid 's pillow in the July morning , the fresh mountain air blow in upon old and young from the great open window , like a caress . 

 ' I be begin to know you , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , gently . 

 ' I think it be the magic of love , Mary , that have sweeten and soften your nature , and endear you to I . I think you have grow ever so much sweet a girl since your engagement . or it may be that you be the same always , and it be I who be blind . Lesbia be all in all to I . all in all and now I be nothing to she , ' she murmur , to herself rather than to Mary . 

 ' I be so proud to think that you see an improvement in I since my engagement , ' say Mary , modestly . ' I have try very hard to improve myself , so that I might be more worthy of he . ' 

 ' you be worthy , Mary , worthy of the good and the high : and I believe that , although you be make what the world call a very bad match , you be marry wisely . you be wed yourself to a life of obscurity ; but what do that matter , if it be a happy life ? I have know what it be to pursue the phantom fortune , and to find youth and hope and happiness vanish from the pathway which I follow . ' 

 ' dear grandmother , I wish you have be able to marry the man of your choice , ' answer Mary , tenderly . 

 she be ready to weep over that waste life of her grandmother 's ; to weep for that forced parting of true lover , albeit the tragedy be half a century old . 

 ' I should have be a happy woman and a well woman if fate have be kind to I , Mary , ' answer Lady Maulevrier , gravely ; ' and now that I be daily draw nearer the land of shadow , I will not stand in the way of faithful lover . I have a fancy , Mary , that I have not many month to live . ' 

 ' only an invalid 's fancy , ' say Mary , stoop down to kiss the pale forehead , so full of thought and care ; ' only a morbid fancy , nurse in the monotony of this quiet room . Maulevrier and Jack and I must find some way of amuse you . ' 

 ' you will never amuse I out of that conviction , my dear . I can see the shadow lengthen and the sand run out . there be but a few grain leave in the glass , Mary ; and while those last I should like to see you and Mr. Hammond marry . I should like to feel that your fate be settle before I go . God know what confusion and trouble may follow my death . ' 

 this be say with a sharp ring of despair . 

 ' I be not go to leave you , grandmother , ' say Mary . 

 ' not even for the man you love ? you be a good girl , Mary . Lesbia have forsake I for a less temptation . ' 

 ' Grandmother , that be hardly fair . it be your own wish to have Lesbia present this season , ' remonstrate Mary , loyal to the absent . 

 ' true , my dear . I see she be very tired of her life here , and I think it be well . but I be sorely afraid London have spoil she . no , Mary , you can stay with I to the end , if you like . there be room enough for you and your husband under this roof . I like this Mr. Hammond . his be the only face that ever recall the face of the dead . yes , I like he ; and although I know nothing about he except what Maulevrier tell I and that be of the scanty still I feel , somehow , that I can trust he . send your lover to I , Mary . I want to have a serious talk with he . ' 

 Mary run off to obey , flutter , blushing , and tremble . this idea of marriage in the immediate future be to be the last degree startling . a year have seem a very long time ; and she have be tell that she and her lover must wait a year at the very least ; so that vision of marriage have seem afar off in the dim shadowland of the future . she have be tell nothing by her lover of where she be to live , or what her life be to be like when she be his wife . and now she be tell that they be to be marry almost immediately , that they be to live in the house where she have be rear , in that familiar land of hill and water , that they be to roam about the dale and mountain together , they two , as man and wife . the whole thing be wonderful , bewildering , impossible almost . 

 this be on the first morning after Mr. Hammond 's arrival . Maulevrier have go off to hunt the Rotha for otter , and be up to his waist in the water , no doubt , by this time . Hammond be stroll up and down the terrace in front of the house , look at the green expanse of Fairfield , the dark bulk of Seat Sandal , the near crest of Helm Crag and Silver Howe . 

 ' you be to come to her ladyship directly , please , ' say Mary , go up to he . 

 he take both her hand , draw she nearer to he , smile down at she . they have be sit side by side at the breakfast table half - an - hour ago , he wait upon she as she pour out the tea ; yet by his tender greeting and the delight in his face it might have be suppose they have not meet for week . such be the sweet inanity of love . 

 ' what do her ladyship want with I , darling ? and why be you blush ? ' he ask . 

 ' I I think she be go to talk about our marriage , ' falter Mary . 

 ' " why , I will talk to she upon this theme until mine eyelid can no long wag , " ' quote Hammond . ' take I to she , Mary . I hope her ladyship be grow sensible . ' 

 ' she be very kind , very sweet . she have change so much of late . ' 

 Mary go with he to the door of her ladyship 's sitting - room , and there leave he to go in alone . she go to the library that room over which a gloomy shadow seem to have hang ever since that awful winter afternoon when Mary find Lady Maulevrier lie on the floor in the twilight . but it be a noble room , and in her studious hour Mary love to sit here , wall round with book , and able to consult or dip into as many volume as she like . to - day , however , her mind be not attuned to study . she sit with a volume of Macaulay open before she : but her thought be not with the author . she be wonder what those two be say in the room overhead , and find all attempt at read futile , she let her head sink back upon the cushion of her deep luxurious chair , and sit with her dreamy eye fix on the summer landscape and her thought with her lover . 

 Lady Maulevrier look very wan and tired in the bright morning light , when Mr. Hammond seat himself beside her sofa . the change in her appearance since the spring be more marked to - day than it have seem to he last night in the dim lamplight . yes , there be need here for a speedy settlement of all earthly matter . the traveller be near the mysterious end of the journey . the summon might come at any hour . 

 ' Mr. Hammond , I feel a confidence in your integrity , your goodness of heart , and high principle which I never think I could feel for a man of whom I know so little , ' begin Lady Maulevrier , gravely . ' all I know of you or your antecedent be what my grandson have tell I and I must say that the information so give have be very meagre . and yet I believe in you and yet I be go to trust you , wholly , blindly , implicitly and I be go to give you my granddaughter , ever so much soon than I intend to give she to you . soon , very soon , if you will have she ! ' 

 ' I will have she to - morrow , if there be time to get a special licence , ' exclaim Hammond , bend down to kiss the dowager 's hand , radiant with delight . 

 ' you shall marry she very soon , if you like , marry she by special licence , in this room . I should like to see your wedding . I have a strange impatience to behold one of my granddaughter happily marry , to know that her future be secure , that come weal , come woe , she be safe in the protection of a brave true man . I be not scared by the idea of a little poverty . that be often the good education for youth . but while you and I be alone we may as well talk about way and mean . perhaps you may hardly feel prepared to take upon yourself the burden of a wife this year . ' 

 ' as well this year as next . I be not afraid . ' 

 ' young man be so rash . however , as long as I live your responsibility will be only nominal . this house will be Mary 's home , and yours whenever you be able to occupy it . of course I should not like to interfere with your professional effort but if you be cultivate literature , why book can be write at Fellside well than in London . this lakeland of our have be the nursery of deathless writer . but I feel that my day be number and when I be dead well death be always a cause of change and trouble of some kind , and Mary will profit very little by my death . the bulk of my fortune be leave to Lesbia . I have teach she to consider herself my heiress ; and it would be unjust to alter my will . ' 

 ' pray do not dream of such a thing there be no need Mary will be rich enough , ' exclaim Hammond , hastily . 

 ' with five hundred a year and the fruit of your industry , ' say Lady Maulevrier . ' yes , yes , with modest aspiration and simple habit , people can live happily , honourably , on a few hundred a year . and if you really mean to devote yourself to literature , and do not mind bury yourself alive in this lake district until you have make your name as a writer , why the problem of way and mean will be easily solve . ' 

 ' Dear Lady Maulevrier , I be not afraid of way and mean . that be the last question which need trouble you . I tell Lesbia when I offer myself to she nearly a year ago , that if she would trust I , if she would cleave to I , poverty should never touch she , sordid care should never come near her dwelling . but she could not believe I . she be like Thomas the twin . I could show she no palpable security for my promise and she would not believe for the promise ' sake . Mary trust I ; and Mary shall not regret her confidence . ' 

 ' ah ! it be different with Lesbia , ' sigh Lady Maulevrier . ' I teach she to be ambitious . she have be school to set a high price upon herself . I know she care for you very much , even . but she could not face poverty ; or , if you like , I will say that she could not face an obscure existence sacrifice her ambition , a justifiable ambition in one so lovely , at the bidding of her first wooer . and then , again , she be tell that if she marry you , she would for ever forfeit my regard . you must not blame she for obey I . ' 

 ' I do not blame she ; for I have win the peerless pearl the jewel above all price a perfect woman . and now , dear Lady Maulevrier , give I but your consent , and I be off to York this afternoon , to interview the archbishop , and get the special licence , which will allow I to we d my darling here by your couch to - morrow afternoon . ' 

 ' I have no objection to your get the licence immediately ; but you must let I write a cheque before you go . a special licence be expensive I believe it cost fifty pound . ' 

 ' if it cost a thousand I should not think it dear . but I have a notion that I shall be able to get the licence cheap . you have make I wild with happiness . ' 

 ' but you must not refuse my cheque . ' 

 ' indeed I must , Lady Maulevrier . I be not quite such a pauper as you think I . ' 

 ' but fifty pound and the expense of the journey ; an outlay altogether unexpected on your part . I begin to fear that you be very reckless . a spendthrift shall never marry my granddaughter , with my consent . ' 

 ' I have never yet spend above half my income . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier look at he in wonderment and perplexity . have the young man go suddenly out of his mind , overwhelm by the greatness of his bliss ? 

 ' but I think you be poor , ' she falter . 

 ' it have please you to think so , dear Lady Maulevrier ; but I have more than enough for all my want , and I shall be able to provide a fitting home for my Mary , when you can spare she to preside over her own establishment . ' 

 ' Establishment ' seem rather a big word , but Lady Maulevrier suppose that in this case it mean a cook and housemaid , with perhaps later on a boy in button , to break window and block the pantry sink with missing teaspoon . 

 ' well , Mr. Hammond , this be quite an agreeable surprise , ' she say , after a brief silence . ' I really think you be poor as poor as a young man of gentlemanlike habit could be , and yet exist . perhaps you will wonder why , think this , I bring myself to consent to your marriage with my granddaughter . ' 

 ' it be a great proof of your confidence in I , or in Providence , ' reply Hammond , smile . 

 ' it be no such thing . I be govern by a sentiment a memory . it be my love for the dead which soften my heart towards you , John Hammond . ' 

 ' indeed ! ' he murmur , softly . 

 ' there be but one man in this world I ever fondly love the love of my youth my dearest and well , in the day when my heart be fresh and innocent and unambitious . that man be Ronald Hollister , afterwards Lord Hartfield . and yours be the only face that ever recall his to my mind . it be but a vague likeness a look now and then ; but slight as that likeness be it have be enough to make my heart yearn towards you , as the heart of a mother to her son . ' 

 John Hammond kneel beside the sofa , and bent his handsome face over the pale face on the pillow , imprint such a kiss as a son might have give . his eye be full of tear . 

 ' Dear Lady Maulevrier , think that it be the spirit of the dead which bless you for your fidelity to old memory , ' he say , tenderly . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 BY SPECIAL LICENCE . 


 after that interview with John Hammond all the arrangement for the marriage be plan by Lady Maulevrier with a calm and business - like capacity which seem extraordinary in one so frail and helpless . for a little while after Hammond leave she she remain lose in a reverie , deeply affect by the speech and manner of her granddaughter 's lover , as he give she that first kiss of duty and affection , the affection of one who in that act declare the allegiance of a close and holy bond . 

 yes , she tell herself , this marriage , humble as it might be , be altogether satisfactory . her own feeling towards the man of her granddaughter 's choice be one of instinctive affection . her heart have yearn to he from the beginning of their acquaintance ; but she have school herself to hide all indication of she like for he , she have make every effort to keep he at a distance , deem his very merit a source of danger in a household where there be two fresh impressionable girl . 

 and despite all her caution and care he have succeed in win one of those girl : and she be glad , very glad , that he have so succeed in baffle her prudence . and now it be agreeable to discover that he be not quite such a pauper as she have suppose he to be . 

 her heart feel light than it have be for some time when she set about plan the wedding . 

 the first step in the business be to send for James Steadman . he come immediately , grave and quiet as of old , and stand with his serious eye bent upon the face of his mistress , await her instruction . 

 ' Lady Mary be go to be married to Mr. Hammond , by special licence , in this room , to - morrow afternoon , if it can be manage so soon , ' say Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' I be very glad to hear it , my lady , ' answer Steadman , without the faint indication of surprise . 

 ' why be you so particularly glad ? ' ask his mistress , look at he sharply . 

 ' because Lady Mary 's presence in this house be a source of danger to your arrangement . she be very energetic and enterprise very shrewd and well , she be a woman so I suppose there can be no harm in say she be somewhat inquisitive . thing will be much safe here when Lady Mary be go ! ' 

 ' but she will not be go she be not go away except for a very brief honeymoon . I can not possibly do without she . she have become necessary to my life , Steadman ; and there be so little left of that life now , that there be no need for I to sacrifice the last gleam of sunshine . the girl be very sweet , and loving , and true . I be not half fond enough of she in the past ; but she have make herself very dear to I of late . there be many thing in this life , Steadman , which we only find out too late . ' 

 ' but , surely , my lady , Lady Mary will leave Fellside to go to a home of her own after her marriage . ' 

 ' no , I tell you , Steadman , ' his mistress answer , with a touch of impatience ; ' Lady Mary and her husband will make this house their home so long as I be here . it will not be long . ' 

 ' God grant it may be very long before you cease to be mistress here , ' answer Steadman , with real feeling ; and then in a low tone he go on : ' pardon I , my lady , for the suggestion , but do you think it wise to have Mr. Hammond here as a resident ? ' 

 ' why should it not be wise ? Mr. Hammond be a gentleman . ' 

 ' true , my lady ; but any accident , such as that which bring Lady Mary into the old garden - - ' 

 ' no such accident need occur it must not occur , Steadman , ' exclaim Lady Maulevrier , with kindle eye . she who have so long rule supreme be not inclined to have any desire of hers question . ' there must have be gross carelessness that day carelessness on your part , or that stable door would never have be leave open . the key ought to have be in your possession . it ought not to have be in the power of the stableman to open that door . as to Mr. Hammond 's presence at Fellside , I can not see any danger any reason why harm should come of it , more than of Lord Maulevrier 's presence here in the past . ' 

 ' the two gentleman be so different , my lady , ' say Steadman , with a gloomy brow . ' his lordship be so light - hearted and careless , his mind take up with his horse , gun , dog , fishing , shooting , and all kind of sport . he be not a gentleman to take much notice of anything out of his own line . but this Mr. Hammond be different a very thoughtful gentleman , an inquire mind , as one would say . ' 

 ' Steadman , you be get cowardly in your old age . the danger such a risk as you hint at , must be grow less and less every day . after forty year of security - - ' 

 ' Security ' echoed Steadman , with a monosyllabic laugh which express intense bitterness . ' say forty year during which I have feel myself upon the edge of a precipice every day and every hour . security ! but perhaps you be right , my lady , I be grow old and nervous , a feebler man than I be a few year ago , feebler in body and mind . let Mr. Hammond make his home here , if it please your ladyship to have he . so long as I be well and able to get about there can be no danger of anything awkward happen . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier look alarmed . 

 ' but you have no expectation of fall ill , I hope , Steadman ; you have no premonition of any malady ? ' 

 ' no , my lady , none except the malady of old age . I feel that I be not the man I once be , that be all . my brain be get woolly , and my sight be cloud now and then . and if I be to fall ill suddenly - - ' 

 ' oh , it would be terrible , it would be a dire calamity ! there be your wife , certainly , to look after thing , but - - ' 

 ' my wife would do she good , my lady . she be a faithful creature , but she be not yes , without any unkindness I must say that Mrs. Steadman be not a genius ! ' 

 ' oh , Steadman , you must not fail I ! I be horror - stricken at the mere idea , ' exclaim Lady Maulevrier . ' after forty year great God ! it would be terrible . Lesbia , Mary , Maulevrier ! the great , malignant , babble world outside these door . I be hem round with peril . for God 's sake preserve your strength . take care of your health . you be my strong rock . if you feel that there be anything amiss with you , or that your strength be fail , consult Mr. Horton neglect no precaution . the safety of this house , of the family honour , hang upon you . ' 

 ' pray do not agitate yourself , my lady , ' entreat Steadman . ' I be wrong to trouble you with my fear . I shall not fail you , be sure . although I be get old , I shall hold out to the end . ' 

 ' the end can not be very far off , ' say Lady Maulevrier , gloomily . 

 ' I think that forty year ago , my lady . but you be right the end must be near now . yes , it must be near . and now , my lady , your order about the wedding . ' 

 ' it will take place to - morrow , as I tell you , in this room . you will go to the Vicar and ask he to officiate . his two daughter will no doubt consent to be Lady Mary 's bridesmaid . you will make the request in my name . perhaps the Vicar will call this afternoon and talk matter over with I . Lady Mary and her husband will go to Cumberland for a brief honeymoon a week at most and then they will come back to Fellside . tell Mrs. Power to prepare the east wing for they . she will make one of the room into a boudoir for Lady Mary ; and let everything be as bright and pretty as good taste can make it . she can telegraph to London for any new furniture that may be want to complete her arrangement . and now send Lady Mary to I . ' 

 Mary come , fresh from the pine - wood , where she have be walk with her lover ; her lover of to - day , her husband to - morrow . he have tell she how he be to start for York directly after luncheon , and to come back by the early train next day , and how they two be to be married to - morrow afternoon . 

 ' it be more wonderful than any dream that I ever dream . ' exclaim Mary . ' but how can it be ? I have not even a wedding gown . ' 

 ' a fig for wedding gown ! it be Mary I be to we d , not her gown . be you clothe like patient Grisel I should be content . besides you have no end of pretty gown . and you be to be dress for travel , remember ; for I be go to carry you off to Lodore directly we be married , and you will have to clamber up the rocky bed of the waterfall to see the sun set behind the Borrowdale hill in your wedding gown . it have well be one of those neat little tailor gown which become you so well . ' 

 ' I will wear whatever you tell I , ' answer Mary . ' I shall always dress to please you , and not the outside world . ' 

 ' will you , my Griselda . some day you shall be dress as Grisel be 

 " in a cloth of gold that brighte shone , 
 with a coroune of many a riche stone . " 
 ' yes , you darling , when you be Lord Chancellor ; and till that day come I will wear tailor gown , linsey - wolsey , anything you like , ' cry Mary , laugh . 

 she run to her grandmother 's room , ineffably content , without a thought of trousseau or finery ; but then Mary Haselden be one of those few young woman for whom life be not a question of fashionable raiment . 

 ' Mary , I be go to send you off upon your honeymoon to - morrow afternoon , ' say Lady Maulevrier , smile at the bright , happy face which be bent over she . ' will you come back and nurse a fretful old woman when the honeymoon be over ? ' 

 ' the honeymoon will never be over , ' answer Mary , joyously . ' our wed life be to be one long honeymoon . but I will come back in a very few day , and take care of you . I be not go to let you do without I , now that you have learn to love I . ' 

 ' and will you be content to stay with I when your husband have go to London ? ' 

 ' yes , but I shall try to prevent his go very often , or stay very long . I shall try to wind myself into his heart , so that there will be an ache void there when we be part . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier proceed to tell Mary all her arrangement . three handsome room in the east wing , a bedroom , dressing - room , and boudoir , be to be make ready for the newly - married couple . Fršulein M ller be to be dismiss with a retire pension , in order that Lady Mary and her husband might feel themselves master and mistress in the low part of the house . 

 ' and if your husband really mean to devote himself to literature , he can have no well workshop than the library I have put together , ' say Lady Maulevrier . 

 ' and no well adviser and guide than you , dear grandmother , you who have read everything that have be write worth read during the last half century . ' 

 ' I have read a great deal , Mary , but I hardly know if I be any wiser on that account , ' answer Lady Maulevrier . ' after all , however much of other people 's wisdom we may devour , it be in ourselves that we be thus , or thus . our past folly rise up against we at the end of life ; and we see how little our book - learning have help we to stand against foolish impulse , against evil passion . " be good , " Mary , " and let who will be wise , " as the poet say . a faithful heart be your only anchor in the stormy sea of life . my dear , I be so glad you be go to be marry . ' 

 ' it be very sudden , ' say Mary . 

 ' very sudden ; yet in your case that do not much matter . you have quite make up your mind about Mr. Hammond , I believe . ' 

 ' make up my mind ! I begin to worship he the first night he come here . ' 

 ' foolish child . well , there be no need to wait for settlement . you have only your allowance as Lord Maulevrier 's daughter a first charge on the estate , which can not be make away with or anticipate , and of which no husband can deprive you . ' 

 ' he shall have every sixpence of it , ' murmur Mary . 

 ' and Mr. Hammond , though he tell I he be well off than I suppose , can have nothing to settle . so there will be nothing forfeit by a marriage without settlement . ' 

 Mary could not enter upon the question . it be even of less importance than the wedding gown . 

 the gong sound for luncheon . 

 ' Steadman 's dogcart be to take Mr. Hammond to the station at half - past two , ' say Lady Maulevrier , ' so you have well go and give he his luncheon . ' 

 Mary need no second bidding . she fly downstairs , and meet her lover in the hall . 

 what a happy luncheon it be ! Fršulein ' mounched , and mounche , and mounche , ' like the sailor 's wife eat chestnut : but those two lover lunch upon moonshine , upon each other 's little word and little look , upon their own ineffable bliss . they sit side by side , and help each other to the nice thing on the table , but neither could eat , and they get considerably mixed in their way of eat , take chutnee with strawberry cream , and currant jelly with asparagus . what do it matter ? everything taste of bliss . 

 ' you have have absolutely nothing to eat , ' say Mary , piteously , as the dogcart come grind round upon the dry gravel . 

 ' oh , I have do splendidly thank . I have just have a macaroon and some of that capital gorgonzola . God bless you , dearest , and a revoir , a revoir to - morrow . ' 

 ' and to - morrow I shall be Mary Hammond , ' cry Mary , clasp her hand . ' be not   it capital fun ? ' 

 they be in the porch alone . the servant be all at dinner , save the groom with the cart . Miss M ller be still munch at the well - spread table in the dining - room . 

 John Hammond fold his sweetheart in his arm for one brief embrace ; there be no time for loitering . in another moment he be spring into the cart . a shake of the rein , and he be drive slowly down the steep avenue . 

 ' life be full of parting , ' Mary say to herself , as she watch the last glimpse of the dogcart between the tree down in the road below , ' but this one be to be very short , thank God . ' 

 she wonder what she should do with herself for the rest of the afternoon , and finally , find that she be not want by her grandmother until afternoon tea , she set out upon a round of visit to her favourite cottager , to bid they a long farewell as a spinster . 

 ' you will be away a long time , I suppose , Lady Mary ? ' say one of her humble friend ; ' you will be go to Switzerland or Italy , or some of those foreign part where great lady and gentleman travel for their honeymoon ? ' 

 but Mary declare that she would be absent a week at long . she be come back to take care of her invalid grandmother ; and she be not go to marry a great gentleman , but a man who would have to work for his living . 

 she go back to Fellside , and read the Times , and pour out Lady Maulevrier 's tea , and sit on her low stool by the sofa , and the old and the young woman be as happy and confidential together as if they have be always the near and dearest to each other . her ladyship have see Miss M ller , and have inform that excellent person that her service at Fellside would no long be require after Lady Mary 's marriage ; but that her devotion to her duty during the last fourteen year should be reward by a pension which , together with her saving , would enable she to spend the rest of her day in repose . Miss M ller be duly grateful , and own to a tender longing for the Heimath , and declare herself ready to retire from her post whenever her ladyship please . 

 ' I shall go back to Germany directly I leave you , and I shall live and die there , unless I be want by one of my old pupil . but should Lady Lesbia or Lady Mary need my service for their daughter , in day to come , they can command I . for no one else will I abandon the Fatherland . ' 

 the Fršulein thus easily dispose of , Lady Mary feel that matrimony would verily mean independence . and yet she be prepared to regard her husband as her master . she mean to obey he in all meekness and reverence of spirit . 

 she spend the rest of the afternoon and the whole of the evening in her grandmother 's sitting - room , din tete - a - tete with the invalid for the first time since her illness . Lady Maulevrier talk much of Mary 's future , and of Lesbia 's ; but it be evident that she be full of uneasiness upon the latter subject . 

 ' I do not   know what Lesbia be go to do with her life , ' she say , with a sigh . ' her letter tell I of nothing but gown and party ; and Georgina Kirkbank can only expatiate upon Mr. Smithson 's wealth , and the grand position he be go to occupy by - and - by . I should like to see both my granddaughter marry before I die yes , I should like to see Lesbia 's fate secure , if she be to be only Lady Lesbia Smithson . ' 

 ' she can not fail to make a good match , grandmother , ' say Mary . 

 ' I be begin to lose faith in her future , ' answer Lady Maulevrier . ' there seem to be a fatality about the career of particularly attractive girl . they be too confident of their power to succeed in life . they trifle with fortune , fascinate the wrong people , and keep the right people at arm 's length . I think if I have be Lesbia 's guide in society her first season would have count for more than it be likely to count for under Lady Kirkbank 's management . I should have awaken Lesbia from the dream of dress and dance the mere butterfly life of a girl who never look beyond the present moment . but now go and give order about your packing , Mary . it be past ten , and Clara have well pack your trunk early to - morrow morning . ' 

 Clara be a modest easedale damsel , who have be promote to be Lady Mary 's personal attendant , when the more mature Kibble have go away with Lady Lesbia . Mary require very little wait upon , but she be not the less glad to have a neat little smile maiden devoted to her service , ready to keep her room neat and trim , to go on errand to the cottager , to arrange the flower in the old china bowl , and to make herself generally useful . 

 it seem a strange thing to have to furnish a trousseau from the wardrobe of everyday life a trousseau in which nothing , except half - a - dozen pair of glove , a pair of boot , and a few odd and end of lace and ribbon would be actually new . Mary think very little of the matter , but the position of thing strike she maid as altogether extraordinary and unnatural . 

 ' you should have see the thing Miss Freeman have , Lady Mary , ' exclaim the damsel , ' the daughter of that cotton - spin gentleman from Manchester , who live at the Gables you should have see her new gown and thing when she be marry . Mrs. Freeman 's maid keep company with my brother James he be in the stable at Freeman 's , you know , Lady Mary and she ask I in to look at the trousseau two day before the wedding . I never see such beautiful dress such hat such bonnet such jacket and mantle . it be like go into one of those grand shop at York , and have all the thing in the shop pull out for one to look at such silk and satin and trim ah ! how those dress be trim . the mystery be how the young lady could ever get herself into they , or sit down when she would get one of they on . ' 

 ' instrument of torture , Clara . I should hate such gown , even if I be go to marry a rich man , as I suppose Miss Freeman be . ' 

 ' not a bit of it , Lady Mary . she be only go to marry a Bolton doctor with a small practice ; but her maid tell I she be determined she would get all she could out of her pa , in case he should lose all his money and go bankrupt . they say that trousseau cost two thousand pound . ' 

 ' well , Clara , I would rather have my tailor gown , in which I can scramble about the ghyll and crag just as I like . ' there be a pale yellow indian silk , smother with soft yellow lace , which would serve for a wedding gown ; for indifferent as Mary be to the great clothe question , she want to look in some wise as a bride . a neat chocolate - colour cloth , almost new from the tailor 's hand , with a little cloth toque to match , would do for the wedding journey . all the detail of Mary 's wardrobe be the perfection of neatness . she have grow very neat and careful in her habit since her engagement , anxious to be industrious and frugal in all thing a really handy housewife for a hard - work bread - winner . and now she be tell that Mr. Hammond be not so poor as she have think . she would not be oblige to stint herself , and manage , as she have suppose when she go about among the cottager , take lesson in household economy . it be almost a disappointment . 

 she and Clara finish the packing that night , Mary be much too excited for the possibility of sleep . there be not much to pack , only one roomy american trunk a trunk which hold everything a Gladstone bag for thing that might possibly be want in a hurry , and a handsome dressing - bag , Maulevrier 's last birthday gift to his sister . 

 Mary have receive no gift from her lover , save the plain gold engagement ring , and a few new book send straight from the publisher . Clara take care to inform her young mistress that Miss Freeman 's sweetheart have send she all manner of splendid present , scent bottle , photograph album , glove box , and other thing of beauty , albeit his mean be suppose to be nil . it be evident that Clara disapprove of Mr. Hammond 's conduct in this matter , and even suspect he of meanness . 

 ' he do ought to have send you his photograph , Lady Mary , ' say Clara , with a reproachful air . 

 ' I daresay he would have do so , Clara , but he have be photograph only once in his life . ' 

 ' lawk a mercy , Lady Mary ! why most young gentleman have themselves photograph in every new place they go to ; and as Mr. Hammond have be a traveller , like his lordship , I make sure he would have be photograph in knickerbocker and every other kind of attitude . ' 

 Mary have not refrain from ask for her lover 's portrait ; and he have tell she that he have carefully abstain from have his countenance reproduce in any manner since his fifteenth year , when he have be photograph at his mother 's desire . 

 ' the present fashion of photograph star out of every stationer 's window make a man 's face public property , ' he tell Mary . ' I do not   want every street arab in London to recognise I . ' 

 ' but you be not a public man , ' say Mary . ' your photograph would not be in all the window ; although , in my humble opinion , you be a very handsome man . ' 

 Hammond blush , laugh , and turn the conversation , and Mary have to exist without any picture of her lover . 

 ' Millais shall paint I in his grand Reynolds manner by - and - by , ' he tell Mary . 

 ' Millais ! oh , Jack ! when will you and I be able to give a thousand or so for a portrait ? ' 

 ' ah , when , indeed ? but we may as well enjoy our day - dream , like Alnaschar , without smash our basket of crockery . ' 

 and now Mary , who have manage to exist without the picture , be to have the original . he be to be all her own her master , her lord , her love , after to - morrow unto eternity , in life , and in the grave , and in the dim hereafter beyond the grave , they two be to be one . in heaven there be to be no marrying or give in marriage , Mary be tell ; but her own heart cry aloud to she that the happily wed must remain link in heaven . God would not part the bless soul of true lover . 

 a short sleep , break by happy dream , and it be morning , Mary 's wedding morning , fairest of summer day , July in all her beauty . Mary go to her grandmother 's room , and wait upon she at breakfast . 

 Lady Maulevrier be in excellent spirit . 

 ' everything be arrange , Mary . I have have a telegram from Hammond , who have get the licence , and will come at half - past one . at three the Vicar will come to marry you , his daughter , Katie and Laura , act as your bridesmaid . ' 

 ' Bridesmaids ! ' exclaim Mary . ' I forget all about bridesmaid . be I really to have any ? ' 

 ' you will have two girl of your own age to bear you company , at any rate . I have ask dear old Horton to be present ; and he , Fršulein , and Maulevrier will complete the party . it will not be a brilliant wedding , Mary , or a costly ceremonial , except for the licence . ' 

 ' and poor Jack will have to pay for that , ' say Mary , with a long face . 

 ' Poor Jack refuse to let I pay for it , ' answer Lady Maulevrier . ' he be vastly independent , and I fear somewhat reckless . ' 

 ' I like he for his independence ; but he must not   be reckless , ' say Mary , severely . 

 he be to be the master in all thing ! and yet she be to exercise a restrain influence , she be to guard he against his own weakness , his too generous impulse . her voice be to be the voice of prudence . this be how Mary understand the marriage tie . 

 under ordinary condition Mary would have be in the avenue , lie in wait for her lover , eager to get the very first glimpse of he when he arrive , to see he before he have brush the dust of the journey from his raiment . but to - day she hang back . she stay in her grandmother 's room and sit beside the sofa , shy , and even a little downcast . this lover who be so soon to be transform into a husband be a formidable personage . she dare not rush forth to greet he . perhaps he have change his mind by this time , and be sorry he have ever ask she to marry he . perhaps he think he be be hustle into a marriage . he have be tell that he be to wait at least a year . and now , all in a moment , he be send off to get a special licence . how could she be quite sure that he like this kind of treatment ? 

 if there be any faith to be place in the human countenance , Mr. Hammond be in no wise an unwilling bridegroom ; for his face beam with happy light as he come into the room presently , follow by an elderly man with grey hair and whisker , and in a strictly professional frock coat , whom the butler announce as Mr. Dorncliffe . Lady Maulevrier look startled , somewhat offend even at this intrusion , and she give Mr. Dorncliffe a very haughty salutation , which be almost more crush than no salutation at all . 

 Mary stand up by her grandmother 's sofa , and look rather frightened . 

 ' Dear Lady Maulevrier , ' say Hammond , ' I venture to telegraph to my lawyer to meet I at York last night , and come on here with I this morning . he have prepare a settlement , which I should like you to hear he read , and which he will explain to you , if necessary , while molly and I go for a stroll in the ground . ' 

 he have never call she molly before . he put his arm round she with a proud air of possession , even under her grandmother 's eye . and she nestle close up to his side , forget everything but the delight of belong to he . 

 they go downstairs , and through the billiard room to the terrace , and from the terrace to the tennis lawn , where John Hammond sit read Heine nearly a year ago , just before he propose to Lesbia . 

 ' do you remember that day ? ' ask Mary , look at he , solemnly . 

 ' I remember every day and every hour we have spend together since I begin to love you , ' answer Hammond . 

 ' ah , but this be before you begin to love I , ' say Mary , with a piteous little grimace . ' this be while you be love Lesbia as hard as ever you could . do not   you remember the day you propose to she a lovely summer day like this , the lake just as blue , the sun shin upon Fairfield just as it be shin now , and you sit there read Heine those sweet , sweet verse , that seem make of sigh and tear ; and every now and then you pause and look up at Lesbia , and there be more love in your eye than in all Heine 's poetry , though that brim over with love . ' 

 ' but how do you know all this , molly ? you be not here . ' 

 ' I be not very far off . I be behind those bush , watch and listen . I know you be in love with Lesbia , and I think you despise I , and I be very , very wretched ; and I listen afterwards when you propose to she there behind the pine tree and I hat she for refuse you , and I be afraid I hat you for propose to she . ' 

 ' when I ought to have be propose to my Molly , blind fool that I be , ' say Hammond , smile tenderly at she , smile , though his eye be dim with tear . ' my own sweet love , it be a terrible mistake , a mistake that might have cost I the happiness of a lifetime . but Fate be very good to I , and let I have my Mary after all . and now let we sit down under the old red beech and talk till it be time to go and get ready for our wedding . I suppose one ought to brush one 's hair and wash one 's hand for that kind of thing , even when the function be not on a ceremonious scale . ' 

 Mary laugh . 

 ' I have a pretty gown than this to be marry in , although it be not   a wedding gown , ' she say . 

 ' oh , by - the - by , I have something for you , ' say her lover , ' something in the way of ornament , but I do not   suppose you would care to wear they to - day . I will run and get they . ' 

 he go back to the house , leave Mary sit on the rustic bench under the fine old copper beech , a tree that have be stand long before Lady Maulevrier enlarge the old stone house into a stately villa . he return in a few minute , bring a morocco bag about the size of those usually carry by lawyer or lawyer ' clerk . 

 ' I do not   think I have give you anything since we be engage , Mary , ' he say , as he seat himself by her side . 

 Mary blush , remember how Clara , the maid , have remark upon this fact . 

 ' you give I my ring , ' she say , look down at the massive band of gold , ' and you have give I ever so many delightful book . ' 

 ' those be very humble gift , molly : but to - day I have bring you a wedding present . ' 

 he open the bag and take out a red morocco case , and then half - a - dozen more red morocco case of various shape and size . the first look new , but the other be old - fashioned and pass shabby , as if they have be knock about broker ' shop for the last quarter of a century . 

 ' there be my wedding gift , Mary , ' he say , hand she the new case . 

 it contain an exquisitely paint miniature of a very beautiful woman , in a large oval locket set with sapphire . 

 ' you have ask I for my portrait , dear , ' he say . ' I give you my mother 's rather than my own , because I love she as I never think to love again , till I know you . I should like you to wear that locket sometimes , Mary , as a kind of link between the love of the past and the love of the present . be my mother live , she would welcome and cherish my bride and my wife . she be dead , and you and she can never meet on earth : but I should like you to be familiar with the face which be once the light of my life . ' 

 Mary 's eye fill with tear as she gaze at the face in the miniature . it be the portrait of a woman of about thirty a face of exquisite refinement , of calm and pensive beauty . 

 ' I shall treasure this picture always , above all thing , ' she say : but ' why do you have it set so splendidly , Jack ? no gem be need to give your mother 's portrait value in my eye . ' 

 ' I know that , dear , but I want to make the locket worth wear . and now for the other case . the locket be your lover 's free gift , and be yours to keep and to bequeath to your child . these be heirloom , and yours only during your husband 's lifetime . ' 

 he open one of the large case , and on a bed of black velvet Mary beheld a magnificent diamond necklace , with a large pendant . he open another and display a set of spray for the hair . another contained earring , another bracelet , the last a tiara . 

 ' what be they for ? ' gasp Mary . 

 ' for my wife to wear . ' 

 ' oh , but I could never wear such thing , ' she exclaim , with an idea that these must be stage jewellery . ' they be paste , of course very beautiful for people who like that kind of thing but I do not . ' 

 she feel deeply shocked at this evidence of bad taste on the part of her lover . how the thing flash in the sunshine but so do the crystal drop in the old venetian girandole . 

 ' no , Molly , they be not paste ; they be brazilian diamond , and , as Maulevrier would say , they be as good as they make they . they be heirloom , molly . my dear mother wear they in her summer - tide of wed happiness . my grandmother wear they for thirty year before she ; my great grandmother wear they at the Court of Queen Charlotte , and they be wear at the Court of Queen Anne . they be nearly two hundred year old ; and those central stone in the tiara come out of a cap wear by the Great Mogul , and be the large table diamond know . they be historic , Mary . ' 

 ' why , they must be worth a fortune . ' 

 ' they be value at something over seventy thousand pound . ' 

 ' but why do not   you sell they ? ' exclaim Mary , open her eye wide with surprise , ' they would give you a handsome income . ' 

 ' they be not mine to sell , molly . do not I tell you that they be heirloom ? they be the family jewel of the Countesses of Hartfield . ' 

 ' then what be you ? ' 

 ' Ronald Hollister , Earl of Hartfield , and your adore lover ! ' 

 Mary give a cry of surprise , a cry of distress even . 

 ' oh , that be too dreadful ! ' she exclaim ; ' grandmother will be so unhappy . she have set her heart upon Lesbia marry Lord Hartfield , the son of the man she love . ' 

 ' I get wind of her wish more than a year ago , ' say Hartfield , ' from your brother ; and he and I hatch a little plot between we . he tell I Lesbia be not worthy of his friend 's devotion tell I that she be vain and ambitious that she have be educate to be so . I determine to come and try my fate . I would try to win she as plain John Hammond . if she be a true woman , I tell myself , vanity and ambition would be blow to the four wind , provide I could win her love . I come , I see she ; and to see be to love she . God know I try honestly to win she ; but I have swear to myself that I would woo she as John Hammond , and I do not waver in my resolution no , not when a word would have turn the scale . she like I , I think , a little ; but she do not like the notion of an obscure life as the wife of a hardworke professional man . the pomp and vanity of this world have it against love or liking , and she give I up . I thank God that the pomp and vanity prevail ; for this happy chance give I Mary , my sweet wordsworthian damsel , find , like the violet or the celandine , by the wayside , in Wordsworth 's own country . ' 

 ' and you be Lord Hartfield ! ' exclaim Mary , still lose in wonder , and with no elation at this change in the aspect of her life . ' I always know you be a great man . but poor grandmother ! it will be a dreadful disappointment to she . ' 

 ' I think not . I think she have learn my Molly 's value ; rather late , as I learn it ; and I believe she will be glad that one of her granddaughter should marry the son of her first lover . let we go to she , love , and see if she be reconcile to the idea , and whether the settlement be ready for execution . Dorncliffe and his clerk be work at it half through the night . ' 

 ' what be the good of a settlement ? ' ask Mary . ' I be sure I do not   want one . ' 

 ' Lady Hartfield must not be dependent upon her husband 's whim or pleasure for her milliner 's bill or her private charity , ' answer her lover , smile at her eagerness to repudiate anything business - like . 

 ' but I would rather be dependent on your pleasure . I shall never have any milliner 's bill ; and I be sure you would never deny I money for charity . ' 

 ' you shall not have to ask I for it , except when you have exceed your pin - money . I hope you will do that now and then , just to afford I the pleasure of do you a favour . ' 

 ' Hartfield , ' repeat Mary , to herself , as they go towards the house ; ' shall I have to call you Hartfield ? I do not   like the name nearly so well as Jack . ' 

 ' you shall call I Jack for old sake 's sake , ' say Hartfield , tenderly . 

 ' how do you think of such a name as Jack ? ' 

 ' rather an effort of genius , be not   it . well , first and foremost I be christen Ronald John all the Hollisters be christen John name of the founder of the race ; and , secondly , Maulevrier and I be always plain Mr. Morland and Mr. Hammond in our travel , and always call each other Jack and Jim . ' 

 ' how nice ! ' say Mary ; ' would you very much mind our be plain Mr. and Mrs. Hammond , while we be on our honeymoon trip ? ' 

 ' I should like it of all thing . ' 

 ' so should I. People will not take so much notice of we , and we can do what we like , and go where we like . ' 

 ' delightful ! we will even disguise ourselves as Cook 's tourist , if you like . I would not mind . ' 

 they be at the door of Lady Maulevrier 's sitting room by this time . they go in , and be greet with smile . 

 ' let I look at the Countess of Hartfield that be to be in half an hour , ' say her ladyship . ' oh , Mary , Mary , what a blind idiot I have be , and what a lucky girl you be ! I tell you once that you be wise than Lesbia , but I little think how much wise you have be . ' 

 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

 ' our love be new , and then but in the spring . ' 


 Henley Regatta be over . it have pass like a tale that be tell ; like Epsom and Ascot , and all the other glory of the London season . happy those for whom the glory of Henley , the grace of Ascot , the fever of Epsom , be not as weary as a twice - tell tale , bring with they only bitter memory of youth that have flee , of hope that have wither , of day - dream that have never be realise . there be some to whom that mad hastening from pleasure to pleasure , that rush from scene to scene of excitement , that eager crowd into one day and night of gaiety which might fairly relieve the placid monotony of a month 's domesticity , a month 's professional work some there be to whom this Vanity Fair be as a treadmill or the turning of a crank , the felon 's deep humiliation , purposeless , unprofitable , labour . 

 the regatta be over , and Lady Kirkbank and her charge hasten back to Arlington Street . Theirs be the very first departure ; albeit Mr. Smithson plead hard for a prolongation of their visit . the weather be exceptionally lovely , he urge . water picnic be delightful just now the bank be alive with the colour of innumerable wild flower , as beautiful and more poetical than the gorgeous flora of the Amazon or the Paraguay river . and Lady Lesbia have develop a genius for punting ; and lean against her pole , with her hair fly loose and sleeve roll up above the elbow , she be a subject for canvas or marble , Millais or Adams Acton . 

 ' when we be in Italy I will have she model , just in that attitude , and that dress , ' say Mr. Smithson . ' she will make a lovely companion for my Reading girl : one all repose and reverie , the other all life and action . Dear Lady Kirkbank , you really must stay for another week at least . why go back to the smoke and sultriness of town ? here we can almost live on the water ; and I will send to London for some people to make music for we in the evening , or if you miss your little game at " Nap , " we will play for an hour or so every night . it shall not be my fault if my house be not pleasant for you . ' 

 ' your house be charming , and I shall be here only too often in the day to come ; you will have more than enough of I then , I promise you , ' reply Georgie , with her girlish laugh , ' but we must not stop a day long now . People would begin to talk . besides , we have engagement for every hour of the week that be come , and for a fortnight after ; and then I suppose I ought to take Lesbia to the North to see her grandmother , and to discuss all the preparation and arrangement for this very serious event in which you and Lesbia be to be the chief performer . ' 

 ' I shall be very glad to go to Grasmere myself , and to make the acquaintance of my future grandmother - in - law , ' say Mr. Smithson . 

 ' you will be charm with she . she belong to the old school something of a fossil , perhaps , but a very dignified fossil . she have grow old in a rustic seclusion , and know less of our world than a mother abbess ; but she have read immensely , and be wonderfully clever . I be bind to tell you that she have very lofty idea about her granddaughter ; and I believe she will only be reconcile to Lesbia 's marriage with a commoner by the notion that you be sure of a peerage . I venture to hint as much in my letter to Lady Maulevrier yesterday . ' 

 a shade of sullenness creep over Horace Smithson 's visage . 

 ' I should hope that such settlement as I be in a position to make will convince Lady Maulevrier that I be a respectable suitor for her granddaughter , ex peerage , ' he say , somewhat haughtily . 

 ' my dear Smithson , do I not tell you that poor Lady Maulevrier be a century behind the time , ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , with an aggrieved look . ' if she be one of we , of course she would know that wealth be the paramount consideration , and that you be quite the good match of the season . but she be dreadfully arriťrťe , poor dear thing ; and she must have amuse herself with the day - dream of see Lesbia a duchess , or something of that kind . I shall tell she that Lesbia can be one of the queen of society without have strawberry leaf on her coach panel , and that my dear friend Horace Smithson be a much well match than a seedy duke . so do not   look cross , my dear fellow ; in I you have a friend who will never desert you . ' 

 ' thank , ' say Smithson , inwardly resolve that , so soon as this little transaction of his marriage be over , he would see as little of Georgie Kirkbank and her cotton frock and schoolgirl hat as bare civility would allow . 

 he have promise she that she should be the rich by a neat little bundle of fat and flourish railway stock when his happiness be secure , and he be not go to break his promise . but he do not mean to give George and Georgie free quarter at Rood Hall , or at Cowes , or Deauville ; and he mean to withdraw his wife altogether from Lady Kirkbank 's pinchbeck set . 

 what be Lesbia 's feeling in the early morning after the last day of the regatta , as she slowly pace the lavender walk in the Ladies ' Garden , alone ? for happily Mr. Smithson be not so early a riser as the grasmere - breed damsel , and she have this fresh morning hour to herself . of what be she think as she pace slowly up and down the broad gravel walk , between two row of tall old bush , on which mass of purple blossom stand up from the pale grey foliage , silvery where the summer breeze touch it ? 

 well , she be think first what a grand old place Rood Hall be , and that it be in a manner hers henceforward . she be to be mistress of this house , and of other house , each after its fashion as perfect as Rood Hall . she be to have illimitable money at her command , to spend and give away as she like . she , who yesterday have be torture by the idea of owe a paltry three thousand pound , be henceforward to count she thousand by the hundred . her sens reel before that dazzle vision of figure with row of cipher after they , one cipher more or less meaning the difference between thousand and million . everybody have agree in assure she that Mr. Smithson be inordinately rich . everybody have consider it his or her business to give her information about the gentleman 's income ; clearly imply thereby that in the opinion of society Mr. Smithson 's merit as a suitor be a question of so much bullion . 

 could she doubt she who have learn in one short season to know what the world be make of and what it most value could she , steep to the lip in the wisdom of Lady Kirkbank 's set , doubt for an instant that she be make a well match in the eye of society , than if she have marry a man of the high lineage in all England , a peer of the high rank , without large mean ? she know that money be power , that a man might begin life as a pot - boy or a greengrocer , a knacker or a dust contractor , and climb to the topmost pinnacle , be he only rich enough . she know that society would eat such a man 's dinner and dance at his wife 's ball , and pretend to think he an altogether exceptional man , make believe to admire he for his own sake , to think his wife most brilliant among woman , if he be only rich enough . and could she doubt that society would bow down to she as Lady Lesbia Smithson ? she have learn a great deal in her single season , and she know how society be influence and govern , almost as well as Sir Robert Walpole know how human nature could be mould and direct at the will of a shrewd diplomatist . she know that in the fashionable world every man and every woman , every child even , have his or her price , and may be buy and sell at pleasure . she have her price , she , Lesbia , the pearl of Grasmere ; and the price have be fairly bid she have surrender to the bidder . 

 ' I suppose I always mean to marry he , ' she think , pause in her promenade to gaze across the verdant landscape , a fertile vale , against a background of low hill . all the landscape , to the edge of those hill , belong to Mr. Smithson . ' yes , I must have mean to give way at last , or I should hardly have tolerate his attention . it would have be a pity to refuse such a place as this ; and , he be quite gentlemanlike ; and as I have do with all romantic idea , I do not see why I should not learn to like he very much . ' 

 she dismiss the idea of Smithson lightly , with this conclusion , which she believe very virtuous ; and then as she resume she walk her thought revert to the Park Lane Palace . 

 ' I hardly know whether I like it , ' she muse languidly ; ' beautiful as it be , it be only a reproduction of bygone splendour , and it be painfully excruciating now . for my own part I would much rather have the shabby old house which have belong to one 's ancestor , which have come to one as a heritage , by divine right as it be , instead of be buy with newly make money . to my mind it would rank higher . yet I doubt if anybody nowadays set a pin 's value upon ancestor . People ask , who be he ? but they only mean , how much have he ? and provide a person be not absolutely in trade , not actually engage in sell soap , or match , or mustard , society do not   care a straw how his money have be make . the only secondary question be , how long will it last ? and that be of course important . ' 

 Musing thus , wordly wisdom personify , the maiden look up and see her lover enter at the light little iron gate which give entrance to this feminine Eden . she go to meet he , look all simplicity and freshness in her white morning gown and neat little dunstable hat . it seem to he as he gaze at she almost as if this delicate , sylph - like beauty be some wild white flower of the wood personify . 

 she give he her hand graciously , but he draw she to his breast and kiss she , with the air of a man who be exercise an indisputable right . she suppose that it be his right , and she submit , but release herself as quickly as possible . 

 ' my dearest , how lovely you look in this morning light , ' he exclaim , ' while all the other woman be upstairs make up their face to meet the sun , and we shall see every shade of bismuth by - and - by , from pale mauve to purple . ' 

 ' it be very uncivil of you to say such a thing of your guest , ' exclaim Lesbia . 

 ' but they all indulge in bismuth you must be quite aware of that . they call the stuff by different name Blanc Rosati , Creme de l'Imperatrice , milk of Beauty , Perline , Opaline , Ivorine but it mean bismuth all the same . expose your fashionable beauty to the fume of sewer - gas , and that dazzle whiteness would turn to a dull brown hue , or even black . thank heaven , my Lesbia wear real lily and rose . have you be here long ? ' 

 ' about half an hour ' 

 ' I only wish I have know . I should not have dawdle so long over my dressing . ' 

 ' I be very glad you do not know , ' Lesbia answer coolly . ' do you suppose I never want to be alone ? life in London be perpetual turmoil ; one 's eye grow weary with ever - move crowd , one 's ear ache with try to distinguish one voice among the buzz of voice . ' 

 ' then why go back to town ? why go back to the turmoil and the treadmill ? it be only a kind of treadmill , after all , though we choose to call it pleasure . stay here , Lesbia , and let we live upon the river , and among the flower , ' urge Smithson , with as romantic an air as if he have never hear of contango , or bulling and bear ; and yet only half an hour ago , while his valet be shave he , he be debate within himself whether he should be bear or bull in his influence upon certain stock . 

 it be suppose that he never go near the city , that he have shake the dust of Lombard Street and the House off his shoe , that his fortune be make , and he have no further need of speculation . yet the proverb hold good with the stock - jobber . ' he who have once drunk will drink again . ' of that fountain there be no satiety . 

 ' stay and hear the last of the nightingale , ' he murmur ; ' we be famous for our nightingale . ' 

 ' I wonder you do not   order a fricassťe of their tongue , like that loathsome person in roman history . ' 

 ' I hope I shall never resemble any loathsome person . why can you not stay ? ' 

 ' why , because it be not etiquette , Lady Kirkbank say . ' 

 ' Lady Kirkbank , eh ? la belle farce , Lady Kirkbank stand out for etiquette . ' 

 ' do not   laugh at my chaperon , sir . upon what rock can a poor girl lean if you undermine her faith in her chaperon , sir . ' 

 ' I hope you will have a well guardian before you be a month old . I mean to be a very strong rock , Lesbia . you do not know how firmly I shall stand between you and all the peril of society . you have be but poorly guard hitherto . ' 

 ' you talk as if you mean to be an abominable tyrant , ' say Lesbia . ' if you do not   take care I shall change my mind , and recall my promise . ' 

 ' not on that account , Lesbia : every woman like a man who stand up for his own . it be only your invertebrate husband whose wife drift into the divorce court . I mean to keep and hold the prize I have win . when be it to be , dearest our wedding day ? ' 

 ' not for age , I hope some time next summer , at the early . ' 

 ' you would not be so cruel as to keep I wait a year ? ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' you would not ask that if you love I . ' 

 ' you be ask too much , ' say Lesbia , with a flash of defiance . ' there have be nothing say about love yet . you ask I to be your wife , and I say yes mean that at some remote period such a thing might be . ' 

 she know that the man be her slave slave to her beauty , slave to her superior rank and she be determine not to lessen the weight of his chain by so much as a feather . 

 ' do not that promise imply something like love ? ' he ask , earnestly . 

 ' perhaps it imply a little gratitude for your devotion , which I have neither court nor encourage ; a little respect for your talent , your perseverance a little admiration for your wonderful success in life . perhaps love may follow these sentiment , naturally , easily , if you be very patient ; but if you talk about our be marry before next year , you will simply make I hate you . ' 

 ' then I will say very little , except to remind you that there be no earthly reason why we should not be marry next month . October and November be the good month for Rome , and I hear you say last night you be pin to see Rome . ' 

 ' what then can not Lady Kirkbank take I to Rome ? ' 

 ' and introduce you to the rowdy people in the city , ' cry Mr. Smithson . ' Lesbia , I adore you . it be the dream of my life to be your husband ; but if you be go to spend a winter in Italy with Lady Kirkbank , I renounce my right , I surrender my hope . you will not be the wife of my dream after that . ' 

 ' do you assert a right to control my life during our engagement ? ' 

 ' some little right ; above all , the privilege of choose your friend . and that be one reason why I most fervently desire our marriage should not be delay . you would find it difficult , impossible perhaps , to get out of Lady Kirkbank 's claw while you be single ; but once my wife , that amiable old person can be make to keep she distance . ' 

 ' Lady Kirkbank 's claw ! what a horrible way in which to speak of a friend . I think you adore Lady Kirkbank . ' 

 ' so I do . we all adore she , but not as a guide for youth . as a speciman of the elderly female of the latter half of the nineteenth century , she be perfect . such gush , such juvenility , such broad view , such an utter absence of starch ; but as a lamp for the footstep of girlhood no , there we must pause . ' 

 ' you be very ungrateful . do you know that poor Lady Kirkbank have be most strenuous in your behalf ? ' 

 ' oh , yes , I know that . ' 

 ' and you be not grateful ? ' 

 ' I intend to be very grateful , so grateful as to entirely satisfy Lady Kirkbank . ' 

 ' you be horribly cynical . that remind I , there be a poor girl whom Lady Kirkbank have under her wing one season a Miss Trinder , to whom I be tell you behave shamefully . ' 

 ' there be a parson 's daughter who throw herself at my head in a most audacious way , and who behave so badly , egg on by Lady Kirkbank , that I have to take refuge in flight . do you suppose I be the kind of man to marry the first adventurous damsel who take a fancy to my town house , and think it would be a happy hunting ground for a herd of brother and sister ? Miss Trinder be shock bad style , and her design be transparent from the very beginning ! I let she flirt as much as she like ; and when she begin to be seriously sentimental I take wing for the East . ' 

 ' be she pretty ? ' ask Lesbia , not displeased at this contemptuous summing up of poor Belle Trinder 's story . 

 ' if you admire the Flemish type , as illustrate by Rubens , she be lovely . a complexion of lily and rose cabbage rose , bien entendu , which be apt to deepen into peony after champagne and mayonaise at Ascot or Sandown a figure oh well a tremendous figure hair of an auburn that touch perilously on the confine of red large , serviceable foot , and an appetite the appetite of a ploughman 's daughter rear upon short common . ' 

 ' you be very cruel to a girl who evidently admire you . ' 

 ' a fig for her admiration ! she want to live in my house and spend my money . ' 

 ' there go the gong , ' exclaim Lesbia ; ' pray let we go to breakfast . you be hideously cynical , and I be wofully tired of you . ' 

 and as they stroll back to the house , by lavender walk and rise garden , and across the dewy lawn , Lesbia question herself as to whether she be one whit well or more dignified than Isabella Trinder . she wear her rue with a difference , that be all . 

 CHAPTER XXXV . 

 ' all FANCY , PRIDE , and FICKLE maidenhood . ' 


 the return to Arlington Street mean a return to the ceaseless whirl of gaiety . even at Rood Hall life have be as near an approach to perpetual motion as one could hope for in this world ; but the excitement and the hurrying and scamper in Berkshire have a rustic flavour ; there be moment that be almost repose , a breathing space between the blue river and the blue sky , in a world that seem make of green field and hang wood , the plashing of water , and the song of the lark . but in London the very atmosphere be charge with hurry and agitation ; the freshness be go from the verdure of the park ; the glory of the rhododendron have fade ; the Green Park below Lady Kirkbank 's mansion be baked and rusty ; the tower of the Houses of Parliament yonder be dimly see in a mist of heat . London air taste of smoke and dust , vibrate with the incessant roll of carriage , and the trampling of multitudinous foot . 

 there be woman of rank who can take the London season quietly , and live their own life in the midst of the whirl and the riot woman for whom that squirrel - like circulation round and round the fashionable wheel have no charm woman who only receive people they like , only go into society that be congenial . but Lady Kirkbank be not one of these . the advance of age make she only more keen in the pursuit of pleasure . she would have abandon herself to despair have the glass over the mantelpiece in her boudoir cease to be choke and litter with card have her book of engagement show a blank page . happily there be plenty of people if not all of they the good people who want Sir George and Lady Kirkbank at their party . the gentleman be sport and harmless , the lady be good - natured , and just sufficiently eccentric to be amusing without degenerate into a bore . and this year she be ask almost everywhere , for the sake of the beauty who go under her wing . Lesbia have be as a pearl of price to her chaperon , from a social point of view ; and now that she be engage to Horace Smithson she be likely to be even more valuable . 

 Mr. Smithson have promise Lady Kirkbank , sportively as it be , and upon the impulse of the moment , as he would have offer to wager a dozen of glove , that be he so happy as to win her protťgťe 's hand he would find she an investment for , say , a thousand , which would bring she in twenty per cent . ; nay , more , he would also find the thousand , which would have be the initial difficulty on poor Georgie 's part . but this little matter be in Georgie 's mind a detail , compare with the advantage to accrue to she indirectly from Lesbia 's union with one of the rich man in London . 

 Lady Kirkbank have bring about many good match , and have be too often reward with base ingratitude upon the part of her protťgťes , after marriage ; but there be a touch of Arcady in the good soul 's nature , and she be always trustful . she tell herself that Lesbia would not be ungrateful , would not basely kick down the ladder by which she have mount to height empyrean , would not cruelly shelve the friend who have pioneer she to high fortune . she count upon make the house in Park Lane as her own house , upon be the prime mover of all Lesbia 's hospitality , the supervisor of her visit list , the shadow behind the throne . 

 there be ball and party nightly , dinner , luncheon , garden - party ; and yet there be a sense of wan in the glory of the world everybody feel that the fag - end of the season be approach . all the really great entertainment be over the Cabinet dinner , the Reception at the Foreign Office , the last of the State ball and concert . some of the good people have already leave town ; and senator be begin to complain that they see no prospect of early deliverance . there be Goodwood still to look forward to ; and after Goodwood the Deluge or rather Cowes Regatta , about which Lady Kirkbank 's set be already talk . 

 Lady Lesbia be to be at Cowes for the Regatta week . that be a settled thing . Mr. Smithson 's schooner - yacht , the Cayman , be to be her hotel . it be to be Lady Kirkbank and Lady Lesbia 's yacht for the nonce ; and Mr. Smithson be to live on shore at his villa , and at that aristocratic club to which , by Maulevrier 's influence , and on the score of his approach marriage with an earl 's daughter , he have be just select . he would be only Lady Kirkbank 's visitor on board the Cayman . the severe etiquette of the situation would therefore not be infringe ; and yet Mr. Smithson would have the happiness of see his betroth sole and sovereign mistress of his yacht , and of spend the long summer day at her foot . even to Lady Lesbia this idea of the yacht be not without its charm . she have never be on board such a yacht as the Cayman ; she be a good sailor , as testify by many an excursion , in hire sailing boat , at Tynemouth , and St. Bees ; and she know that she would be the queen of the hour . she accept Mr. Smithson 's invitation for the Cowes week more graciously than she be will not to receive his attention , and be pleased to say that the whole thing would be rather enjoyable . 

 ' it will be simple enchantment , ' exclaim the more enthusiastic Georgie Kirkbank . ' there be nothing so rapturous as life on board a yacht ; there be a flavour of adventure , a sansgene , a in short everything in the world that I like . I shall wear my cotton frock , and give myself up to enjoyment , lie on the deck and look up at the blue sky , too deliciously idle even to read the last horrid thing of Zola 's . ' 

 but the Cowes Regatta wag nearly three week ahead ; and in the meantime there be Goodwood , and the ravel thread of the London season have to be wind up . and by this time it be know everywhere that the affair between Mr. Smithson and Maulevrier 's sister be really on . ' it be as settle a business as the entry and bet for next year 's Derby , ' say one lounger to another in the smoking - room of the Haute Gomme . ' play or pay , do not   you know . ' 

 Lady Kirkbank and Lesbia have both write to Lady Maulevrier , Lesbia write somewhat coldly , very briefly , and in a half defiant tone , to the effect that she have accept Mr. Smithson 's offer , and that she hop her grandmother would be pleased with a match which everybody suppose to be extremely advantageous . she be go to Grasmere immediately after the Cowes week to see her dear grandmother , and to be assure of her approval . in the meanwhile she be awfully busy ; there be caller drive up to the door at that very moment , and her brain be rack by the apprehension that she might not get her new gown in time for the Bachelor 's Ball , which be to be quite one of the nice thing of the year , so dear grandmother must excuse a hurried letter , etc . , etc . , etc . 

 Georgie Kirkbank be more effusive , more lengthy . she expatiate upon the stupendous alliance which her sweetest Lesbia be about to make ; and take credit to herself for have guide Lesbia 's footstep in the right way . 

 ' Smithson be a most difficult person , ' she write . ' the least error of taste on your dear girl 's part would have froissťd he . man with that immense wealth be always suspicious , ready to imagine mercenary motif , on their guard against be trap . but Lesbia have I at she back , and she manage he perfectly . he be positively her slave ; and you will be able to twist he round your little finger in the matter of settlement . you may do what you like with he , for the ground have be thoroughly prepare by I . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier 's reply be not enthusiastic . she have no doubt Mr. Smithson be a very good match , accord to the modern estimate of matrimonial alliance , in which money seem to be the Alpha and Omega . but she have cherish view of another kind . she have hop to see her dear granddaughter wear one of those noble and historic name which be a badge of distinction for all time . she have hop to see she enter one of those grand old family which be a kind of royalty . and that Lesbia should marry a man whose sole distinction consist of an immense fortune amass heaven know how , be a terrible blow to her pride . 

 ' but it be not the first , ' write Lady Maulevrier . ' my pride have receive crush blow in day past , and I ought to be humble to the dust . but there be a stubborn resistance in some nature which stand firm against every shock . you and Lesbia will both be surprised to hear that Mary , from whom I expect so little , have make a really great match . she be marry yesterday afternoon in my morning room , by special licence , to the Earl of Hartfield , the lover of her choice , whom we at Fellside have all know as plain John Hammond . he be an admirable young man , and sure to make a great figure in the world , as no doubt you know well than I do , for you be in the way of hear all about he . his courtship of Mary be quite an idyll ; and the happy issue of this romantic love - affair have cheer and comfort I more than anything that have happen since Lesbia leave I . ' 

 this letter , write in Fršulein 's niggle little hand , Lady Kirkbank hand to Lesbia , who read it through in silence ; but when she come to that part of the letter which tell of her sister 's marriage , her cheek grow ashy pale , her brow contract , and she start to her foot and star at Lady Kirkbank with wild , dilate eye , as if she have be sting by an adder . 

 ' a strange mystification , be not   it ? ' say Lady Kirkbank , almost frighten at the awful look in Lesbia 's face , which be even bad than Belle Trinder 's expression when she read the announcement of Mr. Smithson 's flight . 

 ' strange mystification ! it be base treachery a vile and wicked lie ! ' cry Lesbia , furiously . ' what right have he to come to we under false colour , to pretend to be poor , a nobody with only the vague hope of make a decent position in the future ? and to offer himself under such impossible condition to a girl bring up as I have be a girl educate by one of the proud and most ambitious of woman to force I to renounce everything except he ? how could he suppose that any girl , so place , could decide in his favour ? if he have love I he would have tell I the truth he would not have make it impossible for I to accept he . ' 

 ' I believe he be a very high flown young man , ' say Lady Kirkbank , soothingly ; ' he be never in my set , you know , dear . and I suppose he have some old Minerva - press idea that he would find a girl who would marry he for his own sake . and your sister , no doubt , eager to marry anybody , poor child , for the sake of get away from that very lovely dungeon of Lady Maulevrier 's , snap at the chance ; and by a mere fluke she become a countess . ' 

 Lesbia ignore these consolatory remark . she be pace the room like a tigress , her delicate cambric handkerchief grasp between her two hand , and tear and rent by the convulsive action of her finger . she could have throw herself from the balcony on to the spike of the area railing , she could have dash herself against yonder big plate - glass window look towards the Green Park , like a bird which shatter his little life against the glass barrier which he mistake for the open sky . she could have fling herself down on the floor and grovel , and tear her hair she could have do anything mad , wicked , desperate , in the wild rage of this moment . 

 ' love I ! ' she exclaim ; ' he never love I . if he have he would have tell I the truth . what , when I be in his arm , my head upon his breast , my whole be surrender to he , adore he , what more could he want ? he must have know that this mean real love . and why should he put it upon I to fight so hard a fight to brave my grandmother 's anger to be curse by she to face poverty for his sake ? I never profess to be a heroine . he know that I be a woman , with all a woman 's weakness , a woman 's fear of trial and difficulty in the future . it be a cowardly thing to use I so . ' 

 ' it be , ' say Lady Kirkbank , in the same soothe tone ; ' but if you like this Hammond - Hartfield creature a little in those old day , I know you have outlive that like long ago . ' 

 ' of course ; but it be a hard thing to know one have be fool , cheat , weigh in the balance and find wanting , ' say Lesbia , scornfully . 

 she be tame down a little by this time , ashamed of that outbreak of violent passion , feel that she have reveal too much to Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' it be a caddish thing to do , ' say Georgie ; ' and this Hartfield be just what I always think he an insufferable prig . however , my sweetest girl , there be really nothing to lament in the matter . your sister have make a good alliance , which will score high in your favour by - and - by , and you be go to marry a man who be three time as rich as Lord Hartfield . ' 

 ' Rich , yes ; and nothing but rich ; while Lord Hartfield be a man of the very high standing , belong to the flower of english nobility . Rich , yes ; Mr. Smithson be rich ; but , as Lady Maulevrier say , he have make his money heaven know how . ' 

 ' Mr. Smithson have not make his money heaven know how , ' answer Lady Kirkbank , indignantly . ' he have make it in cochineal , in iron , in gunpowder , in coal , in all kind of commodity . everybody in the City know how he have make his money , and that he have a genius for turn everything into gold . if the gold change back into one of the base metal , it be only when Mr. Smithson have make all he want to make . and now he have quite do with the City . the House be the only business of his life ; and he be become a power in the House . you have every reason to be proud of your choice , Lesbia . ' 

 ' I will try to be proud of it , ' say Lesbia , resolutely . ' I will not be scorn and trample upon by Mary . ' 

 ' she seem a harmless kind of girl , ' say Lady Kirkbank , as if she have be talk of a housemaid . 

 ' she be a design minx , ' exclaim Lesbia , ' and have set her cap at that man from the very beginning . ' 

 ' but she could not have know that he be Lord Hartfield . ' 

 ' no ; but he be a man ; and that be enough for she . ' 

 from this time forward there be a change in Lady Lesbia 's style and manner a change very much for the bad , as old - fashioned people think ; but to the taste of some among Lady Kirkbank 's set , the change be an improvement . she be gayer than of old , gay with a reckless vivacity , intensely eager for action and excitement , for card and racing , and all the strong stimulant of fashionable life . Most people ascribe this increase vivacity , this electric manner , to the fact of her engagement to Horace Smithson . she be giddy with her triumph , dazzle by a vision of the gold which be soon to be her . 

 ' egad , if I see myself in a fair way of be able to write cheque upon such an account as Smithson 's I should be as wild as Lady Lesbia , ' say one of the damsel 's military admirer at the rag . ' and I believe the young lady be slightly dip . ' 

 ' who tell you that ? ' ask his friend . 

 ' a mother of mine , ' answer the youth , with an apologetic air , as if he hardly care to own such a humdrum relationship . ' Seraphine , the dressmaker , be complain want to see the colour of Lady Lesbia Haselden 's money vulgar curiosity ask my old mother if she think the account be safe , and so on . that be how I come to know all about it . ' 

 ' well , she will be able to pay Seraphine next season . ' 

 Lord Maulevrier come back to London directly after his sister 's wedding . the event , which come off so quietly , so happily , fill he with unqualified joy . he have hop from the very first that his Molly would win the cup , even while Lesbia be make all the running , as he say afterwards . and Molly have win , and be the wife of one of the good young man in England . Maulevrier , albeit unused to the melting - mood , shed a tear or two for very joy as the sister he love and the friend of his boyhood and youth stand side by side in the quiet room at Grasmere , and speak the solemn word that make they one for ever . 

 the first news he hear after his return to town be of Lesbia 's engagement , which be common talk at the club . the visitor at Rood Hall have come back to London full of the event , and be proud of give a detailed account of the affair to outsider . 

 they all talk patronisingly of Smithson , and seem to think it rather a wonderful fact that he do not drop his aspirate or eat pea with a knife . 

 ' a man of stirling metal , ' say the gossip , ' who can hold his own with many a fellow bear in the purple . ' 

 Maulevrier call in Arlington Street , but Lady Kirkbank and her protťgťe be out ; and it be at a cricket match at the Orleans Club that the brother and sister meet for the first time after Lord Hartfield 's wedding , which by this time have be in all the paper ; a very simple announcement : 

 ' on the 29th inst . , at Grasmere , by the Reverend Douglass Brooke , the Earl of Hartfield to Mary , young daughter of the ninth Earl of Maulevrier . ' 

 Lesbia be the centre of a rather noisy little court , in which Mr. Smithson be conspicuous by his superior reserve . 

 he do not exert himself as a lover , pay no compliment , be not sentimental . the pearl be win , and he wear it very quietly ; but wherever Lesbia go he go ; she be hardly ever out of his sight . 

 Maulevrier receive the cool possible greeting . Lesbia turn pale with anger at sight of he , for his presence remind she of the most humiliating passage in her life ; but the big red satin sunshade conceal that pale angry look , and nothing in Lesbia 's manner betray emotion . 

 ' where have you be hide yourself all this time , and why be you not at Henley ? ' she ask . 

 ' I have be at Grasmere . ' 

 ' oh , you be a witness of that most romantic marriage . the Lady of Lyons reverse , the gardener 's son turn out to be an earl . be it excruciatingly funny ? ' 

 ' it be one of the most solemn wedding I ever see . ' 

 ' Solemn ! what , with my Tomboy sister as bride ! impossible ! ' 

 ' your sister cease to be a Tomboy when she fall in love . she be a sweet and womanly woman , and will make an adorable wife to the fine fellow I know . I hear I be to congratulate you , Lesbia , upon your engagement with Mr. Smithson . ' 

 ' if you think I be the person to be congratulate , you be at liberty to do so . my engagement be a fact . ' 

 ' oh , of course , Mr. Smithson be the winner . but as I hope you intend to be happy , I wish you joy . I be tell Smithson be a really excellent fellow when one get to know he ; and I shall make it my business to be well acquaint with he . ' 

 Smithson be stand just out of hearing , watch the bowling . Maulevrier go over to he and shake hand , their acquaintance hitherto have be of the slight , and very shy upon his lordship 's part ; but now Smithson could see that Maulevrier mean to be cordial . 

 CHAPTER XXXVI . 

 a RASTAQUOUERE . 


 there be a dinner party in one of the new house in Grosvenor Place that evening , to which Lady Kirkbank and Lesbia have be bid . the new house belong to a new man , who be suppose to have make million out of railway , and other gigantic achievement in the engineering line ; and the new man and his wife be friend of Mr. Smithson , and have make the simple Georgie 's acquaintance only within the last three week . 

 ' of course they be stupid , my dear , ' she remark , in response to some slighting remark of Lesbia 's , ' but I be always willing to know rich people . one drop in for so many good thing ; and they never want any return in kind . it be quite enough for they to be allow to spend their money upon we . ' 

 the house be gorgeous in all the glory of the very late fashion in upholstery ; hall Algerian ; dining - room Pompeian ; drawing - room early italian ; music - room Louis Quatorze ; billiard - room mediaval English . the dinner be as magnificent as dinner can be make . three - fourth of the guest be the haute gomme of the financial world , and perspire gold . the other third belong to a class which Mr. Smithson describe somewhat contemptuously as the shake - back nobility . an irish peer , a young son of a ducal house that have run to seed , a political agitator , a grass widow whose title husband be governor of an obscure colony , an ancient dowager with hair which be too luxuriant to be anything but a wig , and diamond which be so large as to suggest paste . 

 Lesbia sit by she affiance at the glitter table , light with cluster of wax candle , which shine upon a level parterre of tea rose , gardenia , and gloire de Malmaison carnation ; from which rise at interval group of silver - gilt dolphin , support shallow golden dish pile with peach , grape , and all the costly produce of Covent Garden . 

 Conversation be not particularly brilliant , nor have the guest an elated air . the thermometer be near eighty , and at this period of the season everybody be tired of this kind of dinner , and would gladly have forego the great achievement of culinary art , in favour of a chicken and a salad , eat under green leaf , in a garden at Wargrave or Henley , within sound of the ripple river . 

 on Lesbia 's right hand there be a portly personage of jewish type , dark to swarthiness , and somewhat oily , whose every word suggest bullion . he and Mr. Smithson be evidently acquaintance of long standing , and Mr. Smithson present he to Lesbia , whereupon he join in their conversation now and then . 

 his talk be of the usual standard . he have see everything worth see in London and in Paris , between which city he seem to oscillate with such frequency that he might be say to live in both place at once . he have his stall at Covent Garden , and his stall at the Grand Opera . he be a subscriber at the Theatre FranÁais . he have see all the race at Longchamps and Chantilly , as well as at Sandown and Ascot . but every now and then he and Mr. Smithson drift from the customary talk about opera and race , picture and french novel , to the wide world of commerce and speculation , mine , waterwork , and foreign loan and Lesbia leant back in her chair , and fan herself languidly , with half - close eyelid , while two or three course go round , she give the little supercilious look at each entrťe offer to she , to be observe on such occasion , as if the thing offer be particularly nasty . 

 she wonder how long the two man be go to prose about mine and share , in those subdue half - mysterious voice , tell each other occult fact in half - express phrase , utterly dark to the outside world ; but , while she be languidly wonder , a change in her lover 's manner startle she into keenest curiosity . 

 ' Montesma be in Paris , ' say Mr. Sampayo , the dark gentleman ; ' I din last week with he at the Continental . ' 

 Mr. Smithson 's complexion fade curiously , and a leaden darkness come over his countenance , as of a man whose heart and lung suddenly refuse their office . but in a few moment he be smile feebly . 

 ' indeed ! I think he be play out year ago . ' 

 ' a man of that kind be never play out . Don Gomez de Montesma be as clever as Satan , as handsome as Apollo , and he bear one of the old name in Castile . such a man will always come to the front . C'est un rastaquouere mais rastaquouere de bon genre . you know he intimately la bas , I believe ? ' 

 ' in Cuba ; yes , we be pretty good friend once . ' 

 ' and be useful to each other , no doubt , ' say Mr. Sampayo , pleasantly . ' be that argentiferous copper Company in sixty - four your or his ? ' 

 ' there be a good many people concern in it . ' 

 ' no doubt ; it take a good many people to work that kind of thing , but I fancy you and Montesma be about the only two who come out of it pleasantly . and he and you do a little in the shipping line , do not   you african produce ? however , that be an old song . you have have so many good thing since then . ' 

 ' do Montesma talk of come to London ? ' 

 ' he do not talk about it ; but he would hardly go back to the tropic without have a look round on both side of the Channel . he be always fond of society , pretty woman , dancing , and amusement of all kind . I have no doubt we shall see he here before the end of the season . ' 

 Mr. Smithson pursue the subject no far . he turn to Lesbia , who have be curiously interested in this little bit of conversation interested first because Smithson have seem agitated by the mention of the Spaniard 's name ; secondly , because of the description of the man , which have a romantic sound . the very word tropic suggest a romance . and Lesbia , whose mind be jade by the monotony of a London season , the threadbare fabric of society conversation , kindle at any image which appeal to her fancy . 

 Clever as Satan , handsome as Apollo , scion of an old castilian family , fresh from the tropic . her imagination dwelt upon the idea which these word have conjure up . 

 three day after this she be at the opera with her chaperon , her lover in attendance as usual . the opera be " Faust , " with Nillson as Marguerite . after the performance they be to drive down to Twickenham on Mr. Smithson 's drag , and to dance and sup at the Orleans . the last ball of the season be on this evening ; and Lesbia have be persuade that it be to be a particular recherchť ball , and that only the very nice people be to be present . at any rate , the drive under the light of a July moon would be delicious ; and if they do not like the people they find there they could eat their supper and come away immediately after , as Lady Kirkbank remark philosophically . 

 the opera be nearly over that grand scene of Valentine 's death be on and Lesbia be listen breathlessly to every note , watch every look of the actor , when there come a modest little knock at the door of her box . she dart an angry glance round , and shrug her shoulder vexatiously . what Goth have dare to knock during that thrilling scene ? 

 Mr. Smithson rise and creep to the door and quietly open it . 

 a dark , handsome man , who be a total stranger to Lesbia , glide in , shake hand with Smithson as he enter . 

 till this moment Lesbia 's whole being have be absorb in the scene that bitter anathema of the brother , the sister 's cry of anguish and shame . where else be there tragedy so human , so enthral grief that so wring the spectator 's heart ? it need a Goethe and a Gounod to produce this masterpiece . 

 in an instant , in a flash , Lesbia 's interest in the stage be go . her first glance at the stranger tell she who he be . the olive tint , the eye of deep black , the grand form of the head and perfect chiselling of the feature could belong only to that scion of an old castilian race whom she have hear describe the other evening ' clever as Satan , handsome as Apollo . ' 

 yes , this must be the man , Don Gomez de Montesma . there be nothing in Mr. Smithson 's manner to indicate that the Spaniard be an unwelcome guest . on the contrary , Smithson receive he with a cordiality which in a man of naturally reserve manner seem almost rapture . the curtain fall , and he present Don Gomez to Lady Kirkbank and Lady Lesbia ; whereupon dear Georgie begin to gush , after she will not , and to ask a good many question in a manner that be too girlish to seem impertinent . 

 ' how perfectly you speak English ! ' she exclaim . ' you must have live in England a good deal . ' 

 ' on the contrary , it be my misfortune to have live here very little , but I have know a good many English and Americans in Cuba and in Paris . ' 

 ' in Cuba ! do you really come from Cuba ? I have always fancy that Cuba must be an altogether charming place to live in like Biarritz or Pau , do not   you know , only far away . do please tell I where it be , and what kind of a place . ' 

 Geographically , Lady Kirkbank 's mind be a blank . it be quite a revelation to she to find that Cuba be an island . 

 ' it must be a lovely spot ! ' exclaim the fervid creature . ' let I see , now , what do we get from Cuba ? cigar and and tobacco . I suppose in Cuba everybody smoke ? ' 

 ' man , woman , and child . ' 

 ' how delicious ! would that I be a Cuban ! and the native , be they nice ? ' 

 ' there be no aborigine . the Indians whom Columbus find soon perish off the face of the island . european civilisation generally have that effect . but one of our most benevolent captain - general provide we with an import population of nigger . ' 

 ' how delightful . I have always long to live among a slave population , dear submissive black thing dress in coral necklace and feather , instead of the horrid over - feed wretch we have to wait upon we . and if the aborigine be not want it be just as well for they to die out , do not   you know , ' prattle Lady Kirkbank . 

 ' it be very accommodating of they , no doubt . yet we could employ half a million of they , if we have they , in drain our swamp . agriculture suffer by the loss of indian labour . ' 

 ' I suppose they be like the creature in Pizarro , poor dear yellow thing with brass bracelet , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' I remember see Macready as Rolla when I be quite a little thing . ' 

 and now the curtain rise for the last act . 

 ' do you care about stay for the end ? ' ask Mr. Smithson of Lesbia . ' it will make we rather late at the Orleans . ' 

 ' never mind how late we be , ' say Lesbia , imperiously . ' I have always be cheat out of this last act for some stupid party . Imagine lose Gounod and Nillson for the sake of struggle through the mob on a stifle staircase , and be elbow by inane young man , with gardenia in their coat . ' 

 Lady Lesbia have a pretty little way of always oppose any suggestion of her sweetheart . she be resolve to treat he as badly as a future husband could be treat . in consent to marry he she have do he a favour which be a great deal more than such a person have any right to expect . 

 she leant forward to watch and listen , with her elbow rest on the velvet cushion her head upon her hand , and she seem absorb in the scene . but this be mere outward seem . all the enchantment of music and acting be over . she only hear and see vaguely , as if it be a shadowy scene enact ever so far away . every now and then her eye glance involuntarily toward Don Gomez , who stand lean against the back of the box , pale , languid , graceful , poetic , an altogether different type of manhood from that with which she have of late be satiate . 

 those deep dark eye of his have a dreamy look . they gaze across the dazzle house , into space , above Lady Lesbia 's head . they seem to see nothing ; and they certainly be not look at she . 

 Don Gomez be the first man she ever remember to have be present to she who do not favour she with a good deal of hard staring , more or less discreetly manage , during the first ten minute of their acquaintance . on he her beauty fall flat . he evidently fail to recognise her supreme loveliness . it might be that she be the wrong type for Cuba . every nation have its own Venus ; and that far away spot beyond the torrid zone might have a somewhat barbarous idea of beauty . at any rate , Don Gomez be apparently unimpressed . and yet Lesbia flatter herself that she be look she good to - night , and that her costume be a success . she wear a white satin gown , short in the skirt , for the luxury of freedom in waltzing , and make with Quaker - like simplicity , the bodice high to the throat , fit she like a sheath . 

 her only ornament be a garland of scarlet poppy wreathe from throat to shoulder , and a large diamond heart which Mr. Smithson have lately give she ; ' a bullock 's heart , ' as Lady Kirkbank call it . 

 when the curtain fall , and not till then , she rise and allow herself to be clothe in a brown velvet Newmarket , which completely cover her short satin gown . she have a little brown velvet toque to match the Newmarket , and thus attire she would be able to take her seat on the drag which be wait on the quiet side of Covent Garden . 

 ' why should not you go with we , Don Gomez ? ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , in a gush of hospitality . ' the drive will be charming not equal to your tropical Cuba but intensely nice . and the garden will be something too sweet on such a night as this . I know they when the dear Duc d'Aumale be there . ay de mi , such a man ! ' 

 Lady Kirkbank sigh , with the air of have know his Altťsse Royale intimately . 

 ' I should be charm , ' say Don Gomez , ' if I think my friend Smithson want I . would you really like to have I , Smithson ? ' 

 ' I should be enchant . ' 

 ' and there be room on the drag ? ' 

 ' room enough for half - a - dozen . I be only take Sir George Kirkbank and Colonel Delville whom we be to pick up at the Haute Gomme and Mr. and Mrs. Mostyn , who be in the stall . ' 

 ' a nice snug little party , ' exclaim that charming optimist , Lady Kirkbank . ' I hate a crowd on a drag . the way some of the member of the four - in - hand Club load their coach on parade remind I of a beanfeast ! ' 

 they find Lady Kirkbank 's footman and one of Mr. Smithson 's groom wait in the hall of the opera house . the groom to conduct they to the spot where the drag be wait ; the footman to carry wrap and take his mistress 's final order . there be a bohemian flavour in the little walk to the great fruit garden , which be odorous of bruise peach and stale salad as they pass it . Waggon - load of cabbage and other garden stuff be stand about by the old church ; the roadway be litter with the refuse of the market ; and the air be faint and heavy with the scent of herb and flower . 

 Lesbia mount lightly to her place of honour on the box - seat ; and Lady Kirkbank be hoist up after she . Mr. and Mrs. Mostyn follow ; and then Don Gomez take his seat by Lady Kirkbank 's side and behind Lesbia , a vantage point from which he could talk to she as much as he like . Mr. Smithson seat himself a minute afterwards , and drive off by King Street and Leicester Square and on to Piccadilly , steer cleverly through the traffic of cab and carriage , which be at its apogee just now , when all the theatre be disgorge their crowd . Piccadilly be quieter , yet there be plenty of carriage , late people go to party and early people go home , horse slip and slide on stone or wood , half the roadway up , and luminous with lantern . they stop in front of the Haute Gomme , where they pick up Sir George Kirkbank and Colonel Delville , a big man with a patriarchal head , suppose to be one of the fine whist player in London , and to make a handsome income by his play . he have ride in the Balaclava charge , be a favourite everywhere , and , albeit no genius , be much cleverer than his friend and school - fellow , George Kirkbank . they have be at Eton together , have both make love to the lively Georgie , and have be inseparable for the last thirty year . 

 ' could not   get on without Delville , ' say Sir George ; ' dooced smart fellow , sir . know the rope ; and do all the thinking for both of we . ' 

 and now they be fairly start , and the team fall into a rattle pace , with the road pretty clear before they . Hyde Park be one umbrageous darkness , edge by long line of golden light . coolness and silence enfold all thing in the summer midnight , and Lesbia , not prone to romance , sink into a dreamy state of mind , as she lean back in her seat and watch the shadowy tree glide by , the long vista of lamp and verdure in front of she . she be glad that no one talk to she , for talk of any kind must have break the spell . Don Gomez sit like a statue in his place behind she . from Lady Kirkbank , the loquacious , come a gentle sound of snoring , a subdue , ladylike snore , breathe softly at interval , like a sigh . Mr. Smithson have his team , and his own thought , too , for occupation , thought which to - night be not altogether pleasant . 

 at the back of the coach Mrs. Mostyn be descant on the evolution of the nautilus , and the relationship of protoplasm and humanity , to Colonel Delville , who sit smile placidly behind an immense cigar , and accept the most stupendous fact and the most appalling theory with a friendly little nod of his handsome head . 

 Mr. Mostyn frankly sleep , as it be his custom to do upon all convenient occasion . he call it recuperate . 

 ' Frank ought to be delightfully fresh , for he recuperate all the way down , ' say his wife , when they alight in the dewy garden at Twickenham , in front of the lamp - light portico . 

 ' I would not   have mind his recuperating if he have not   snore so abominably , ' remark Colonel Delville . 

 it be nearly one o'clock , and the ball have thin a little , which make it all the well for those who remain . Mr. Smithson 's order have be give two day ago , and the very good of the waiter have be tell off for his especial service . the lady go upstairs to take off their wrapping and muffling , and Lesbia emerge dazzle from her brown velvet Newmarket , while Lady Kirkbank , bend closely over the look - glass , like a witch over a caldron , repair her complexion with cotton wool . 

 they go through the conservatory to the octagon dining - room , where the supper be ready , a special supper , on a table by a window , a table laden with exotic and brilliant with glass and silver . the supper be , of course , perfect in its way . Mr. Smithson 's chef have be down to see about it , and Mr. Smithson 's own particular champagne and the claret grow in his own particular clo in the Gironde , have be send down for the feast . no common cuisine , no common wine could be good enough ; and yet there be a day when the cheap gargote in Belleville or Montmartre be good enough for Mr. Smithson . there have be day on which he do not dine at all , and when the fume of a gibelotte steam from a workman 's restaurant make his mouth water . 

 the supper be all life and gaiety . everyone be hungry and thirsty , and freshen by the drive , except Lesbia . she be singularly silent , eat hardly anything , but drink three or four glass of champagne . 

 Don Gomez be not a great talker . he have the air of a prince of the blood royal , who expect other people to talk and to keep he amuse . but the little he say be to the point . he have a fine baritone , very low and subdue , and have a languor which be almost insolent , but not without its charm . there be an air of originality about the manner and the man . 

 he be the typical rastaquouere , a man of finished manner , and unknown antecedent , a foreigner , apparently rich , obviously accomplish , but with that indefinable air which bespeak the adventurer ; and which give society as fair a warning as if the man wear a placard on his shoulder with the word cave . 

 but to Lesbia this Spaniard be the first really interesting man she have meet since she see John Hammond ; and her interest in he be much more vivid than her interest in Hammond have be at the beginning of their acquaintance . that pale face , with its tint of old ivory , those thin , finely - cut lip , indicative of diabolical craft , could she but read aright , those unfathomable eye , touch her fancy as it have never yet be touch , awake within she that latent vein of romance , self - abnegation , supreme foolishness , which lurk in the nature of every woman , be she chaste as ice and pure as snow . 

 the supper be long . it be past two o'clock , and the ballroom be thinly occupy , when Mr. Smithson 's party go there . 

 ' you will not   dance to - night , I suppose ? ' say Smithson , as Lesbia and he go slowly down the room arm in arm . it be in a pause between two waltz . the wide window at the end be open to the summer night , and the room be delightfully cool . ' you must be horribly tired ? ' 

 ' I be not in the least tired , and I mean to waltz , if anyone will ask I , ' reply Lesbia , decisively . 

 ' I ought to have ask you to dance , and then it would have be the other way , ' say Smithson , with a touch of acrimony . ' surely you have dance enough in town , and you might be oblige for once in a way , and come and sit with I in the garden , and listen to the nightingale . ' 

 ' there be no nightingale after June . there be the Manola , ' as the band strike up , ' my very favourite waltz . ' 

 Don Gomez be at her elbow at this moment 

 ' may I have the honour of this waltz with you , Lady Lesbia ? ' he ask ; and then with a serio - comic glance at his stoutish friend , ' I do not   think Smithson waltz ? ' 

 ' I have be tell that nobody can waltz who have be bear on this side of the Pyrenees , ' answer Lesbia , withdraw her arm from her lover 's , and slip , it through the Spaniard 's , with the air of a slave who obey a master . 

 Smithson look dagger , and retire to a corner of the room glowering . be a man twenty - two time millionaire , like the parisian Rothschild , he could not find armour against the poison arrow of jealousy . Don Gomez possess many of those accomplishment which make man dangerous , but as a dancer he be hor ligne ; and Horace Smithson know that there be no surer road to a girl 's fancy than the magic circle of a waltz . 

 those two be float round the room in the old slow legato step , which recall to Smithson the picture of a still more spacious room in an island under the Southern Cross the blue water of the bay shin yonder under the starlight of the tropic , fire - fly gleam and flash in the foliage beyond the open window , fire - fly flash amidst the gauzy drapery of the dancer , and this same Gomez revolve with the same slow languid grace , his arm encircle the svelte figure of a woman whose southern beauty outshone Lesbia 's blonde english loveliness as the tropical star outshine the lamp that light our colder sky . yes , every detail of the scene flash back into his mind , as if a curtain have be suddenly pluck back from a long - hide picture . the Cuban 's tall slim figure , the head gently bend towards his partner 's head , as at this moment , and those dark eye look up at he , intoxicate with that nameless , indefinable fascination which it be the lot of some man to exercise . 

 ' he rob I of she ! ' think Smithson , gloomily . ' will he rob I of this one too ? surely not ! Havana be Havana and this one be not a Creole . if I can not trust that lovely piece of marble , there be no woman on earth to be trust . ' 

 he turn his back upon the dancer , and go out into the garden . his soul be wring with jealousy , yet he could watch no long . there be too much pain there be too many bitter memory of shame , and loss , and ignominy evoke by that infernal picture . if he have be free he would have assert his authority as Lesbia 's future husband ; he would have take she away from the Orleans ; he would have tell she plainly and frankly that Don Gomez be no fit person for she to know ; and he would have so plan that they two should never meet again . but Horace Smithson be not free . he be bind hand and foot by those fetter which the chain of past event have forge stern fact which the man himself may forget , or try to forget , but which other people never forget . there be generally some dark spot in the history of such man as Smithson man who climb the giddiest height of this world with that desperate rapidity which imply many a perilous leap from crag to crag , many a moraine skim over , and many an awful gulf span by a hair - breadth bridge . Mr. Smithson 's history be not without such spot ; and the dark of all have relation to his career in Cuba . the story have be know by very few perhaps completely know only by one man ; and that man be Gomez de Montesma . 

 for the last fifteen year the most fervent desire of Horace Smithson 's heart have be the hope that tropical nature , in any one of her various disagreeable form , would be oblige enough to make an end of Gomez . but the force of nature have not work on Mr. Smithson 's side . no loathsome leprosy have eat his enemy 's flesh ; neither cayman nor crocodile , neither Juba snake nor poisonous spider have mark he for its prey . the tropical sun have leave he unsmitten . he have live and he have prosper ; and he be here , like a guilty conscience incarnate , to spoil Horace Smithson 's peace . 

 ' I must be diplomatic , ' Smithson say to himself , as he walk up and down an avenue of irish yew , in a solitary part of the ground , smoke his cigarette , and hear the music swell and sink in the distance . ' I will give she a hint as to that man 's character , and I will keep they apart as much as I can . but if he force himself upon I there be no help for it . I can not afford to be uncivil to he . ' 

 ' can not afford ' in this instance mean ' dare not , ' and Horace Smithson 's thought as he pace the yew - tree walk be full of gloom . 

 during that long meditation he make up his mind on one point , namely , that , let he suffer what pang he might , he must not betray his jealousy . to do that would be to lower himself in Lesbia 's eye , and to play into his rival 's hand ; for a jealous man be almost always contemptible in the sight of his mistress . he would carry himself as if he be sure of her fidelity ; and this very confidence , with a woman of honour , a girl rear as Lesbia have be rear , would render it impossible for she to betray he . he would show himself high - minded , confident , generous , chivalrous , even ; and he would trust to chance for the issue . Chance be Mr. Smithson 's only idea of divinity ; and Chance have hitherto be kind to he . there have be dark hour in his life , but the darkness have not last long ; and the lucky accident of his career have be of a nature to beguile he into the belief that among the favourite of Destiny he stand first and foremost . 

 while Mr. Smithson muse thus , alone and in the darkness , Montesma and Lady Lesbia be wander arm in arm in another and lovely part of the ground , where golden light be scatter like cuban fire - fly among the foliage of seringa and magnolia , arbutus and rhododendron , while at interval a sudden flush of rosy light be shed over garden and river , as if by enchantment , surprise a couple here and there in the midst of a flirtation which have begin in darkness . 

 the ground be lovely in the balmy atmosphere of a July night , the river glide with mysterious motion under the star , great mass of gloom darken the stream with an almost awful look where the wood of Petersham and Ham House cast their dense shadow on the water . Don Gomez and his companion wander by the river side to a spot where a group of magnolia shelter they from the open lawn , and where there be some rustic chair close to the balustrade which protect the parapet . in this spot , which be a kind of island , divide from the rest of the ground by the intervene road , they find themselves quite alone , and in the midst of a summer stillness which be break only by the low , lazy ripple of the tide run seaward . the light of Richmond look far away , and the little town with its variety of level have an italian air in the distance . 

 from the ballroom , faint and fitful , come the music of a waltz . 

 ' I be afraid I have   bring you too far , ' say Don Gomez . 

 ' on the contrary , it be a relief to get away from the light and the people . how delicious this river be ! I be bring up on the shore of a lake ; but after all a lake be horribly tame . its limit be always star one in the face . there be no room for one 's imagination to wander . now a river like this suggest an infinity of possibility , drift on and on and on into undiscovered region , by ever - vary shore . I feel to - night as if I should like to step into that little boat yonder , ' point to a light skiff bob gently up and down with the tide , at the bottom of a flight of step , ' and let the stream take I wherever it choose . ' 

 ' if I could but go with you , ' say Gomez , in that deep and musical tone which make the commonest word seem melody , ' I would ask for neither compass nor rudder . what could it matter whither the boat take I ? there be no place under the star which would not be a paradise with you . ' 

 ' please do not   make a dreamy aspiration the occasion for a compliment , ' exclaim Lesbia , lightly . ' what I say be so silly that I do not   wonder you think it right to say something just a little sillier . but moonlight and running water have a curious effect upon I ; and I , who be the most prosaic among woman , become ridiculously sentimental . ' 

 ' I can not believe that you be prosaic . ' 

 ' I assure you it be perfectly true . I be of the earth , earthy ; a woman of the world , in my first season , ambitious , fond of pleasure , vain , proud , exact , all those thing which I be tell a woman ought not to be . ' 

 ' you pain I when you so slander yourself ; and I shall make it the business of my life to find out how much truth there be in that self - slander . for my own part I do not believe a word of it ; but as it be rude to contradict a lady I will only say that I reserve my opinion . ' 

 ' be you to stay long in England ? ' ask Lesbia . 

 she be lean against the stone balustrade in a careless attitude , as of one who be weary , her elbow on the stone slab , and her head throw back against her arm . the white satin gown , mould to her figure , have a statuesque air , and she look like a marble statue in the dim light , every line of the graceful form expressive of repose . 

 ' that will depend . I be not particularly fond of London . a very little of your English Babylon satisfy I , in a general way ; but there be condition which might make England enchanting . where do you go at the end of the season ? ' 

 ' first to Goodwood , and then to Cowes . Mr. Smithson be so kind as to place his yacht at Lady Kirkbank 's disposal , and I be to be her guest on board the Cayman , just as I be in Arlington Street . ' 

 ' the Cayman ! that name be a reminiscence of Mr. Smithson 's south american travel . ' 

 ' no doubt ! be he long in South America ? ' 

 ' three or four year . ' 

 ' but not in Cuba all that time , I suppose ? ' 

 ' he have business relation with Cuba all that time , and oscillate between our island and the main . he be rather fortunate in his little adventure with we make almost as much money as General Tacon , of blessed memory . but I dare say Smithson have tell you all his adventure in that part of the world . ' 

 ' no , he very rarely talk about his travel : and I be not particularly interested in commercial speculation . there be always so much to think of and talk about in the business of the moment . be you fond of Cuba ? ' 

 ' not passionately . I always feel as if I be an exile there , and yet one of my ancestor be with Columbus when he discover the island , and my race be among the early settler . my family have give three Captain - general to Cuba : but I can not forget that I belong to an old world , and have forfeit that which ought to have be a brilliant place in Europe for the luxurious obscurity of a colony . ' 

 ' but you must be attach to a place in which your family have live for so many generation ? ' 

 ' I like the star and the sea , the mountain and savanna , the tropical vegetation , and the dreamy , half - oriental life ; but at good it be a kind of stagnation , and after a residence of a few month in the island of my birth I generally spread my wing for the wide world of the old continent or the new . ' 

 ' you must have travel so much , ' say Lesbia , with a sigh . ' I have be nowhere and see nothing . I feel like a child who have be shut up in a nursery all its life , and know of no world beyond four wall . ' 

 ' not to travel be not to live , ' say Don Gomez . 

 ' I be to be in Italy next November , I believe , ' say Lesbia , not care to own that this italian trip be to be her honeymoon . 

 ' Italy ! ' exclaim the Spaniard , contemptuously . ' once the finish school of the english nobility ; now the happy hunting - ground of the Cockney tourist and the prosperous Yankee . all the poetry of Italy have be dry up , and the whole country vulgarise . if you want romance in the old world go to Spain ; in the new , try Peru or Brazil , Mexico or California . ' 

 ' I be afraid I be not adventurous enough to go so far . ' 

 ' no : woman cling to beat track . ' 

 ' we obey our master , ' answer Lesbia , meekly . 

 ' ah , I forget . you be to have a master and soon . I hear as much before I see you to - night . ' 

 Lesbia half rise , as if to leave this cool retreat above the ripple tide . 

 ' yes , it be all settle , ' she say ; ' and now I think I must go back . Lady Kirkbank will be wonder what have become of I . ' 

 ' let she wonder a little long , ' say Don Gomez . ' why should we hurry away from this delightful spot ? why break the spell of the river ? life have so few moment of perfect contentment . if this be one with you as it be with I let we make the most of it . Lady Lesbia , do you see those weed yonder , drift with the tide , drift side by side , touch as they drift ? they have meet heaven know how , and will part heaven know where , on their way to the sea ; but they let themselves go with the tide . we have meet like those poor weed . do not   let we part till the tide part we . ' 

 Lesbia give a little sigh , and submit . she have talk of woman obey their master ; and the implication be that she mean to obey Mr. Smithson . but there be a fate in these thing ; and the man who be to be her master , whose light breath be to sway she , whose light look be to rule she , be here at her side in the silence of the summer night . 

 they talk long , but of indifferent subject ; and their talk might have be hear by every member of the Orleans Club , and no harm do . yet word and phrase count for very little in such a case . it be the tone , it be the melody of a voice , it be the magic of the hour that tell . 

 the tide come , in the person of Mr. Smithson , and part these two weed that be drift towards the great mysterious ocean of fate . 

 ' I have be hunt for you everywhere , ' he say , cheerfully . ' if you want another waltz , Lady Lesbia , you have well take the next . I believe it be to be the last . at any rate our party be clamour to be drive home . I find poor Lady Kirkbank fast asleep in a corner of the drawing - room . ' 

 ' will you give I that last waltz ? ' ask Don Gomez . 

 Lady Lesbia feel that the long - suffer Smithson have endure enough . womanly instinct constrain she to refuse that final waltz : but it seem to she as if she be make a tremendous sacrifice in so do . and yet she have waltz to her heart 's content during the season that be wan , and know all the waltz play by all the fashionable band . she give a little sigh , as she say 

 ' no , I must not indulge myself . I must go and take care of Lady Kirkbank . ' 

 Mr. Smithson offer his arm , and she take it and go away with he , leave Don Gomez to follow at his leisure . there would be some delay no doubt before the drag start . the lamp have go out among the foliage , and the star be wan a little , and there be a faint cold light creep over the garden which mean the advent of morning . Don Gomez stroll towards the lighted house , smoke a cigarette . 

 ' she be very lovely , and she be well not quite spoil by her entourage , and they tell I she be an heiress sure to inherit a fine fortune from some ancient grandmother , bury alive in Westmoreland , ' he muse . ' what a splendid opportunity it would be if if the business could be arrange on the square . but as it be well as it be there be the chance of an adventure ; and when do a Montesma ever avoid an adventure , although there be dagger or poison lurk in the background ? and here there be neither poison nor steel , only a lovely woman , and an infatuated stockbroker , about whom I know enough to disgrace and ruin an archbishop . poor Smithson ! how very unlucky that I should happen to come across your pathway in the heyday of your late love affair . we have have our little adventure in that line already , and we have measure sword together , metaphorically , before to - night . when it come to a question of actual sword my Smithson decline . pas si bete . ' 

 CHAPTER XXXVII . 

 LORD HARTFIELD REFUSES a fortune . 


 a honeymoon among lake and mountain , amidst the gorgeous confusion of Borrowdale , in a little world of wild , strange loveliness , shut in and isolate from the prosaic outer world by the vast and tower mass of Skiddaw and Blencathara a world of one 's own , as it be , a world steep in romance and poetry , dear to the soul of poet . there be many such honeymoon every summer ; indeed , the mountain path , the waterfall and lake swarm with happy lover ; and this land of hill and water seem to have be make expressly for honeymoon traveller ; yet never go truer lover wander by lake and torrent , by hill and valley , than those two whose brief honeymoon be now draw to a close . 

 it be altogether a magical time for Mary , this dawn of a new life . the immensity of her happiness almost frighten she . she could hardly believe in it , or trust in its continuance . 

 ' be I really , really , really your wife ? ' she ask on their last day , bend down to speak to her husband , as he lead her pony up the rough way of Skiddaw . ' it be all so dreadfully like a dream . ' 

 ' thank God , it be the very truth , ' answer Lord Hartfield , look fondly at the fresh young face , brighten by the summer wind , which faintly stir the auburn hair under the neat little hat . 

 ' and be I actually a Countess ? I do not   care about it one little bit , you know , except as a stupendous joke . if you be to tell I that you have be only make fun of poor grandmother and I , and that those diamond be glass , and you only plain John Hammond , it would not   make the faint difference . indeed , it would be a weight off my mind . it be an awfully oppressive thing to be a Countess . ' 

 ' I be sorry I can not relieve you of the burden . the law of the land have make you Lady Hartfield ; and I hope you be prepare your mind for the duty of your position . ' 

 ' it be very dreadful , ' sigh Mary . ' if her ladyship be as well and as active as she be when first you come to Fellside , she could have help I ; but now there will be no one , except you . and you will help I , will not   you Jack ? ' 

 ' with all my heart . ' 

 ' my own true Jack , ' with a little fervent squeeze of his sunburnt hand . ' in society I suppose I shall have to call you Hartfield . " Hartfield , please ring the bell . " " give I a footstool , Hartfield . " how odd it sound . I shall be blurt out the old dear name . ' 

 ' I do not   think it will much matter . it will pass for one of Lady Hartfield 's little way . every woman be suppose to have little way , do not   you know . one have a little way of drop her friend ; another have a little way of not pay her dressmaker ; another 's little way be to take too much champagne . I hope Lady Hartfield 's little way will be her devotion to her husband . ' 

 ' I be afraid I shall end by be a nuisance to you , for I shall love you ridiculously , ' answer Mary , gaily ; ' and from what you have tell I about society , it seem to I that there can be nothing so unfashionable as an affectionate wife . will you mind my be quite out of fashion , Jack ? ' 

 ' I should very much object to your be in the fashion . ' 

 ' then I be happy . I do not   think it be in my nature to become a woman of fashion ; although I have cure myself , for your sake , of be a hoyden . I have so school myself for what I think our new life be to be ; so train myself to be a manage economical wife , that I feel quite at sea now that I be to be mistress of a house in Grosvenor Square and a place in Kent . still , I will bear with it all ; yes , even endure the weight of those diamond for your sake . ' 

 she laugh , and he laugh . they be quite alone among the hill hardy mountaineer both and they could be as foolish as they like . she rest her head upon his shoulder , and he and she and the pony make one as they climb the hill , close together . 

 ' our last day , ' sigh Mary , as they go down again , after a couple of blissful hour in that wild world between earth and sky . ' I shall be glad to go back to poor grandmother , who must be sadly lonely ; but it be so sweet to be quite alone with you . ' 

 they leave the Lodore Hotel in an open carriage , after luncheon next day , and post to Fellside , where they arrive just in time to assist at Lady Maulevrier 's afternoon tea . she receive they both with warm affection , and make Hartfield sit close beside her sofa ; and every now and then , in the pause of their talk , she lay she waste and too delicate finger upon the young man 's strong brown hand , with a caressing gesture . 

 ' you can never know how sweet it be to I to be able to love you , ' she say tenderly . ' you can never know how my heart yearn to you from the very first , and how hard it be to keep myself in check and not be too kind to you . oh , Hartfield , you should have tell I the truth . you should not have come here under false colour . ' 

 ' should I not , Lady Maulevrier ? it be my only chance of be love for my own sake ; or , at least of know that I be so loved . if I have come with my rank and my fortune in my hand , as it be one of the good match of the year what security could I ever have feel in the disinterested love of the girl who choose I ? as plain John Hammond I woo and be reject ; as plain John Hammond I woo and win ; and the prize which I so win be a pearl above price . not for world , be the last year to be live over again , would I have one day of my life alter . ' 

 ' well , I suppose I ought to be satisfied . I want you for Lesbia , and I have get you for Mary . good of all , I have get you for myself . Ronald Hollister 's son be mine ; he be of my kin ; he belong to I ; he will not forsake I in life ; he will be near I , God grant , when I die . ' 

 ' Dear Lady Maulevrier , as far as in I lie , I will be to you as a son , ' say Lord Hartfield , very solemnly , stoop to kiss her hand . 

 Mary come away from her tea - table to embrace her grandmother . 

 ' it make I so happy to have win a little of your regard , ' she murmur , ' and to know that I have marry a man whom you can love . ' 

 ' of course you have hear of Lesbia 's engagement ? ' Lady Maulevrier say presently , when they be take their tea . 

 ' Maulevrier write to we about it . ' 

 ' to we . ' how nice it sound , think Mary , as if they be a firm , and a letter write to one be write to both . 

 ' and do you know this Mr. Smithson ? ' 

 ' not intimately . I have meet he at the Carlton . ' 

 ' I be tell that he be very much esteemed by your party , and that he be very likely to get a peerage when this Ministry go out of office . ' 

 ' that be not improbable . peerage be to be have if a man be rich enough ; and Smithson be suppose to be inordinately rich . ' 

 ' I hope he have character as well as money , ' say Lady Maulevrier , gravely . ' but do you think a man can become inordinately rich in a short time , with unblemished honour ? ' 

 ' we be tell that nothing be impossible , ' answer Hartfield . ' faith can remove a mountain ; only one do not often see it do . however , I believe Mr. Smithson 's character be fairly good as millionaire go . we do not inquire too closely into these thing nowadays . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier sigh and hold her peace . she remember the day when she have protest vehemently , passionately , against Lesbia 's marriage with a poor man . and now she have an unhappy feeling about Mr. Smithson 's wealth , a doubt , a dread that all might not be well with those million , that some portion of that golden tide might flow from impure source . she have live remote from the world , but she have read the paper diligently , and she know how often the splendour of commercial wealth have be suddenly obscure behind a black cloud of obloquy . she could not rejoice heartily at the idea of Lesbia 's engagement . 

 ' I be to see the man early in August , ' she say , as if she be talk of a butler . ' I hope I may like he . Lady Kirkbank tell I it be a brilliant marriage , and I must take her word . what can I do for my granddaughter a useless log a prisoner in two room ? ' 

 ' it be very hard , ' murmur Mary , tenderly , ' but I do not see any reason why Lesbia should not be happy . she like a brilliant life ; and Mr. Smithson can give she as much gaiety and variety as she can possibly desire . and , after all , yacht , and horse , and villa , and diamond be nice thing . ' 

 ' they be the thing for which half the world be ready to cheat or murder the other half , ' say Lady Maulevrier , bitterly . she have tell herself long ago that wealth be power , and she have sacrifice many thing , her own peace , her own conscience among they , in order that her child and grandchild should be rich ; and , know this , she feel it ill become she to be scrupulous , and to inquire too closely as to the source of Mr. Smithson 's wealth . he be rich , and the world have no fault to find with he . he have attend the last levťe . he go into reputable society . and he could give Lesbia all those thing which the world call good . 

 Fršulein M ller have pack her heavy old german trunk , and have go back to the Heimath , laden with present of all kind from Lady Maulevrier ; so Mary and her husband feel as if Fellside be really their own . they din with her ladyship , and leave she for the night an hour after dinner ; and then they go down to the garden , and roam about in the twilight , and talk , and talk , and talk , as only true lover can talk , be they Strephon and Daphne in life 's glad morning , or grey - haired Darby and Joan ; and lastly they go down to the lake , and row about in the moonlight , and talk of King Arthur 's death , and of that mystic sword , Excalibur , ' work by the lonely maiden of the lake . ' 

 they spend three happy day in wander about the neighbourhood , revisit in the delicious freedom of their wed life those spot which they have see together , when Mary be still in bondage , and the eye of propriety , as represent by Miss M ller , be always upon she . now they be free to go where they please to linger where they like they belong to each other , and be under no other dominion . 

 the dogcart , James Steadman 's dogcart , which he have rarely use during the last six month , be put in requisition and Lord Hartfield drive his wife about the country . they go to the Langdale Pikes , and to Dungeon Ghyll ; and , stand beside the waterfall , Mary tell her husband how miserable she have feel on that very spot a little less than a year ago , when she believe that he think she plain and altogether horrid . whereupon he have to console she with many kiss and sweet word , for the bygone pain on her part , the neglect on his . 

 ' I be a wretch , ' he say , ' blind , besotte , imbecile . ' 

 ' no , no , no . Lesbia be very lovely and I could not expect you would care for I till she be go away . how glad I be that she go , ' add Mary , naively . 

 the sky , which have be cloudless all day , begin to darken as Lord Hartfield drive back to Fellside , and Mary draw a little close to the driver 's elbow , as if for shelter from an impending tempest . 

 ' you have your waterproof , of course , ' he say , look down at she , as the first big drop of a thunder shower dash upon the splash - board . ' no young woman in the Lake country would think of be without a waterproof . ' 

 Mary be duly provide , and with the help of the groom put herself into a snug little tartan Inverness , while Hartfield send the cart spinning along twelve mile an hour . 

 they be at Fellside before the storm develop its full power , but the sky be leaden , the landscape dull and blot , the atmosphere heavy and stifle . the thunder grumble hoarsely , far away yonder in the wild gorge of Borrowdale ; and Mary and her husband make up their mind that the temp would come before midnight . 

 Lady Maulevrier be suffer from the condition of the atmosphere . she have go to bed , prostrate with a neuralgic headache , and have give order that no one but she maid should go near she . so Lord Hartfield and his wife din by themselves , in the room where Mary have eat so many uninteresting dinner tete - a - tete with Fršulein ; and in spite of the storm which howl , pelt , and lighten every now and then , Mary feel as if she be in Paradise . 

 there be no chance of go out after dinner . the lake look like a pool of ink , the mountain be monster of dark and threatening aspect , the rain rattle against the window , and run from the verandah in miniature water - spout . there be nothing to do but stay in door , in the sultry , dusky house . 

 ' let we go to my boudoir , ' say Mary . ' let I enjoy the full privilege of have a boudoir my very own room . be not   it too good of grandmother to have it make so smart for I ? ' 

 ' nothing can be too good for my Mary , ' answer her husband , still in the doting stage , ' but it be very nice of her ladyship and the room be charming . ' 

 delightful as the new boudoir might be , they dawdle in the picture gallery , that long corridor on which all the upper room open , and at one end of which be the door of Lady Maulevrier 's bedroom , at right angle with that red - cloth door , which be never open , except to give egress or ingress to James Steadman , who keep the key of it , as if the old part of Fellside House have be an enchanted castle . Lord Hartfield have not forget that summer midnight last year , when his meditation be disturb by a woman 's pierce cry . he think of it this evening , as Mary and he lower their voice on draw near Lady Maulevrier 's door . she be asleep within there now , perhaps , that strange old woman ; and at any moment an awful shriek , as of a soul in mortal agony , might startle they in the midst of their bliss . 

 the lamp be light below ; but this upper part of the house be wrap in the dull grey twilight of a stormy evening . a single lamp burn dimly at the further end of the corridor , and all the rest be shadow . 

 Mary and her husband walk up and down , talk in subdue tone . he be explain the necessity of his be in London next week , and promise to come back to Fellside directly his business at the House be over . 

 ' it will be delightful to read your speech , ' say Mary ; ' but I be silly and selfish enough to wish you be a country squire , with no business in London . and yet I do not   wish that either , for I be intensely proud of you . ' 

 ' and some day , before we be much old , you will sit in your robe in the peeress 's gallery . ' 

 ' oh , I could not , ' cry Mary . ' I should make a fool of myself , somehow . I should look like a housemaid in borrow plume . remember , I have no Anstand I have be tell so all my life . ' 

 ' you will be one of the prettiest peeress who ever sit in that gallery , and the pure , and true , and dear , ' protest her lover - husband . 

 ' oh , if I be good enough for you , I be satisfied . I marry you , and not the House of Lords . but I be afraid your friend will all say , " Hartfield , why in heaven 's name do you marry that uncultivated person ? " look ! ' 

 she stop suddenly , with her hand on her husband 's arm . it be grow momentarily dark in the corridor . they be at the end near the lamp , and that other end by Lady Maulevrier 's door be in deep darkness , yet not too dark for Lord Hartfield to see what it be to which Mary point . 

 the red - cloth door be open , and a faint glimmer of light show within . a man be stand in the corridor , a small , shrunken figure , bent and old . 

 ' it be Steadman 's uncle , ' say Mary . ' do let I go and speak to he , poor , poor old man . ' 

 ' the madman ! ' exclaim Hartfield . ' no , Mary ; go to your room at once . I will get he back to his own den . ' 

 ' but he be not mad at any rate , he be quite harmless . let I just say a few word to he . surely I be safe with you . ' 

 Lord Hartfield be not inclined to dispute that argument ; indeed , he feel himself strong enough to protect his wife from all the lunatic in Bedlam . he go towards the end of the corridor , keep Mary well behind he ; but Mary do not mean to lose the opportunity of renew her acquaintance with Steadman 's uncle . 

 ' I hope you be well , poor old soul , ' she murmur , gently , lovingly almost , nestle at her husband 's side . 

 ' what , be it you ? ' cry the old man , tremulous with joy . ' oh , I have be look for you look look wait , wait for you . I have be hop for you every hour and every minute . why do not   you come to I , cruel girl ? ' 

 ' I try with all my might , ' say Mary , ' but people block up the door in the stable , and they would not   let I go to you ; and I have be rather busy for the last fortnight , ' add Mary , blush in the darkness , ' I I be married to this gentleman . ' 

 ' married ! ah , that be a good thing . he will take care of you , if he be an honest man . ' 

 ' I think he be an honest man , but he have turn out to be an earl , ' answer Mary , proudly . ' my husband be Lord Hartfield . ' ' Hartfield Hartfield , ' the old man repeat , feebly . ' surely I have hear that name before . ' 

 there be no violence in his manner , nothing but imbecility ; so Lord Hartfield make up his mind that Mary be right , and that the old man be quite harmless , worthy of all compassion and kindly treatment . 

 this be the same old man whom he have meet on the Fell in the bleak March morning . there be no doubt in his mind about that , although he could hardly see the man 's face in the shadowy corridor . 

 ' come , ' say the man , ' come with I , my dear . you forget I , but I have not forget you . I mean to leave you my fortune . come with I , and I will show you your legacy . it be all for you every rupee every jewel . ' 

 this word rupee startle Lord Hartfield . it have a strange sound from the lip of a Westmoreland peasant . 

 ' come , child , come ! ' say the man impatiently . ' come and see what I have leave you in my will . I make a new will every day , but I leave everything to you every will be in your favour . but if you be married you have well have your legacy at once . your husband be strong enough to take care of you and your fortune . ' 

 ' poor old man , ' whisper Mary ; ' pray let we humour he . ' 

 it be the usual madman 's fancy , no doubt . boundless wealth , exalted rank , sanctity , power these thing all belong to the lunatic . he be the lord of creation , and , feed by such fancy , he enjoy flash of wild happiness in the midst of his woe . 

 ' come , come , both of you , ' say the old man , eagerly , breathless with impatience . 

 he lead the way across the sacred threshold , look back , beckon to they with his waste old hand , and Mary for the first time in her life enter that house which have seem to she from her very childhood as a temple of silence and mystery . the passage be dimly light by a little lamp on a bracket . the old man creep along stealthily , look back , with a face full of cunning , till he come to a broad landing , from which an old staircase , with massive oak banister , lead down to the square hall below . the ceiling be low , the passage be narrow . all thing in the house be curiously different from that spacious mansion which Lady Maulevrier have build for herself . 

 a door on the landing stand ajar . the old man push it open and go in , follow by Mary and her husband . 

 they both expect to see a room humble almost to poverty an iron bedstead , perhaps , and such furniture as the under servant in a nobleman 's household be privileged to enjoy . both be alike surprised at the luxury of the apartment they enter , and which be evidently reserve exclusively for Steadman 's uncle . 

 it be a sitting - room . the furniture be old - fashioned , but almost as handsome as any in Lady Maulevrier 's apartment . there be a large sofa of most comfortable shape , cover with dark red velvet , and furnish with pillow and foot rug , which would have satisfy a Sybarite of the first water . beside the sofa stand a hookah , with all appliance in the oriental fashion ; and half a dozen long cherry - wood pipe neatly arrange above the mantelpiece show that Mr. Steadman 's uncle be a smoker of a luxurious type . 

 in the centre of the room stand a large writing table , with a case of pigeon - hole at the back , a table which would not have disgrace a Prime Minister 's study . a pair of wax candle , in tall silver candlestick , light this table , which be litter with paper , in a wild confusion that too plainly indicate the condition of the owner 's mind . the oak floor be cover with persian prayer rug , old and fade , but of the rich quality . the window curtain be dark red velvet ; and through an open doorway Mary and her husband see a corresponding luxury in the arrangement of the adjoining bedroom . 

 the whole thing seem wild and strange as a fairy tale . the weird and wizene old man , grin and nod his head at they . the handsome room , rich with dark , subdue colour , in the dim light of four wax candle , two on the table , two on the mantelpiece . the perfume of stephanotis and tea - rose , blend faintly with the all - pervade odour of latakia and turkish attar . all be alike strange , bear in mind that this old man be a recipient of Lady Maulevrier 's charity , a hanger - on upon a confidential servant , who might be suppose to be generously treat if he have the run of his tooth and the shelter of a decent garret . verily , there be something regal in such hospitality as this , accord to a pauper lunatic . 

 where be Steadman , the alert , the watchful , all this time ? Mary wonder . they have meet no one . the house be as mute as if it be under the spell of a magician . it be like that awful chamber in the arabian story , where the young man find the magic horse , and start on his fatal journey . Mary feel as if here , too , there must be peril ; here , too , fate be work . 

 the old man go to the writing table , push aside the paper , and then stoop down and turn a mysterious handle or winch under the knee - hole , and the writing - desk move slowly on one side , while the pigeon - hole sank , and a deep well full of secret drawer be lay open . 

 from one of these secret drawer the old man take a bunch of key , nodding , chuckle , mutter to himself as he grope for they with tremulous hand . 

 ' Steadman be uncommonly clever think he know everything but he do not   know the trick of this table . I could hide a regiment of Sepoys in this table , my dear . well , well , perhaps not sepoy too big , too big but I could hide all the State paper of the Presidency . there be drawer enough for that . ' 

 Hartfield watch he intently , with thoughtful brow . there be a mystery here , a mystery of the deep dye ; and it be for he it must need be his task , welcome or unwelcome , to unravel it . 

 this be the Maulevrier skeleton . 

 ' now , come with I , ' say the old man , clutch Mary 's wrist , and draw she towards the half - open door lead into the bedroom . 

 she have a feeling of shrinking , for there be something uncanny about the old man , something that might be life or death , might belong to this world or the next ; but she have no fear . in the first place , she be courageous by nature , and in the second her husband be with she , a tower of strength , and she could know no fear while he be at her side . 

 the strange old man lead the way across his bedroom to an inner chamber , oak pannelle , with very little furniture , but hold much treasure in the shape of trunk , portmanteaux all very old and dusty and two large wooden case , band with iron . 

 before one of these case the man kneel down , and apply a key to the padlock which fasten it . he give the candle to Lord Hartfield to hold , and then open the box . it seem to be full of book , which he begin to remove , heap they on the floor beside he ; and it be not till he have clear away a layer of dingy volume that he come to a large metal strong box , so heavy that he could not lift it out of the chest . 

 slowly , tremulously , and with quickened breathing , he unlock the box where it be , and raise the lid . 

 ' look , ' he say eagerly , ' this be her legacy this be my little girl 's legacy . ' 

 Lord Hartfield bend down and look at the old man 's treasure , by the waver light of the candle ; Mary look over his shoulder , breathless with wonder . 

 the strong box be divide into compartment . one , and the large , be fill with rouleaux of coin , pack as closely as possible . the other contain jewel , set and unset diamond , emerald , ruby , sapphire which flash back the flicker flame of the candle with glinting of rainbow light . 

 ' these be all for she all all , ' exclaim the old man . ' they be worth a prince 's ransom . those rouleaux be all gold ; those gem be priceless . they be the dowry of a princess . but they be hers now yes , my dear , they be yours because you speak sweetly , and smile prettily , and be very good to a lonely old man and because you have my mother 's face , dear , a smile that recall the day of my youth . lift out the box and take it away with you , if you be strong enough , you , you , ' he say , touch Lord Hartfield . ' hide it somewhere keep it from she . let no one know no one except your wife and you must be in the secret . ' 

 ' my dear sir , it be out of the question impossible that my wife or I should accept one of those coin or the small of those jewel . ' 

 ' why not , in the devil 's name ? ' 

 ' first and foremost , we do not know how you come in possession of they ; secondly , we do not know who you be . ' 

 ' they come to I fairly enough bequeath to I by one who have the right to leave they . would you have have all that gold leave for an adventurer to wallow in ? ' 

 ' you must keep your treasure , sir , however it may have come to you , ' answer Lord Hartfield firmly . ' my wife can not take upon herself the burden of a single gold coin least of all from a stranger . remember , sir , to we your possession of this wealth nay , your whole existence be a mystery . ' 

 ' you want to know who I be ? ' say the old man draw himself up , with a sudden hauteur which be not without dignity , despite his shrunken form and grotesque appearence . ' well , sir . I be - - ' 

 he check himself abruptly , and look round the room with a scared expression . 

 ' no , no , no , ' he mutter ; ' caution , caution ! they have not do with I yet ; she warn I they be lie in wait ; I must not   walk into their trap . ' and then turn to Lord Hartfield , he say , haughtily , ' I shall not condescend to tell you who I be , sir . you must know that I be a gentleman , and that be enough for you . there be my gift to your wife ' pointing to the chest ' take it or leave it . ' 

 ' I shall leave it , sir , with all due respect . ' 

 a frightful change come over the old man 's face at this determined refusal . his eye glower at Lord Hartfield under the heavy scowling brow ; his bloodless lip work convulsively . 

 ' do you take I for a thief ? ' he exclaim . ' be you afraid to touch my gold that gold for which man and woman sell their soul , blast their life with shame , and pain , and dishonour , all the world over ? do you stand aloof from it refuse to touch it , as if it be infect ? and you , too , girl ! have you no sense ? be you an idiot ? ' 

 ' I can do nothing against my husband 's wish , ' Mary answer , quietly ; ' and , indeed , there be no need for we to take your money . we be rich without it . please leave that chest to a hospital . it will be ever so much well than give it to we . ' 

 ' you tell I you be go to marry a poor man ? ' 

 ' I know . but he cheat I , and turn out to be a rich man . he be a horrid impostor , ' say Mary , draw close to her husband , and smile up at he . 

 the old man fling down the lid of his strong box , which shut with a sonorous clang . he lock it , and put the key in his pocket . 

 ' I have do with you . ' he say . ' you can go your way , both of you . Fools , fool , fool ! the world be people with rogue and fool ; and , by heaven , I would rather have to do with the rogue ! ' 

 he fling himself into an arm - chair , one of the few object of furniture in the room , and leave they to find their way back alone . 

 ' good - night , sir , ' say Lord Hartfield ; but the old man make no reply . he sit frown sullenly . 

 ' good - night , sir , ' say Mary , in her gentle voice , breathe infinite pity . 

 ' good - night , child , ' he growl . ' I be sorry you have marry an ass . ' 

 this be more than Mary could stand , and she be about to reply with some acrimony , when her husband put his hand upon her lip and hurry she away . 

 on the landing they meet Mrs. Steadman , a stout , commonplace person , who always have the same half - frightened look , as of one who live in the shadow of an abide terror , obviously cow and brow - beat by her husband , accord to the Fellside household . 

 at sight of Lord Hartfield and his wife she look a little more frightened than usual . 

 ' goodness gracious , Lady Mary ! how ever do you come here ? ' she gasp , not yet have quite realise the fact that Mary have be promote . 

 ' we come to please Steadman 's uncle he bring we in here , ' Mary answer , quietly . 

 ' but where do you find he ? ' 

 ' in the corridor just by her ladyship 's room . ' 

 ' then he must have take the key out of Steadman 's pocket , or Steadman must have leave it about somewhere , ' mutter Mrs. Steadman , as if explain the matter to herself , rather than to Mary . ' my poor husband be not the man he be . and so you meet he in the corridor , and he bring you in here . poor old gentleman ! he get madder and madder every day . ' 

 ' there be method in his madness , ' say Lord Hartfield . ' he talk very much like sanity just now . have your husband have the charge of he long ? ' 

 Mrs. Steadman answer somewhat confusedly . 

 ' a goodish time , sir . I can not   quite exactly say time pass so quiet in a place like this . one hardly keep count of the year . ' 

 ' forty year , perhaps ? ' 

 Mrs. Steadman blench under Lord Hartfield 's steadfast look a look which question more searchingly than his word . 

 ' forty year , ' she repeat , with a faint laugh . ' oh , dear no , sir , not a quarter as long . it be not   so many year , after all , since Steadman 's poor old uncle go a little queer in his head ; and Steadman , have such a quiet home here , and plenty of spare room , make bold to ask her ladyship if he might give the poor old man a home , where he would be in nobody 's way . ' 

 ' and the poor old man seem to have a very luxurious home , ' answer Lord Hartfield . ' pray when and where do Mr. Steadman 's uncle learn to smoke a hookah ? ' 

 Simple as the question be , it prove too much for Mrs. Steadman . she only shake her head , and falter some unintelligible reply . 

 ' where be your husband ? ' ask Lord Hartfield ; ' I should like to have a little talk with he , if he be disengage . ' 

 ' he be not very well , my lord , ' answer Mrs. Steadman . ' he have be ail off and on for the last six month , but I could not   get he to see the doctor , or to tell her ladyship that he be in bad health . and about a week ago he break down altogether , and fall into a kind of drowsy state . he keep about , and he do his work pretty much the same as usual , but I can see that it be too much for he . if you like to come downstairs I can let you through the low door into the hall ; and if he should have wake up since I have leave he he will be at your lordship 's service . but I would rather not wake he out of his sleep . ' 

 ' there be no occasion . what I have to say will keep till to - morrow . ' 

 Lord Hartfield and his wife follow Mrs. Steadman downstairs to the low dark hall , where an old eight - day clock tick with hoarse and solemn beat , and a fine stag 's head over each doorway give evidence of some former Haselden 's sporting taste . the door of a small panel parlour stand half - way open ; and within the room Lord Hartfield see James Steadman asleep in an arm - chair by the fire , which burn as brightly as if it have be Christmas time . 

 ' he be so chilly and shivery this afternoon that I be oblige to light a fire , ' say Mrs. Steadman . 

 ' he seem to be sleep heavily , ' say Hartfield . ' do not   awaken he . I will see he to - morrow morning before I go to London . ' 

 ' he sleep half the day just as heavy as that , my lord , ' say the wife , with a troubled air . ' I do not   think it can be right . ' 

 ' I do not   think so either , ' answer Lord Hartfield . ' you have well call in the doctor . ' 

 ' I will , my lord , to - morrow morning . James will be angry with I , I daresay ; but I must take upon myself to do it without his leave . ' 

 she lead the way along a passage correspond with the one above , and unlock a door open into a lobby near the billiard - room . 

 ' come , molly , see if you can beat I at a fifty game , ' say Lord Hartfield , with the air of a man who want to shake off the impression of some dominant idea . 

 ' of course you will annihilate I , but it will be a relief to play , ' answer Mary . ' that strange old man have give I a shock . everything about his surrounding be so different from what I expect . and how could an uncle of Steadman 's come by all that money and those jewel if they be jewel , and not bit of glass which the poor old thing have chop up , in order to delude himself with an imaginary treasure ? ' 

 ' I do not think they be bit of glass , Molly . ' 

 ' they sparkle tremendously almost as much as my our the family diamond , ' say Mary , puzzle how to describe that property which she hold in right of her position as countess regnant ; ' but if they be real jewel , and all those rouleaux real money , how could Steadman 's uncle become possessed of such wealth ? ' 

 ' how , indeed ? ' say Lord Hartfield , choose his cue 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 

 ON BOARD the ' CAYMAN . ' 


 Goodwood have come and go , a brief bright season of loss and gain , fine gown , flirtation , lobster en mayonaise , champagne , sunshine , dust , glare , babble of many voice , success , failure , triumph , humiliation . a very pretty picture to contemplate from the outside , this little world in holiday clothe , frame in greenery ! but just on the Brocken , where the nice girl among the dancer have the unpleasant peculiarity of drop a little red mouse out of her mouth so too here under different form there be red mouse drop about among the company . here a hint of come insolvency ; there a whisper of a threatened divorce suit , stave off for a while , compromise , family secret , little difficulty everywhere ; betroth couple smilingly accept congratulation , who should never have be affiance be truth and honour the rule of life ; forsake wife pretend to think their husband model of fidelity ; jovial creature with ruin star in their face ; household divide and sham union ; almost everybody live above his or her mean ; and the knowledge that nobody be any well or any happy than his neighbour society 's only fountain of consolation . 

 Lady Lesbia 's gown and parasol have be admire , her engagement have furnish an infinity of gossip , and the fact of Montesma 's constant attendance upon she have give zest to the situation , just that flavour of peril and fatality which the soul of society loveth . 

 ' be she go to marry they both ? ' ask an ancient dowager of the ever - young type . 

 ' no , dear Lady Sevenoaks , she can only marry one , do not   you know ; but the other be nice to go about with ; and I believe it be the other she really like . ' 

 ' it be always the other that a woman like , ' answer the dowager ; ' I be madly in love with this peruvian no , I think you say Cuban myself . I wish some good - natured creature would present he to I . if you know anybody who know he , tell they to bring he to my next afternoon Saturday . but why do choose machin Smithson allow such a handsome hanger - on ? after marriage I could understand that he might not be able to help himself ; but before marriage a man generally have some kind of authority . ' 

 the world wonder a little , just as Lady Sevenoaks wonder , at Smithson 's complacency in allow a man so attractive as Montesma to be so much in the society of his future wife , yet even the censorious could but admit that the Cuban 's manner offer no ground for offence . he come to Goodwood ' on his own hook , ' as society put it : and every man who wear a decent coat and be not a welsher have a right to enjoy the prettiest race - course in England . he spend a considerable part of the day in Lesbia 's company ; but since she be the centre of a little crowd all the time , there could be no offence in this . he be a stranger , know very few people , and have nothing to do but to amuse himself . Smithson be an old and familiar friend , and be in a measure bind to give he hospitality . 

 Mr. Smithson have recognise that obligation , but in a somewhat spar manner . there be a dozen unoccupied bedchamber in the Park Lane Renaissance villa ; but Smithson do not invite his cuban acquaintance to shift his quarter from the Bristol to Park Lane . he be civil to Don Gomez : but anyone who have take the trouble to watch and study the conduct and social relation of these two man would have see that his civility be a forced civility , and that he endure the Spaniard 's society under constraint of some kind . 

 and now all the world be flock to Cowes for the regatta , and Lesbia and her chaperon be establish on board Mr. Smithson 's yacht , the Cayman ; and the captain of the Cayman and all her crew be deliver over to Lesbia to be her slave and to obey her light breath . the Cayman be to lie at anchor off Cowes for the regatta week ; and then she be to sail for Hyde , and lie at anchor there for another regatta week ; and she be to be a float hotel for Lady Lesbia so long as the young lady would condescend to occupy she . 

 the captain be an altogether exceptional captain , and the crew be a pick crew , ruddy face , sandy whisker for the most part , Englishmen all , honest , hardy fellow from between the Nore and the Wash , talk in an honest provincial patois , dash with sea slang . they be the very pink and pattern of cleanliness , and the Cayman herself from stem to stern be dazzle and spotless to an almost painful degree . 

 not content with the exist arrangement of the yacht , which be at once elegant and luxurious , Mr. Smithson have send down a Bond Street upholsterer to refit the saloon and Lady Lesbia 's cabin . the dark velvet and morocco which suit a masculine occupant would not have harmonise with girlhood and beauty ; and Mr. Smithson 's saloon , as originally design , have something of the air of a tabagie . the Bond Street man strip away all the velvet and morocco , pluck up the Turkey carpet , drape the scuttle - port with pale yellow cretonne garnish with orange pompon , subdue the glare of the skylight by a blind of oriental silk , cover the divan with persian saddlebag , the floor with a delicate indian matting , and furnish the saloon with all that be most feminine in the way of bamboo chair and tea - table , japanese screen and fan of gorgeous colouring . here and there against the fluted yellow drapery he fasten a large Rhodes plate ; and the thing be do . Lady Lesbia 's cabin be all bamboo and embroider India muslin . an oval glass , frame in Dresden biscuit , adorn the side , a large white bearskin cover the floor . the berth be pretty enough for the cradle of a duchess 's first baby . even Lesbia , spoil by much indulgence and unlimited credit , give a little cry of pleasure at sight of the nest that have be make ready for she . 

 ' really , Mr. Smithson be immensely kind ! ' she exclaim . 

 ' Smithson be always kind , ' answer Lady Kirkbank , ' and you do not   half enough appreciate he . he have give I his very own cabin such a dear little den ! there be his cigar box and everything lovely on the shelf , and his own particular dressing - case put open for I to use all the back of all the brush repoussť silver , and all the scent - bottle fill expressly for I . if the yacht would only stand quite still , I should think it more delicious than the good house I ever stay in : only I do not   altogether enjoy that little way it have of gurgle up and down perpetually . ' 

 Mr. Smithson 's chief butler , a german Swiss , and a treasure of intelligence , have come down to take the domestic arrangement of the yacht into his control . the Park Lane chef be also on board , Mr. Smithson 's steward act as his subordinate . this great man grumble sorely at the smallness of his surrounding ; for the most luxurious yacht be a poor substitute for the spacious kitchen and storeroom and stillroom of the London mansion . there be a cabin for Lady Kirkbank 's Rilboche and Lady Lesbia 's Kibble , where the two might squabble at their leisure ; in a word , everything have be do that forethought could do to make the yacht as perfect a place of sojourn as any float habitation , from Noah 's Ark to the Orient steamer , have ever be make . 

 it be between four and five upon a delicious July afternoon that Lady Kirkbank and her charge come on board . the maid and the luggage have be send a day in advance , so that everything might be in its place , and the empty box all stow away , before the lady arrive . they have nothing to do but walk on board and fle themselves into the low luxurious chair ready for they on the deck , a little weary by the heat and dust of a railway journey , and with that delicious sense of languid indifference to all the care of life which seem to be in the very atmosphere of a perfect summer afternoon . 

 a striped awning cover the deck , and great basket of rose pink , and red , and yellow be place about here and there . Tea be ready on a low table , a swing brass kettle hiss merrily , with an air of supreme homeliness . 

 Mr. Smithson have accompany his fiancťe from town , and now sit read the Globe , and meekly wait for his tea , while Lesbia take a languid survey of the shore and the flotilla of boat , little and big , and while Lady Kirkbank rhapsodise about the yacht , praise everything , and call everything by a wrong name . he be to be their guest all day , and every day . they be to have enough of he , as Lesbia have observe to her chaperon , with a spice of discontent , not quite so delighted with the arrangement as her faithful swain . to he the idea be rapture . 

 ' you have contrive somehow to keep I very much at a distance hitherto , ' he tell Lesbia , ' and I feel sometimes as if we be almost stranger ; but a yacht be the good place in the world to bring two people together , and a week at Cowes will make we nearer to each other and more to each other than three month in London ; ' and Lesbia have say nothing , inwardly revolt at the idea of become any nearer and dearer to this man whom she have pledge herself to marry . she be to be his wife yes , some day and it be his desire the some day should be soon : but in the interval her dear privilege be the power to keep he at a distance . 

 and yet she could not make up her mind to break with he , to say honestly , ' I never like you much , and now we be engaged I find myself like you less and less every day . save I from the irrevocable wickedness of a loveless marriage . forgive I , and let I go . ' no , this she could not bring herself to say . she do not like Mr. Smithson , but she value the position he be able to give she . she want to be mistress of that infinite wealth she could not renounce that right to which she fancy she have be bear , her right to be one of the Queens of Society : and the only man who have offer to crown she as queen , to find she a palace and a court , be Horace Smithson . without Mr. Smithson her first season would have result in dire failure . she might perhaps have endure that failure , and be content to abide the chance of a second season , have it not be for Mary 's triumph . but for Mary to be a Countess , and for Lesbia to remain Lesbia Haselden , a nobody , dependent upon the caprice of a grandmother whose mean might after all be but limit no , such a concatenation as that be not to be endure . Lesbia tell herself that she could not go back to Fellside to remain there indefinitely , a spinster and a dependent . she have learn the true value of money ; she have find out what the world be like ; and it seem to she that some such person as Mr. Smithson be essential to her existence , just as a butler be a necessity in a house . one may not like the man , but the post must be fill . 

 again , if she be to throw over Mr. Smithson , and speculate upon her chance of next year , what hope have she of do well in her second season than in her first ? the horizon be blank . there be no great parti likely to offer himself for competition . she have see all that the market could produce . wealthy bachelor , high - bear lover , could not drop from the moon . Lesbia , school by Lady Kirkbank , know her peerage by heart ; and she know that , have miss Lord Hartfield , there be really no one in the Blue Book worth wait for . thus , care only for those thing which wealth can buy , she have make up her mind that she could not do without Horace Smithson 's money ; and she must therefore need resign herself to the disagreeable necessity of take Smithson and his money together . the great auctioneer fate would not divide the lot . 

 she tell herself that for she a loveless marriage be , after all , no prodigious sacrifice . she have find out that heart make but a small figure in the sum of her life . she could do without love . a year ago she have fancy herself in love with John Hammond . in her seclusion at St. Bees , in the long , dull August day , saunter up and down by the edge of the sea , in the melancholy sunset hour , she think that her heart be break , that life be worthless without the man she love . she have think and feel all this , but not strongly enough to urge she to any great effort , not keenly enough to make she burst her chain . she have prefer to suffer this loss than to sacrifice her chance of future aggrandisement . and now she look back and remember those sunset walk by the sea , and all her thought and feeling in those silent summer hour ; and she smile at herself , half in scorn , half in pity , for her own weakness . how easily she have learn to do without he who at that hour seem the well part of her existence . a good deal of gaiety and praise , a little mild flirtation at Kirkbank Castle , and lo ! the image of her first lover begin to grow dim and blur , like a faded photograph . a season at Cannes , and she be cure . a week in London , and that first love be a thing of the past , a dream from which the dreamer awaketh , forget the thing that he have dream . 

 remember all this she tell herself that she have no heart , that love or no love be a question of very little moment , and that the personal quality of the man whom she choose for a husband matter nothing to she , provide that his land and house and social status come up to her standard of merit . she have see Mr. Smithson 's house and land ; and she be distinctly assure that he would in due course be raise to the peerage . she have , therefore , every reason to be satisfied . 

 have thus reason out the circumstance of her new life , she accept her fate with a languid grace , which harmonise with her delicate and patrician beauty . nobody could have for a moment suppose from her manner that she love Horace Smithson ; but nobody have the right to think that she detest he . she accept all his attention as a thing of course . the flower which he strew beneath her footstep , the pearl which he melt in her wine metaphorically speak be just ' good enough ' and no more . this afternoon , when Mr. Smithson ask she how she like the arrangement of the saloon and cabin , she say she think they would do very nicely . ' they would do . ' nothing more . 

 ' it be dreadfully small , of course , ' she say , ' when one be accustom to room : but it be rather amusing to be in a sort of doll 's house , and on deck it be really very nice . ' 

 this be the most Mr. Smithson have for his pain , and he seem to be content therewith . if a man will marry the prettiest girl of the year he must be satisfied with such scant civility as conscious perfection may give he . we know that Aphrodite be not altogether the most comfortable wife , and that Helen be a cause of trouble . 

 Mr. Smithson sit in a bamboo chair beside his mistress , and look ineffably happy when she hand he a cup of tea . Sky and sea be one exquisite azure the colour of the boat glance in the sunshine as if they have be jewel ; here an emerald rudder , there a gunwale paint with liquid ruby . white sail , white frock , white duck make vivid patch of light against the blue . the landscape yonder shone and sparkle as if it have be incandescent . all the world of land and sky and sea be steep in sunshine . a day on which to do nothing , read nothing , think nothing , only to exist . 

 while they sit bask in the balmy atmosphere , look lazily at that bright , almost insupportable picture of blue sea under blue sky , there come the dip of oar , make music , and a sound of coolness with every plash of water . 

 ' how good it be of somebody to row about , just to give we that nice soothe sound , ' murmur Lesbia . 

 Lady Kirkbank , with her dear old head throw back upon the cushion of her luxurious chair , and her dear little cornflower hat just a thought on one side , be sleep the sleep of the just , and unconsciously reveal the little golden arrangement which give variety to her front tooth . 

 the soothe sound come near and nearer , close under the Cayman 's quarter , and then a brown hand clasp the man - rope , and a light slim figure swing itself upon deck , while the boat bob and splash below . 

 it be Montesma , who have not be expect till the racing , which be not to begin for two day . a faint , faint rose bloom flush Lady Lesbia 's cheek at sight of he ; and Mr. Smithson give a little look of vexation , just one rapid contraction of the eyebrow , which resume their conventional placidity the next instant . 

 ' so good of you , ' he murmur . ' I really do not expect you till the beginning of the week . ' 

 ' London be simply insupportable in this weather most of all for a man bear in the Havanas . my soul thirst for blue water . so I say to myself , this good Smithson be at Cowes ; he will give I the run of his yacht and a room at his villa . why not go to Cowes at once ? ' 

 ' the room be at your service . I have only two or three of my people at Formosa , but just enough to look after a bachelor friend . ' 

 ' I want very little service , my dear fellow , ' answer Montesma , pleasantly . ' a man who have cross the Cordilleras and camp in the primeval forest on the shore of the Amazon , learn to help himself . so this be the Cayman ? Muy deleitoso , mi amigo . a float Paradise in little . if the ark have be like this , I do not   think any of the passenger would have want the flood to dry up . ' 

 he shake hand with Lady Lesbia as he speak , and with Lady Kirkbank , who look at he as if he be part of her dream , and then he sink into the chair on Lesbia 's left hand , with the air of be establish for the rest of the day . 

 ' I have leave my portmanteaux at the end of the pier , ' he say lazily . ' I dare say one of your fellow will be good enough to take they to Formosa for I ? ' 

 Mr. Smithson give the necessary order . all the beauty have go out of the sea and the sky for he , all the contentment from his mind ; and yet he be in no position to rebel against Fate in no position to say directly or indirectly , ' Don Gomez de Montesma , I do not   want you here , and I must request you to transfer yourself elsewhither . ' 

 Lesbia 's feeling be curiously different . the very sight of that nervous brown hand upon the rope just now have send a strange thrill through her vein . she who believe herself heartless could scarce trust herself to speak for the vehement throbbing of her heart . a sense of joy too deep for word possess she as she recline in her low chair , with droop eyelid , yet feel the fire of those dark southern eye upon her face , scorch she like an actual flame . 

 ' Lady Lesbia , may I have a cup of tea ? ' he ask ; not because he want the tea , but only for the cruel delight of see if she be able to give it to he calmly . 

 her hand shake , flutter , wander helplessly , as she pour out that cup of tea and hand it to Montesma , a feminine office which she have perform placidly enough for Mr. Smithson . the Spaniard take the cup from she with a quiet smile , a subtle look which seem to explore the inmost depth of her consciousness . 

 yes , this man be verily her master . she know it , and he know it , as that look of his tell she . vain to play her part of languid indifference vain to struggle against her bondage . in heart and spirit she be at his foot , an odalisque , recognise and bow down to her sultan . 

 happily for the general peace , Mr. Smithson have be look away seaward , with a somewhat troubled brow , while that little cup and saucer episode be be enact . and in the next minute Lesbia have recover her self - command , and resume that graceful languor which be one of her charm . she be weak , but she be not altogether foolish ; and she have no idea of succumb to this new influence of yield herself up to this conqueror , who seem to take her life into his hand as if it be a bit of thistledown . her agitation of those first few minute be due to the suddenness of his appearance the reaction from dulness to delight . she have be tell that he be not to be at Cowes till Monday , and lo ! he be here at her side , just as she be think how empty and dreary life be without he . 

 he drop into his place so naturally and easily , make himself so thoroughly at home and so agreeable to every one , that it be almost impossible for Horace Smithson to resent his audacity ! Mr. Smithson 's vital might be devour by the gnawing of the green - eyed monster , but however fierce that gnawing be , he do not want to seem jealous . Montesma be there as the very incarnation of some experience in Mr. Smithson 's past career , and he dare not object to the man 's presence . 

 and so the summer day wear on . they have the yacht all to themselves that evening , for the racing yacht be fulfil engagement in other water , and the gay company of pleasure - seeker have not yet fully assemble . they be drop in one by one , all the evening , and Cowes road grow full of life with every hour of the summer night . 

 Mr. Smithson and his guest din in the saloon , a snug little party of four , and sit long over dessert , deep into the dusk ; and they talk of all thing under heaven , thing frivolous , thing grave , but most of all about that fair , strange world in far - off southern water , the sunny island of the Caribbean Sea , and the dreamy , luxurious life of that tropical clime , half spanish , half oriental , wholly independent of european conventionality . Lesbia listen , enchant by the picture . what be Park Lane palace , and Berkshire manor , the petty splendour of the architect and the upholsterer , weigh against a world in which all nature be on a grander scale ? Mr. Smithson might give her fine house and costly upholstery ; but only the Tropic of Cancer could give she large and bright star , a world of rich colouring , a land of perpetual summer , night luminous with fire - fly , garden in which the fern and the cactus be as forest tree , and where humming - bird flash among the foliage like live flower ; nay , where the flower themselves take the form of the animal world and seem instinct with life and motion . 

 ' yes , ' say Mr. Smithson , with his gentlemanlike drawl , ' Spanish America and the West Indies be delightful place to talk about . there be so many thing one leave out of the picture thief , nigger , jigger , snake , mosquito , yellow Jack , creep , crawl creature of all kind . I always feel very glad I have be to South America . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' in order that I may never go there again , ' reply Mr. Smithson . 

 ' I be begin to hope you would take I there some day , ' say Lesbia . 

 ' never again , no , not even for your sake . no man should ever leave Europe after he be five - and - thirty ; indeed , I doubt if after that age he should venture beyond the Mediterranean . that be the sea of civilisation . anything outside it mean barbarism . ' 

 ' I hope we be go to travel by - and - by , ' say Lesbia ; ' I have be mew up in Grasmere half my life , and if you be go to confine I to the shore of the Mediterranean , which be , after all , only a large lake , for the other half of my life , my existence will be a dull piece of work after all . I agree with what Don Gomez say the other night : " not to travel be not to live . " ' 

 they go on deck presently and sit in the summer darkness , light only by the star , and by the light of the yacht , and the faintly gleam window of the lighted town , sit long and late , in a state of ineffable repose . Lady Kirkbank , fortify by the produce of Mr. Smithson 's particular clo , and by a couple of glass of green Chartreuse , sleep profoundly . she have not enjoy herself so much for the last three month . she have be stretch on Society 's rack , and she have be grind in Society 's mill ; and neither mind nor body have be her own to do what she like withal . she have toil early and late , and have spar herself in no wise . and now the trouble be over for a space . here be rest and respite . she have do her duty as a chaperon , have provide her charge with the very good thing the matrimonial market offer . she have pay her creditor something on account all round , and have leave they appeased and trustful , if not content . Sir George have go oft alone to drink the water at Spa , and to fortify himself for Scotland and the grouse season . she be her own mistress , and she could fold her hand and take her rest , eat and drink and sleep and be merry , all at Mr. Smithson 's expense . 

 the yacht come flock in next day , like a flight of white - wing sea bird , and Mr. Smithson have enough to do receive visitor upon the Cayman . he be fully occupy ; but Montesma have nothing to do , except to amuse Lady Lesbia and her chaperon , and in this onerous task he succeed admirably . Lesbia find that it be too warm to be on the deck when there be perspire people , whose breath must be ninety by the thermometer , perpetually come on board ; so she and Lady Kirkbank sit in the saloon , and have the more distinguished guest bring down to they as to a Court ; and the shrewd of the guest be quick to divine that no company beyond that of Don Gomez de Montesma be really want in that rose - scented saloon . 

 the Spaniard teach Lady Kirkbank monte , which delight she , and which she vow she would introduce at her supper party in the half season of November , when she should be in London for a week or two , as a bird of passage , flit southward . he begin to teach Lesbia Spanish , a language for which she have take a sudden fancy ; and it be curious what tender accent , what hide meaning even a grammar can take from such a teacher . Spanish come easily enough to a learner who have be thoroughly drill in French and italian , and who have be teach the rudiment of Latin ; so by the end of a lesson , which go on at interval all day , the pupil be able to lisp a passage of Don Quixote in the sweetest Castilian , very sweet to the ear of Don Gomez a kind of baby language , precious as the first half - form syllable of infancy to mother . 

 Montesma have nothing to do but to amuse himself and his companion all day in the saloon , amidst odour of rose and peach , in a shadowy coolness make by strip silken blind ; but Mr. Smithson be not so much his own master . that innumerable company of friend which be the portion of the rich man give to hospitality would not let the owner of the Cayman go scot - free . 

 at a place like Cowes , on the eve of the regatta week , the freelance of society expect to find entertainment ; and Mr. Smithson have to maintain his character for princely hospitality at the sacrifice of his feeling as a lover . every ripple of Lesbia 's silvery laughter , every deep tone of Montesma 's voice , from the cabin below , send a pang to his jealous soul ; and yet he have to smile , and to order more champagne cup , and to be lavish of his good cigar , albeit insist that his friend should smoke their cigar in the bow well to leeward , so that no foul breathing of tobacco should pollute his Cleopatra galley . 

 Cleopatra be very happy meanwhile , sublimely indifferent even to the odour of tobacco . she have she Antony at her foot , look up at she , as she recite her lesson , with darkly luminous eye , obviously worship she , obviously intent on win she without count the cost . when have a Montesma ever count the cost to himself or other the cost in gold , in honour , in human life ? the record of Cuba in the palmy day of the slave trade would tell how lightly they hold the last ; and for honour , well , the private hell of island and main could tell their tale of specially print playing card , in which the sword or star on the back of each card have a secret language of their own , and be as finger - post for the initiate player . 

 Mr. Smithson have business on shore , and be fain to leave the yacht for an hour or two before dinner . he invite Don Gomez to go with he , but the offer be graciously decline . 

 ' Amigo , I do not   care even to look at land in such weather . it be so detestably dry , ' he plead . ' it be only the sound of the sea gurgle against the hull that reconcile one to existence . go , and be happy at your club , and send off those occult telegram of your , dearest . I shall not leave the Cayman till bed - time . ' 

 he look as fresh and cool as if utterly unaffected by the heat , which to a Cuban must have be a merely lukewarm condition of the atmosphere . but he affect to be prostrate , and Smithson could not insist . he have his card to play in a game which require extreme caution , and there be no friendly indicator on the back of his king and ace . he be feel his way in the dark , and do not know how much mischief Montesma be prepared to do . 

 when the owner of the yacht be go Don Gomez propose an adjournment to the deck for afternoon tea , and the trio sit under the awning , tea - drinking and gossip for the next hour . Lady Kirkbank tell the steward to say not at home to everybody , just as if she have a street door . 

 ' there be a good deal of the dolce far niente about this , ' say Montesma , presently ; ' but do not   you think we have be anchor in sight of that shabby little town quite long enough , and that it would be rather nice to spread our wing and sail round the island before the racing begin ? ' 

 ' it would be exquisite , ' say Lesbia . ' I be very tired of inaction , though I dearly love learn Spanish , ' she add , with a lovely smile , and a look that be half submissive , half mutinous . ' but I have really be begin to wonder whether this boat can move . ' 

 ' you will see that she can , and at a smart pace , too , if I sail she . shall we circumnavigate the island ? we can set sail after dinner . ' 

 ' will Mr. Smithson consent , do you think ? ' 

 ' why do Smithson exist , except to obey you ? ' 

 ' I do not   know if Lady Kirkbank would quite like it , ' say Lesbia , look at her chaperon , who be wave a big japanese fan , slowly , unsteadily , and with a somewhat drunken air , the while she slide into dreamland . 

 ' quite like what ? ' she murmur , drowsily . 

 ' a little sail . ' 

 ' I should dearly love it , if it do not   make I sea - sick . ' 

 ' sea - sick on a glassy lake like this ! impossible , ' say Montesma . ' I consider the thing settle . we set sail after dinner . ' 

 Mr. Smithson come back to the yacht just in time to dress for dinner . Don Gomez excuse himself from put on his dress suit . he be go to sail the yacht himself , and he be dress for his work , picturesquely , in white duck trouser , white silk shirt , and black velvet shooting jacket . he din with the permission of the lady , in this costume , in which he look so much handsomer than in the livery of polite life . he have a red scarf tie round his waist , and when at his work by - and - by , he wear a little red silk cap , just stick lightly on his dark hair . the dinner to - day be all animation and even excitement , very different from the languorous calm of yesterday . Lesbia seem a new creature . she talk and laugh and flash and sparkle as she have never yet do within Mr. Smithson 's experience . he contemplate the transformation with wonder not unmixe with suspicion . never for he have she be so brilliant never in response to his glance have her violet eye thus kindle , have her smile be so entrancingly sweet . he watch Montesma , but in he he could find no fault . even jealousy could hardly take objection to the Spaniard 's manner to Lady Lesbia . there be not a look , not a word that hint at a private understanding between they , or which seem to convey deep meaning than the common language of society . no , there be no ground for fault - finding ; and yet Smithson be miserable . he know this man of old , and know his influence over woman . 

 Mr. Smithson hand over the management of the yacht without a murmer , albeit he pretend to be able to sail she himself , and be in the habit of take the command for a couple of hour on a sunny afternoon , much to the amusement of skipper and crew . but Montesma be a sailor bear and breed the salt keen breath of the sea have be the first breath in his nostril he have manage his light felucca before he be twelve year old , have sail every inch of the Caribbean Sea , and northward to the furthermost of the Bahamas before he be fifteen . he have live more on the water than on the land in that wild boyhood of his ; a boyhood in which book and professor have play but small part . Montesma 's school have be the world , and beautiful woman his only professor . he have learn arithmetic from the transaction of bubble company ; modern language from the lip of the woman who love he . he be a crack shot , a perfect swordsman , a reckless horseman , and a dancer in whom dance almost rise to genius . beyond these limit he be as ignorant as dirt ; but he have a cleverness which serve as a substitute for book learning , and he seldom fail in impress the people he meet with the idea that he , Gomez de Montesma , be no ordinary man . 

 directly after dinner the preparation for an immediate start begin ; very much to the disgust of skipper and crew , who be not in the habit of work after dinner ; but Montesma care nothing for the short answer of the captain , or the black look of the man . 

 Lesbia want to learn all about everything the name of every sail , of every rope . she stand near the helmsman , a slim graceful figure in a white gown of some soft material , with never a jewel or a flower to relieve that statuesque simplicity . she wear no hat , and the rich chesnut hair be roll in a loose knot at the back of the small Greek - look head . Montesma come to she every now and then to explain what be be do ; and by - and - by , when the canvas be all up , and the yacht be skim over the water , like a giant swan bear by the current of some vast strong river , he come and stay by her side , and they two sit make little baby sentence in Spanish , he as teacher and she as pupil , with no one near they but the sailor . 

 the owner of the Cayman have disappear mysteriously a quarter of an hour after the sail be unfurl , and Lady Kirkbank have totter down to the saloon . 

 ' I be not go cabin , ' she falter , when Lesbia remonstrate with she , ' only go saloon sofa lie down little Smithson take care you , ' not perceive that Smithson have vanish , ' shall be quite close . ' 

 so Lesbia and Don Gomez be alone under the summer star , murmur little bit of Spanish . 

 ' it be the only true way of learn a language , ' he say ; ' grammar be a delusion . ' 

 it be a very delightful and easy way of learn , at any rate . Lesbia recline in her bamboo chair , and fan herself indolently , and watch the shadowy shore of the island , cliff and hill , down and woode crest , flit past she like dream - picture , and her lip slowly shape the word of that soft lisping language so simple , so musical a language make for lover and for song , one would think . it be wonderful what rapid progress Lesbia make . 

 she hear a church clock on the island striking , and ask Don Gomez the hour . 

 ' ten , ' he say . 

 ' Ten ! surely it must be later . it be past eight before we begin dinner , and we have be sail for ever so long . captain , kindly tell I the time , ' she call to the skipper , who be loll over the gunwale near the foremast smoking a meditative pipe . 

 ' twelve o'clock , my lady . ' 

 ' Heavens , can I possibly have be sit here so long . I should like to stay on deck all night and watch the sailing ; but I must really go and take care of poor Lady Kirkbank . I be afraid she be not very well . ' 

 ' she have a somewhat distracted air when she go below , but I daresay she will sleep off her trouble . if I be you I should leave she to herself . ' 

 ' impossible ! what can have become of Mr. Smithson ? ' 

 ' I have a shrewd suspicion that it be with Smithson as with poor Lady Kirkbank . ' 

 ' do you mean that he be ill ? ' 

 ' precisely . ' 

 ' what , on a calm summer night , sail over a sea of glass . the owner of a yacht ! ' 

 ' rather ignominious for poor Smithson , be not   it ? but man who own yacht be only mortal , and be sometimes wretched sailor . Smithson be feeble on that point , as I know of old . ' 

 ' then be not   it rather cruel of we to sail his yacht ? ' 

 ' yacht be mean for sailing , and again , sea - sickness be suppose to be a wholesome exercise . ' 

 ' good - night . ' 

 ' good - night , ' both good night in Spanish , and with a touch of tenderness which the word could hardly have express in English . 

 ' must you really go ? ' plead Montesma , hold her hand just a thought long than he have ever hold it before . 

 ' ah , the little more , and how much it be , ' say the poet . 

 ' really and truly . ' 

 ' I be so sorry . I wish you could have stay on deck all night . ' 

 ' so do I , with all my heart . this calm sea under the starlit sky be like a dream of heaven . ' 

 ' it be very nice , but if you stay I think I could promise you considerable variety . we shall have a temp before morning . ' 

 ' of all thing in the world I should love to see a thunderstorm at sea . ' 

 ' be on the alert then , and Captain Parkes and I will try to oblige you . ' 

 ' at any rate you have make it impossible for I to sleep . I shall stay with Lady Kirkbank in the saloon . good - night , again . ' 

 ' good - night . ' 

 CHAPTER XXXIX . 

 in storm and DARKNESS . 


 Lesbia find Lady Kirkbank prostrate on a low divan in the saloon , sleepless , and very cross . the atmosphere reek with red lavender , sal - volatile , eau de Cologne , and brandy , which latter remedy poor Georgie have take freely in her agony . Kibble , the faithful Grasmere girl , sit by the divan , fan the sufferer with a large japanese fan . Rilboche have naturally , as a Frenchwoman , succumb utterly to her own feeling , and be moan in her berth , wail out every now and then that she would never have take service with Miladi have she suspect she to be capable of such cruelty as to take she to live for week upon the sea . 

 if this be the state of affair now while the ocean be only gently stir , what would it be by - and - by if the temp should really come ? 

 ' what can you be think of , stay on deck all night with those man ? ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , peevishly . ' it be hardly respectable . ' 

 she would have be still more inclined to object have she know that Lesbia 's companion have be ' that man ' rather than ' those man . ' 

 ' what do you mean by all night ? ' Lesbia retort , contemptuously ; ' it be only just twelve . ' 

 ' only twelve . I think we be close upon daylight . I have suffer an eternity of agony . ' 

 ' I be very sorry you should be ill ; but really the sea have be so deliciously calm . ' 

 ' I believe I should have suffer less if it have be diabolically rough . oh , that monotonous flip - flap of the water , that slow heaving of the boat ! nothing could be bad . ' 

 ' I be glad to hear you say that , for Don Gomez say we be likely to have a temp . ' 

 ' a tempest ! ' shriek Georgie . ' then let he stop the boat this instant and put I on shore . tell he to land I anywhere on the Needles even . I could stop at the lighthouse till morning . a storm at sea will be simply my death . ' 

 ' Dear Lady Kirkbank , I be only joke , ' say Lesbia , who do not want to be worry by her chaperon 's nervous apprehension : ' so far the night be lovely . ' 

 ' give I a spoonful more brandy , my good creature , ' to Kibble . ' Lesbia , you ought never to have bring I into this miserable state . I consent to stay on board the yacht ; but I never consent to sail on she . ' 

 ' you will soon be well , dear Lady Kirkbank ; and you will have such an appetite for breakfast to - morrow morning . ' 

 ' where shall we be at breakfast time ? ' 

 ' Off St. Catherine 's point , I believe just half way round the island . ' 

 ' if we be not at the bottom of the sea , ' groan Georgie . 

 they be now in the open Channel , and the boat dip and rise to large billow than have encounter her course before . Lady Kirkbank lie in a state of collapse , in which life seem only sustainable by occasional teaspoonful of cognac gently tilt down her throat by the patient Kibble . 

 Lesbia go to her cabin , but with no intention of remain there . she be firmly convinced that the storm would come , and she mean to be on deck while it be rag . what harm could thunder or lightning , hail or rain , do to she while he be by to protect she ? he would be busy sail the boat , perhaps , but still he would have a moment now and then in which to think of she and care for she . 

 yes , the storm be come . there be a livid look upon the water , and the atmosphere be heavy with heat ; the sky to windward black as a funeral pall . Lesbia be almost fearless , yet she feel a thrill of awe as she look into that dense blackness . to leeward the star be still visible ; but that gigantic mass of cloud come creep slowly , solemnly over the sky , while the shadow flit fast across the water , swallow up that ghastly electric glare . 

 Lesbia wrap herself in a white cashmere sortie de bal and steal up the companion . Montesma be work at the rope with his own hand , call direction to the sailor to shorten and take in the canvas , urge they to increase effort by work at the rope with his own hand , spring up the rigging and on deck , flash backwards and forwards amidst the rigging like a being of supernatural power . he have take off his jacket , and be clothe from top to toe in white , save for that streak of scarlet which tightly girdle his waist . his tall flexible form , perfect in line as a greek statue of Hermes , stand out against the background of black night . his voice , with its tone of brief imperious command , the proud carriage of his head , the easy grace of his rapid movement , all proclaim the man bear to rule over his fellow - man . and it be these master spirit , these bear ruler , whom woman instinctively recognise as their sovereign lord , and for whom woman count no sacrifice too costly . 

 in the midst of his activity Montesma suddenly see that white - rob figure stand at the top of the companion , and fly to her side . the boat be pitch heavily , dip into the trough of the sea at an angle of forty - five degree , as it seem to Lesbia . 

 ' you ought not to be here , ' say Montesma ; ' it be much rough than I expect . ' 

 ' I be not afraid , ' she answer ; ' but I will go back to my cabin if I be in your way . ' 

 ' in my way '   with deep tenderness : ' yes , you be in my way , for I shall think of nothing else now you be here . but I believe we have do all that need be do to the yacht , and I can take care of you till the storm be over . ' 

 he put his arm round she as the stem dip , and lead she towards the stern , guide her footstep , support she as her light figure sway against he with the motion of the boat . a vivid flash of lightning show he her face as they stand for an instant lean against each other , his arm encircle she . ah , what deep feeling in that countenance , once so passionless ; what a new light in those eye . it be like the awakening of a long dormant soul . 

 he take the helm from the captain and stand steer the vessel , and call out his order , with Lesbia close beside he , hold she with his disengage arm , draw she near he as the vessel pitch violently , draw her nearer still when they ship a sea , and a great fountain of spray enfold they both in a dense cloud of salt water . 

 the thunder roar and rattle , as if it begin and end close beside they . fork lightning zigzag amidst the rigging . Sheet lightning enwrap those two in a luminous atmosphere , reveal face that be pale with passion , lip that tremble with emotion . there be but scant opportunity for speech , and neither of these two feel the need of word . to be together , bind near to each other than they have ever be yet , than they might ever be again , in the midst of thunder and lightning and dense cloud of spray . this be enough . once when the Cayman pitch with exceptional fury , when the thunder crash and roar loudest , Lesbia find her head lie on Montesma 's breast and his arm round she , his lip upon her face . she do not wrench herself from that forbid embrace . she let those lip kiss hers as never mortal man have kiss she before . but an instant later , when Montesma 's attention be distract by his duty as steersman , and he let she go , she slip away in the darkness , and melt from his sight and touch like a modern Undine . he dare not leave the helm and follow she then . he send one of the sailor below a little later , to make sure that she be safe in her cabin ; but he see she no more that night . 

 the storm abate soon after daybreak , and the morning be lovely ; but Don Gomez and Lady Lesbia do not meet again till the church bell on the island be ring for morning service , and then the lady be safe under the wing of her chaperon , with her affiance husband in attendance upon she at the breakfast table in the saloon . 

 she receive Montesma with the faint inclination of the head , and she carefully avoid all occasion of speech with he during the leisurely , long spin - out meal . she be as white as her muslin gown , and her eye tell of a sleepless night . she talk a little , very little to Lady Kirkbank and Mr. Smithson ; to the Spaniard not at all . and yet Montesma be in no manner dash by this appearance of deep offence . so might Francesca have look the morning after that little scene over the book ; yet she sacrifice her salvation for her lover all the same . it be a familiar stage upon the journey which Montesma know by heart . here the inclination of the road be so many degree more or less ; for this hill you be command to put on an extra horse ; at this stage it be forbid to go more than eight mile an hour , and so on , and so on . Montesma know every inch of the ground . he put on a melancholy look , and talk very little . he have be on deck all night , and so there be an excuse for his be quiet . 

 Lady Kirkbank relate her impression of the storm , and talk enough for four . she have suffer the pang of purgatory , but her natural cheeriness assert itself , and she make no moaning about past agony which have exercise a really delightful influence on her appetite . Mr. Smithson also be cheerful . he have pay his annual tribute to Neptune , and might hope to go scot - free for the rest of the season . 

 ' if I have stay on deck I must have have my finger in the pie ; so I think it well to go below and get a good night 's rest in the steward 's cabin , ' he say , not care to confess his suffering as frankly as Lady Kirkbank admit her . 

 after breakfast , which be prolong till noon , Montesma ask Smithson to smoke a cigarette on deck with he . 

 ' I want to talk to you on a rather serious matter , ' he say . 

 Lesbia hear the word , and look up with a frightened glance . could he mean to attempt anything desperate ? be he go to confess the fatal truth to Horace Smithson , to tell she affiance lover that she be untrue to her bond , that she love he , Montesma , as fondly as he love she , that their two soul have mingle like two flame fan by the same current , and thence have rise to a conflagration which must end in ruin , if she be not set free to follow where her heart have go , free to belong to that man whom her spirit choose for lord and master . her heart leap at the hope that Montesma be go to do this , that he be strong enough to break her bond for she , powerful and rich enough to secure she a brilliant future . yet this last consideration , which hitherto have be paramount , seem now of but little moment . to be with he , to belong to he , would be enough for bliss . albeit that in such a choice she forfeit all that she have ever possess or hop for of earthly prosperity . adventurer , beggar , whatever he might be , she choose he , and love he with all the strength of a weak soul newly awaken to passionate feeling . 

 unhappily for Lesbia Haselden , Montesma be not at all the kind of man to take so direct and open a course as that which she imagine possible . 

 his business with Mr. Smithson be of quite a different kind . 

 ' Smithson , do you know that you have an utterly incompetent crew ? ' he say , gravely , when they two be stand aft , light their cigarette . 

 ' indeed I do not . the man be all experienced sailor , and the captain rank high among yachtsman . ' 

 ' english yachtsman be not particularly good judge of sailor . I tell you your skipper be no sailor , and his man be fool . if it have not be for I the Cayman would have go to piece on the rock last night , and if you be to cross to St. Malo , as you talk of do , for the regatta there , you have well sack these man and let I get you a south american crew . I know of a fellow who be in London just now the captain of a Rio steamer , who will send you a crew of pick man , if you give I authority to telegraph to he . ' 

 ' I do not   like foreign sailor , ' say Smithson , look perplexed and worried ; ' and I have perfect confidence in Wilkinson . ' 

 ' which be as much as to say that you consider I a liar ! go to the bottom your own way , mon ami : ce n'est pas mon affaire , ' say Montesma , turn on his heel , and leave his friend to his own device . 

 have he press the point , Smithson would have suspect he of some evil motive , and would have be resolute in his resistance ; but as he say no more about it , Smithson begin to feel uncomfortable . 

 he be no sailor himself , know absolutely nothing about the navigation of his yacht , though he sometimes pretend to sail she ; and he have no power to judge of his skipper 's capacity or his man 's seamanship . he have engage the captain wholly on the strength of the man 's reputation , guarantee by certain certificate which seem to mean a great deal . but after all such certificate might mean very little such a reputation might be no real guarantee . the sailor have be engage by the captain , and their ruddy face and thoroughly british appearence , the exquisite cleanliness which they maintain in every detail of the yacht , have seem to Mr. Smithson the perfection of seamanship . 

 but it be not the less true that the clean of yacht , with deck of spotless whiteness , sail of unsullied purity , brass shin and sparkling like gold fresh from the goldsmith 's , might be spike upon a rock , or might founder on a sand - bank , or heel over under too much canvas . Mr. Smithson be inclined to suspect any proposition of Montesma 's ; yet he be not the less disturbed in mind by the assertion . 

 the day wear on , and the yacht sail merrily over a summer sea . Mr. Smithson fidget about the deck uneasily , watch every movement of the sailor . no boat could be sail well , as it seem to he ; but in such weather and over such water any boat must need go easily . it be in the blackness of night , amidst the fury of the storm , that Montesma 's opinion have be form . Smithson begin to think that his friend be right . the sailor have honest countenance , but they look horribly stupid . could man with such vacuous grin , such an air of imbecile good - nature , be capable of act wisely in any terrible crisis ? could they have nerve and readiness , quickness , decision , all those grand qualite which be need by the seaman who have to contend with the fury of the element ? 

 Mr. Smithson and his guest have breakfast too late for the possibility of luncheon . they be in Cowes Roads by one o'clock . a fleet of yacht have arrive during their absence , and the scene be full of life and gaiety . Lady Lesbia hold a levťe at the afternoon tea , and have a crowd of her old admirer around her adorer whose presence in no wise disturb Horace Smithson 's peace . he would have be content that his wife should go through life with a herd of such worshipper follow in her footstep . he know the aimless innocence , the almost infantine simplicity of the typical Johnnie , Chappie , Muscadin , Petit Creve , Gommeux call he by what name you will . from these he fear no evil . but in that one follower who give no outward token of his worship he dread peril . it be Montesma he watch , while dragoon with close - cropped hair , and imbecile youth with head rigid in four - inch collar , be hang about Lady Lesbia 's low bamboo chair , and administer obsequiously to the small necessity of the tea - table . 

 it be while this tea - table business be go on that Mr. Smithson take the opportunity of set his mind at rest , be it possible , as to the merit of Captain Wilkinson . among his visitor this afternoon there be the owner of three or four racing yacht a man renowned for his victory , at home and abroad . 

 ' I think you know something of my captain , Wilkinson , before I engage he , ' say Smithson , with assumed carelessness . 

 ' I know every skipper on board every boat in the squadron , ' answer his friend . ' a good fellow , Wilkinson thoroughly honest fellow . ' 

 ' honest ; oh yes , I know all about that . but how about his seamanship ? his certificate be wonderfully good , but they be not everything . 

 ' everything , my dear fellow , ' cry the other ; ' they be next to nothing . but I believe Wilkinson be a tolerable sailor . ' 

 this be not encouraging . 

 ' he have never be unlucky , I believe . ' 

 ' my dear Smithson , you be a great authority in the City , but you be not very well up in the record of the yacht world , or you would know that your Captain Wilkinson be skipper on the Orinoco when she run aground on the Chesil Bank , come home from Cherbourg Regatta , fifteen life lose , and the yacht , in less than half an hour , ground to powder . that be rather a bad case , I remember ; for though it be a tempestuous night , the accident would never have happen if Wilkinson have not mistake the light . so you see his Trinity House paper do not   prevent his go wrong . ' 

 good heaven ! this be the strong confirmation of Montesma 's charge . the man be a stupid man , an incapable man , a man to whose intelligence and care human life should never be trust . a fig for his honesty ! what would honesty be worth in a hurricane off the Chesil Beach ? what would honesty serve a ship spit on the Jailors off Jersey ? Montesma be right . if the Cayman be to make a trip to St. Malo she must be navigate by competent man . Horace Smithson hat foreign sailor , copper - face ruffian , with flash black eye which seem to threaten murder , do you but say a rough word to they ; sleek , raven - haired scoundrel , with bowie - knife in their girdle , ready for mutiny . but , after all , life be worth too much to be risk for a prejudice , a sentiment . 

 perhaps that St. Malo business might be avoid ; and then there need be no change in captain or crew . the yacht must be safe enough lie at anchor in the roadstead . by - and - by , when the visitor have depart , and Mr. Smithson be reposefully enjoy his tea by Lady Lesbia 's side , he approach the subject . 

 ' do you really care about cross to St. Malo after this really prefer the idea to Ryde ? ' 

 ' Infinitely , ' exclaim Lesbia , quickly . ' Ryde would only be Cowes ever again a less Cowes ; and I think when you first propose it that the plan be rather stupid , though I do not want to be uncivil and say so . but I be delighted with Don Gomez de Montesma 's amendment , substitute St. Malo for Ryde . in the first place the trip across will be delicious ' Lady Kirkbank give a faint groan ' and in the second place I be die to see Brittany . ' 

 ' I doubt if you will highly appreciate St. Malo . it be a town of many and various smell . ' 

 ' but I want to smell those foreign smell of which one hear much . at least it be an experience . we need not be on shore any long than we like . and I want to see that fine rocky coast , and Chateaubriand 's tomb on the what's - its - name . so nice to be bury in that way . ' 

 ' then you have set your heart on go to St. Malo , and would not like any change in our plan ? ' 

 ' any change will be simply detestable , ' answer Lesbia , all the more decidedly since she suspect a desire for change on the part of Mr. Smithson . 

 she be in no amiable humour this afternoon . all her nerve seem strained to their utmost tension . she be irritated , tremulous with nervous excitement , incline to hate everybody , Horace Smithson most of all . in her cabin a little later on , when she be change her gown for dinner , and Kibble be somewhat slow and clumsy in the lacing of the bodice , she wrench herself from the girl 's hand , fling herself into a chair , and burst into a flood of passionate tear . 

 ' o God ! that I be on one of those island in the Caribbean Sea an island where Europeans never come where I might lie down among the poisonous tropical flower , and sleep the rest of my day away . I be sick to death of my life here ; of the yacht , the people everything . ' 

 ' this air be too relaxing , Lady Lesbia , ' the girl murmur , soothingly ; ' and you do not   have your natural rest last night . shall I get you a nice strong cup of tea ? ' 

 ' Tea ! no . I have be live upon tea for the last twenty - four hour . I have eat nothing . my mouth be parch and burn . oh , Kibble ! ' fling her head upon the girl 's buxom arm , and let it rest there , ' what a happy creature you be not a care not a care . ' 

 ' I be sure you can not   have any care , Lady Lesbia , ' say Kibble , with an incredulous smile , try to smooth the disorder hair , anxious to make haste with the unfinished toilet , for it be within a few minute of eight . 

 ' I be full of care . I be in debt horribly in debt get deep and deep every day and I be go to sell myself to the only man who can pay my debt and give I fine house , and finery like this , ' pluck at the crepe de chine gown , with its flossy fringe , its delicate lace , a marvel of artistic expenditure ; a garment which look simplicity itself , and yet be so cleverly contrive as to cost five - and - thirty guineas . the great effect in it require to be study with a microscope . 

 ' but surely , dear Lady Lesbia , you will not   marry Mr. Smithson , if you do not   love he ? ' 

 ' do you suppose love have anything to do with marriage in society ? ' 

 ' oh , Lady Lesbia , it would be so unkind to he , so cruel to yourself . ' 

 ' cruel to myself . yes , I be cruel to myself . I have the chance of happiness a year ago , and I lose it . I have the chance of happiness now yes , of consummate bliss and have not   the courage to snatch at it . take off this horrid gown , Kibble ; my head be split : I shall not   go to dinner . ' 

 ' oh , Lady Lesbia , you be treading on the pearl embroidery , ' remonstrate poor Kibble , as Lesbia kick the new gown from under her foot . 

 ' what do it matter ! ' she exclaim with a bitter little laugh . ' it have not be pay for perhaps it never will be . ' 

 the dinner be silent and gloomy . it be as if a star have be suddenly blot out of the sky . Smithson , ordinarily so hospitable , have be too much disturb in mind to ask any of his friend to stay to dinner ; so there be only Lady Kirkbank , who be too tired to be lively , and Montesma , who be inclined to be thoughtful . Lesbia 's absence , and the idea that she be ill , give the feast almost a funereal air . 

 after dinner Smithson and Montesma sit on deck , smoke their cigar , and lazily watch the light on sea , and the light on shore ; these brilliant in the foreground , those dim in the distance . 

 ' you can telegraph to your Rio Janeiro friend to - morrow morning , if you like , ' say Smithson , presently , ' and tell he to send a first - rate skipper and crew . Lady Lesbia have make up her mind to see St. Malo Regatta , and with such a sacred charge I can not   be too careful . ' 

 ' I will wire before eight o'clock to - morrow , ' answer Montesma , ' you have decide wisely . your respectable English Wilkinson be an excellent man but nothing would surprise I less than his reduce your Cayman to matchwood in the next gale . ' 

 CHAPTER XL . 

 a note of ALARM . 


 that strange scene in the old house at Fellside make a profound impression upon Lord Hartfield . he try to disguise his trouble , and do all in his power to seem gay and at perfect ease in his wife 's company ; but his mind be full of anxiety , and Mary love he too well to be for a moment in doubt as to his feeling . 

 ' there be something wrong , Jack , ' she say , while they be breakfast at a table in the verandah , with the lake and the bill in front of they and the sweet morning air around they . ' you try to talk and to be lively , but there be a little perpendicular wrinkle in your forehead which I know as well as the letter of the alphabet , and that little line mean worry . I use to see it in the old day , when you be break your heart for Lesbia . why can not you be frank and confide in I . it be your duty , sir , as my husband . ' 

 ' be it my duty to halve my burden as well as my joy ? how do I know if those girlish shoulder be strong enough to bear the weight of they ? ' 

 ' I can bear anything you can bear , and I will not   be cheat out of my share in your worry . if you be oblige to have a tooth out , I would have one out too , for company . ' 

 ' I hope the dentist would be too conscientious to allow that . ' 

 ' tell I your trouble , Hartfield , ' she say , earnestly , lean across the table , bring her grave intelligent face near to he . 

 they be quite alone , he and she . the servant have do their ministering . behind they there be the empty dining - room , in front of they the sunlit panorama of lake and hill . there could not be a safe place for tell secret . 

 ' tell I what it be that worry you , ' Mary plead again . 

 ' I will , dear . after all perfect trust be the good ; nay , it be your due , for you be brave enough and true enough to be trust with secret that mean life and death . in a word , then , Mary , the cause of my trouble be that old man we see the other night . ' 

 ' Steadman 's uncle ? ' 

 ' do you really believe that he be Steadman 's uncle ? ' 

 ' my grandmother tell I so , ' answer Mary , redden to the root of her hair . 

 to this girl , who be the soul of truth , there be deep shame in the idea that her kinswoman , the woman whom of all the world she most owe reverence and honour , could be deem capable of falsehood . 

 ' do you think my grandmother would tell I an untruth ? ' 

 ' I do not believe that man be a poor dependent , an old servant 's kinsman , shelter and care for in this house for charity 's sake . forgive I , Mary , if I doubt the word of one you love ; but there be position in life in which a man must judge for himself . would Mr. Steadman 's kinsman be lodge as that old man be lodge ; would he talk as that old man talk ; and last and great perplexity of all , would he possess a treasure of gold and jewel which must be worth many thousand ? ' 

 ' but you can not know for certain that those thing be valuable ; they may be rubbish that this poor old man have scrap together and hoard for year , glass jewel buy at country fair . those rouleaux may contain lead or copper . ' 

 ' I do not think so , Mary . the stone have all the brilliancy of valuable gem , and then there be other in the fine filagree setting goldsmith 's work which bear the stamp of an eastern world . take my word for it , that treasure come from India ; and it must have be bring to England by Lord Maulevrier . it may have exist all these year without your grandmother 's knowledge . that be quite possible ; but it seem to I impossible that such wealth should be within the knowledge and the power of a pauper lunatic . ' 

 ' but if that unhappy old man be not a relation of Steadman 's support here by my grandmother 's benevolence , who can he be , and why be he here ? ' ask Mary . 

 ' oh , Molly dear , these be two question which I can not answer , and which yet ought to be answer somehow . since that night I have feel as if there be a dark cloud lower over this house a cloud almost as terrible in its menace of danger as the forshadowing of fate in a greek legend . for your sake , for the honour of your race , for my own self - respect as your husband , I feel that this mystery ought to be solve , and all dark thing make light before your grandmother 's death . when she be go the master - key to the past will be lose . ' 

 ' but she will be spar for many year , I hope , spar to sympathise with my happiness , and with Lesbia 's . ' 

 my dear girl , we can not hope that . the thread of her life be wear very thin . it may snap at any moment . you can not look seriously in your grandmother 's face , and yet delude yourself with the hope that she have year of life before she . ' 

 ' it will be very hard to part , just as she have begin to care for I , ' say Mary , with her eye full of tear . 

 ' all such parting be hard , and your grandmother 's life have be so lonely and joyless that the memory of it must always have a touch of pain . one can not say of she as we can of the happy ; she have live her life all thing have be give to she , and she fall asleep at the close of a long and glorious day . for some reason which I can not understand , Lady Maulevrier 's life have be a prolonged sacrifice . ' 

 ' she have always give we to understand that she be fond of Fellside , and that this seclude life suit she , ' say Mary , meditatively . 

 ' I can not help doubt her sincerity on that point . Lady Maulevrier be too clever a woman , and forgive I , dear , if I add too worldly a woman , to be content to live out of the world . the bird must have chafe its breast against the bar of the cage many and many a time when you think that all be peace . be sure , Mary , that your grandmother have a powerful motive for spend all her day in this place , and I can but think that the old man we see the other night have some part in that motive . do you remember tell I of her ladyship 's vehement anger when she hear you have make the acquaintance of her pensioner ? ' 

 ' yes , she be very angry , ' Mary answer , with a troubled look . ' I never see she so angry she be almost beside herself say the harsh thing to I talk as if I have do some dreadful mischief . ' 

 ' would she have be so moved , do you think , unless there be some fatal secret involve in that man 's presence here ? ' 

 ' I hardly know what to think . tell I everything . what be it that you fear ? what be it that you suspect ? ' 

 ' to tell you my fear and suspicion be to tell you a family secret that have be keep from you out of kindness all the year of your life and I hardly think I could bring myself to that if I do not know what the world be , and how many good - natured friend Lady Hartfield will meet in society , by - and - by , ready to tell she , by hint and innuendo , that her grandfather , the Governor of Madras , come back to England under a cloud of disgrace . ' 

 ' my poor grandfather ! how dreadful ! ' exclaim Mary , pale with pity and shame . ' do he deserve his disgrace , poor unhappy creature or be he the victim of false accusation ? ' 

 ' I can hardly tell you that , Mary , any more than I can tell whether Warren Hastings deserve the abuse that be wreak upon he at one time , or the acquittal that give the lie to his slanderer in after year . the event occur forty year ago the story be only half know then , and like all such story form the basis for every kind of exaggeration and perversion . ' 

 ' do Maulevrier know ? ' falter Mary . 

 ' Maulevrier know all that be know by the general public , and no more . ' 

 ' and you have marry the granddaughter of a disgrace man , ' say Mary , with a piteous look . ' do you know when you marry I ? ' 

 ' as much as I know now , dear love . if you have be Jonathan Wild 's granddaughter you would have be just as dear to I . I marry you , dear ; I love you ; I believe in you . all the grandfather in Christendom would not shake my faith by one tittle . ' 

 she throw herself into his arm , and sob upon his breast . but sweet as this assurance of his love be to she , she be not the less stricken by shame at the thought of possible infamy in the past , a shameful memory for ever brood over her name in the present . 

 ' society never forget a scandal , ' she say ; ' I have hear Maulevrier say that . ' 

 ' Society have a long memory for other people 's sin , but it only avenge its own wrong . give the wicked fairy Society a bad dinner , or leave she out of your invitation list for a ball , and she will twit you with the crime or the misfortune of a remote ancestor she will go about talk of your grandfather the leper , or your great aunt who run away with her footman . but so long as the wicked fairy get all she want out of you , she care not a straw for the misdeed of past generation . ' 

 he speak lightly , laughingly almost , and then he order the dogcart to be bring round immediately , and he drive Mary across the hill towards Langdale , to bring the colour back to her blanched cheek . he bring she home in time to give her grandmother an hour for letter - writing before luncheon , while he walk up and down the terrace below Lady Maulevrier 's window , meditate the course he be to take . 

 he be to leave Westmoreland next day to take his place in the House of Lords during the last important debate of the session . he make up his mind that before he leave he would seek an interview with Lady Maulevrier , and boldly ask she to explain the mystery of that old man 's presence at Fellside . he be her kinsman by marriage , and he have swear to honour she and to care for she as a son ; and as a son he would urge she to confide in he , to unburden her conscience of any dark secret , and to make the crooked thing straight , before she be call away . 

 while he be forecast this interview , meet imaginary objection , argue point which might have to be argue , a servant come out to he with an ochre envelope on a little silver tray that unpleasant - look envelope which seem always a presage of trouble , great or small . 

 ' Lord Maulevrier , Albany , to Lord Hartfield , Fellside , Grasmere . 

 ' for God 's sake come to I at once . I be in great trouble ; not on my own account , but about a relation . ' 

 a relation except his grandmother and his two sister Maulevrier have no relation for whom he care a straw . this message must have relation to Lesbia . be she ill dying , the victim of some fatal accident , runaway horse , boat upset , train smash ? there be something ; and Maulevrier appeal to his near and good friend . there be no withstanding such an appeal . it must be answer , and immediately . 

 Lord Hartfield go into the library and write his reply message , which consist of six word . 

 ' go to you by first train . ' 

 the next train leave windermere at three . there be just time to get a fresh horse put in the dogcart , and a Gladstone bag pack . 

 CHAPTER XLI . 

 PRIVILEGED information . 


 Lord Hartfield do not arrive at Euston Square until near eleven o'clock at night . a hansom deposit he at the entrance to the Albany just as the clock of St. James 's Church chime the hour . he find only Maulevrier 's valet . his lordship have wait indoor all the evening , and have only go out a quarter of an hour ago . he have go to the Cerberus , and beg that Lord Hartfield would be kind enough to follow he there . 

 Lord Hartfield be not fond of the Cerberus , and indeed deem that lively place of rendezvous a very dangerous sphere for his friend Maulevrier ; but in the face of Maulevrier 's telegram there be no time to be lose , so he walk across Piccadilly and down St. James 's Street to the fashionable little club , where the man be drop in after the theatre and dinner , and where sheafs of bank note be be exchange for those various coloured counter which represent diver value , from the respectable ' pony ' to the modest ' chip . ' 

 Maulevrier be in the first room Hartfield look into , stand behind some man who be play . 

 ' that be something like friendship , ' he exclaim , when he see Lord Hartfield , and then he hook his arm through his friend 's , and lead he off to the dining room . 

 ' come and have some supper , old fellow , ' he say , ' and I can tell you my trouble while you be eat it . James , bring we a grill , and a lobster , and a bottle of Mumms , number 27 , you know . ' 

 ' yes , my lord . ' 

 ' sorry to find you in this den , Maulevrier , ' say Lord Hartfield . 

 ' have not   touch a card . have not   do half an hour 's punt this season . but it be a kind of habit with I to wander in here now and then . I know so many of the member . one poor devil lose nine thousand one night last week . rather rough upon he , be not   it ? all ready money at this shop , do not   you know . ' 

 ' thank God , I know nothing about it . and now , Maulevrier , what be wrong , and with whom ? ' 

 ' everything be wrong , and with my sister Lesbia . ' 

 ' good heaven ! what do you mean ? ' 

 ' only this , that there be a fellow after she whose very name mean ruin to woman a spanish - american adventurer reckless , handsome , a gambler , seducer , duellist , dare - devil . the man she be to marry seem to have neither nous nor spunk to defend she . everybody at Goodwood see the game that be be play , everybody at Cowes be watch the card , bet on the result . yes , great God , the man at the Squadron Club be stake their money upon my sister 's character even monkey that she bolt with Montesma five to three against the marriage with Smithson ever come off . ' 

 ' be this true ? ' 

 ' it be as true as your marriage with Molly , as true as your loyalty to I . I be tell of it all this morning at the Haute Gomme by a man I can rely upon , a really good fellow , who would not leave I in the dark about my sister 's danger when all the smoking - room in Pall Mall be snigger about it . my first impulse be to take the train for Cowes ; but then I know if I go alone I should let my temper get the well of I . I should knock somebody down throw somebody out of the window make a devil of a scene . and this would be fatal for Lesbia . I want your counsel , your cool head , your steady common - sense . " not a step forward without Jack , " I say to myself , so I bolt off and send that telegram . it relieve my feeling a little , but I have   have a wretched day . ' 

 ' waiter , bring I a Bradshaw , or an A b c , ' say Lord Hartfield . 

 he have eat nothing but a biscuit since breakfast , but he be ready to go off at once , supperless , if there be a train to carry he . unluckily there be no train . the mail have start . nothing till seven o'clock next morning . 

 ' eat your supper , old fellow , ' say Maulevrier . ' after all , the danger may not be so desperate as I fancy this morning . Slander be the favourite amusement of the age we live in . we must allow a margin for exaggeration . ' 

 ' a very liberal margin , ' answer Hartfield . ' no doubt the man who warn you mean honestly , but this scandal may have grow out of the mere trifle . the feebleness of the Masher 's brain be only exceed by the foulness of the Masher 's tongue . I daresay this rumour about Lady Lesbia have its beginning and end among the Masher specie . ' 

 ' I hope so , but I have see those two together I meet they at Victoria one evening after Goodwood . Old Kirkbank be shuffle on ahead , carry Smithson with she , absorb his attention by fussification about her carriage . Lesbia and that cuban devil be in the rear . they look as if they have all the world to themselves . Faust and Marguerite in the garden be not in it for the expression of intense absorbing feeling compare with those two . I be not an intellectual party , but I know something of human nature , and I know when a man and woman be in love with each other . it be one of the thing that never have be , that never can be hide . ' 

 ' and you say this Montesma be a dangerous man ? ' 

 ' deadly . ' 

 ' well , we must lose no time . when we be on the spot it will be easy to find out the truth ; and it will be your duty , if there be danger , to warn Lesbia and her future husband . 

 ' I would much rather shoot the Cuban , ' say Maulevrier . ' I never know much good come of a warning in such a case : it generally precipitate matter . if I could play ťcartť with he at the club , find he sport an extra king , throw my card in his face , and accept his challenge for an exchange of shot on the sand beyond Cherbourg there would be something like satisfaction . ' 

 ' you say the man be a gambler ? ' 

 ' report say something bad of he . report say he be a cheat . ' 

 ' we must not be dependent upon society gossip , ' reply Lord Hartfield . ' I have an idea , Maulevrier . the more we know about this man Montesma , I think you call he - - ' 

 ' Gomez de Montesma . ' 

 ' the more fully we be acquaint with Don Gomez de Montesma 's antecedent the well we shall be able to cope with he , if we come to handy - grip . it be too late to start for Cowes , but it be not too late to do something . Fitzpatrick , the political - economist , spend a quarter of a century in South America . he be a very old friend know my father and I can venture to knock at his door after midnight all the more as I know he be a night - worker . he be very likely to enlighten we about your cuban hidalgo . ' 

 ' you shall finish your supper before I let you stir . after that you may do what you like . I be always a child in your hand , Jack , whether it be climb a mountain or cross the horse - shoe Fall . I consider the business in your hand now . I will go with you wherever you like , and do what you tell I . when you want I to kick anybody , or fight anybody , you can give I the office and I will do it . I know that Lesbia 's interest be safe in your hand . you once care very much for she . you be her brother - in - law now , and , next to I , you be her natural protector , take into account that her future husband be a cad and do not   score . ' 

 ' meet I at Waterloo at ten minute to seven to - morrow morning , and we will go down to Cowes together . I be off to find Fitzpatrick . good night . ' 

 so they part . Lord Hartfield walk across the Park to Great George Street , where Mr. Fitzpatrick have chamber of a semi - official character , on the first floor of a solemn - looking old house , spacious , gloomy without and within , wall sombre with the subdue colouring of decoration half a century old . 

 the lighted window of those first - floor room tell Lord Hartfield that he be not too late . he ring the bell , which be answer with the brief delay by a sleepy - look clerk , who have be take shorthand note for Mr. Fitzpatrick 's great book upon ' Protection versus Free Trade . ' the clerk look sleepy , but his employer have as brisk an air as if he be just begin the day ; although he have be work without intermission since nine o'clock that evening , and have do a long day 's work before dinner . he be walk up and down the spacious unluxurious room , half office , half library , smoke a cigar . upon a large table in the centre of the room stand two powerful reading lamp with green shade , illuminate a chaotic mass of book and pamphlet , heap and scatter all over the table , save just on that spot between the two lamp , which accommodate Mr. Fitzpatrick 's blot pad and inkpot , a pewter inkpot which hold about a pint . 

 ' how d'ye do , Hartfield ? glad you have   look I up at last , ' say the Irishman , as if a midnight call be the most natural thing in the world . ' just come from the House ? ' 

 ' no ; I have   just come from Westmoreland . I think I should find you among those everlasting book of your , late as it be . can I have a few word alone with you ? ' 

 ' certainly . Morgan , you can go away for a bit . ' 

 ' home , sir ? ' 

 ' home well yes , I suppose it be late . you look sleepy . I should have be glad to finish the chapter on Beetroot Sugar to - night but it may stand over for the morning . be sure you be early . ' 

 ' yes , sir , ' the clerk respond with a faint sigh . 

 he be pay handsomely for late hour , liberally reward for his shorthand service ; and yet he wish the great Fitzpatrick have not be quite so industrious . 

 ' now , my dear Hartfield , what can I do for you ? ' ask Fitzpatrick , when the clerk have go . ' I can see by your face that you have   something serious in hand . can I help you ? ' 

 ' you can , I believe , in a very material way . you be five - and - twenty year in Spanish America ? ' 

 ' rather more than less . ' 

 ' here , there , and everywhere ? ' 

 ' yes ; there be not a city in South America that I have not live in for something between a day and a year . ' 

 ' you know something about most man of any mark in that part of the world , I conclude ? ' 

 ' it be my business to know man of all kind . I have my mission from the Spanish Government . I be engage to examine the condition of commerce throughout the colony , the working of protection as against free trade , and so on . strange , by - the - bye , that Cuba , the last place to foster the slave trade , be of all spot of the earth the first to carry free - trade principle into practical effect , long before they be recognise in any european country . ' 

 ' strange to I that you should speak of Cuba so soon after my come in , ' answer Lord Hartfield . ' I be here to ask you to help I to find out the antecedent of a man who hail from that island . ' 

 ' I ought to know something about he , whoever he be , ' reply Mr. Fitzpatrick , briskly . ' I spend six month in Cuba not very long before my return to England . Cuba be one of my fresh memory ; and I have a pretty tight memory for fact , name and figure . never could remember two line of poetry in my life . ' 

 ' do you ever hear of , or meet with , a man call Montesma Gomez de Montesma ? ' 

 ' could not   have stop a month in Havana without hear something about that gentleman , ' answer Fitzpatrick , ' I hope he be not   a friend of your , and that you have not lend he money ? ' 

 ' Neither ; but I want to know all you can tell I about he . ' 

 ' you shall have it in black and white , out of my cuban note - book , ' reply the other , unlock a drawer in the official table ; ' I always take note of anything worth recording , on the spot . a man be a fool who trust to memory , where personal character be at stake . Montesma be as well know at Havana as the Morro Fort or the Tacon Theatre . I have hear story enough about he to fill a big volume ; but all the fact record there ' strike the morocco cover of the note - book ' have be thoroughly sift ; I can vouch for they . ' 

 he look at the index , find the page , and hand the book to Lord Hartfield . 

 ' read for yourself , ' he say , quietly . 

 Lord Hartfield read three or four page of plain statement as to various adventure by sea and land in which Gomez de Montesma have figure , and the reputation which he bear in Cuba and on the Main . 

 ' you can vouch for this ? ' he say at last , after a long silence . 

 ' for every syllable . ' 

 ' the story of his marriage ? ' 

 ' Gospel truth : I know the lady . ' 

 ' and the rest ? ' 

 ' all true . ' 

 ' a thousand thank . I know now upon what ground I stand . I have to save an innocent , high - breed girl from the clutch of a consummate scoundrel . ' 

 ' shoot he , and shoot she , too , if there be no well way of save she . it will be an act of mercy , ' say Mr. Fitzpatrick , without hesitation . 

 CHAPTER XLII . 

 ' shall it be ? ' 


 while Lord Hartfield sit in his friend 's office in Great George Street read the life story of Gomez de Montesma , tell with the cruel precision and the unvarnished language of a criminal indictment , the hero of that history be glide round the spacious ballroom of the Cowes Club , with Lady Lesbia Haselden 's dark - brown head almost recline on his shoulder , her violet eye look up at his every now and then , shyly , entrancingly , as he bend his head to talk to she . 

 the Squadron Ball be in full swing between midnight and the first hour of morning . the flower have not lose their freshness , the odour of dust and feverish human breath have not yet pollute the atmosphere . the window be open to the purple night , the purple sea . the star seem to be close outside the verandah , shin on purpose for the dancer ; and these two the man tall , pale , dark , with flash eye and short , sleek raven hair , small head , noble bearing ; the girl divinely lovely in her marble purity of complexion , her classical grace of form these two be , as every one avow and acknowledge , the handsome couple in the room . 

 ' we be none of we in it compare with they , ' say a young naval commander to his partner , whereupon the young lady look somewhat sourly , and reply that Lady Lesbia 's feature be undeniably regular and her complexion good , but that she be want in soul . 

 ' be she ? ' ask the sailor , incredulously , ' look at she now . what do you call that , if it be not   soul ? ' 

 ' I call it simply disgraceful , ' answer his partner , sharply turn away her head . 

 Lesbia be look up at the Spaniard , her lip faintly part , all her face listen eagerly as she catch some whisper word , breathe among the soft ripple of her hair , from lip that almost touch her brow . People can not go on waltzing for ten minute in a dead silence , like automatic dancer . there must be conversation . only it be well that the lip should do most of the talking . when the eye have so much to say society be apt to be censorious . 

 Mr. Smithson be smoke a cigarette on the lawn with a sporting peer . a man to whom tobacco be a necessity can not be always on guard ; but it be quite possible that in the present state of Lady Lesbia 's feeling Smithson would have have no restraining influence have he be ever so watchful . to what act in the passion drama have her love come to - night as she float round the room , with her head incline towards her lover 's breast , the strong pulsation of his heart sound in her ear , like the rhythmical beat of the bass yonder in Waldteufel 's last waltz ? be there still the uncertainty as to the dťnouement which mark the third act of a good play ? or be there the dread foreboding , the sense of impending doom which should stir the spectator with pity and terror as the fourth act hurry to its passionate close ? who could tell ? she have be full of life and energy to - day on board the yacht during the racing , in which she seem to take an ardent interest . the Cayman have follow the racer for three hour through a freshen sea , much to Lady Kirkbank 's disgust , and Lesbia have be the soul of the party . the same yesterday . the yacht have only get back to Cowes in time for the ball , and all have be hurry and excitement while the lady dress and cross to the club , the spray dash over their opera mantle , poor Lady Kirkbank 's complexion yellow with mal de mer , in spite of a double coating of Blanc de Fedora , the last fashionable cosmetic . 

 to - night Lesbia be curiously silent , depress even , as it seem to those who be interested in observe she ; and all the world be interested in a famous beauty . she be very pale , even her lip be colourless , and the large violet eye and firmly pencil brow alone give colour to her face . she look like a marble statue , the eye and eyebrow accentuate with touch of colour . those lovely eye have a heavy look , as of trouble , weariness ; nay , absolute distress . 

 never have she look less brilliant than to - night ; never have she look more beautiful . it be the loveliness of a newly - awaken soul . the wonderful Pandora - casket of life , with its infinite evil , its little good , have give up its secret . she know what passionate love really mean . she know what such love mostly mean self - sacrifice , surrender of the world 's wealth , severance from friend , the breaking of all old tie . to love as she love mean the crossing of a river more fatal than the Rubicon , the casting of a die more desperate than that which Casar fling upon the board when he take up arm against the Republic . 

 the river be not yet cross , but her foot be on the margin , wet with the ripple of the stream . the fatal die be not yet cast , but the dice - box be in her hand ready for the throw . Lesbia and Montesma dance together not too often , three waltz out of sixteen but when they be so waltz they be the cynosure of the room . that bet of which Maulevrier have hear be rife to - night , and the odd upon the Cuban have go up . it be nine to four now that those two would be over the border before the week be out . 

 Mr. Smithson be not neglectful of his affianced . he take she into the supper - room , where she drink some Moselle cup , but eat nothing . he sit out three or four waltz with she on the lawn , listen to the murmer of the sea , and talk very little . 

 ' you be look wretchedly ill to - night , Lesbia , ' he say , after a dismal silence . 

 ' I be sorry that I should put you to shame by my bad look , ' she answer , with that keen acidity of tone which indicate irritated nerve . 

 ' you know that I do not   mean anything of the kind ; you be always lovely , always the lovely everywhere ; but I do not   like to see you so ghastly pale . ' 

 ' I suppose I be over - fatigued : that I have do too much in London and here . life in Westmoreland be very different , ' she add , with a sigh , and a touch of wonder that the Lesbia Haselden , whose methodical life have never be stir by a ruffle of passion , could have be the same flesh and blood yes , verily , the same woman , whose heart throb so vehemently to - night , whose brain seem on fire . 

 ' be you sure there be nothing the matter ? ' he ask , with a faint quiver in his voice . 

 ' what should there be the matter ? ' 

 ' who can say ? God know that I know no cause for evil . I be honest enough , and faithful enough , Lesbia . but your face to - night be like a presage of calamity , like the dull , livid sky that go before a thunderstorm . ' 

 ' I hope there be no thunderbolt come , ' she answer , lightly . ' what very tall talk about a headache , for really that be all that ail I . Hark , they have begin " my Queen . " I be engage for this waltz . ' 

 ' I be sorry for that . ' 

 ' so be I. I would ever so much rather have stay out here . ' 

 two hour later , in the steely morning light , when sea and land and sky have a metallic look as if light by electricity , Lady Lesbia stand with her chaperon and her affiance husband on the landing stage belong to the club , ready to step into the boat in which six swarthy seaman in red shirt and cap be to row they back to the yacht . Mr. Smithson draw the warm sortie de bal , with its gold - colour satin lining and white fox border , close round Lesbia 's slender form . 

 ' you be shiver , ' he say ; ' you ought to have warm wrap . 

 ' this be warm enough for St. Petersburg . I be only tired very tired . ' 

 ' the Cayman will rock you to sleep . ' 

 Don Gomez be stand close by , wait for his host . the two man be to walk up the hill to Formosa , a village with a classic portico , delightfully situated above the town . 

 ' what time be we to come to breakfast ? ask Mr. Smithson . 

 ' not too early , in mercy 's name . two o'clock in the afternoon , three , four ; why not make it five combine breakfast with afternoon tea , ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank , with a tremendous yawn . ' I never be so thoroughly fag ; I feel as if I have be beat with stick , basti what be its name . ' 

 she be lean all her weight upon Mr. Smithson , as he hand she down the step and into the boat . her normal weight be not a trifle , and this morning she be heavy with champagne and sleep . carefully as Smithson support she she give a lurch at the bottom of the step , and plunge ponderously into the boat , which dip and careen under she , whereat she shriek , and implore Mr. Smithson to save she . 

 all this occupy some minute , and give Lesbia and the Cuban just time for a few word that have to be say somehow . 

 ' good - night , ' say Montesma , as they clasp hand ; ' good - night ; ' and then in a low voice he say , ' well , have you decide at last ? shall it be ? ' 

 she look at he for a moment or so , pale in the starlight , and then murmur an almost inaudible syllable . 

 ' yes . ' 

 he bent quickly and press his lip upon her gloved hand , and when Mr. Smithson look round they two be stand apart , Montesma in a listless attitude , as if tired of wait for his host . 

 it be Smithson who hand Lesbia into the boat and arrange her wrap , and hang over her tenderly as he perform those small office . 

 ' now really , ' he ask , just before the boat put off , ' when be we to be with you to - morrow ? ' 

 ' Lady Kirkbank say not till afternoon tea , but I think you may come a few hour early . I be not at all sleepy . ' 

 ' you look as if you need sleep badly , ' answer Smithson . ' I be afraid you be not half careful enough of yourself . good - night . ' 

 the boat be glide off , the oar dipping , as he speak . how swiftly it shoot from his ken , flash in and out among the yacht , where the lamp be burn dimly in that clear radiance of new - bear day . 

 Montesma give a tremendous yawn as he take out his cigar - case , and he and Mr. Smithson do not say twenty word between they during the walk to Formosa , where servant be sit up , lamp burn , a great silver tray , with brandy , soda , liqueur , coffee , in readiness . 

 CHAPTER XLIII . 

 ' alas , for SORROW be all the end of this ' 


 Lady Kirkbank retire to her cabin directly she get on board the Cayman . 

 ' good - night , child ! I be more than half asleep , ' she say ; ' and I think if there be to be an earthquake an hour hence I should hardly hear it . go to your berth directly , Lesbia ; you look positively awful . I have see girl look bad after ball before now , but I never see such a spectre as you look this morning . ' 

 Poor Georgie 's own complexion leave something to be desire . the Blanc de Fedora have be a brilliant success for the first two hour : after that the warm room begin to tell upon it , and there come a greasiness , then a streakiness , and now all that be leave of an alabaster skin be a livid patch of purplish paint here and there , upon a crow's - foot ground . the eyebrow , too , have give in , and narrow line of Vandyke brown meander down Lady Kirkbank 's cheek . the frizzy hair have go altogether wrong , and have a wild look , suggestive of the witch in Macbeth , and the scraggy neck and poor old shoulder show every year of their age in the ghastly morning light . 

 Lesbia wait in the saloon till Lady Kirkbank have bolt herself into her cabin , and then she go up to the deck wrap in her satin - line , fur - border cloak , and coil herself in a bamboo arm - chair , and nestle her bare head into a turkish pillow , and try to sleep , there with the cool morning breeze blow upon her burn forehead , and the plish - plash of seawater soothe her ear . 

 there be only three or four sailor on deck , weird , almost diabolical - look creature , Lesbia think , in striped shirt , with bare arm , of a shin bronze complexion , flash black eye , sleek raven hair , a sinister look . what specie of man they be Mestizoes , Coolies , Yucatekes she know not , but she feel that they be something wild and strange , and their presence fill she with a vague fear . he , whose influence now rule her life , have tell she that these man be bear mariner , and that she be twenty time safe with they than when the yacht have be under the control of those honest , grin red - whisker English Jack Tars . but she like the english sailor well , all the same ; and she shrink from the faint contact with these tawny - visage stranger , pluck away the train of her gown as they pass her chair , lest they should brush against her drapery . 

 on deck this morning , with only those dark face near , she have a sense of loneliness , of helplessness , of abandonment even . unbidden the image of her home at Grasmere flash into her mind all thing so calm , so perfectly order , such a sense of safety , of home no peril , no temptation , no fever only peace : and she have grow sick to death of peace . she have pray for temp : and the temp have come . 

 there be a heavenly quiet in the air in the early summer morning , only the creaking of a spar , the scream of a seagull now and then . how pale the lamp be grow on board the yacht . Paler still , yellow , and dim , and blur yonder in the town . the eastward face window be golden with the rise sun . yes , this be morning . the yacht be move away yonder , majestical , swan - like , white sail shin against the blue . 

 she close her eye , and try to sleep ; but sleep would not come . she be always listen listen for the dip of oar , listen for a snatch of melody from a mellow baritone whose every accent she know so well . 

 it come at last , the sound her soul long for . she lie among her cushion with closed eye , listen , drink in those rich ripe note as they come near and nearer , to the measure of dip oar , ' La donna e mobile ' 

 Nearer and nearer , until the little boat grind against the hull . she lift her heavy eyelid as Montesma leapt over the gunwale , almost into her arm . he be at her side , kneel by her low chair , kiss the little hand , chill with the freshness of morning . 

 ' my own , my very own , ' he murmur , passionately . 

 he care no more for those copper - face Helots yonder than if they have be make of wood . he have fate in his own hand now , as it seem to he . he go to the skipper and give he some order in Spanish , and then the sail be unfurl , the Cayman spread her broad white wing , and move off among those other yacht which be glide , gliding , glide out to sea , melt from Cowes road like a vision that fadeth with the broad light of morning . 

 when the sail be up and the yacht be run merrily through the water , Montesma go back to Lady Lesbia , and they two sit side by side , gild and glorify in the vivid light of sunrise , talk as they have never talk before , her head upon his shoulder , a smile of ineffable peace upon her lip , as of a weary child that have find rest . 

 they be sail for Havre , and at Havre they be to be marry by the english chaplain , and from Havre they be to sail for the Havana , and to live there ever afterwards in a fairy - tale dream of bliss , break only by an annual visit to Paris , just to buy gown and bonnet . Surrendered be all Lesbia 's ambitious hope forget go ; her desire to reign princess paramount in the kingdom of fashion her thirst to be wealthy among the wealthy go forget . her dream now be of the dolce far niente of a tropical climate , a boudoir giving on the caribbean sea , cigarette , coffee , night spend in a foreign opera house , the languid , reposeful existence of a spanish dama with he , with he . it be for his sake that she have modify all her idea of life . to be with he she would have be content to dwell in the tent of the Patagonians , on the wild and snow - clothe Pampas . a love which be strong enough to make her sacrifice duty , the world , her fair fame as a well - breed woman , be a love that recke but little of the path along which her lover 's hand be to lead . for he , to be with he , she renounce the world . the rest do not count . 

 the summer hour glide past they . the Cayman be far out at sea ; all the other yacht have vanish , and they be alone amidst the blue , with only a solitary three - master yonder , on the edge of the horizon . More than once Lesbia have talk of go below to change her ball gown for the attire of everyday life ; but each time her lover have detain she a little long , have plead for a few more word . Lady Kirkbank would be astir presently , and there would be no more solitude for they till they be marry , and could shake she off altogether . so Lesbia stay , and those two drink the cup of bliss , hush by the monotonous sing - song of the sea , the rhythm of the swing sail . but now it be broad morning . the hour when society , however late it may keep its revel overnight , be apt to awaken , be it only to call for a cup of strong tea and to turn again on the pillow of lassitude , after that refreshment , like the sluggard of Holy Writ . at ten o'clock the sun send his golden arrow across the silken coverlet of her berth and awaken Lady Kirkbank , who open her eye and look about languidly . the little cabin be heave itself up and down in a curious way ; Mr. Smithson 's cigar - case be slop as if they be go to fall upon Lady Kirkbank 's couch , and the look - glass , with all its dainty appliance , be make an angle of forty - five degree . there be more swirling and washing of water against the hull than ever Georgie Kirkbank have hear in Cowes Roads . 

 ' mercy on I ! this horrid thing must be move , ' she exclaim to the empty air . ' it must have break loose in the night . ' 

 she have no confidence in those savage - look sailor , and she have a vision of the yacht drift at the mercy of wind and wave , drift for day , week , and month ; drift to the German Ocean , drift to the North Pole . Mr. Smithson and Montesma on shore no one on board to exercise authority over those fearful man . 

 perhaps they have mutiny , and be carry off the yacht as their booty , with Lesbia and her chaperon , and all their gown . 

 ' I be almost glad that harpy Seraphine have my diamond , ' think poor georgie , ' or I should have have they with I on board this hateful boat . ' 

 and then she rap vehemently against the panel of the cabin , and scream for Rilboche , whose den be adjacent . 

 Rilboche , who detest the sea , make her appearance after some delay , look even green than her mistress , who , in rise from her berth , already begin to suffer the agony of sea - sickness . 

 ' what do this mean ? ' exclaim Lady Kirkbank ; ' and where be we go ? ' 

 ' that be what I should like to know , my lady . but I daresay Lady Lesbia and Mr. Montesma can tell you . they be both on deck . ' 

 ' Montesma ! why , we leave he on shore ! ' 

 ' yes , my lady , but he come on board at five o'clock this morning . I look at my watch when I hear he land , and he and Lady Lesbia have be sit on deck ever since . ' 

 ' and now it be ten . five hour on deck impossible ! ' 

 ' time do not   seem long when one be happy , my lady , ' murmur Rilboche , in her own language . 

 ' help I to dress this instant , ' scream her mistress : ' that dreadful Spaniard be elope with we . ' 

 despite the hideous depression of that malady which strike down Kaiser and beggar with the same rough hand , Lady Kirkbank contrive to get herself dress decently , and to stagger up the companion to that part of the deck where the persian carpet be spread , and the bamboo chair and table be set out under the striped awning . Lesbia and her lover be sit together , he give she a first lesson in the art of smoke a cigarette . he have tell she playfully that every man , woman , and child in Cuba be a smoker , and she have besought he to let she begin , and now , with infinite coquetry , be take her first lesson . 

 ' you shameless minx ! ' exclaim Georgie , pale with anger . 

 ' where be Smithson my poor , good Smithson ? ' 

 ' fast asleep in his bed at Formosa , I hope , dear Lady Kirkbank , ' the Cuban answer , with perfect sang froid . ' Smithson be out of it , as you idiomatic English say . I hope , Lady Kirkbank , you will be as kind to I as you have be to Smithson ; and depend upon it I shall make Lady Lesbia as good a husband as ever Smithson could have do . ' 

 ' you ! ' exclaim the matron , contemptuously . ' you ! - a foreigner , an adventurer , who may be as poor as Job , for anything I know about you . ' 

 ' Job be once rather comfortably off , Lady Kirkbank ; and I can answer for it that Montesma 's wife will know none of the pang of poverty . ' 

 ' if you be a beggar I would not care , ' say Lesbia , draw nearer to he . 

 they have both rise at Lady Kirkbank 's approach , and be stand side by side , confront she . Lesbia have shrink from the idea of poverty with John Hammond ; yet , for this man 's sake , she be ready to face penury , ruin , disgrace , anything . 

 ' do you mean to tell I that Lord Maulevrier 's sister , a young lady under my charge , answerable to I for her conduct , be capable of jilt the man to whom she have solemnly bind herself , in order to marry you ? ' demand Lady Kirkbank , turn to Montesma . 

 ' yes ; that be what I be go to do , ' answer Lesbia , boldly . ' it would be a great sin to keep my promise than to break it . I never like that man , and you know it . you badger I into accept he , against my own well judgment . you drift I so deeply into debt that I be willing to marry a man I loathe in order to get my debt pay . this be what you do for the girl place under your charge . but , thank God , I have release myself from your clutch . I be go far away to a new world , where the memory of my old life can not follow I . People may be angry or pleased ! I do not care . I shall be the wife of the man I have choose out of all the world for my husband the man God make to be my master . ' 

 ' you be - - ' gasp Lady Kirkbank . ' I can not   say what you be . I never in my life feel so tempt to use improper language . ' 

 ' Dear Lady Kirkbank , be reasonable , ' plead Montesma ; ' you can have no interest in see Lesbia marry to a man she dislike . ' 

 Georgia redden a little , remember that she be interested to the amount of some thousand in the Smithson and Haselden alliance ; but she take a high ground than mercenary consideration . 

 ' I be interested in do the very good for a young lady who have be entrust to my care , the granddaughter of an old friend , ' she answer , with dignity . ' I have no objection to you in the abstract , Don Gomez . you have always be vastly civil , I be sure - - ' 

 ' stand by we in our day of need , Lady Kirkbank , and you will find I the staunch friend you ever have . ' 

 ' I be bind in honour to consider Mr. Smithson , Lesbia , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' I wonder that a decently - bring up girl can behave so abominably . ' 

 ' it would be more abominable to marry a man I detest . I have make up my mind , Lady Kirkbank . we shall be at Havre to - morrow morning , and we shall be married to - morrow shall we not , Gomez ? ' 

 she let her head sink upon his breast , and his arm enfold she . thus shelter , she feel safe , thus and thus only . she have throw her cap over the mill ; snap her finger at society ; care not a jot what the world might think or say of she . this man would she marry and no other ; this man 's fortune would she follow for good or evil . he have that kind of influence with woman which be almost ' possession . ' it smell of brimstone . 

 ' come , my dear good soul , ' say Montesma , smile at the angry matron , ' why not take thing quietly ? you have have a good many girl under your wing ; and you must know that youth and maturity see life from a different standpoint . in your eye my old friend Smithson be an admirable match . you measure he by his house , his stable , his banker 's book ; but Lesbia would rather marry the man she love , and take the risk of his fate . I be not a pauper , Lady Kirkbank , and the home to which I shall take my love be pretty enough for a princess of the blood royal , and for her sake I shall grow rich yet , ' he add , with his eye kindling ; ' and if you care to pay we a visit next February in our parisian apartment I will promise you as pleasant a nest as you can wish to occupy . ' 

 ' how do I know that you will ever bring she back to Europe ? ' say Lady Kirkbank , piteously . ' how do I know that you will not bury she alive in your savage country , among blackamoor , like those horrid sailor , over there kill she , perhaps , when you be tired of she ? ' 

 at these word of Lady Kirkbank 's , fling out at random , Montesma blanch , and his deep black eye meet her with a strangely sinister look . 

 ' yes , ' she cry , hysterically ' kill she , kill she ! you look as if you could do it . ' 

 Lesbia nestle close to her lover 's heart . 

 ' how dare you say such thing to he , ' she cry , angrily . ' I trust he , do not   you see ; trust he with my whole heart , with all my soul . I shall be his wife to - morrow , for good or evil . ' 

 ' very much for evil , I be afraid , ' say Lady Kirkbank . ' perhaps you will be kind enough to come to your cabin and take off that ball gown , and make yourself just a little less disreputable in outward appearance , while I get a cup of tea . ' 

 Lesbia obey , and go down to her cabin , where Kibble be wait with a fresh white muslin frock and all its belonging , lay out ready for her mistress , sorely perplex at the turn which affair be take . she have never like Horace Smithson , although he have give she tip which be almost a provision for her old age ; but she have think it a good thing that her mistress , who be frightfully extravagant , should marry a millionaire ; and now they be sail over the sea with a lot of coloured sailor , and the millionaire be leave on shore . 

 Lady Kirkbank go into the saloon , where breakfast be lay ready , and where the steward be in attendance with that air of be absolutely unconscious of any domestic disturbance , which be the mark of a well - train servant . 

 Lesbia appear in something less than an hour , newly dressed and fresh looking , in her pure white gown , her brown hair bind in a coronet round her small greek head . she sit down by Lady Kirkbank 's side , and try to coax she into good humour . 

 ' why can not   you take thing pleasantly , dear ? ' she plead . ' do now , like a good soul . you hear he say he be well off , and that he will take I to Paris next winter , and you can come to we there on your way from Cannes , and stay with we till Easter . it will be so nice when the Prince and all the good people be in Paris . we shall only stay in Cuba till the fuss about my run away be all over , and people have forget , do not   you know . as for Mr. Smithson , why should I have any more compunction about jilt he than he have about that poor Miss Trinder ? by - the - bye , I want you to send he back all his present for I . they be almost all in Arlington Street . I bring nothing with I except my engagement ring , ' look down at the half - hoop of diamond , and pull it off her finger as she talk . ' I have a kind of presentiment - - ' 

 ' you mean that you have make up your mind to throw he over . ' 

 ' no . but I feel there be breaker ahead . it might have come to throw myself into the sea . perhaps you would have like that well than what have happen . ' 

 ' I do not   know , I be sure . the whole thing be disgraceful . London will ring with the scandal . what be I to say to Lady Maulevrier , to your brother ? and pray how do you propose to get marry at Havre ? you can not be marry in a french town by merely hold up your finger . there be no registry office . I be sure I have no idea how the thing be do . ' 

 ' Don Gomez have arrange all that everything have be think of everything have be plan . a steamer will take we to St. Thomas , and another steamer will take we on to Cuba . ' 

 ' but the marriage the licence ? ' 

 ' I tell you everything have be provide for . please take this ring and send it to Mr. Smithson when you go back to England . ' 

 ' send it to he yourself . I will have nothing to do with it . ' 

 ' how dreadfully disagreeable you be , ' say Lesbia , pouting , ' just because I be marry to please myself , instead of to please you . it be frightfully selfish of you . ' 

 Montesma come in at this moment . he , too , have dress himself freshly , and be look his handsome , in that buccaneer style of costume which he wear when he sail the yacht . he and Lesbia breakfast at their ease , while Lady Kirkbank recline in her bamboo arm - chair , feel very unhappy in her mind and far from well . Neptune and she could not accommodate themselves . 

 after a leisurely breakfast , enliven by talk and laughter , the cabin window open , the sun shin , the freshen breeze blow in , Lesbia and Don Gomez go on deck , and he recline at her foot while she read to he from the page of her favourite Keats , read languidly , lazily , yet exquisitely , for she have be teach to read as well as to sing . the poetry seem to have be write on purpose for they ; and the sky and the atmosphere around they seem to have be make for the poetry . and so , with interval of stroll on the deck , and an hour or so dawdle away at luncheon , and a leisurely afternoon tea , the day wear on to sunset , and they go back to Keats , while Lady Kirkbank sulk and sleep in a corner of the saloon . 

 ' this be the happy day of my life , ' Lesbia murmur , in a pause of their reading , when they have drop endymion 's love to talk of their own . 

 ' but not of mine , my angel . I shall be happy still when we be far away on broad water , beyond the reach of all who can part we . ' 

 ' can any one part we , Gomez , now that we have pledge ourselves to each other ? ' she ask , incredulously . 

 ' ah , love , such pledge be sometimes break . all woman be not lion - hearte . while the sea be smooth and the ship run fair , all be easy enough ; but when tempest and peril come that be the test , Lesbia . will you stand by I in the temp , love ? ' 

 ' you know that I will , ' she answer , with her hand lock in his two hand , clasp as with a life - long clasp . 

 she could not imagine any severe ordeal to be go through . if Maulevrier hear of her elopement in time for pursuit , there would be a fuss , perhaps an angry bother rag and fuming . but what of that ? she be her own mistress . Maulevrier could not prevent her marrying whomsoever she please . 

 ' swear that you will hold to I against all the world , ' he say , passionately , turn his head to look across the stern of the vessel . 

 ' against all the world , ' she answer , softly . 

 ' I believe your courage will be test before long , ' he say ; and then he cry to the skipper , ' crowd on all sail , Tomaso . that boat be chase we . ' 

 Lesbia spring to her foot , look as he look to a spot of vivid white on the horizon . Montesma have snatch up a glass and be watch that distant spot . 

 ' it be a steam - yacht , ' he say . ' they will catch we . ' 

 he be right . although the Cayman strain every timber so that her keel cut through the water like a boomerang , wind and steam beat wind without steam . in less than an hour the steam - yacht be beside the Cayman , and Lord Maulevrier and Lord Hartfield have board Mr. Smithson 's deck . 

 ' I have come to take you and Lady Kirkbank back to Cowes , Lesbia , ' say Maulevrier . ' I be not go to make any undue fuss about this little escapade of your , provide you go back with Hartfield and I at once , and pledge yourself never to hold any further communication with Don Gomez de Montesma . ' 

 the Spaniard be stand close by , silent , white as death , but ready to make a good fight . that pallor of the clear olive skin be not from want of pluck ; but there be the deadly knowledge of the ground he stand upon , the doubt that any woman , least of all such a woman as Lady Lesbia Haselden , could be true to he if his character and antecedent be reveal to she . and how much or how little these two man could tell she about himself or his past life be the question which the next few minute would solve . 

 ' I be not go back with you , ' answer Lesbia . ' I be go to Havre with Don Gomez de Montesma . we be to be marry there as soon as we arrive . ' 

 ' to be marry at Havre , ' cry Maulevrier . ' an appropriate place . a sailor have a wife in every port , do not   you know . ' 

 ' we have well go down to the cabin , ' say Hartfield , lay his hand upon his friend 's shoulder . ' if Lady Lesbia will be good enough to come with we we can tell she all that we have to tell quietly there . ' 

 Lord Hartfield 's tone be unmistakeable . everything be know . 

 ' you can talk at your ease here , ' say Montesma , face the two man with a diabolical recklessness and insolence of manner . ' not one of these fellow on board know a dozen sentence of English . ' 

 ' I would rather talk below , if it be all the same to you , Senor ; and I should be glad to speak to Lady Lesbia alone . ' 

 ' that you shall not do unless she desire it , ' answer Montesma . 

 ' no , he shall hear all that you have to say . he shall hear how I answer you , ' say Lesbia . 

 Lord Hartfield shrug his shoulder . 

 ' as you please , ' he say . ' it will make the disclosure a little more painful than it need have be ; but that can not be help . ' 

 CHAPTER XLIV . 

 ' OH , SAD KISSED MOUTH , how SORROWFUL it be ! ' 


 they all go down to the saloon , where Lady Kirkbank sit , look the image of despair , which change to delighted surprise at sight of Lord Hartfield and his friend . 

 ' do you give your consent to my sister 's elopement with this man , Lady Kirkbank ? ' Maulevrier ask , brusquely . 

 ' I give my consent ! good gracious ! no . he have elope with I ever so much more than with your sister . she know all about it , I have   no doubt : but the wretch run away with I in my sleep . ' 

 ' I be glad , for your own self - respect , that you have no hand in this disgraceful business , ' reply Maulevrier ; and then turn to Lord Hartfield , he say , ' Hartfield , will you tell my sister who and what this man be ? will you make she understand what kind of pitfall she have escape ? upon my soul , I can not speak of it . ' 

 ' I recognise no right of Lord Hartfield 's to interfere with my action , and I will hear nothing that he may have to say , ' say Lesbia , stand by her lover 's side , with head erect and eye dark with anger . 

 ' your sister 's husband have the strong right to control your action , Lady Lesbia , when the family honour be at stake , ' answer Hartfield , with grave authority . ' accept I at least as a member of your family , if you will not accept I as your disinterested and devoted friend . ' 

 ' friend ! ' echo Lesbia , scornfully . ' you might have be my friend once . your friendship then would have be of some value to I , if you have tell I the truth , instead of approach I with a lie upon your lip . you talk of honour , Lord Hartfield ; you , who come to my grandmother 's house as an impostor , under a false name ! ' 

 ' I go there as a man stand on his own merit , assume no rank save that which God give he among his fellow - man , claim to be possess of no fortune except intellect and industry . if I could not win a wife with such credential , it be well for I never to marry at all , Lady Lesbia . but we have no time to speak of the past . I be here as your brother 's friend , here to save you . ' 

 ' to part I from the man to whom I have give my heart . that you can not do . Gomez , why do you not speak ? tell he , tell he ! ' cry Lesbia , with a voice strangle by sob ; ' tell he that I be to be your wife to - morrow , at Havre . your wife ! ' 

 ' Dear Lady Lesbia , that can not be , ' say Lord Hartfield , sorrowfully , pity she in her helplessness , as he might have pity a young bird in the fowler 's net . ' I be assure upon undeniable authority that Senor Montesma have a wife live at Cuba ; and even be this not so be he free to marry you his character and antecedent would for ever forbid such a marriage . ' 

 ' a wife ! no , no , no ! ' shriek Lesbia , look wildly from one to the other . ' it be a lie a lie , invent by my brother , who always hat I by you , who fool and deceive I ! it be a lie , an infamous invention ! Don Gomez , speak to they : for pity 's sake answer they ! do not   you see that they be drive I mad ? ' 

 she fling herself into his arm , she bury she dishevel head upon his breast ; she cling to he with hand that writhe convulsively in her agony . 

 Maulevrier spring across the cabin and wrench she from her lover 's grasp . 

 ' you shall not pollute she with your touch , ' he cry ; ' you have poison her mind already . Scoundrel , seducer , slave - dealer ! do you hear , Lesbia ? shall I tell you what this man be what trade he follow yonder , on his native island this spanish hidalgo this all - accomplish gentleman lineal descendant of the Cid fine flower of andalusian chivalry ? it be not enough for he to cheat at card , to float bubble company , bogus lottery . his profligate extravagance , his love of sybarite luxury , require a large resource than the petty scheme which enrich small man . a slave ship , which could earn nearly twenty thousand pound on every voyage , and which could make two run in a year that be the trade for Don Gomez de Montesma , and he carry it on merrily for six or seven year , till the british cruiser get too keen for he , and the good old game be play out . you see that scar upon the hidalgo 's forehead , Lesbia a token of knightly prowess , you think , perhaps . no , my girl , that be the mark of an english cutlass in a scuffle on board a slaver . a merry trade , Lesbia the live cargo stow close under hatch have rather a bad time of it now and then short ration of food and water , yellow Jack . they die like rotten sheep sometimes bad then for the dealer . but if he can land the bulk of his human ware safe and sound the profit be enormous . the Captain - General take his capitation fee , the blackie be draft off to the sugar plantation , and everybody be satisfied ; but I think , Lesbia , that your british prejudice would go against marriage with a slave - trader , be he ever so free to make you his wife , which this particular dealer in blackamoor be not . ' 

 ' be this true , this part of their vile story ? ' demand Lesbia , look at her lover , who stand apart from they all now , his arm fold , his face deadly pale , the low lip quiver under the grinding of his strong white tooth . 

 ' there be some truth in it , ' he answer , hoarsely . ' everybody in Cuba have a finger in the african trade , before your british philanthropy spoil it . Mr. Smithson make sixty thousand pound in that line . it be the foundation of his fortune . and yet he have his misfortune in run his cargo a ship burn , a freight roast alive . there be some very black story in Cuba against poor Smithson . he will never go there again . ' 

 ' Mr. Smithson may be a scoundrel ; indeed , I believe he be a pretty bad speciman in that line , ' say Lord Hartfield . ' but I doubt if there be any story that can be tell of he quite so bad as the history of your marriage , and the event that go before it . I have be tell the story of the beautiful Octoroon , who love and trust you , who share your good and evil fortune for the most desperate year of your life , be almost accept as your wife , and whose strangle corpse be find in the harbour while the bell be ring for your marriage with a rich planter 's heiress the lady who , no doubt , now patiently await your return to her native island . ' 

 ' she will wait a long time , ' say Montesma , ' or fare ill if I go back to she . Lesbia , his lordship 's story of the Octoroon be a fable an invention of my cuban enemy , who hate we old Spaniards with a poisonous hatred . but this much be true . I be a married man bind , fetter by a tie which I abhor . our Havre marriage would have be bigamy on my part , a delusion on your . I could not have take you to Cuba . I have plan our life in a fairer , more civilised world . I be rich enough to have surround you with all that make life worth live . I would have give you love as true and as deep as ever man give to woman . all that would have be want would have be the legality of the tie : and as law never yet make a marriage happy which lack the element of bliss , our lawless union need not have miss happiness . Lesbia , you say that you would hold by I , come what might . the bad have come , love ; but it leave I not the less your true lover . ' 

 she look at he with wild despairing eye , and then , with a hoarse strange cry , rush from the cabin , and up the companion , with a desperate swiftness which seem like the flight of a bird . Montesma , Hartfield , Maulevrier , all follow she , heedless of everything except the dire necessity of arrest her flight . each in his own mind have divine her purpose . 

 they be not too late . it be Hartfield 's strong arm that catch she , hold she as in a vice , drag she away from the edge of the deck , just where there be a space open to the wave . another instant and she would have fling herself overboard . she fall back into Lord Hartfield 's arm , with a wild choking cry : ' let I go ! let I go ! ' another moment , and a flood of crimson stain his shirt - front , as she lie upon his breast , with closed eyelid and blood - bedabble lip , in blessed unconsciousness . 

 they carry she on to the steam - yacht , and down to the cabin , where there be ample accommodation and some luxury , although not the elegance of Bond Street upholstery . Rilboche , Lady Kirkbank , Kibble , luggage of all kind be transfer from one yacht to the other , even to the vellum bind Keats which lie face downwards on the deck , just where Lesbia have fling it when the Cayman be board . the crew of the steam - yacht Philomel help in the transfer : there be plenty of hand , and the work be do quickly ; while the Meztizoes , Yucatekes , Caribs , or whatever they be , look on and grin ; and while Montesma stand lean against the mast , with fold arm and sombre brow , a cigarette between his lip . 

 when the woman and all their belonging be on board the Philomel , Lord Hartfield address himself to Montesma . 

 ' if you consider yourself entitle to call I to account for this evening 's work you know where to find I , ' he say . 

 Montesma shrug his shoulder , and throw away his cigarette with a contemptuous gesture . 

 ' ce n'est pas la peine , ' he say ; ' I be a dead shot , and should be pretty sure to send a bullet through you if you give I the chance ; but I should not be any nearer win she if I kill you : and it be she and she only that I want . you may think I an adventurer swindler gambler slave - dealer what you will but I love she as I never think to love a woman , and I should have be true as steel , if she have be plucky enough to trust I . but , as I tell she an hour ago , woman have not lion heart . they can talk tall while the sky be clear and the sun shin , but at the first crack of thunder va te promener . ' 

 ' if you have kill she ' begin Hartfield . 

 ' kill she ! no . some small bloodvessel burst in the agitation of that terrible scene . she will be well in a week , and she will forget I . but I shall not forget she . she be the one flower that have spring on the barren plain of my life . she be my Picciola . ' 

 he turn his back on Lord Hartfield and walk to the other end of the deck . something in his face , in the vibration of his deep voice , convince Hartfield of his truth . a bad man undoubtedly steep to the lip in evil and yet so far true that he have passionately , deeply , devotedly love this one woman . 

 it be the dead of night when Lesbia recover consciousness , and even then she lie silent , take no heed of those around she , in a state of utter prostration . Kibble nurse she carefully , tenderly , all through the night ; Maulevrier hardly leave the cabin , and Lady Kirkbank , always more or less a victim to the agony of sea - sickness , still find time to utter lamentation and wailing over the ruin of her protťgťe 's fortune . 

 ' never have a girl such a chance , ' she moan . ' quite the good match in society . the house in Park Lane alone cost a fortune . her diamond would have be the fine in London . ' 

 ' they would have be stain with the blood of the nigger he trade in out yonder , ' answer Maulevrier . ' do you think I would have let my sister marry a slave - dealer ? ' 

 ' I do not   believe a syllable of it , ' protest Lady Kirkbank , dab her brow with a handkerchief steep in eau de Cologne . ' a vile fabrication of Montesma 's , who want to blacken poor Smithson 's character in order to extenuate his own crime . ' 

 ' well , we will not   go into that question , ' say Maulevrier wearily . ' the Smithson match be off , anyhow ; and it matter very little to we whether he make most money out of nigger or bubble company , or lottery or gaming hell . ' 

 ' I be convinced that Smithson make his fortune in a thoroughly gentlemanlike manner , ' argue Lady Kirkbank . ' look at the people who visit he , and the house he go to . and I do not   see why the match need be off . I be sure , if Lesbia play her card properly , he will look over this this little escapade . ' 

 Maulevrier contemplate the worldly old face with infinite scorn . 

 ' do she look like a girl who will play her card in your fashion ? ' he ask , point to his sister , whose white face upon the pillow seem like a mask cut out of marble . ' upon my soul , Lady Kirkbank , I consider my sister 's elopement with this spanish adventurer , with whom she be over head and ear in love , a far more respectable act than her engagement to Smithson , for whom she care not a straw . ' 

 ' well , I hope if you so approve of her conduct you will help she to pay her dressmaker , and the rest of they , ' retort Lady Kirkbank . ' she have be plunge rather deeply , I believe , under the impression that Smithson would pay all her bill when she be marry . your grandmother may not quite like the budget . ' 

 ' I will do all I can for she , ' answer Maulevrier . ' I would do a great deal to save she from the degradation to which your teaching have bring she . ' 

 Lady Kirkbank look at he for a moment or so with reproachful eye , and then shrug her shoulder contemptuously . 

 ' if I ever expect gratitude from people I might feel the injustice the insolence of your last remark , ' she say ; ' but as I never do expect gratitude , I be not disappoint in this case . and now I think if there be a cabin which I can have to myself I should like to retire to it , ' she add . ' my care be throw away here . ' 

 there be a cabin at Lady Kirkbank 's disposal . it have be already appropriate by Rilboche , and smell of cognac ; but Rilboche resign her berth to her mistress , and lay herself meekly on the floor for the rest of the voyage . 

 they be in Cowes road at eight o'clock next morning , and Lord Hartfield go on shore for a doctor , whom he bring back before nine , and who pronounce Lady Lesbia to be in a very weak and prostrate condition , and forbid she be move within the next two day . happily Lord Hartfield have borrow the Philomel and her crew from a friend who have give he carte blanche as to the use he make of she , and who freely leave she at his disposal so long as he and his party should need the accommodation . Lesbia could nowhere be well off than on the yacht , where she be away from the gossip and tittle - tattle of the town . 

 the roadstead be quiet enough now . all the racing yacht have melt away like a dream , and most of the pleasure yacht be off to Ryde . Lady Lesbia lie in her curtained cabin , with Kibble keeping watch beside her bed , while Maulevrier come in every half - hour to see how she be sit by she a little now and then , and talk of indifferent thing in a low kind voice , which be full of comfort . 

 she seem grateful for his kindness , and smile at he once in a way , with a piteous little smile ; but she have the air of one in whom the mainspring of life be break . the pallid face and heavy violet eye , the semi - transparent hand which lie so listlessly upon the crimson coverlet , convey an impression of supreme despair . Hartfield , look down at she for the last time when he come to say good - bye before leave for London , be remind of the story of one whose life have be thus rudely break , who have love as foolishly and even more fondly , and for whom the world hold nothing when that tie be sever . 

 ' she look on many a face with vacant eye , 
 on many a token without know what ; 
 she see they watch she , without ask why , 
 and recke not who around her pillow sit . ' 
 but Lesbia Haselden belong to a wide and more sophisticated world than that of the daughter of the Grecian Isle , and for her existence offer wide horizon . it might be prophesy that for she the dark ending of a girlish dream would not be a life - long despair . the passionate love have be at fever point ; the passionate grief must have its fever too , and burn itself out . 

 ' do all you can to cheer she , ' say Lord Hartfield to Maulevrier , ' and bring she to Fellside as soon as ever she be strong enough to bear the journey . you and Kibble , with your own man , will be able to do all that be necessary . ' 

 ' quite able . ' 

 ' that be right . I must be in the House for the expect division to - night , and I shall go back to Grasmere to - morrow morning . poor Mary be horribly lonely . ' 

 Lord Hartfield go off in the boat to catch the Southampton steamer ; and Maulevrier be now sole custodian of the yacht and of his sister . he and the doctor have agree to keep she on board , in the fresh sea air , till she be equal to the fatigue of the journey to Grasmere . there be nothing to be gain by take she on to the island or by carry she to London . the yacht be well find , provide with all thing needful for comfort , and Lesbia could be nowhere well off until she be safe in her old home : that home she have leave so gaily , in the freshness of her youthful inexperience , nearly a year ago , and to which she would return so battered and break , so deeply degrade by the knowledge of evil . 

 Lady Kirkbank have start for London on the previous day . 

 ' I be evidently not want here , ' she say , with an offend air ; ' and I must have everything at Kirkbank ready for a house full of people before the twelfth of August , so the soon I get to Scotland the well . I shall make a dťtour in order to go and see Lady Maulevrier on my way down . it be due to myself that I should let she know that I be entirely blameless in this most uncomfortable business . ' 

 ' you can tell her ladyship what you please , ' answer Maulevrier , bluntly . ' I shall not gainsay you , so long as you do not slander my sister ; but as long as I live I shall regret that I , know something of London society , do not interfere to prevent Lesbia be give over to your keeping . ' 

 ' if I have know the kind of girl she be I would have have nothing to do with she , ' retort Lady Kirkbank with exasperation ; and so they part . 

 the Philomel have be lie off Cowes three day before Mr. Smithson appear upon the scene . he have get wind somehow from a sailor , who have talk with one of the foreign crew , of the destination of the Cayman , and he have cross from Southampton to Havre on the steamer Wolf during that night in which Lesbia have be carry back to Cowes on the Philomel . 

 he be at Havre when the Cayman arrive , with Montesma and his tawny - visage crew on board , no one else . 

 ' you may examine every corner of your ship , ' Montesma cry , scornfully , when Smithson come on board and swear that Lesbia must be hide somewhere in the vessel . ' the bird have fly : she will shelter in neither your nest nor in mine , Smithson . you have lose she and so have I. we may as well be friend in misfortune . ' 

 he be haggard , livid with grief and anger . he look ten year old than he have look the other night at the ball , when his dash and swagger , and handsome spanish head have be the admiration of the room . 

 Smithson be very angry , but he be not a fight man . he have enjoy various opportunity for distinguish himself in that line in the island of Cuba ; but he have always avoid such opportunity . so now , after a good deal of bluster and violent language , which Montesma take as lightly as if it have be the whistling of the wind in the shroud , poor Smithson calm down , and allow Gomez de Montesma to leave the yacht , with his portmanteaux , unharmed . he mean to take the first steamer for the spanish Main , he tell Smithson . he have have quite enough of Europe . 

 ' I daresay it will end in your marry she , ' he say , at the last moment . ' if you do , be kind to she . ' 

 his voice falter , choke by a sob , at those last word . after all , it be possible for a man without principle , without morality , to begin to make love to a woman in a mere spirit of adventure , in sheer devilry , and to be rather hard hit at the last . 

 Horace Smithson sail his yacht back to Cowes without loss of time , and send his card to Lord Maulevrier on board the Philomel . his lordship reply that he would wait upon Mr. Smithson that afternoon at four o'clock , and at that hour Maulevrier again board the Cayman ; but this time very quietly , as an expect guest . 

 the interview that follow be very painful . Mr. Smithson be willing that this unhappy episode in the life of his betrothed , this folly into which she have be beguile by a man of infinite treachery , a man of all other man fatal to woman , should be forget , should be as if it have never be . 

 ' it be her very innocence which make she a victim to that scoundrel , ' say Smithson , ' her girlish simplicity and Lady Kirkbank 's folly . but I love your sister too well to sacrifice she lightly , Lord Maulevrier ; and if she can forget this midsummer madness , why , so can i. ' 

 ' she can not forget , Mr. Smithson , ' answer Maulevrier , gravely . ' she have do you a great wrong by listen to your false friend 's address ; but she do you a still great wrong when she accept you as her husband without one spark of love for you . she and you be both happy in have escape the degradation , the deep misery of a loveless union . I be glad yes , glad even of this shameful escapade with Montesma though it have drag her good name through the gutter , glad of the catastrophe that have save she from such a marriage . you be very generous in your willingness to forget my sister 's folly . let your forgetfulness go a step far , and forget that you ever meet she . ' 

 ' that can not be , Lord Maulevrier . she have ruin my life . ' 

 ' not at all . an affair of a season , ' answer Maulevrier , lightly . ' next year I shall hear of you as the accepted husband of some new beauty . a man of Mr. Smithson 's wealth and good nature need not languish in single blessedness . ' 

 with this civil speech Lord Maulevrier go back to the Philomel 's gig , and this be his last meeting with Mr. Smithson , until they meet a year later in the beat track of society . 

 CHAPTER XLV . 

 ' that FELL ARREST , without all BAIL . ' 


 it be the beginning of August before Lesbia be pronounce equal to the fatigue of a long journey ; and even then it be but the shadow of her former self which return to Fellside , the pale spectre of joy depart , of trust deceive . 

 Maulevrier have be very good to she , patient , unselfish as a woman , in his ministering to the break - hearted girl . that broken heart would be whole again , no doubt , in the future , as many other break heart have be ; but the grief , the despair , the sense of hopelessness and aimlessness in life be very real in the present . if the picturesque seclusion of Fellside have seem dull and joyless to Lesbia in day go by , it be much dull to she now . she be shock at the change in her grandmother , and she show a good deal of feeling and affection in her intercourse with the invalid ; but once out of her presence Lady Maulevrier be forget , and Lesbia 's thought drift back into the old current . they dwelt obstinately , unceasingly upon Montesma , the man whose influence have awaken the slumber soul from its torpor , have stir the deep of a passionate nature . 

 slave - dealer , gambler , adventurer , liar his name blacken by the suspicion of a still dark crime . she shudder at the thought of the villain from whose snare she have be rescue : and yet , his image as he have be to she in the brief golden time when she believe he noble , and chivalrous , and true , haunt her lonely day , mix itself with her troubled dream , come between she and every other thought . 

 everybody be good to she . that pale and joyless face , that look of patient , hopeless suffering which she try to disguise every now and then with a faint forced smile , and silvery little ripple of society laughter , seem unconsciously to implore pity and pardon . Lady Maulevrier utter no word of reproach . ' my dearest , Fate have not be kind to you , ' she say , gently , after tell Lesbia of Lady Kirkbank 's visit . ' the handsome woman be seldom the happy . destiny seem to have a grudge against they . and if thing have go amiss it be I who be most to blame . I ought never to have entrust you with such a woman as Georgina Kirkbank . but you will be happy next season , I hope , dearest . you can live with Mary and Hartfield . they will take care of you . ' 

 Lesbia shudder . 

 ' do you think I be go back to the society treadmill ? ' she exclaim . ' no , I have do with the world . I shall end my day here , or in a convent . ' 

 ' you think so now , dear , but you will change your mind by - and - by . a fancy that have last only a few week can not alter your life . it will pass as other dream have pass . at your age you have the future before you . ' 

 ' no , it be the past that be always before I , ' answer Lesbia . ' my future be a blank . ' 

 the bill come pour in ; dressmaker , milliner , glover , bootmaker , tailor , stationer , perfumer ; awful bill which make Lady Maulevrier 's blood run cold , so degrading be their story of selfish self - indulgence , of senseless extravagance . but she pay they all without a word . she take upon her shoulder the chief burden of Lesbia 's wrongdoing . it be her indulgence , her weak preference which have foster her granddaughter 's selfishness , train she to vanity and worldly pride . the result be ignominious , humiliating , bitter beyond all common bitterness ; but the cup be of her own brewing , and she drink it without a murmur . 

 Parliament be prorogue ; the season be over ; and Lord Hartfield be establish at Fellside for the autumn he and his wife utterly happy in their affection for each other , but not without care as to their surrounding , which be full of trouble . first there be Lesbia 's sorrow . grant that it be a grief which would inevitably wear itself out , as other such grief have do from time immemorial ; but still the sorrow be there , at their door . next , there be the state of Lady Maulevrier 's health , which give her old medical adviser the grave fear . at Lord Hartfield 's earnest desire a famous doctor be summon from London ; but the great man could only confirm Mr. Horton 's verdict . the thread of life be wear thin every day . it might snap at any hour . in the meantime the only regime be repose of body and mind , an all - pervade calm , the avoidance of all exciting topic . one moment of violent agitation might prove fatal . 

 know this , how could Lord Hartfield call her ladyship to account for the presence of that mysterious old man under Steadman 's charge ? how venture to touch upon a topic which , by Mary 's showing , have exercise a most disturbing influence upon her ladyship 's mind on that solitary occasion when the girl venture to approach the subject ? 

 he feel that any attempt at an explanation be impossible . it be not for he to precipitate Lady Maulevrier 's end by pry into her secret . grant that shame and dishonour of some kind be involve in the existence of that strange old man , he , Lord Hartfield , must endure his portion in that shame must be content to leave the dark riddle unsolve . 

 he resign himself to this state of thing , and try to forget the cloud that hang over the house of Haselden ; but the sense of a mystery , a fatal family secret , which must come to light soon or later since all such secret be know at last know , sift , and bandy about from lip to lip , and publish in a thousand different newspaper , and cry aloud in the street the sense of such a secret , the dread of such a revelation weigh upon he heavily . 

 Maulevrier , the restless , be off to Argyleshire for the grouse shoot as soon as he have deposit Lady Lesbia comfortably at Fellside . 

 ' I should only be in your way if I stop , ' he say , ' for you and Molly have hardly get over the honeymoon stage yet , though you put on the air of Darby and Joan . I shall be back in a week or ten day . ' 

 ' in Lady Maulevrier 's state of health I do not   think you ought to stay away very long , ' say Hartfield . 

 ' Poor Lady Maulevrier ! she never care much for I , do not   you know . but I suppose it would seem unkind if I be to be out of the way when the end come . the end ! good heaven ! how coolly I talk of it ; and a year ago I think she be as immortal as Fairfield yonder . ' 

 he go away , his spirit dash by that awful thought of death , and Lord and Lady Hartfield have the house to themselves , since Lesbia hardly count . she seldom leave her own room , except to sit with her grandmother for an hour . she lie on her sofa or sit in a low arm - chair by the window , read Keats or Shelley or only dream dream over the brief golden time of her life , with its fond delusion , its false brightness . Mr. Horton go to see she every day feel the feeble little pulse which seem hardly to have force enough to beat urge she to struggle against apathy and inertia , to walk a little , to go for a long drive every day , to live in the open air to which instruction she pay not the slight attention . the desire for life be go . disappointed in her ambition , betray in her love , humiliate , dupe , degrade a social failure . what have she to live for ? she feel as if it would have be a good thing , quite the good thing that could happen , if she could turn her face to the wall and die . all that past season , its triumph , its pleasure , its variety , be like a garish dream , a horror to look back upon , hateful to remember . 

 in vain do Mary and Hartfield urge Lesbia to join in their simple pleasure , their walk and ride and drive , and boat excursion . she always refuse . 

 ' you know I never care much for roam about these everlaste hill , ' she tell Mary . ' I never have your passion for Lakeland . it be very good of you to wish to have I , but it be quite impossible . I have hardly strength enough for a little walk in the garden . ' 

 ' you would have more strength if you go out more , ' plead Mary , almost with tear . ' Mr. Horton say sun and wind be the good doctor for you . Lesbia , you frighten I sometimes . you be just let yourself fade away . ' 

 ' if you know how I hate the world and the sky , Mary , you would not   urge I to go out of door , ' Lesbia answer , moodily . ' indoor I can read , and get away from my own thought somehow , for a little while . but out yonder , face to face with the hill and the lake the scene I have know all my life I feel a heart - sickness that be bad than death . it madden I to see that old , old picture of mountain and water , the same for ever and ever , no matter what heart be break . ' 

 Mary creep close beside her sister 's couch , put her arm round her neck , lay she cheek rich in the ruddy bloom of health against Lesbia 's pallid and sink cheek , and comfort she as much as she could with tender murmur and love kiss . other comfort , she could give none . all the wisdom in the world will not cure a girl 's heart - sickness when she have fling away the treasure of her love upon a worthless object . 

 and so the day go by , peacefully , but sadly ; for the shadow of doom hang heavily over the house upon the Fell . nobody who look upon Lady Maulevrier could doubt that her day be number , that the oil be wax low in the lamp of life . the end , the awful , mysterious end , be draw near ; and she who be call be make no such preparation as the Christian make to answer the dread summon . as she have live , she mean to die an avow unbeliever . More than once Mary have take courage , and have talk to her grandmother of the world beyond , the blessed hope of re - union with the friend we have lose , in a new and bright life , only to be meet by the sceptic 's cynical smile , the materialist 's barren creed . 

 ' my dearest , we know nothing except the immutable law of material life . all the rest be a dream a beautiful dream , if you like a consolation to that kind of temperament which can take comfort from dream ; but for anyone who have read much , and think much , and keep as far as possible on a level with the scientific intellect of the age for such an one , Mary , these old fable be too idle . I shall die as I have live , the victim of an inscrutable destiny , work blindly , evil to some , good to other . ah ! love , life have begin very fairly for you . may the fate be kind always to my gentle and love girl ! ' 

 there be more talk between they on this dark mystery of life and death . Mary bring out her poor little argument , glorify by the light of perfect faith ; but they be of no avail against opinion which have be the gradual growth of a long and joyless life . Time have attune Lady Maulevrier 's mind to the gospel of Schopenhauer and the Pessimists , and she be content to see the mystery of life as they have see it . she have no fear , but she have some anxiety as to the thing that be to happen after she be go . she have take upon herself a heavy burden , and she have not yet come to the end of the road where her burden might be lay quietly down , her task accomplish . if she fall by the wayside under her load the consequence for the survivor might be full of trouble . 

 her anxiety be increase by the fact that her faithful servant and adviser , James Steadman , be no long the man he have be . the change in he be painfully evident memory failing , energy go . he come to his mistress 's room every morning , receive her order , answer her question ; but Lady Maulevrier feel that he go through the old duty in a mechanical way , and that his dull brain but half understand their importance . 

 one evening at dusk , just as Hartfield and Mary be leave Lady Maulevrier 's room , after dinner , an appalling shriek run through the house a cry almost as terrible as that which Lord Hartfield hear in the summer midnight just a year ago . but this time the sound come from the old part of the house . 

 ' something have happen , ' exclaim Hartfield , rush to the door of communication . 

 it be bolt inside . he knock vehemently ; but there be no answer . he run downstairs , follow by Mary , breathless , in an agony of fear . just as they approach the low door , lead to the old house , it be fling open , and Steadman 's wife stand before they pale with terror . 

 ' the doctor , ' she cry ; ' send for Mr. Horton , somebody , for God 's sake . oh , my lord , ' with a sudden burst of sobbing , ' I be afraid he be dead . ' 

 ' Mary , despatch some one for Horton , ' say Lord Hartfield . keep his wife back with one hand , he close the door against she , and then follow Mrs. Steadman through the long low corridor to her husband 's sitting - room . 

 James Steadman be lie upon his back upon the hearth , near the spot be Lord Hartfield have see he sleep in his arm - chair a month ago . 

 one look at the distorted face , dark with inject blood , the dreadful glassy glare of the eye , the foam - stain lip , tell that all be over . the faithful servant have die at his post . whatever his charge have be , his term of service be end . there be a vacancy in Lady Maulevrier 's household . 

 CHAPTER XLVI . 

 the day of reckoning . 


 Lord Hartfield stay with the frightened wife while she kneel beside that awful figure on the hearth , wring her hand with piteous bewailing and lamentation over the unconscious clay . he have always be a good husband to she , she murmur ; hard and stern perhaps , but a good man . and she have obey he without a question . whatever he do or say she have count right . 

 ' we have not have a happy life , though there be many who have envy we her ladyship 's favour , ' she say in the midst of her lamentation . ' no one know where the shoe pinch but those who have to wear it . poor James ! early and late , early and late , study her ladyship 's interest , caring and think , in order to keep trouble away from she . always on the watch , always on the listen . that be what wear he out , poor fellow ! ' 

 ' my good soul , your husband be an old man , ' argue Lord Hartfield , in a consolatory tone , ' and the end must come to all of we somehow . ' 

 ' he might have live to be a much old man if he have have less worry , ' say the wife , bend her face to kiss the cold dead brow . ' his day be full of care . we should have be happy in the poor cottage in Grasmere than we ever be in this big grand house . ' 

 thus , in broken fragment of speech , Mrs. Steadman lament over her dead , while the heavy pendulum of the eight - day clock in the hall sound the slowly - pass moment , until the coming of the doctor break upon the quiet of the house , with the noise of open door and approach footstep . 

 James Steadman be dead . medicine could do nothing for that lifeless clay , lie on the hearth by which he have sit on so many winter night , for so many year of faithful unquestione service . there be nothing to be do for that stiffening form , save the last office for the dead ; and Lord Hartfield leave Mr. Horton to arrange with the weep woman as to the doing of these . he be anxious to go to Lady Maulevrier , to break to she , as gently as might be , the news of her servant 's death . 

 and what of that strange old man in the upper room ? who be to attend upon he , now that the caretaker be lay low ? 

 while Lord Hartfield linger on the threshold of the door that lead from the old house to the new , ponder this question , there come the sound of wheel on the carriage drive , and then a loud ring at the hall door . 

 it be Maulevrier , just arrive from Scotland , smell of autumn rain and cool fresh air . 

 ' dreadfully bored on the moor , ' he say , as they shake hand . ' no bird nobody to talk to could not   stand it any long . how be the sister ? Lesbia well ? why , man alive , how queer you look ! nothing amiss , I hope ? ' 

 ' yes , there be something very much amiss . Steadman be dead . ' 

 ' Steadman ! her ladyship 's right hand . that be rather bad . but you will drop into his stewardship . she will trust your long head , I know . much well that she should look to her granddaughter 's husband for advice in all business matter than to a servant . when do it happen ? ' 

 ' half an hour ago . I be just go to Lady Maulevrier 's room when you rang the bell . take off your inverness , and come with I . ' 

 ' the poor grandmother , ' mutter Maulevrier . ' I be afraid it will be a blow . ' 

 he have much less cause for fear than Lord Hartfield , who know of deep and secret reason why Steadman 's death should be a calamity of dire import for his mistress . Maulevrier have be tell nothing of that scene with the strange old man the hidden treasure the anglo - indian phrase which have fill Lord Hartfield 's mind with the dark doubt . 

 if that half - lunatic old man , describe by Lady Maulevrier as a kinsman of Steadman 's , be verily the person Lord Hartfield believe , his presence under that roof , unguarde by a trust - worthy attendant , be fraught with danger . it would be for Lady Maulevrier , helpless , a prisoner to her sofa , at death 's door , to face that danger . the very thought of it might kill she . and yet it be imperative that the truth should be tell she without delay . 

 the two young man go to her ladyship 's sit room . she be alone , a volume of her favourite Schopenhauer open before she , under the light of the shade reading - lamp . sorry comfort in the hour of trouble ! 

 Maulevrier go over to she and kiss she ; and then drop silently into a chair near at hand , his face in shadow . Hartfield seat himself nearer the sofa , and nearer the lamp . 

 ' Dear Lady Maulevrier , I have come to tell you some very bad news ' 

 ' Lesbia ? ' exclaim her ladyship , with a frightened look . 

 ' no , there be nothing wrong with Lesbia . it be about your old servant Steadman . ' 

 ' dead ? ' falter Lady Maulevrier , ashy pale , as she look at he in the lamplight . 

 he bend his head affirmatively . 

 ' yes . he be seize with apoplexy fall from his chair to the hearth , and never speak or stir again . ' 

 Lady Maulevrier utter no word of sorrow or surprise . she lay , look straight before she into vacancy , the pale attenuate feature rigid as if they have be marble . what be to be do what must be tell whom could she trust ? those be the question repeat themselves in her mind as she star into space . and no answer come to they . 

 no answer come , except the opening of the door opposite her couch . the handle turn slowly , hesitatingly , as if move by feeble finger ; and then the door be push slowly open , and an old man come with shuffle footstep towards the one light spot in the middle of the room . 

 it be the old man Lord Hartfield have last see gloating over his treasury of gold and jewel the man whom Maulevrier have never see whose existence for forty year have be hide from every creature in that house , except Lady Maulevrier and the Steadmans , until Mary find her way into the old garden . 

 he come close up to the little table in front of Lady Maulevrier 's couch , and look down at she , a strange , uncanny being , wither and bent , with pale , fade eye in which there be a glimmer of unholy light . 

 ' good - evening to you , Lady Maulevrier , ' he say in a mocking voice . ' I should not   have know you if we have meet anywhere else . I think , of the two of we , you be more changed than I. ' 

 she look up at he , her feature quiver , her haughty head draw back ; as a bird shrink from the gaze of a snake , recoiling , but too fascinated to fly . her eye meet his with a look of unutterable horror . for some moment she be speechless , and then , look at Lord Hartfield , she say , piteously 

 ' why do you let he come here ? he ought to be take care of shut up . it be Steadman 's old uncle a lunatic I shelter . why be he allow to come to my room ? ' 

 ' I be Lord Maulevrier , ' say the old man , draw himself up and plant his crutch stick upon the floor ; ' I be Lord Maulevrier , and this woman be my wife . yes , I be mad sometimes , but not always . I have my bad fit , but not often . but I never forget who and what I be , Algernon , Earl of Maulevrier , Governor of Madras . ' 

 ' Lady Maulevrier , be this horrible thing true ? ' cry her grandson , vehemently . 

 ' he be mad , Maulevrier . do not   you see that he be mad ? ' she exclaim , look from Hartfield to her grandson , and then with a look of loathing and horror at her accuser . 

 ' I tell you , young man , I be Maulevrier , ' say the accuser ; ' there be no one else who have a right to be call by that name , while I live . they have shut I up she and her accomplice deny my name hide I from the world . he be dead , and she lie there stricken for her sin . ' 

 ' my grandfather die at the inn at Great Langdale , falter Maulevrier . 

 ' your grandfather be bring to this house ill out of his wit . all cloud and darkness here , ' say the old man , touch his forehead . ' how long have it be ? who can tell ? a weary time long , dark night , full of ghost . yes , I have see he the Rajah , that copper - face scoundrel , see he as she tell I he look when she give the signal to her slave to strangle he , there in the hall , where the grave be dig ready for the traitor 's carcass . she too yes , she have haunt I , call upon I to give up her treasure , to restore her son . ' 

 ' yes , ' cry the paralytic woman , suddenly lift out of herself , as it be , in a paroxysm of fury , every feature convulse , every nerve strain to its utmost tension ; ' yes , this be Lord Maulevrier . you have hear the truth , and from his own lip . you , his only son 's only son . you his granddaughter 's husband . you hear he avow himself the instigator of a diabolical murder ; you hear he confess how his paramour 's husband be strangle at his false wife 's bidding , in his own palace , bury under the Moorish pavement in the hall of many arch . you hear how he inherit the Rajah 's treasure from a mistress who die strangely , swiftly , conveniently , as soon so he have weary of she , and a new favourite have begin to exercise her influence . such thing be do in the East dynasty annihilate , kingdom overthrown , poison or bowstring use at will , to gratify a profligate 's passion , or pay for a spendthrift 's extravagance . such thing be do when that man be Governor of Madras as be never do by an Englishman in India before his time . he go there fetter by no prejudice he be more Mussulman than the Mussulmen themselves a deep , dark traitor . and it be to hide such crime as these to interpose the great peacemaker death between he and the government which be resolve upon punish he to save the honour , the fortune of my son , and the child who be to come after he , the name of a noble race , a name that be ever stainless until he defile it it be for this great end I take step to hide that feeble , useless life of his from the world he have offend ; it be for this end that I cause a peasant to be bury in the vault of the Maulevriers , with all the pomp and ceremony that befit the funeral of one of England 's old earl . I screen he from his enemy I save he from the ignominy of a public trial from the execration of his countryman . his only punishment be to eat his heart under this roof , in luxurious seclusion , his comfort study , his whim gratify so far as they could be by the most faithful of servant . a light penance for the dark infamy of his life in India , I think . his mind be all but go when he come here , but he have his rational interval , and in these the burden of his lonely life may have weigh heavily upon he . but it be not such a heavy burden as I have bear I , his gaoler , I who have devote my existence to the one task of guard the family honour . ' 

 he , whom she thus acknowledge as her husband , have sink exhaust into a chair near she . he take out his gold snuff - box , and refresh himself with a leisurely pinch of snuff , look about he curiously all the while , with a senile grin . that flash of passion which for a few minute have restore he to the full possession of his reason have burn itself out , and his mind have relapse into the condition in which it have be when he talk to Mary in the garden . 

 ' my pipe , Steadman , ' he say , look towards the door ; ' bring I my pipe , ' and then , impatiently , ' what have become of Steadman ? he have be get inattentive very inattentive . ' 

 he get up , and move slowly to the door , lean on his crutch - stick , his head sink upon his breast , mutter to himself as he go ; and thus he vanish from they , like the spectre of some terrible ancestor which have return from the grave to announce the coming of calamity to a doomed race . his grandson look after he , with an expression of intense displeasure . 

 ' and so , Lady Maulevrier , ' he exclaim , turn to his grandmother , ' I have bear a title that never belong to I , and enjoy the possession of another man 's estate all this time , thank to your pretty little plot . a very respectable position for your grandson to occupy , upon my life ! ' 

 Lord Hartfield lift his hand with a warning gesture . 

 ' spare she , ' he say . ' she be in no condition to endure your reproach . ' 

 spare she yes . Fate have not spar she . the beautiful face beautiful even in age and decay change suddenly as she look at they the mouth become distort , the eye fix : and then the heavy head fall back upon the pillow the paralysed form , wholly paralysed now , lie like a thing of stone . it never move again . Consciousness be blot out for ever in that moment . the feeble pulse of heart and brain throb with gradually diminish power for a night and a day ; and in the twilight of that dreadful day of nothingness the last glimmer of the light die in the lamp , and Lady Maulevrier and the burden of her sin be beyond the veil . 

 Viscount Haselden , alias Lord Maulevrier , hold a long consultation with Lord Hartfield on the night of his grandmother 's death , as to what step ought to be take in relation to the real Earl of Maulevrier : and it be only at the end of a serious and earnest discussion that both young man come to the decision that Lady Maulevrier 's secret ought to be keep faithfully to the end . assuredly no good purpose could be achieve by let the world know of old Lord Maulevrier 's existence . a half - lunatic octogenarian could gain nothing by be restore to right and possession which he have most justly forfeit . all that justice demand be that the closing year of his life should be make as comfortable as care and wealth could make they ; and Hartfield and Haselden take immediate step to this end . but their first act be to send the old earl 's treasure chest under safe convoy to the India House , with a letter explain how this long - hide wealth , bring from India by Lord Maulevrier , have be discover among other effect in a lumber - room at Lady Maulevrier 's country house . the money so deliver up might possibly have form part of his lordship 's private fortune ; but , in the absence of any knowledge as to its origin , his grandson , the present Lord Maulevrier , prefer to deliver it up to the authority of the India House , to be deal with as they might think fit . 

 the old earl make no further attempt to assert himself . he seem content to remain in his own room as of old , to potter about the garden , where his solitude be as complete as that of a hermit 's cell . the only moan be make be for James Steadman , whose service he miss sorely . Lord Hartfield replace that devoted servant by a clever austrian valet , a new importation from Vienna , who understand very little English , a train attendant upon mental invalid , and who be quite capable of deal with old Lord Maulevrier . 

 Lord Hartfield go a step far ; and within a week of those two funeral of servant and mistress , which cast a gloom over the peaceful valley of Grasmere , he bring down a famous mad - doctor to diagnose his lordship 's case . there be but little risk in so do , he argue with his friend , and it be their duty so to do . if the old man should assert himself to the doctor as Lord Maulevrier , the declaration would pass as a symptom of his lunacy . but it happen that the physician arrive at Fellside on one of Lord Maulevrier 's bad day , and the patient never emerge from the feeble phase of imbecility . 

 ' brain quite go , ' pronounce the doctor , ' bodily health very poor . take he to the South of France for the winter Hyeres , or any quiet place . he can not   last long . ' 

 to Hyeres the old man be take , with Mrs. Steadman as nurse , and the austrian valet as body - servant and keeper . Mary , for whom , in his bright hour he show a warm affection , go with he under her husband 's wing . 

 Lord Hartfield rent a chateau on the slope of an olive - clothe hill , where he and his young wife , whose health be somewhat delicate at this time , spend a winter in peaceful seclusion ; while Lesbia and her brother travel together in Italy . the old man 's strength improve in that lovely climate . he live to see the rose and orange blossom of the early spring , and die in his arm - chair suddenly , without a pang , while Mary sit at his foot read to he : a quiet end of an evil and troubled life . and now he whom the world have know as Lord Maulevrier be verily the earl , and could hear himself call by his title once more without a touch of shame . 

 the secret of Lady Maulevrier 's sin have be so faithfully keep by the two young man that neither of her granddaughter know the true story of that mysterious person whom Mary have first hear of as James Steadman 's uncle . she and Lesbia both know that there be painful circumstance of some kind connect with this man 's existence , his hidden life in the old house at Fellside ; but they be both content to learn no more . respect for their grandmother 's memory , sorrowful affection for the dead , prevail over natural curiosity . 

 early in February Maulevrier send decorator and upholsterer into the old house in Curzon Street , which be ready before the middle of May to receive his lordship and his young wife , the girlish daughter of a Florentine nobleman , a gazelle - eyed Italian , with a voice whose every tone be music , and with the gentle , shyest , most engaging manner of any girl in Florence . Lady Lesbia , strangely subdue and change by the grief and humiliation of her last campaign , have be her brother 's counsellor and confidante throughout his wooing of his fair italian bride . she be to spend the season under her brother 's roof , to help to initiate young Lady Maulevrier in the mysterious rite of London society , and to warn she of those rock and shoal which have wreck her own fortune . 

 the month of May bring a son and heir to Lord Hartfield ; and it be not till after his birth that Mary , Countess of Hartfield , be present to her sovereign , and begin her career as a matron of rank and standing , very much overpower by the weight of her honour , and look forward with delight to the end of the season and a flight to argyleshire with her husband and baby . 


 the END .