Lady Audley 's Secret 



 BY 
 MARY 
 ELIZABETH 
 BRADDON 



 LADY AUDLEY 's SECRET . 

 by Miss M.E. Braddon . 

 CHAPTER I. 

 LUCY . 

 it lie down in a hollow , rich with fine old timber and luxuriant pasture ; and you come upon it through an avenue of lime , border on either side by meadow , over the high hedge of which the cattle look inquisitively at you as you pass , wonder , perhaps , what you want ; for there be no thorough - fare , and unless you be go to the Court you have no business there at all . 

 at the end of this avenue there be an old arch and a clock tower , with a stupid , bewildering clock , which have only one hand and which jump straight from one hour to the next and be therefore always in extreme . through this arch you walk straight into the garden of Audley Court . 

 a smooth lawn lie before you , dot with group of rhododendron , which grow in more perfection here than anywhere else in the county . to the right there be the kitchen garden , the fish - pond , and an orchard border by a dry moat , and a broken ruin of a wall , in some place thick than it be high , and everywhere overgrown with trail ivy , yellow stonecrop , and dark moss . to the left there be a broad graveled walk , down which , year ago , when the place have be a convent , the quiet nun have walk hand in hand ; a wall border with espalier , and shadow on one side by goodly oak , which shut out the flat landscape , and circle in the house and garden with a darkening shelter . 

 the house face the arch , and occupy three side of a quadrangle . it be very old , and very irregular and rambling . the window be uneven ; some small , some large , some with heavy stone mullion and rich stain glass ; other with frail lattice that rattle in every breeze ; other so modern that they might have be add only yesterday . great pile of chimney rise up here and there behind the pointed gable , and seem as if they be so broken down by age and long service that they must have fall but for the straggling ivy which , crawl up the wall and trail even over the roof , wound itself about they and support they . the principal door be squeeze into a corner of a turret at one angle of the building , as if it be in hiding from dangerous visitor , and wish to keep itself a secret a noble door for all that old oak , and stud with great square - head iron nail , and so thick that the sharp iron knocker strike upon it with a muffled sound , and the visitor ring a clanging bell that dangle in a corner among the ivy , lest the noise of the knocking should never penetrate the stronghold . 

 a glorious old place . a place that visitor fall in rapture with ; feel a yearn wish to have do with life , and to stay there forever , star into the cool fish - pond and count the bubble as the roach and carp rise to the surface of the water . a spot in which peace seem to have take up her abode , set her soothe hand on every tree and flower , on the still pond and quiet alley , the shady corner of the old - fashioned room , the deep window - seat behind the paint glass , the low meadow and the stately avenue ay , even upon the stagnant well , which , cool and shelter as all else in the old place , hide itself away in a shrubbery behind the garden , with an idle handle that be never turn and a lazy rope so rotten that the pail have break away from it , and have fall into the water . 

 a noble place ; inside as well as out , a noble place a house in which you incontinently lose yourself if ever you be so rash as to attempt to penetrate its mystery alone ; a house in which no one room have any sympathy with another , every chamber run off at a tangent into an inner chamber , and through that down some narrow staircase lead to a door which , in its turn , lead back into that very part of the house from which you think yourself the furth ; a house that could never have be plan by any mortal architect , but must have be the handiwork of that good old builder , Time , who , add a room one year , and knock down a room another year , topple down a chimney coeval with the Plantagenets , and set up one in the style of the Tudors ; shake down a bit of Saxon wall , allow a Norman arch to stand here ; throw in a row of high narrow window in the reign of Queen Anne , and join on a dining - room after the fashion of the time of Hanoverian George I , to a refectory that have be stand since the Conquest , have contrive , in some eleven century , to run up such a mansion as be not elsewhere to be meet with throughout the county of Essex . of course , in such a house there be secret chamber ; the little daughter of the present owner , Sir Michael Audley , have fall by accident upon the discovery of one . a board have rattle under her foot in the great nursery where she play , and on attention be draw to it , it be find to be loose , and so removed , reveal a ladder , lead to a hiding - place between the floor of the nursery and the ceiling of the room below a hiding - place so small that he who have hide there must have crouch on his hand and knee or lain at full length , and yet large enough to contain a quaint old carve oak chest , half fill with priest ' vestment , which have be hide away , no doubt , in those cruel day when the life of a man be in danger if he be discover to have harbor a roman catholic priest , or to have mass say in his house . 

 the broad outer moat be dry and grass - grow , and the laden tree of the orchard hang over it with gnarl , straggle branch that draw fantastical shadow upon the green slope . within this moat there be , as I have say , the fish - pond a sheet of water that extend the whole length of the garden and border which there be an avenue call the lime - tree walk ; an avenue so shade from the sun and sky , so screen from observation by the thick shelter of the over - arch tree that it seem a choose place for secret meeting or for steal interview ; a place in which a conspiracy might have be plan , or a lover 's vow register with equal safety ; and yet it be scarcely twenty pace from the house . 

 at the end of this dark arcade there be the shrubbery , where , half bury among the tangle branch and the neglect weed , stand the rusty wheel of that old well of which I have speak . it have be of good service in its time , no doubt ; and busy nun have perhaps draw the cool water with their own fair hand ; but it have fall into disuse now , and scarcely any one at Audley Court know whether the spring have dry up or not . but shelter as be the solitude of this lime - tree walk , I doubt very much if it be ever put to any romantic us . often in the cool of the evening Sir Michael Audley would stroll up and down smoke his cigar , with his dog at his heel , and his pretty young wife dawdle by his side ; but in about ten minute the baronet and his companion would grow tired of the rustle lime and the still water , hide under the spread leaf of the water - lily , and the long green vista with the broken well at the end , and would stroll back to the drawing - room , where my lady play dreamy melody by Beethoven and Mendelssohn till her husband fall asleep in his easy - chair . 

 Sir Michael Audley be fifty - six year of age , and he have marry a second wife three month after his fifty - fifth birthday . he be a big man , tall and stout , with a deep , sonorous voice , handsome black eye , and a white beard a white beard which make he look venerable against his will , for he be as active as a boy , and one of the hard rider in the country . for seventeen year he have be a widower with an only child , a daughter , Alicia Audley , now eighteen , and by no mean too well pleased at have a step - mother bring home to the Court ; for Miss Alicia have reign supreme in her father 's house since her early childhood , and have carry the key , and jingle they in the pocket of her silk apron , and lose they in the shrubbery , and drop they into the pond , and give all manner of trouble about they from the hour in which she enter her teen , and have , on that account , delude herself into the sincere belief , that for the whole of that period , she have be keep the house . 

 but Miss Alicia 's day be over ; and now , when she ask anything of the housekeeper , the housekeeper would tell she that she would speak to my lady , or she would consult my lady , and if my lady please it should be do . so the baronet 's daughter , who be an excellent horsewoman and a very clever artist , spend most of her time out of door , rid about the green lane , and sketch the cottage child , and the plow - boy , and the cattle , and all manner of animal life that come in her way . she set her face with a sulky determination against any intimacy between herself and the baronet 's young wife ; and amiable as that lady be , she find it quite impossible to overcome Miss Alicia 's prejudice and dislike ; or to convince the spoilt girl that she have not do she a cruel injury by marry Sir Michael Audley . the truth be that Lady Audley have , in become the wife of Sir Michael , make one of those apparently advantageous match which be apt to draw upon a woman the envy and hatred of her sex . she have come into the neighborhood as a governess in the family of a surgeon in the village near Audley Court . no one know anything of she , except that she come in answer to an advertisement which Mr. Dawson , the surgeon , have insert in the Times . she come from London ; and the only reference she give be to a lady at a school at Brompton , where she have once be a teacher . but this reference be so satisfactory that none other be need , and Miss Lucy Graham be receive by the surgeon as the instructress of his daughter . her accomplishment be so brilliant and numerous , that it seem strange that she should have answer an advertisement offer such very moderate term of remuneration as those name by Mr. Dawson ; but Miss Graham seem perfectly well satisfied with her situation , and she teach the girl to play sonata by Beethoven , and to paint from nature after Creswick , and walk through a dull , out - of - the - way village to the humble little church , three time every Sunday , as contentedly as if she have no high aspiration in the world than to do so all the rest of her life . 

 People who observe this , account for it by say that it be a part of her amiable and gentle nature always to be light - hearte , happy and content under any circumstance . 

 wherever she go she seem to take joy and brightness with she . in the cottage of the poor her fair face shine like a sunbeam . she would sit for a quarter of an hour talk to some old woman , and apparently as pleased with the admiration of a toothless crone as if she have be listen to the compliment of a marquis ; and when she trip away , leave nothing behind she   for her poor salary give no scope to her benevolence , the old woman would burst out into senile rapture with her grace , beauty , and her kindliness , such as she never bestow upon the vicar 's wife , who half feed and clothe she . for you see , Miss Lucy Graham be bless with that magic power of fascination , by which a woman can charm with a word or intoxicate with a smile . every one love , admire , and praise she . the boy who open the five - bar gate that stand in her pathway , run home to his mother to tell of her pretty look , and the sweet voice in which she thank he for the little service . the verger at the church , who usher she into the surgeon 's pew ; the vicar , who see the soft blue eye uplifted to his face as he preach his simple sermon ; the porter from the railway station , who bring she sometimes a letter or a parcel , and who never look for reward from she ; her employer ; his visitor ; her pupil ; the servant ; everybody , high and low , unite in declare that Lucy Graham be the sweetest girl that ever live . 

 perhaps it be the rumor of this which penetrate into the quiet chamber of Audley Court ; or , perhaps , it be the sight of her pretty face , look over the surgeon 's high pew every Sunday morning ; however it be , it be certain that Sir Michael Audley suddenly experience a strong desire to be well acquaint with Mr. Dawson 's governess . 

 he have only to hint his wish to the worthy doctor for a little party to be get up , to which the vicar and his wife , and the baronet and his daughter , be invite . 

 that one quiet evening seal Sir Michael 's fate . he could no more resist the tender fascination of those soft and melt blue eye ; the graceful beauty of that slender throat and droop head , with its wealth of shower flaxen curl ; the low music of that gentle voice ; the perfect harmony which pervade every charm , and make all doubly charming in this woman ; than he could resist his destiny ! destiny ! why , she be his destiny ! he have never love before . what have be his marriage with Alicia 's mother but a dull , jog - trot bargain make to keep some estate in the family that would have be just as well out of it ? what have be his love for his first wife but a poor , pitiful , smolder spark , too dull to be extinguish , too feeble to burn ? but this be love this fever , this longing , this restless , uncertain , miserable hesitation ; these cruel fear that his age be an insurmountable barrier to his happiness ; this sick hatred of his white beard ; this frenzied wish to be young again , with glisten raven hair , and a slim waist , such as he have twenty year before ; these , wakeful night and melancholy day , so gloriously brighten if he chance to catch a glimpse of her sweet face behind the window curtain , as he drive past the surgeon 's house ; all these sign give token of the truth , and tell only too plainly that , at the sober age of fifty - five , Sir Michael Audley have fall ill of the terrible fever call love . 

 I do not think that , throughout his courtship , the baronet once calculate upon his wealth or his position as reason for his success . if he ever remember these thing , he dismiss the thought of they with a shudder . it pain he too much to believe for a moment that any one so lovely and innocent could value herself against a splendid house or a good old title . no ; his hope be that , as her life have be most likely one of toil and dependence , and as she be very young nobody exactly know her age , but she look little more than twenty , she might never have form any attachment , and that he , be the first to woo she , might , by tender attention , by generous watchfulness , by a love which should recall to she the father she have lose , and by a protect care that should make he necessary to she , win her young heart , and obtain from her fresh and early love , the promise of her hand . it be a very romantic day - dream , no doubt ; but , for all that , it seem in a very fair way to be realize . Lucy Graham appear by no mean to dislike the baronet 's attention . there be nothing whatever in her manner that betray the shallow artifice employ by a woman who wish to captivate a rich man . she be so accustomed to admiration from every one , high and low , that Sir Michael 's conduct make very little impression upon she . again , he have be so many year a widower that people have give up the idea of his ever marry again . at last , however , Mrs. Dawson speak to the governess on the subject . the surgeon 's wife be sit in the school - room busy at work , while Lucy be put the finishing touch on some water - color sketch do by her pupil . 

 " do you know , my dear Miss Graham , " say Mrs. Dawson , " I think you ought to consider yourself a remarkably lucky girl ? " 

 the governess lift her head from its stoop attitude , and star wonderingly at her employer , shake back a shower of curl . they be the most wonderful curl in the world soft and feathery , always float away from her face , and make a pale halo round her head when the sunlight shine through they . 

 " what do you mean , my dear Mrs. Dawson ? " she ask , dip her camel' - hair brush into the wet aquamarine upon the palette , and poise it carefully before put in the delicate streak of purple which be to brighten the horizon in her pupil 's sketch . 

 " why , I mean , my dear , that it only rest with yourself to become Lady Audley , and the mistress of Audley Court . " 

 Lucy Graham drop the brush upon the picture , and flush scarlet to the root of her fair hair ; and then grow pale again , far pale than Mrs. Dawson have ever see she before . 

 " my dear , do not   agitate yourself , " say the surgeon 's wife , soothingly ; " you know that nobody ask you to marry Sir Michael unless you wish . of course it would be a magnificent match ; he have a splendid income , and be one of the most generous of man . your position would be very high , and you would be enable to do a great deal of good ; but , as I say before , you must be entirely guide by your own feeling . only one thing I must say , and that be that if Sir Michael 's attention be not agreeable to you , it be really scarcely honorable to encourage he . " 

 " his attention encourage he ! " mutter Lucy , as if the word bewilder she . " pray , pray do not   talk to I , Mrs. Dawson . I have no idea of this . it be the last thing that would have occur to I . " she lean her elbow on the drawing - board before she , and clasp her hand over her face , seem for some minute to be think deeply . she wear a narrow black ribbon round her neck , with a locket , or a cross , or a miniature , perhaps , attach to it ; but whatever the trinket be , she always keep it hide under her dress . once or twice , while she sit silently think , she remove one of her hand from before her face , and fidget nervously with the ribbon , clutch at it with a half - angry gesture , and twist it backward and forward between her finger . 

 " I think some people be bear to be unlucky , Mrs. Dawson , " she say , by - and - by ; " it would be a great deal too much good fortune for I to become Lady Audley . " 

 she say this with so much bitterness in her tone , that the surgeon 's wife look up at she with surprise . 

 " you unlucky , my dear ! " she exclaim . " I think you be the last person who ought to talk like that you , such a bright , happy creature , that it do every one good to see you . I be sure I do not   know what we shall do if Sir Michael rob we of you . " 

 after this conversation they often speak upon the subject , and Lucy never again show any emotion whatever when the baronet 's admiration for she be canvass . it be a tacitly understand thing in the surgeon 's family that whenever Sir Michael propose , the governess would quietly accept he ; and , indeed , the simple Dawsons would have think it something more than madness in a penniless girl to reject such an offer . 

 so , one misty August evening , Sir Michael , sit opposite to Lucy Graham , at a window in the surgeon 's little drawing - room , take an opportunity while the family happen by some accident to be absent from the room , of speak upon the subject near to his heart . he make the governess , in a few but solemn word , an offer of his hand . there be something almost touch in the manner and tone in which he speak to her half in deprecation , know that he could hardly expect to be the choice of a beautiful young girl , and pray rather that she would reject he , even though she break his heart by do so , than that she should accept his offer if she do not love he . 

 " I scarcely think there be a great sin , Lucy , " he say , solemnly , " than that of a woman who marry a man she do not love . you be so precious to I , my beloved , that deeply as my heart be set on this , and bitter as the mere thought of disappointment be to I , I would not have you commit such a sin for any happiness of mine . if my happiness could be achieve by such an act , which it could not which it never could , " he repeat , earnestly " nothing but misery can result from a marriage dictate by any motive but truth and love . " 

 Lucy Graham be not look at Sir Michael , but straight out into the misty twilight and dim landscape far away beyond the little garden . the baronet try to see her face , but her profile be turn to he , and he could not discover the expression of her eye . if he could have do so , he would have see a yearn gaze which seem as if it would have pierce the far obscurity and look away away into another world . 

 " Lucy , you hear I ? " 

 " yes , " she say , gravely ; not coldly , or in any way as if she be offend at his word . 

 " and your answer ? " 

 she do not remove her gaze from the darken country side , but for some moment be quite silent ; then turn to he , with a sudden passion in her manner , that light up her face with a new and wonderful beauty which the baronet perceive even in the grow twilight , she fall on her knee at his foot . 

 " no , Lucy ; no , no ! " he cry , vehemently , " not here , not here ! " 

 " yes , here , here , " she say , the strange passion which agitate she make her voice sound shrill and pierce not loud , but preternaturally distinct ; " here and nowhere else . how good you be how noble and how generous ! love you ! why , there be woman a hundred time my superior in beauty and in goodness who might love you dearly ; but you ask too much of I ! remember what my life have be ; only remember that ! from my very babyhood I have never see anything but poverty . my father be a gentleman : clever , accomplished , handsome but poor and what a pitiful wretch poverty make of he ! my mother but do not let I speak of she . poverty poverty , trial , vexation , humiliation , deprivation . you can not tell ; you , who be among those for whom life be so smooth and easy , you can never guess what be endure by such as we . do not ask too much of I , then . I can not be disintereste ; I can not be blind to the advantage of such an alliance . I can not , I can not ! " 

 beyond her agitation and her passionate vehemence , there be an undefined something in her manner which fill the baronet with a vague alarm . she be still on the ground at his foot , crouch rather than kneeling , her thin white dress cling about she , her pale hair stream over her shoulder , her great blue eye glitter in the dusk , and her hand clutch at the black ribbon about her throat , as if it have be strangle she . " do not   ask too much of I , " she keep repeat ; " I have be selfish from my babyhood . " 

 " Lucy Lucy , speak plainly . do you dislike I ? " 

 " dislike you ? no no ! " 

 " but be there any one else whom you love ? " 

 she laugh aloud at his question . " I do not love any one in the world , " she answer . 

 he be glad of her reply ; and yet that and the strange laugh jar upon his feeling . he be silent for some moment , and then say , with a kind of effort : 

 " well , Lucy , I will not ask too much of you . I dare say I be a romantic old fool ; but if you do not dislike I , and if you do not love any one else , I see no reason why we should not make a very happy couple . be it a bargain , Lucy ? " 

 " yes . " 

 the baronet lift she in his arm and kiss she once upon the forehead , then quietly bid her good - night , he walk straight out of the house . 

 he walk straight out of the house , this foolish old man , because there be some strong emotion at work in his breast neither joy nor triumph , but something almost akin to disappointment some stifle and unsatisfie longing which lie heavy and dull at his heart , as if he have carry a corpse in his bosom . he carry the corpse of that hope which have die at the sound of Lucy 's word . all the doubt and fear and timid aspiration be end now . he must be content , like other man of his age , to be marry for his fortune and his position . 

 Lucy Graham go slowly up the stair to her little room at the top of the house . she place her dim candle on the chest of drawer , and seat herself on the edge of the white bed , still and white as the drapery hang around she . 

 " no more dependence , no more drudgery , no more humiliation , " she say ; " every trace of the old life melt away every clew to identity bury and forget except these , except these . " 

 she have never take her left hand from the black ribbon at her throat . she draw it from her bosom , as she speak , and look at the object attach to it . 

 it be neither a locket , a miniature , nor a cross ; it be a ring wrap in an oblong piece of paper the paper partly write , partly print , yellow with age , and crumple with much folding . 

 CHAPTER II . 

 ON BOARD THE ARGUS . 

 he throw the end of his cigar into the water , and lean his elbow upon the bulwark , star meditatively at the wave . 

 " how wearisome they be , " he say ; " blue and green , and opal ; opal , and blue , and green ; all very well in their way , of course , but three month of they be rather too much , especially " 

 he do not attempt to finish his sentence ; his thought seem to wander in the very midst of it , and carry he a thousand mile or so away . 

 " poor little girl , how pleased she will be ! " he mutter , open his cigar - case , lazily survey its content ; " how pleased and how surprised ? poor little girl . after three year and a half , too ; she will be surprised . " 

 he be a young man of about five - and - twenty , with dark face bronze by exposure to the sun ; he have handsome brown eye , with a lazy smile in they that sparkle through the black lash , and a bushy beard and mustache that cover the whole low part of his face . he be tall and powerfully build ; he wear a loose gray suit and a feel hat , throw carelessly upon his black hair . his name be George Talboys , and he be aft - cabin passenger on board the good ship Argus , laden with australian wool and sailing from Sydney to Liverpool . 

 there be very few passenger in the aft - cabin of the Argus . an elderly wool - stapler return to his native country with his wife and daughter , after have make a fortune in the colony ; a governess of three - and - thirty year of age , go home to marry a man to whom she have be engage fifteen year ; the sentimental daughter of a wealthy australian wine - merchant , invoice to England to finish her education , and George Talboys , be the only first - class passenger on board . 

 this George Talboys be the life and soul of the vessel ; nobody know who or what he be , or where he come from , but everybody like he . he sit at the bottom of the dinner - table , and assist the captain in do the honor of the friendly meal . he open the champagne bottle , and take wine with every one present ; he tell funny story , and lead the life himself with such a joyous peal that the man must have be a churl who could not have laugh for pure sympathy . he be a capital hand at speculation and vingt - et - un , and all the merry game , which keep the little circle round the cabin - lamp so deep in innocent amusement , that a hurricane might have howl overhead without their hearing it ; but he freely own that he have no talent for whist , and that he do not   know a knight from a castle upon the chess - board . 

 indeed , Mr. Talboys be by no mean too learn a gentleman . the pale governess have try to talk to he about fashionable literature , but George have only pull his beard and star very hard at she , say occasionally , " ah , yes , by Jove ! " and " to be sure , ah ! " 

 the sentimental young lady , go home to finish her education , have try he with Shelby and Byron , and he have fairly laugh in her face , as if poetry be a joke . the woolstapler sound he on politic , but he do not seem very deeply verse in they ; so they let he go his own way , smoke his cigar and talk to the sailor , lounge over the bulwark and stare at the water , and make himself agreeable to everybody in his own fashion . but when the Argus come to be within about a fortnight 's sail of England everybody notice a change in George Talboys . he grow restless and fidgety ; sometimes so merry that the cabin ring with his laughter ; sometimes moody and thoughtful . favorite as he be among the sailor , they be tired at last of answer his perpetual question about the probable time of touch land . would it be in ten day , in eleven , in twelve , in thirteen ? be the wind favorable ? how many knot an hour be the vessel do ? then a sudden passion would sieze he , and he would stamp upon the deck , cry out that she be a rickety old craft , and that her owner be swindler to advertise she as the fast - sailing Argus . she be not fit for passenger traffic ; she be not fit to carry impatient living creature , with heart and soul ; she be fit for nothing but to be laden with bale of stupid wool , that might rot on the sea and be none the bad for it . 

 the sun be droop down behind the wave as George Talboys light his cigar upon this August evening . only ten day more , the sailor have tell he that afternoon , and they would see the english coast . " I will go ashore in the first boat that hail we , " he cry ; " I will go ashore in a cockle - shell . by Jove , if it come to that , I will swim to land . " 

 his friend in the aft - cabin , with the exception of the pale governess , laugh at his impatience ; she sigh as she watch the young man , chafe at the slow hour , push away his untasted wine , fling himself restlessly about upon the cabin sofa , rush up and down the companion ladder , and star at the wave . 

 as the red rim of the sun drop into the water , the governess ascend the cabin stair for a stroll on deck , while the passenger sit over their wine below . she stop when she come up to George , and , stand by his side , watch the fade crimson in the western sky . 

 the lady be very quiet and reserved , seldom share in the after - cabin amusement , never laugh , and speak very little ; but she and George Talboys have be excellent friend throughout the passage . 

 " do my cigar annoy you , Miss Morley ? " he say , take it out of his mouth . 

 " not at all ; pray do not leave off smoking . I only come up to look at the sunset . what a lovely evening ! " 

 " yes , yes , I dare say , " he answer , impatiently ; " yet so long , so long ! ten more interminable day and ten more weary night before we land . " 

 " yes , " say Miss Morley , sigh . " do you wish the time short ? " 

 " do I ? " cry George . " indeed I do . do not   you ? " 

 " Scarcely . " 

 " but be there no one you love in England ? be there no one you love look out for your arrival ? " 

 " I hope so , " she say gravely . they be silent for some time , he smoke his cigar with a furious impatience , as if he could hasten the course of the vessel by his own restlessness ; she look out at the wan light with melancholy blue eye eye that seem to have fade with pore over closely - print book and difficult needlework ; eye that have fade a little , perhaps , by reason of tear secretly shed in the lonely night . 

 " see ! " say George , suddenly , point in another direction from that toward which Miss Morley be look , " there be the new moon ! " 

 she look up at the pale crescent , her own face almost as pale and wan . 

 " this be the first time we have see it . " 

 " we must wish ! " say George . " I know what I wish . " 

 " what ? " 

 " that we may get home quickly . " 

 " my wish be that we may find no disappointment when we get there , " say the governess , sadly . 

 " Disappointment ! " 

 he start as if he have be strike , and ask what she mean by talk of disappointment . 

 " I mean this , " she say , speak rapidly , and with a restless motion of her thin hand ; " I mean that as the end of the voyage draw near , hope sink in my heart ; and a sick fear come over I that at the last all may not be well . the person I go to meet may be change in his feeling toward I ; or he may retain all the old feeling until the moment of see I , and then lose it in a breath at sight of my poor wan face , for I be call a pretty girl , Mr. Talboys , when I sail for Sydney , fifteen year ago ; or he may be so change by the world as to have grow selfish and mercenary , and he may welcome I for the sake of my fifteen year ' saving . again , he may be dead . he may have be well , perhaps , up to within a week of our landing , and in that last week may have take a fever , and die an hour before our vessel anchor in the Mersey . I think of all these thing , Mr. Talboys , and act the scene over in my mind , and feel the anguish of they twenty time a day . twenty time a day , " she repeat ; " why I do it a thousand time a day . " 

 George Talboys have stand motionless , with his cigar in his hand , listen to she so intently that , as she say the last word , his hold relax , and the cigar drop in the water . 

 " I wonder , " she continue , more to herself than to he , " I wonder , look back , to think how hopeful I be when the vessel sail ; I never think then of disappointment , but I picture the joy of meeting , imagine the very word that would be say , the very tone , the very look ; but for this last month of the voyage , day by day , and hour by hour my heart sink and my hopeful fancy fade away , and I dread the end as much as if I know that I be go to England to attend a funeral . " 

 the young man suddenly change his attitude , and turn his face full upon his companion , with a look of alarm . she see in the pale light that the color have fade from his cheek . 

 " what a fool ! " he cry , strike his clench fist upon the side of the vessel , " what a fool I be to be frighten at this ? why do you come and say these thing to I ? why do you come and terrify I out of my sens , when I be go straight home to the woman I love ; to a girl whose heart be as true as the light of Heaven ; and in whom I no more expect to find any change than I do to see another sun rise in to - morrow 's sky ? why do you come and try to put such fancy in my head when I be go home to my darling wife ? " 

 " your wife , " she say ; " that be different . there be no reason that my terror should terrify you . I be go to England to rejoin a man to whom I be engage to be marry fifteen year ago . he be too poor to marry then , and when I be offer a situation as governess in a rich australian family , I persuade he to let I accept it , so that I might leave he free and unfettered to win his way in the world , while I save a little money to help we when we begin life together . I never mean to stay away so long , but thing have go badly with he in England . that be my story , and you can understand my fear . they need not influence you . mine be an exceptional case . " 

 " so be mine , " say George , impatiently . " I tell you that mine be an exceptional case : although I swear to you that until this moment , I have never know a fear as to the result of my voyage home . but you be right ; your terror have nothing to do with I . you have be away fifteen year ; all kind of thing may happen in fifteen year . now it be only three year and a half this very month since I leave England . what can have happen in such a short time as that ? " 

 Miss Morley look at he with a mournful smile , but do not speak . his feverish ardor , the freshness and impatience of his nature be so strange and new to she , that she look at he half in admiration , half in pity . 

 " my pretty little wife ! my gentle , innocent , love little wife ! do you know , Miss Morley , " he say , with all his old hopefulness of manner , " that I leave my little girl asleep , with her baby in her arm , and with nothing but a few blot line to tell she why her faithful husband have desert she ? " 

 " desert she ! " exclaim the governess . 

 " yes . I be an ensign in a cavalry regiment when I first meet my little darling . we be quarter at a stupid seaport town , where my pet live with her shabby old father , a half - pay naval officer ; a regular old humbug , as poor as Job , and with an eye for nothing but the main chance . I see through all his shallow trick to catch one of we for his pretty daughter . I see all the pitiable , contemptible , palpable trap he set for we big dragoon to walk into . I see through his shabby - genteel dinner and public - house port ; his fine talk of the grandeur of his family ; his sham pride and independence , and the sham tear of his bleared old eye when he talk of his only child . he be a drunken old hypocrite , and he be ready to sell my poor , little girl to the high bidder . luckily for I , I happen just then to be the high bidder ; for my father , be a rich man , Miss Morley , and as it be love at first sight on both side , my darling and I make a match of it . no soon , however , do my father hear that I have marry a penniless little girl , the daughter of a tipsy old half - pay lieutenant , than he write I a furious letter , tell I he would never again hold any communication with I , and that my yearly allowance would stop from my wedding - day . 

 " as there be no remain in such a regiment as mine , with nothing but my pay to live on , and my pretty little wife to keep , I sell out , think that before the money be exhaust , I should be sure to drop into something . I take my darling to Italy , and we live there in splendid style as long as my two thousand pound last ; but when that begin to dwindle down to a couple of hundred or so , we come back to England , and as my darling have a fancy for be near that tiresome old father of her , we settle at the watering - place where he live . well , as soon as the old man hear that I have a couple of hundred pound leave , he express a wonderful degree of affection for we , and insist on our boarding in his house . we consent , still to please my darling , who have just then a peculiar right to have every whim and fancy of her innocent heart indulge . we do board with he , and finally he fleece we ; but when I speak of it to my little wife , she only shrug her shoulder , and say she do not like to be unkind to her ' poor papa . ' so poor papa make away with our little stock of money in no time ; and as I feel that it be now become necessary to look about for something , I run up to London , and try to get a situation as a clerk in a merchant 's office , or as accountant , or book - keeper , or something of that kind . but I suppose there be the stamp of a heavy dragoon about I , for do what I would I could not   get anybody to believe in my capacity ; and tired out , and down - hearte , I return to my darling , to find she nursing a son and heir to his father 's poverty . poor little girl , she be very low - spirited ; and when I tell she that my London expedition have fail , she fairly break down , and burst in to a storm of sob and lamentation , tell I that I ought not to have marry she if I could give she nothing but poverty and misery ; and that I have do she a cruel wrong in make she my wife . by heaven ! Miss Morley , her tear and reproach drive I almost mad ; and I fly into a rage with she , myself , her father , the world , and everybody in it , and then rail out of the house . I walk about the street all that day , half out of my mind , and with a strong inclination to throw myself into the sea , so as to leave my poor girl free to make a well match . ' if I drown myself , her father must support she , ' I think ; ' the old hypocrite could never refuse she a shelter ; but while I live she have no claim on he . ' I go down to a rickety old wooden pier , mean to wait there till it be dark , and then drop quietly over the end of it into the water ; but while I sit there smoke my pipe , and star vacantly at the sea - gull , two man come down , and one of they begin to talk of the australian gold - digging , and the great thing that be to be do there . it appear that he be go to sail in a day or two , and he be try to persuade his companion to join he in the expedition . 

 " I listen to these man for upward of an hour , follow they up and down the pier , with my pipe in my mouth , and hear all their talk . after this I fall into conversation with they myself , and ascertain that there be a vessel go to leave Liverpool in three day , by which vessel one of the man be go out . this man give I all the information I require , and tell I , moreover , that a stalwart young fellow , such as I be , could hardly fail to do well in the digging . the thought flash upon I so suddenly , that I grow hot and red in the face , and tremble in every limb with excitement . this be well than the water , at any rate . suppose I steal away from my darling , leave she safe under her father 's roof , and go and make a fortune in the new world , and come back in a twelvemonth to throw it into her lap ; for I be so sanguine in those day that I count on make my fortune in a year or so . I thank the man for his information , and late at night stroll homeward . it be bitter winter weather , but I have be too full of passion to feel cold , and I walk through the quiet street , with the snow drift in my face , and a desperate hopefulness in my heart . the old man be sit drink brandy - and - water in the little dining - room ; and my wife be up - stair , sleep peacefully , with the baby on her breast . I sit down and write a few brief line , which tell she that I never have love she well than now , when I seem to desert she ; that I be go to try my fortune in the new world , and that if I succeed I should come back to bring she plenty and happiness ; but that if I fail I should never look upon her face again . I divide the remainder of our money something over forty pound into two equal portion , leave one for she , and put the other in my pocket . I kneel down and pray for my wife and child , with my head upon the white counterpane that cover they . I be not   much of a pray man at ordinary time , but God know that be a heartfelt prayer . I kiss she once , and the baby once , and then creep out of the room . the dining - room door be open , and the old man be nod over his paper . he look up as he hear my step in the passage , and ask I where I be go . ' to have a smoke in the street , ' I answer ; and as this be a common habit of mine he believe I . three night after I be out at sea , bind for Melbourne a steerage passenger , with a digger 's tool for my baggage , and about seven shilling in my pocket . " 

 " and you succeed ? " ask Miss Morley . 

 " not till I have long despair of success ; not until poverty and I have become such old companion and bed - fellow , that look back at my past life , I wonder whether that dashing , reckless , extravagant , luxurious , champagne - drink dragoon could have really be the same man who sit on the damp ground gnaw a moldy crust in the wild of the new world . I cling to the memory of my darling , and the trust that I have in her love and truth be the one keystone that keep the fabric of my past life together the one star that light the thick black darkness of the future . I be hail - fellow - well - meet with bad man ; I be in the center of riot , drunkenness , and debauchery ; but the purify influence of my love keep I safe from all . thin and gaunt , the half - starve shadow of what I once have be , I see myself one day in a broken bit of look - glass , and be frighten by my own face . but I toil on through all ; through disappointment and despair , rheumatism , fever , starvation ; at the very gate of death , I toil on steadily to the end ; and in the end I conquer . " 

 he be so brave in his energy and determination , in his proud triumph of success , and in the knowledge of the difficulty he have vanquish , that the pale governess could only look at he in wonder admiration . 

 " how brave you be ! " she say . 

 " Brave ! " he cry , with a joyous peal of laughter ; " be not   I work for my darling ? through all the dreary time of that probation , her pretty white hand seem beckon I onward to a happy future ! why , I have see she under my wretched canvas tent sit by my side , with her boy in her arm , as plainly as I have ever see she in the one happy year of our wed life . at last , one dreary foggy morning , just three month ago , with a drizzle rain wet I to the skin , up to my neck in clay and mire , half - starve , enfeeble by fever , stiff with rheumatism , a monster nugget turn up under my spade , and I be in one minute the rich man in Australia . I fall down on the wet clay , with my lump of gold in the bosom of my shirt , and , for the first time in my life , cry like a child . I travel post - haste to Sydney , realize my price , which be worth upward of L20,000 , and a fortnight afterward take my passage for England in this vessel ; and in ten day in ten day I shall see my darling . " 

 " but in all that time do you never write to your wife ? " 

 " never , till the night before I leave Sydney . I could not write when everything look so black . I could not write and tell she that I be fight hard with despair and death . I wait for well fortune , and when that come I write tell she that I should be in England almost as soon as my letter , and give she an address at a coffee - house in London where she could write to I , tell I where to find she , though she be hardly likely to have leave her father 's house . " 

 he fall into a reverie after this , and puff meditatively at his cigar . his companion do not disturb he . the last ray of summer daylight have die out , and the pale light of the crescent moon only remain . 

 presently George Talboys fling away his cigar , and turn to the governess , cry abruptly , " Miss Morley , if , when I get to England , I hear that anything have happen to my wife , I shall fall down dead . " 

 " my dear Mr. Talboys , why do you think of these thing ? God be very good to we ; he will not afflict we beyond our power of endurance . I see all thing , perhaps , in a melancholy light ; for the long monotony of my life have give I too much time to think over my trouble . " 

 " and my life have be all action , privation , toil , alternate hope and despair ; I have have no time to think upon the chance of anything happen to my darling . what a blind , reckless fool I have be ! three year and a half and not one line one word from she , or from any mortal creature who know she . Heaven above ! what may not have happen ? " 

 in the agitation of his mind he begin to walk rapidly up and down the lonely deck , the governess follow , and try to soothe he . 

 " I swear to you , Miss Morley , " he say , " that till you speak to I to - night , I never feel one shadow of fear , and now I have that sick , sink dread at my heart which you talk of an hour ago . let I alone , please , to get over it my own way . " 

 she draw silently away from he , and seat herself by the side of the vessel , look over into the water . 

 George Talboys walk backward and forward for some time , with his head bend upon his breast , look neither to the right nor the left , but in about a quarter of an hour he return to the spot where the governess be seat . 

 " I have be pray , " he say " pray for my darling . " 

 he speak in a voice little above a whisper , and she see his face ineffably calm in the moonlight . 

 CHAPTER III . 

 HIDDEN RELICS . 

 the same August sun which have go down behind the waste of water glimmer redly upon the broad face of the old clock over that ivy - cover archway which lead into the garden of Audley Court . 

 a fierce and crimson sunset . the mullione window and twinkle lattice be all ablaze with the red glory ; the fade light flicker upon the leaf of the lime in the long avenue , and change the still fish - pond into a sheet of burnish copper ; even into those dim recess of bri and brushwood , amidst which the old well be hide , the crimson brightness penetrate in fitful flash till the dank weed and the rusty iron wheel and broken woodwork seem as if they be fleck with blood . 

 the lowing of a cow in the quiet meadow , the splash of a trout in the fish - pond , the last note of a tired bird , the creaking of wagon - wheel upon the distant road , every now and then break the evening silence , only make the stillness of the place seem more intense . it be almost oppressive , this twilight stillness . the very repose of the place grow painful from its intensity , and you feel as if a corpse must be lie somewhere within that gray and ivy - cover pile of building so deathlike be the tranquillity of all around . 

 as the clock over the archway strike eight , a door at the back of the house be softly open , and a girl come out into the garden . 

 but even the presence of a human being scarcely break the silence ; for the girl creep slowly over the thick grass , and glide into the avenue by the side of the fish - pond , disappear in the rich shelter of the lime . 

 she be not , perhaps , positively a pretty girl ; but her appearance be of that order which be commonly call interesting . interesting , it may be , because in the pale face and the light gray eye , the small feature and compress lip , there be something which hint at a power of repression and self - control not common in a woman of nineteen or twenty . she might have be pretty , I think , but for the one fault in her small oval face . this fault be an absence of color . not one tinge of crimson flush the waxen whiteness of her cheek ; not one shadow of brown redeem the pale insipidity of her eyebrow and eyelash ; not one glimmer of gold or auburn relieve the dull flaxen of her hair . even her dress be spoil by this same deficiency . the pale lavender muslin fade into a sickly gray , and the ribbon knot round her throat melt into the same neutral hue . 

 her figure be slim and fragile , and in spite of her humble dress , she have something of the grace and carriage of a gentlewoman , but she be only a simple country girl , call Phoebe Marks , who have be nursemaid in Mr. Dawson 's family , and whom Lady Audley have choose for she maid after her marriage with Sir Michael . 

 of course , this be a wonderful piece of good fortune for Phoebe , who find her wage treble and her work lighten in the well - order household at the Court ; and who be therefore quite as much the object of envy among her particular friend as my lady herself to high circle . 

 a man , who be sit on the break wood - work of the well , start as the lady's - maid come out of the dim shade of the lime and stand before he among the weed and brushwood . 

 I have say before that this be a neglect spot ; it lie in the midst of a low shrubbery , hide away from the rest of the garden , and only visible from the garret window at the back of the west wing . 

 " why , Phoebe , " say the man , shut a clasp - knife with which he have be strip the bark from a blackthorn stake , " you come upon I so still and sudden , that I think you be an evil spirit . I have   come across through the field , and come in here at the gate agen the moat , and I be take a rest before I come up to the house to ask if you be come back . " 

 " I can see the well from my bedroom window , Luke , " Phoebe answer , point to an open lattice in one of the gable . " I see you sit here , and come down to have a chat ; it be well talk out here than in the house , where there be always somebody listen . " 

 the man be a big , broad - shoulder , stupid - look clod - hopper of about twenty - three year of age . his dark red hair grow low upon his forehead , and his bushy brow meet over a pair of greenish gray eye ; his nose be large and well - shape , but the mouth be coarse in form and animal in expression . rosy - cheeked , red - haired , and bull - neck , he be not unlike one of the stout oxen grazing in the meadow round about the Court . 

 the girl seat herself lightly upon the wood - work at his side , and put one of her hand , which have grow white in her new and easy service , about his thick neck . 

 " be you glad to see I , Luke ? " she ask . 

 " of course I be glad , lass , " he answer , boorishly , open his knife again , and scrap away at the hedge - stake . 

 they be first cousin , and have be play fellow in childhood , and sweetheart in early youth . 

 " you do not   seem much as if you be glad , " say the girl ; " you might look at I , Luke , and tell I if you think my journey have improve I . " 

 " it be not   put any color into your cheek , my girl , " he say , glance up at she from under his lowering eyebrow ; " you be every bit as white as you be when you go away . " 

 " but they say travel make people genteel , Luke . I have   be on the continent with my lady , through all manner of curious place ; and you know , when I be a child , Squire Horton 's daughter teach I to speak a little french , and I find it so nice to be able to talk to the people abroad . " 

 " Genteel ! " cry Luke Marks , with a hoarse laugh ; " who want you to be genteel , I wonder ? not I , for one ; when you be my wife you will not   have overmuch time for gentility , my girl . french , too ! dang I , Phoebe , I suppose when we have   save money enough between we to buy a bit of a farm , you will be parleyvooe to the cow ? " 

 she bite her lip as her lover speak , and look away . he go on cut and chop at a rude handle he be fashion to the stake , whistle softly to himself all the while , and not once look at his cousin . 

 for some time they be silent , but by - and - by she say , with her face still turn away from her companion : 

 " what a fine thing it be for Miss Graham that be , to travel with she maid and her courier , and her chariot and four , and a husband that think there be not   one spot upon all the earth that be good enough for she to set her foot upon ! " 

 " ay , it be a fine thing , Phoebe , to have lot of money , " answer Luke , " and I hope you will be warn by that , my lass , to save up your wage agin we get marry . " 

 " why , what be she in Mr. Dawson 's house only three month ago ? " continue the girl , as if she have not hear her cousin 's speech . " what be she but a servant like I ? take wage and work for they as hard , or hard , than I do . you should have see her shabby clothe , Luke wear and patch , and darn and turn and twist , yet always look nice upon she , somehow . she give I more as lady's - maid here than ever she get from Mr. Dawson then . why , I have   see she come out of the parlor with a few sovereign and a little silver in her hand , that master have just give she for her quarter 's salary ; and now look at she ! " 

 " never you mind she , " say Luke ; " take care of yourself , Phoebe ; that be all you have   get to do . what should you say to a public - house for you and I , by - and - by , my girl ? there be a deal of money to be make out of a public - house . " 

 the girl still sit with her face avert from her lover , her hand hang listlessly in her lap , and her pale gray eye fix upon the last low streak of crimson die out behind the trunk of the tree . 

 " you should see the inside of the house , Luke , " she say ; " it be a tumbledown look place enough outside ; but you should see my lady 's room all picture and gilding , and great look - glass that stretch from the ceiling to the floor . paint ceiling , too , that cost hundred of pound , the housekeeper tell she , and all do for she . " 

 " she be a lucky one , " mutter Luke , with lazy indifference . 

 " you should have see she while we be abroad , with a crowd of gentleman hang about she ; Sir Michael not jealous of they , only proud to see she so much admire . you should have hear her laugh and talk with they ; throw all their compliment and fine speech back at they , as it be , as if they have be pelt she with rose . she set everybody mad about she , wherever she go . her singing , her playing , her painting , her dancing , her beautiful smile , and sunshiny ringlet ! she be always the talk of a place , as long as we stay in it . " 

 " be she at home to - night ? " 

 " no ; she have go out with Sir Michael to a dinner party at the Beeches . they have   seven or eight mile to drive , and they will not   be back till after eleven . " 

 " then I will tell you what , Phoebe , if the inside of the house be so mighty fine , I should like to have a look at it . " 

 " you shall , then . Mrs. Barton , the housekeeper , know you by sight , and she can not   object to my show you some of the good room . " 

 it be almost dark when the cousin leave the shrubbery and walk slowly to the house . the door by which they enter lead into the servant ' hall , on one side of which be the housekeeper 's room . Phoebe Marks stop for a moment to ask the housekeeper if she might take her cousin through some of the room , and have receive permission to do so , light a candle at the lamp in the hall , and beckon to Luke to follow she into the other part of the house . 

 the long , black oak corridor be dim in the ghostly twilight the light carry by Phoebe look only a poor speck in the broad passage through which the girl lead her cousin . Luke look suspiciously over his shoulder now and then , half - frightened by the creaking of his own hob - nail boot . 

 " it be a mortal dull place , Phoebe , " he say , as they emerge from a passage into the principal hall , which be not yet light ; " I have   hear tell of a murder that be do here in old time . " 

 " there be murder enough in these time , as to that , Luke , " answer the girl , ascend the staircase , follow by the young man . 

 she lead the way through a great drawing - room , rich in satin and ormolu , buhl and inlay cabinet , bronze , cameo , statuette , and trinket , that glisten in the dusky light ; then through a morning room , hang with proof engraving of valuable picture ; through this into an ante - chamber , where she stop , hold the light above her head . 

 the young man star about he , open - mouthed and open - eyed . 

 " it be a rare fine place , " he say , " and must have cost a heap of money . " 

 " look at the picture on the wall , " say Phoebe , glance at the panel of the octagonal chamber , which be hang with Claudes and Poussins , Wouvermans and Cuyps . " I have   hear that those alone be worth a fortune . this be the entrance to my lady 's apartment , Miss Graham that be . " she lift a heavy green cloth curtain which hang across a doorway , and lead the astonished countryman into a fairy - like boudoir , and thence to a dressing - room , in which the open door of a wardrobe and a heap of dress fling about a sofa show that it still remain exactly as its occupant have leave it . 

 " I have   get all these thing to put away before my lady come home , Luke ; you might sit down here while I do it , I shall not   be long . " 

 her cousin look around in gawky embarrassment , bewilder by the splendor of the room ; and after some deliberation select the most substantial of the chair , on the extreme edge of which he carefully seat himself . 

 " I wish I could show you the jewel , Luke , " say the girl ; " but I can not , for she always keep the key herself ; that be the case on the dressing - table there . " 

 " what , that ? " cry Luke , star at the massive walnut - wood and brass inlaid casket . " why , that be big enough to hold every bit of clothe I have   get ! " 

 " and it be as full as it can be of diamond , ruby , pearl and emerald , " answer Phoebe , busy as she speak in fold the rustle silk dress , and lay they one by one upon the shelf of the wardrobe . as she be shake out the flounce of the last , a jingling sound catch her ear , and she put her hand into the pocket . 

 " I declare ! " she exclaim , " my lady have leave her key in her pocket for once in a way ; I can show you the jewelry , if you like , Luke . " 

 " well , I may as well have a look at it , my girl , " he say , rise from his chair and hold the light while his cousin unlock the casket . he utter a cry of wonder when he see the ornament glitter on white satin cushion . he want to handle the delicate jewel ; to pull they about , and find out their mercantile value . perhaps a pang of longing and envy shoot through his heart as he think how he would have like to have take one of they . 

 " why , one of those diamond thing would set we up in life , Phoebe , he say , turn a bracelet over and over in his big red hand . 

 " put it down , Luke ! put it down directly ! " cry the girl , with a look of terror ; " how can you speak about such thing ? " 

 he lay the bracelet in its place with a reluctant sigh , and then continue his examination of the casket . 

 " what be this ? " he ask presently , point to a brass knob in the frame - work of the box . 

 he push it as he speak , and a secret drawer , line with purple velvet , fly out of the casket . 

 " look ye here ! " cry Luke , please at his discovery . 

 Phoebe Marks throw down the dress she have be fold , and go over to the toilette table . 

 " why , I never see this before , " she say ; " I wonder what there be in it ? " 

 there be not much in it ; neither gold nor gem ; only a baby 's little worsted shoe roll up in a piece of paper , and a tiny lock of pale and silky yellow hair , evidently take from a baby 's head . Phoebe 's eye dilate as she examine the little packet . 

 " so this be what my lady hide in the secret drawer , " she mutter . 

 " it be queer rubbish to keep in such a place , " say Luke , carelessly . 

 the girl 's thin lip curve into a curious smile . 

 " you will bear I witness where I find this , " she say , put the little parcel into her pocket . 

 " why , Phoebe , you be not go to be such a fool as to take that , " cry the young man . 

 " I would rather have this than the diamond bracelet you would have like to take , " she answer ; " you shall have the public house , Luke . " 

 CHAPTER IV . 

 in the first page of " the TIMES . " 

 Robert Audley be suppose to be a barrister . as a barrister be his name inscribe in the law - list ; as a barrister he have chamber in Figtree Court , Temple ; as a barrister he have eat the allotted number of dinner , which form the sublime ordeal through which the forensic aspirant wade on to fame and fortune . if these thing can make a man a barrister , Robert Audley decidedly be one . but he have never either have a brief , or try to get a brief , or even wish to have a brief in all those five year , during which his name have be paint upon one of the door in Figtree Court . he be a handsome , lazy , care - for - nothing fellow , of about seven - and - twenty ; the only son of a young brother of Sir Michael Audley . his father have leave he l400 a year , which his friend have advise he to increase by be call to the bar ; and as he find it , after due consideration , more trouble to oppose the wish of these friend than to eat so many dinner , and to take a set of chamber in the Temple , he adopt the latter course , and unblushingly call himself a barrister . 

 sometimes , when the weather be very hot , and he have exhaust himself with the exertion of smoke his german pipe , and read french novel , he would stroll into the Temple Gardens , and lie in some shady spot , pale and cool , with his shirt collar turn down and a blue silk handkerchief tie loosely about his neck , would tell grave bencher that he have knock himself up with over work . 

 the sly old bencher laugh at the pleasant fiction ; but they all agree that Robert Audley be a good fellow ; a generous - hearted fellow ; rather a curious fellow , too , with a fund of sly wit and quiet humor , under his listless , dawdling , indifferent , irresolute manner . a man who would never get on in the world ; but who would not hurt a worm . indeed , his chamber be convert into a perfect dog - kennel , by his habit of bring home stray and benighted cur , who be attract by his look in the street , and follow he with abject fondness . 

 Robert always spend the hunting season at Audley Court ; not that he be distinguish as a Nimrod , for he would quietly trot to covert upon a mild - temper , stout - limbe bay hack , and keep at a very respectful distance from the hard rider ; his horse know quite as well as he do , that nothing be further from his thought than any desire to be in at the death . 

 the young man be a great favorite with his uncle , and by no mean despise by his pretty , gipsy - face , light - hearted , hoydenish cousin , Miss Alicia Audley . it might have seem to other man , that the partiality of a young lady who be sole heiress to a very fine estate , be rather well worth cultivating , but it do not so occur to Robert Audley . Alicia be a very nice girl , he say , a jolly girl , with no nonsense about she a girl of a thousand ; but this be the high point to which enthusiasm could carry he . the idea of turn his cousin 's girlish like for he to some good account never enter his idle brain . I doubt if he even have any correct notion of the amount of his uncle 's fortune , and I be certain that he never for one moment calculate upon the chance of any part of that fortune ultimately come to himself . so that when , one fine spring morning , about three month before the time of which I be write , the postman bring he the wedding card of Sir Michael and Lady Audley , together with a very indignant letter from his cousin , set forth how her father have just marry a wax - dollish young person , no old than Alicia herself , with flaxen ringlet , and a perpetual giggle ; for I be sorry to say that Miss Audley 's animus cause she thus to describe that pretty musical laugh which have be so much admire in the late Miss Lucy Graham when , I say , these document reach Robert Audley they elicit neither vexation nor astonishment in the lymphatic nature of that gentleman . he read Alicia 's angry cross and recrossed letter without so much as remove the amber mouth - piece of his german pipe from his mustache lip . when he have finish the perusal of the epistle , which he read with his dark eyebrow elevate to the center of his forehead   his only manner of express surprise , by the way   he deliberately throw that and the wedding card into the waste - paper basket , and put down his pipe , prepare himself for the exertion of think out the subject . 

 " I always say the old buffer would marry , " he mutter , after about half an hour 's revery . Alicia and my lady , the stepmother , will go at it hammer and tong . I hope they will not   quarrel in the hunting season , or say unpleasant thing to each other at the dinner - table ; row always upset a man 's digestion . 

 at about twelve o'clock on the morning follow that night upon which the event record in my last chapter have take place , the baronet 's nephew stroll out of the Temple , Blackfriarsward , on his way to the city . he have in an evil hour oblige some necessitous friend by put the ancient name of Audley across a bill of accommodation , which bill not have be provide for by the drawer , Robert be call upon to pay . for this purpose he saunter up Ludgate Hill , with his blue necktie flutter in the hot August air , and thence to a refreshingly cool banking - house in a shady court out of St. Paul 's churchyard , where he make arrangement for sell out a couple of hundred pound ' worth of consol . 

 he have transact this business , and be loiter at the corner of the court , wait for a chance hansom to convey he back to the Temple , when he be almost knock down by a man of about his own age , who dash headlong into the narrow opening . 

 " be so good as to look where you be go , my friend ! " Robert remonstrate , mildly , to the impetuous passenger ; " you might give a man warn before you throw he down and trample upon he . " 

 the stranger stop suddenly , look very hard at the speaker , and then gasp for breath . 

 " Bob ! " he cry , in a tone expressive of the most intense astonishment ; " I only touch british ground after dark last night , and to think that I should meet you this morning . " 

 " I have   see you somewhere before , my bearded friend , " say Mr. Audley , calmly scrutinize the animate face of the other , " but I will be hang if I can remember when or where . " 

 " what ! " exclaim the stranger , reproachfully . " you do not   mean to say that you have   forget George Talboys ? " 

 " no I have not ! " say Robert , with an emphasis by no mean usual to he ; and then hook his arm into that of his friend , he lead he into the shady court , say , with his old indifference , " and now , George tell we all about it . " 

 George Talboys do tell he all about it . he tell that very story which he have relate ten day before to the pale governess on board the Argus ; and then , hot and breathless , he say that he have twenty thousand pound or so in his pocket , and that he want to bank it at Messrs. , who have be his banker many year before . 

 " if you will believe I , I have   only just leave their counting - house , " say Robert . " I will go back with you , and we will settle that matter in five minute . " 

 they do contrive to settle it in about a quarter of an hour ; and then Robert Audley be for start off immediately for the Crown and Scepter , at Greenwich , or the Castle , at Richmond , where they could have a bit of dinner , and talk over those good old time when they be together at Eton . but George tell his friend that before he go anywhere , before he shave or break his fast , or in any way refresh himself after a night journey from Liverpool by express train , he must call at a certain coffee - house in Bridge street , Westminster , where he expect to find a letter from his wife . 

 as they dash through Ludgate Hill , Fleet street , and the Strand , in a fast hansom , George Talboys pour into his friend 's ear all those wild hope and dream which have usurp such a dominion over his sanguine nature . 

 " I shall take a villa on the bank of the Thames , Bob , " he say , " for the little wife and myself ; and we will have a yacht , Bob , old boy , and you shall lie on the deck and smoke , while my pretty one play her guitar and sing song to we . she be for all the world like one of those what's - its - name , who get poor old Ulysses into trouble , " add the young man , whose classic lore be not very great . 

 the waiter at the Westminster coffee - house star at the hollow - eye , unshaven stranger , with his clothe of colonial cut , and his boisterous , excited manner ; but he have be an old frequenter of the place in his military day , and when they hear who he be they fly to do his bidding . 

 he do not want much only a bottle of soda - water , and to know if there be a letter at the bar direct to George Talboys . 

 the waiter bring the soda - water before the young man have seat themselves in a shady box near the disuse fire - place . no ; there be no letter for that name . 

 the waiter say it with consummate indifference , while he mechanically dust the little mahogany table . 

 George 's face blanch to a deadly whiteness . " talboy , " he say ; " perhaps you do not   hear the name distinctly T , A , L , B , O , Y , S. go and look again , there must be a letter . " 

 the waiter shrug his shoulder as he leave the room , and return in three minute to say that there be no name at all resemble Talboys in the letter rack . there be Brown , and Sanderson , and Pinchbeck ; only three letter altogether . 

 the young man drink his soda - water in silence , and then , lean his elbow on the table , cover his face with his hand . there be something in his manner which tell Robert Audley that his disappointment , trifle as it may appear , be in reality a very bitter one . he seat himself opposite to his friend , but do not attempt to address he . 

 by - and - by George look up , and mechanically take a greasy Times newspaper of the day before from a heap of journal on the table , star vacantly at the first page . 

 I can not tell how long he sit blankly star at one paragraph among the list of death , before his daze brain take in its full meaning ; but after considerable pause he push the newspaper over to Robert Audley , and with a face that have change from its dark bronze to a sickly , chalky grayish white , and with an awful calmness in his manner , he point with his finger to a line which run thus : 

 " on the 24th inst . , at Ventnor , Isle of Wight , Helen Talboys , age 22 . " 

 CHAPTER V. 

 the headstone AT VENTNOR . 

 yes , there it be in black and white " Helen Talboys , age 22 . " 

 when George tell the governess on board the Argus that if he hear any evil tiding of his wife he should drop down dead , he speak in perfect good faith ; and yet , here be the bad tiding that could come to he , and he sit rigid , white and helpless , star stupidly at the shocked face of his friend . 

 the suddenness of the blow have stun he . in this strange and bewildered state of mind he begin to wonder what have happen , and why it be that one line in the Times newspaper could have so horrible an effect upon he . 

 then by degree even this vague consciousness of his misfortune fade slowly out of his mind , succeed by a painful consciousness of external thing . 

 the hot August sunshine , the dusty window - pane and shabby - paint blind , a file of fly - blow play - bill fasten to the wall , the black and empty fire - place , a bald - headed old man nod over the Morning Advertizer , the slip - shod waiter fold a tumbled table - cloth , and Robert Audley 's handsome face look at he full of compassionate alarm he know that all these thing take gigantic proportion , and then , one by one , melt into dark blot and swam before his eye , he know that there be a great noise , as of half a dozen furious steam - engine tear and grind in his ear , and he know nothing more except that somebody or something fall heavily to the ground . 

 he open his eye upon the dusky evening in a cool and shaded room , the silence only break by the rumbling of wheel at a distance . 

 he look about he wonderingly , but half indifferently . his old friend , Robert Audley , be seat by his side smoking . George be lie on a low iron bedstead opposite to an open window , in which there be a stand of flower and two or three bird in cage . 

 " you do not   mind the pipe , do you , George ? " his friend ask , quietly . 

 " no . " 

 he lie for some time look at the flower and the bird ; one canary be sing a shrill hymn to the set sun . 

 " do the bird annoy you , George ? shall I take they out of the room ? " 

 " no ; I like to hear they sing . " 

 Robert Audley knock the ash out of his pipe , lay the precious meerschaum tenderly upon the mantelpiece , and go into the next room , return presently with a cup of strong tea . 

 " take this , George , " he say , as he place the cup on a little table close to George 's pillow ; " it will do your head good . " 

 the young man do not answer , but look slowly round the room , and then at his friend 's grave face . 

 " Bob , " he say , " where be we ? " 

 " in my chamber , dear boy , in the Temple . you have no lodging of your own , so you may as well stay with I while you be in town . " 

 George pass his hand once or twice across his forehead , and then , in a hesitate manner , say , quietly : 

 " that newspaper this morning , Bob ; what be it ? " 

 " never mind just now , old boy ; drink some tea . " 

 " yes , yes , " cry George , impatiently , raise himself upon the bed , and star about he with hollow eye . " I remember all about it . Helen ! my Helen ! my wife , my darling , my only love ! dead , dead ! " 

 " George , " say Robert Audley , lay his hand gently upon the young man 's arm , " you must remember that the person whose name you see in the paper may not be your wife . there may have be some other Helen Talboys . " 

 " no , no ! " he cry ; " the age correspond with her , and Talboys be such an uncommon name . " 

 " it may be a misprint for Talbot . " 

 " no , no , no ; my wife be dead ! " 

 he shake off Robert 's restrain hand , and rise from the bed , walk straight to the door . 

 " where be you go ? " exclaim his friend . 

 " to Ventnor , to see her grave . " 

 " not to - night , George , not to - night . I will go with you myself by the first train to - morrow . " 

 Robert lead he back to the bed , and gently force he to lie down again . he then give he an opiate , which have be leave for he by the medical man whom they have call in at the coffee - house in Bridge street , when George faint . 

 so George Talboys fall into a heavy slumber , and dream that he go to Ventnor , to find his wife alive and happy , but wrinkle , old , and gray , and to find his son grow into a young man . 

 early the next morning he be seat opposite to Robert Audley in the first - class carriage of an express , whirl through the pretty open country toward Portsmouth . 

 they land at Ventnor under the burn heat of the midday sun . as the two young man come from the steamer , the people on the pier star at George 's white face and untrimmed beard . 

 " what be we to do , George ? " Robert Audley ask . " we have no clew to find the people you want to see . " 

 the young man look at he with a pitiful , bewildered expression . the big dragoon be as helpless as a baby ; and Robert Audley , the most vacillating and unenergetic of man , find himself call upon to act for another . he rise superior to himself , and equal to the occasion . 

 " have we not well ask at one of the hotel about a Mrs. Talboys , George ? " he say . 

 " her father 's name be Maldon , " George mutter ; " he could never have send she here to die alone . " 

 they say nothing more ; but Robert walk straight to a hotel where he inquire for a Mr. Maldon . 

 yes , they tell he , there be a gentleman of that name stop at Ventnor , a Captain Maldon ; his daughter be lately dead . the waiter would go and inquire for the address . 

 the hotel be a busy place at this season ; people hurry in and out , and a great bustle of groom and waiter about the hall . 

 George Talboys lean against the doorpost , with much the same look in his face , as that which have frighten his friend in the Westminister coffee - house . 

 the bad be confirm now . his wife , Captain Maldon 's daughter be dead . 

 the waiter return in about five minute to say that Captain Maldon be lodge at Lansdowne Cottage , no . 4 . 

 they easily find the house , a shabby , low - windowed cottage , look toward the water . 

 be Captain Maldon at home ? no , the landlady say ; he have go out on the beach with his little grandson . would the gentleman walk in and sit down a bit ? 

 George mechanically follow his friend into the little front parlor dusty , shabbily furnish , and disorderly , with a child 's break toy scatter on the floor , and the scent of stale tobacco hang about the muslin window - curtain . 

 " look ! " say George , point to a picture over the mantelpiece . 

 it be his own portrait , paint in the old dragooning day . a pretty good likeness , represent he in uniform , with his charger in the background . 

 perhaps the most animate of man would have be scarcely so wise a comforter as Robert Audley . he do not utter a word to the stricken widower , but quietly seat himself with his back to George , look out of the open window . 

 for some time the young man wander restlessly about the room , look at and sometimes touch the nick - nack lie here and there . 

 her workbox , with an unfinished piece of work ; her album full of extract from Byron and Moore , write in his own scrawling hand ; some book which he have give she , and a bunch of wither flower in a vase they have buy in Italy . 

 " her portrait use to hang by the side of mine , " he mutter ; " I wonder what they have do with it . " 

 by - and - by he say , after about an hour 's silence : 

 " I should like to see the woman of the house ; I should like to ask she about " 

 he break down , and bury his face in his hand . 

 Robert summon the landlady . she be a good - natured garrulous creature , accustom to sickness and death , for many of her lodger come to she to die . 

 she tell all the particular of Mrs. Talboys ' last hour ; how she have come to Ventnor only ten day before her death , in the last stage of decline ; and how , day by day , she have gradually , but surely , sink under the fatal malady . be the gentleman any relative ? she ask of Robert Audley , as George sob aloud . 

 " yes , he be the lady 's husband . " 

 " what ! " the woman cry ; " he as desert she so cruel , and leave she with her pretty boy upon her poor old father 's hand , which Captain Maldon have tell I often , with the tear in his poor eye ? " 

 " I do not desert she , " George cry out ; and then he tell the history of his three year ' struggle . 

 " do she speak of I ? " he ask ; " do she speak of I at at the last ? " 

 " no , she go off as quiet as a lamb . she say very little from the first ; but the last day she know nobody , not even her little boy , nor her poor old father , who take on awful . once she go off wild - like , talk about her mother , and about the cruel shame it be to leave she to die in a strange place , till it be quite pitiful to hear she . " 

 " her mother die when she be quite a child , " say George . " to think that she should remember she and speak of she , but never once of I . " 

 the woman take he into the little bedroom in which his wife have die . he kneel down by the bed and kiss the pillow tenderly , the landlady cry as he do so . 

 while he be kneel , pray , perhaps , with his face bury in this humble , snow - white pillow , the woman take something from a drawer . she give it to he when he rise from his knee ; it be a long tress of hair wrap in silver paper . 

 " I cut this off when she lie in her coffin , " she say , " poor dear ? " 

 he press the soft lock to his lip . " yes , " he murmur ; " this be the dear hair that I have kiss so often when her head lie upon my shoulder . but it always have a ripple wave in it then , and now it seem smooth and straight . " 

 " it change in illness , " say the landlady . " if you would like to see where they have lay she , Mr. Talboys , my little boy shall show you the way to the churchyard . " 

 so George Talboys and his faithful friend walk to the quiet spot , where , beneath a mound of earth , to which the patch of fresh turf hardly adhere , lie that wife of whose welcome smile George have dream so often in the far antipode . 

 Robert leave the young man by the side of this newly - make grave , and return in about a quarter of an hour , find that he have not once stir . 

 he look up presently , and say that if there be a stone - mason 's anywhere near he should like to give an order . 

 they very easily find the stonemason , and sit down amidst the fragmentary litter of the man 's yard , George Talboys write in pencil this brief inscription for the headstone of his dead wife 's grave : 


 sacred to the Memory of 
 HELEN , 
 the beloved wife of GEORGE TALBOYS , 
 " who depart this life 
 August 24th , 18 , age 22 , 
 deeply regret by her sorrow Husband . 

 CHAPTER VI . 

 ANYWHERE , ANYWHERE OUT of the world . 

 when they return to Lansdowne Cottage they find the old man have not yet come in , so they walk down to the beach to look for he . after a brief search they find he , sit upon a heap of pebble , read a newspaper and eat filbert . the little boy be at some distance from his grandfather , dig in the sand with a wooden spade . the crape round the old man 's shabby hat , and the child 's poor little black frock , go to George 's heart . go where he would he meet fresh confirmation of this great grief of his life . his wife be dead . 

 " Mr. Maldon , " he say , as he approach his father - in - law . 

 the old man look up , and , drop his newspaper , rise from the pebble with a ceremonious bow . his faded light hair be ting with gray ; he have a pinch hook nose ; watery blue eye , and an irresolute - look mouth ; he wear his shabby dress with an affectation of foppish gentility ; an eye - glass dangle over his closely button - up waistcoat , and he carry a cane in his ungloved hand . 

 " Great Heaven ! " cry George , " do not   you know I ? " 

 Mr. Maldon start and color violently , with something of a frightened look , as he recognize his son - in - law . 

 " my dear boy , " he say , " I do not ; for the first moment I do not . that beard make such a difference . you find the beard make a great difference , do you not , sir ? " he say , appeal to Robert . 

 " great heaven ! " exclaim George Talboys , " be this the way you welcome I ? I come to England to find my wife dead within a week of my touching land , and you begin to chatter to I about my beard you , her father ! " 

 " true ! true ! " mutter the old man , wipe his bloodshot eye ; " a sad shock , a sad shock , my dear George . if you have only be here a week early . " 

 " if I have , " cry George , in an outburst of grief and passion , " I scarcely think that I would have let she die . I would have dispute for she with death . I would ! I would ! oh God ! why do not the Argus go down with every soul on board she before I come to see this day ? " 

 he begin to walk up and down the beach , his father - in - law look helplessly at he , rub his feeble eye with a handkerchief . 

 " I have   a strong notion that that old man do not   treat his daughter too well , " think Robert , as he watch the half - pay lieutenant . " he seem , for some reason or other , to be half afraid of George . " 

 while the agitated young man walk up and down in a fever of regret and despair , the child run to his grandfather , and clung about the tail of his coat . 

 " come home , grandpa , come home , " he say . " I be tired . " 

 George Talboys turn at the sound of the babyish voice , and look long and earnestly at the boy . 

 he have his father 's brown eye and dark hair . 

 " my darling ! my darling ! " say George , take the child in his arm , " I be your father , come across the sea to find you . will you love I ? " 

 the little fellow push he away . " I do not   know you , " he say . " I love grandpa and Mrs. Monks at Southampton . " 

 " Georgey have a temper of his own , sir , " say the old man . " he have be spoil . " 

 they walk slowly back to the cottage , and once more George Talboys tell the history of that desertion which have seem so cruel . he tell , too , of the twenty thousand pound bank by he the day before . he have not the heart to ask any question about the past , and his father - in - law only tell he that a few month after his departure they have go from the place where George leave they to live at Southampton , where Helen get a few pupil for the piano , and where they manage pretty well till her health fail , and she fall into the decline of which she die . like most sad story it be a very brief one . 

 " the boy seem fond of you , Mr. Maldon , " say George , after a pause . 

 " yes , yes , " answer the old man , smooth the child 's curling hair ; " yes . Georgey be very fond of his grandfather . " 

 " then he have well stop with you . the interest of my money will be about six hundred a year . you can draw a hundred of that for Georgey 's education , leave the rest to accumulate till he be of age . my friend here will be trustee , and if he will undertake the charge , I will appoint he guardian to the boy , allow he for the present to remain under your care . " 

 " but why not take care of he yourself , George ? " ask Robert Audley . 

 " because I shall sail in the very next vessel that leave Liverpool for Australia . I shall be well in the digging or the backwood than ever I could be here . I be break for a civilized life from this hour , Bob . " 

 the old man 's weak eye sparkle as George declare this determination . 

 " my poor boy , I think you be right , " he say , " I really think you be right . the change , the wild life , the the " he hesitate and break down as Robert look earnestly at he . 

 " you be in a great hurry to get rid of your son - in - law , I think , Mr. Maldon , " he say , gravely . 

 " get rid of he , dear boy ! oh , no , no ! but for his own sake , my dear sir , for his own sake , you know . " 

 " I think for his own sake he would much well stay in England and look after his son , " say Robert . 

 " but I tell you I can not , " cry George ; " every inch of this accursed ground be hateful to I I want to run out of it as I would out of a graveyard . I will go back to town to - night , get that business about the money settle early to - morrow morning , and start for Liverpool without a moment 's delay . I shall be well when I have   put half the world between I and her grave . " 

 " before he leave the house he steal out to the landlady , and ask some more question about his dead wife . 

 " be they poor ? " he ask , " be they pinch for money while she be ill ? " 

 " oh , no ! " the woman answer ; " though the captain dress shabby , he have always plenty of sovereign in his purse . the poor lady want for nothing . " 

 George be relieve at this , though it puzzle he to know where the drunken half - pay lieutenant could have contrive to find money for all the expense of his daughter 's illness . 

 but he be too thoroughly break down by the calamity which have befall he to be able to think much of anything , so he ask no further question , but walk with his father - in - law and Robert Audley down to the boat by which they be to cross to Portsmouth . 

 the old man bid Robert a very ceremonious adieu . 

 " you do not introduce I to your friend , by - the - bye , my dear boy , " he say . George star at he , mutter something indistinct , and run down the ladder to the boat before Mr. Maldon could repeat his request . the steamer speed away through the sunset , and the outline of the island melt in the horizon as they near the opposite shore . 

 " to think , " say George , " that two night ago , at this time , I be steam into Liverpool , full of the hope of clasp she to my heart , and to - night I be go away from her grave ! " 

 the document which appoint Robert Audley as guardian to little George Talboys be draw up in a solicitor 's office the next morning . 

 " it be a great responsibility , " exclaim Robert ; " I , guardian to anybody or anything ! I , who never in my life could take care of myself ! " 

 " I trust in your noble heart , Bob , " say George . " I know you will take care of my poor orphan boy , and see that he be well use by his grandfather . I shall only draw enough from Georgey 's fortune to take I back to Sydney , and then begin my old work again . " 

 but it seem as if George be destine to be himself the guardian of his son ; for when he reach Liverpool , he find that a vessel have just sail , and that there would not be another for a month ; so he return to London , and once more throw himself upon Robert Audley 's hospitality . 

 the barrister receive he with open arm ; he give he the room with the bird and flower , and have a bed put up in his dressing - room for himself . Grief be so selfish that George do not know the sacrifice his friend make for his comfort . he only know that for he the sun be darken , and the business of life do . he sit all day long smoking cigar , and star at the flower and canary , chafe for the time to pass that he might be far out at sea . 

 but just as the hour be draw near for the sailing of the vessel , Robert Audley come in one day , full of a great scheme . 

 a friend of his , another of those barrister whose last thought be of a brief , be go to St. Petersburg to spend the winter , and want Robert to accompany he . Robert would only go on condition that George go too . 

 for a long time the young man resist ; but when he find that Robert be , in a quiet way , thoroughly determine upon not go without he , he give in , and consent to join the party . what do it matter ? he say . one place be the same to he as another ; anywhere out of England ; what do he care where ? 

 this be not a very cheerful way of look at thing , but Robert Audley be quite satisfied with have win his consent . 

 the three young man start under very favorable circumstance , carry letter of introduction to the most influential inhabitant of the russian capital . 

 before leave England , Robert write to his cousin Alicia , tell she of his intend departure with his old friend George Talboys , whom he have lately meet for the first time after a lapse of year , and who have just lose his wife . 

 Alicia 's reply come by return post , and run thus : 

 " MY dear robert how cruel of you to run away to that horrid St. Petersburg before the hunting season ! I have hear that people lose their nose in that disagreeable climate , and as yours be rather a long one , I should advise you to return before the very severe weather set in . what sort of person be this Mr. Talboys ? if he be very agreeable you may bring he to the Court as soon as you return from your travel . Lady Audley tell I to request you to secure she a set of sable . you be not to consider the price , but to be sure that they be the handsome that can be obtain . Papa be perfectly absurd about his new wife , and she and I can not get on together at all ; not that she be , disagreeable to I , for , as far as that go , she make herself agreeable to every one ; but she be so irretrievably childish and silly . 

 " believe I to be , my dear Robert . 

 " your affectionate cousin , 

 " ALICIA AUDLEY . " 

 CHAPTER VII . 

 after a year . 

 the first year of George Talboys ' widowhood pass away , the deep band of crepe about his hat grow brown and dusty , and as the last burn day of another August fade out , he sit smoke cigar in the quiet chamber of Figtree Court , much as he have do the year before , when the horror of his grief be new to he , and every object in life , however trifle or however important , seem saturate with his one great sorrow . 

 but the big ex - dragoon have survive his affliction by a twelvemonth , and hard as it may be to have to tell it , he do not look much the bad for it . Heaven know what waste agony of remorse and self - reproach may not have rack George 's honest heart , as he lie awake at night think of the wife he have abandon in the pursuit of a fortune , which she never live to share . 

 once , while they be abroad , Robert Audley venture to congratulate he upon his recovered spirit . he burst into a bitter laugh . 

 " do you know , Bob , " he say , " that when some of our fellow be wound in India , they come home , bring bullet inside they . they do not talk of they , and they be stout and hearty , and look as well , perhaps , as you or I ; but every change in the weather , however slight , every variation of the atmosphere , however trifle , bring back the old agony of their wound as sharp as ever they have feel it on the battle - field . I have   have my wound , Bob ; I carry the bullet still , and I shall carry it into my coffin . " 

 the traveler return from St. Petersburg in the spring , and George again take up his quarter at his old friend 's chamber , only leave they now and then to run down to Southampton and take a look at his little boy . he always go load with toy and sweetmeat to give to the child ; but , for all this , Georgey would not become very familiar with his papa , and the young man 's heart sicken as he begin to fancy that even his child be lose to he . 

 " what can I do ? " he think . " if I take he away from his grandfather , I shall break his heart ; if I let he remain , he will grow up a stranger to I , and care more for that drunken old hypocrite than for his own father . but then , what could an ignorant , heavy dragoon like I do with such a child ? what could I teach he , except to smoke cigar and idle around all day with his hand in his pocket ? " 

 so the anniversary of that 30th of August , upon which George have see the advertisement of his wife 's death in the Times newspaper , come round for the first time , and the young man put off his black clothe and the shabby crape from his hat , and lay his mournful garment in a trunk in which he keep a packet of his wife 's letter , her portrait , and that lock of hair which have be cut from her head after death . Robert Audley have never see either the letter , the portrait , or the long tress of silky hair ; nor , indeed , have George ever mention the name of his dead wife after that one day at Ventnor , on which he learn the full particular of her decease . 

 " I shall write to my cousin Alicia to - day , George , " the young barrister say , upon this very 30th of August . " do you know that the day after to - morrow be the 1st of September ? I shall write and tell she that we will both run down to the Court for a week 's shooting . " 

 " no , no , Bob ; go by yourself ; they do not   want I , and I would rather " 

 " bury yourself in Figtree Court , with no company but my dog and canary ! no , George , you shall do nothing of the kind . " 

 " but I do not   care for shoot . " 

 " and do you suppose I care for it ? " cry Robert , with charming naivete . " why , man , I do not   know a partridge from a pigeon , and it might be the 1st of April , instead of the 1st of September , for aught I care . I never hurt a bird in my life , but I have hurt my own shoulder with the weight of my gun . I only go down to Essex for the change of air , the good dinner , and the sight of my uncle 's honest , handsome face . besides , this time I have   another inducement , as I want to see this fair - haired paragon my new aunt . you will go with I , George ? " 

 " yes , if you really wish it . " 

 the quiet form his grief have take after its first brief violence , leave he as submissive as a child to the will of his friend ; ready to go anywhere or do anything ; never enjoy himself , or originate any enjoyment , but join in the pleasure of other with a hopeless , uncomplaine , unobtrusive resignation peculiar to his simple nature . but the return of post bring a letter from Alicia Audley , to say that the two young man could not be receive at the Court . 

 " there be seventeen spare bed - room , " write the young lady , in an indignant run hand , " but for all that , my dear Robert , you can not   come ; for my lady have take it into her silly head that she be too ill to entertain visitor   there be no more the matter with she than there be with I , and she can not have gentleman   great , rough man , she say   in the house . please apologize to your friend Mr. Talboys , and tell he that papa expect to see you both in the hunting season . " 

 " my lady 's air and grace shall not   keep we out of Essex for all that , " say Robert , as he twist the letter into a pipe - light for his big meerschaum . " I will tell you what we will do , George : there be a glorious inn at Audley , and plenty of fishing in the neighborhood ; we will go there and have a week 's sport . fishing be much well than shoot ; you have   only to lie on a bank and stare at your line ; I do not   find that you often catch anything , but it be very pleasant . " 

 he hold the twisted letter to the feeble spark of fire glimmering in the grate , as he speak , and then change his mind , deliberately unfold it , and smooth the crumpled paper with his hand . 

 " poor little Alicia ! " he say , thoughtfully ; " it be rather hard to treat her letter so cavalierly I will keep it ; " upon which Mr. Robert Audley put the note back into its envelope , and afterward thrust it into a pigeon - hole in his office desk , mark important . Heaven know what wonderful document there be in this particular pigeon - hole , but I do not think it likely to have contain anything of great judicial value . if any one could at that moment have tell the young barrister that so simple a thing as his cousin 's brief letter would one day come to be a link in that terrible chain of evidence afterward to be slowly forge in the only criminal case in which he be ever to be concern , perhaps Mr. Robert Audley would have lift his eyebrow a little high than usual . 

 so the two young man leave London the next day , with one portmanteau and a rod and tackle between they , and reach the straggling , old - fashioned , fast - decay village of Audley , in time to order a good dinner at the Sun Inn . 

 Audley Court be about three - quarter of a mile from the village , lying , as I have say , deep down in the hollow , shut in by luxuriant timber . you could only reach it by a cross - road border by tree , and as trimly keep as the avenue in a gentleman 's park . it be a lonely place enough , even in all its rustic beauty , for so bright a creature as the late Miss Lucy Graham , but the generous baronet have transform the interior of the gray old mansion into a little palace for his young wife , and Lady Audley seem as happy as a child surround by new and costly toy . 

 in her well fortune , as in her old day of dependence , wherever she go she seem to take sunshine and gladness with she . in spite of Miss Alicia 's undisguised contempt for her step - mother 's childishness and frivolity , Lucy be well love and more admire than the baronet 's daughter . that very childishness have a charm which few could resist . the innocence and candor of an infant beam in Lady Audley 's fair face , and shine out of her large and liquid blue eye . the rosy lip , the delicate nose , the profusion of fair ringlet , all contribute to preserve to her beauty the character of extreme youth and freshness . she own to twenty year of age , but it be hard to believe she more than seventeen . her fragile figure , which she love to dress in heavy velvet , and stiff , rustle silk , till she look like a child trick out for a masquerade , be as girlish as if she have just leave the nursery . all her amusement be childish . she hat reading , or study of any kind , and love society . rather than be alone , she would admit Phoebe Marks into her confidence , and loll on one of the sofa in her luxurious dressing - room , discuss a new costume for some come dinner - party ; or sit chatter to the girl with her jewel - box beside she , upon the satin cushion , and Sir Michael 's present spread out in her lap , while she count and admire her treasure . 

 she have appear at several public ball at Chelmsford and Colchester , and be immediately establish as the belle of the county . pleased with her high position and her handsome house ; with every caprice gratify , every whim indulge ; admire and caress wherever she go ; fond of her generous husband ; rich in a noble allowance of pin - money ; with no poor relation to worry she with claim upon her purse or patronage ; it would have be hard to find in the County of Essex a more fortunate creature than Lucy , Lady Audley . 

 the two young man loiter over the dinner - table in the private sitting - room at the Sun Inn . the window be throw wide open , and the fresh country air blow in upon they as they din . the weather be lovely ; the foliage of the wood touch here and there with faint gleam of the early tint of autumn ; the yellow corn still stand in some of the field , in other just fall under the shin sickle ; while in the narrow lane you meet great wagon draw by broad - cheste cart - horse , carry home the rich golden store . to any one who have be , during the hot summer month , pen up in London , there be in the first taste of rustic life a kind of sensuous rapture scarcely to be describe . George Talboys feel this , and in this he experience the near approach to enjoyment that he have ever know since his wife 's death . 

 the clock strike five as they finish dinner . 

 " put on your hat , George , " say Robert Audley ; " they do not   dine at the Court till seven ; we shall have time to stroll down and see the old place and its inhabitant . " 

 the landlord , who have come into the room with a bottle of wine , look up as the young man speak . 

 " I beg your pardon , Mr. Audley , " he say , " but if you want to see your uncle , you will lose your time by go to the Court just now . Sir Michael and my lady and Miss Alicia have all go to the race up at Chorley , and they will not   be back till nigh upon eight o'clock , most likely . they must pass by here to go home . " 

 under these circumstance of course it be no use go to the Court , so the two young man stroll through the village and look at the old church , and then go and reconnoiter the stream in which they be to fish the next day , and by such mean beguile the time until after seven o'clock . at about a quarter past that hour they return to the inn , and seat themselves in the open window , light their cigar and look out at the peaceful prospect . 

 we hear every day of murder commit in the country . brutal and treacherous murder ; slow , protract agony from poison administer by some kindre hand ; sudden and violent death by cruel blow , inflict with a stake cut from some spread oak , whose every shadow promise peace . in the county of which I write , I have be show a meadow in which , on a quiet summer Sunday evening , a young farmer murder the girl who have love and trust he ; and yet , even now , with the stain of that foul deed upon it , the aspect of the spot be peace . no specie of crime have ever be commit in the bad rookery about seven dial that have not be also do in the face of that rustic calm which still , in spite of all , we look on with a tender , half - mournful yearning , and associate with peace . 

 it be dusk when gig and chaise , dog - cart and clumsy farmer ' phaeton , begin to rattle through the village street , and under the window of the Sun Inn ; deep dusk still when an open carriage and four draw suddenly up beneath the rock sign - post . 

 it be Sir Michael Audley 's barouche which come to so sudden a stop before the little inn . the harness of one of the leader have become out of order , and the foremost postillion dismount to set it right . 

 " why , it be my uncle , " cry Robert Audley , as the carriage stop . " I will run down and speak to he . " 

 George light another cigar , and , shelter by the window - curtain , look out at the little party . Alicia sit with she back to the horse , and he could perceive , even in the dusk , that she be a handsome brunette ; but Lady Audley be seat on the side of the carriage furthest from the inn , and he could see nothing of the fair - haired paragon of whom he have hear so much . 

 " why , Robert , " exclaim Sir Michael , as his nephew emerge from the inn , " this be a surprise ! " 

 " I have not come to intrude upon you at the Court , my dear uncle , " say the young man , as the baronet shake he by the hand in his own hearty fashion . " essex be my native county , you know , and about this time of year I generally have a touch of homesickness ; so George and I have come down to the inn for two or three day 's fishing . " 

 " George George who ? " 

 " George Talboys . " 

 " what , have he come ? " cry Alicia . " I be so glad ; for I be die to see this handsome young widower . " 

 " be you , Alicia ? " say her cousin , " then egad , I will run and fetch he , and introduce you to he at once . " 

 now , so complete be the dominion which Lady Audley have , in her own childish , unthinke way , obtain over her devoted husband , that it be very rarely that the baronet 's eye be long remove from his wife 's pretty face . when Robert , therefore , be about to re - enter the inn , it need but the faint elevation of Lucy 's eyebrow , with a charming expression of weariness and terror , to make her husband aware that she do not want to be bore by an introduction to Mr. George Talboys . 

 " never mind to - night , Bob , " he say . " my wife be a little tired after our long day 's pleasure . bring your friend to dinner to - morrow , and then he and Alicia can make each other 's acquaintance . come round and speak to Lady Audley , and then we will drive home . " 

 my lady be so terribly fatigued that she could only smile sweetly , and hold out a tiny gloved hand to her nephew by marriage . 

 " you will come and dine with we to - morrow , and bring your interesting friend ? " she say , in a low and tired voice . she have be the chief attraction of the race - course , and be weary out by the exertion of fascinating half the county . 

 " it be a wonder she do not   treat you to she never - end laugh , " whisper Alicia , as she lean over the carriage - door to bid Robert good - night ; " but I dare say she reserve that for your delectation to - morrow . I suppose you be fascinate as well as everybody else ? " add the young lady , rather snappishly . 

 " she be a lovely creature , certainly , " murmur Robert , with placid admiration . 

 " oh , of course ! now , she be the first woman of whom I ever hear you say a civil word , Robert Audley . I be sorry to find you can only admire wax doll . " 

 Poor Alicia have have many skirmish with her cousin upon that particular temperament of his , which , while it enable he to go through life with perfect content and tacit enjoyment , entirely preclude his feel one spark of enthusiasm upon any subject whatever . 

 " as to his ever fall in love , " think the young lady sometimes , " the idea be preposterous . if all the divinity on earth be range before he , wait for his sultanship to throw the handkerchief , he would only lift his eyebrow to the middle of his forehead , and tell they to scramble for it . " 

 but , for once in his life , Robert be almost enthusiastic . 

 " she be the prettiest little creature you ever see in your life , George , " he cry , when the carriage have drive off and he return to his friend . " such blue eye , such ringlet , such a ravish smile , such a fairy - like bonnet all of a - tremble with heart' - ease and dewy spangle , shin out of a cloud of gauze . George Talboys , I feel like the hero of a french novel : I be fall in love with my aunt . " 

 the widower only sigh and puff his cigar fiercely out of the open window . perhaps he be think of that far - away time little well than five year ago , in fact ; but such an age go by to he when he first meet the woman for whom he have wear crape round his hat three day before . they return , all those old unforgotten feeling ; they come back , with the scene of their birth - place . again he lounge with his brother officer upon the shabby pier at the shabby watering - place , listen to a dreary band with a cornet that be a note and a half flat . again he hear the old operatic air , and again she come trip toward he , lean on her old father 's arm , and pretend   with such a charming , delicious , serio - comic pretense   to be listen to the music , and quite unaware of the admiration of half a dozen open - mouthed cavalry officer . again the old fancy come back that she be something too beautiful for earth , or earthly us , and that to approach she be to walk in a high atmosphere and to breathe a purer air . and since this she have be his wife , and the mother of his child . she lie in the little churchyard at Ventnor , and only a year ago he have give the order for her tombstone . a few slow , silent tear drop upon his waistcoat as he think of these thing in the quiet and darkening room . 

 Lady Audley be so exhausted when she reach home , that she excuse herself from the dinner - table , and retire at once to her dressing - room , attend by her maid , Phoebe Marks . 

 she be a little capricious in her conduct to this maid sometimes very confidential , sometimes rather reserved ; but she be a liberal mistress , and the girl have every reason to be satisfied with her situation . 

 this evening , in spite of her fatigue , she be in extremely high spirit , and give an animate account of the race , and the company present at they . 

 " I be tired to death , though , Phoebe , " she say , by - and - by . " I be afraid I must look a perfect fright , after a day in the hot sun . " 

 there be light candle on each side of the glass before which Lady Audley be stand unfasten her dress . she look full at she maid as she speak , her blue eye clear and bright , and the rosy childish lip pucker into an arch smile . 

 " you be a little pale , my lady , " answer the girl , " but you look as pretty as ever . " 

 " that be right , Phoebe , " she say , fling herself into a chair , and throw back her curl at the maid , who stand , brush in hand , ready to arrange the luxuriant hair for the night . " do you know , Phoebe , I have hear some people say that you and I be alike ? " 

 " I have hear they say so , too , my lady , " say the girl , quietly " but they must be very stupid to say it , for your ladyship be a beauty , and I be a poor , plain creature . " 

 " not at all , Phoebe , " say the little lady , superbly ; " you be like I , and your feature be very nice ; it be only color that you want . my hair be pale yellow shot with gold , and yours be drab ; my eyebrow and eyelash be dark brown , and yours be almost I scarcely like to say it , but they be almost white , my dear Phoebe . your complexion be sallow , and mine be pink and rosy . why , with a bottle of hair - dye , such as we see advertise in the paper , and a pot of rouge , you would be as good - look as I , any day , Phoebe . " 

 she prattle on in this way for a long time , talk of a hundred different subject , and ridicule the people she have meet at the race , for her maid 's amusement . her step - daughter come into the dressing - room to bid her good - night , and find the maid and mistress laugh aloud over one of the day 's adventure . Alicia , who be never familiar with her servant , withdraw in disgust at my lady 's frivolity . 

 " go on brush my hair , Phoebe , " Lady Audley say , every time the girl be about to complete her task , " I quite enjoy a chat with you . " 

 at last , just as she have dismiss she maid , she suddenly call she back . " Phoebe Marks , " she say , " I want you to do I a favor . " 

 " yes , my lady . " 

 " I want you to go to London by the first train to - morrow morning to execute a little commission for I . you may take a day 's holiday afterward , as I know you have friend in town ; and I shall give you a five - pound note if you do what I want , and keep your own counsel about it . " 

 " yes , my lady . " 

 " see that that door be securely shut , and come and sit on this stool at my foot . " 

 the girl obey . Lady Audley smooth she maid 's neutral - tint hair with her plump , white , and bejewel hand as she reflect for a few moment . 

 " and now listen , Phoebe . what I want you to do be very simple . " 

 it be so simple that it be tell in five minute , and then Lady Audley retire into her bed - room , and curl herself up cozily under the eider - down quilt . she be a chilly creature , and love to bury herself in soft wrapping of satin and fur . 

 " kiss I , Phoebe , " she say , as the girl arrange the curtain . " I hear Sir Michael 's step in the anteroom ; you will meet he as you go out , and you may as well tell he that you be go up by the first train to - morrow morning to get my dress from Madam Frederick for the dinner at Morton Abbey . " 

 it be late the next morning when Lady Audley go down to breakfast past ten o'clock . while she be sip her coffee a servant bring she a seal packet , and a book for she to sign . 

 " a telegraphic message ! " she cry ; for the convenient word telegram have not yet be invent . " what can be the matter ? " 

 she look up at her husband with wide - open , terrified eye , and seem half afraid to break the seal . the envelope be address to Miss Lucy Graham , at Mr. Dawson 's , and have be send on from the village . 

 " read it , my darling , " he say , " and do not be alarm ; it may be nothing of any importance . " 

 it come from a Mrs. Vincent , the schoolmistress with whom she have live before enter Mr. Dawson 's family . the lady be dangerously ill , and implore her old pupil to go and see she . 

 " poor soul ! she always mean to leave I her money , " say Lucy , with a mournful smile . " she have never hear of the change in my fortune . dear Sir Michael , I must go to she . " 

 " to be sure you must , dearest . if she be kind to my poor girl in her adversity , she have a claim upon her prosperity that shall never be forget . put on your bonnet , Lucy ; we shall be in time to catch the express . " 

 " you will go with I ? " 

 " of course , my darling . do you suppose I would let you go alone ? " 

 " I be sure you would go with I , " she say , thoughtfully . 

 " do your friend send any address ? " 

 " no ; but she always live at Crescent Villa , West Brompton ; and no doubt she live there still . " 

 there be only time for Lady Audley to hurry on her bonnet and shawl before she hear the carriage drive round to the door , and Sir Michael call to she at the foot of the staircase . 

 her suite of room , as I have say , open one out of another , and terminate in an octagon antechamber hang with oil - painting . even in her haste she pause deliberately at the door of this room , double - lock it , and drop the key into her pocket . this door once lock cut off all access to my lady 's apartment . 

 CHAPTER VIII . 

 before the storm . 

 so the dinner at Audley Court be postpone , and Miss Alicia have to wait still long for an introduction to the handsome young widower , Mr. George Talboys . 

 I be afraid , if the real truth be to be tell , there be , perhaps , something of affectation in the anxiety this young lady express to make George 's acquaintance ; but if poor Alicia for a moment calculate upon arouse any latent spark of jealousy lurk in her cousin 's breast by this exhibition of interest , she be not so well acquainted with Robert Audley 's disposition as she might have be . indolent , handsome , and indifferent , the young barrister take life as altogether too absurd a mistake for any one event in its foolish course to be for a moment consider seriously by a sensible man . 

 his pretty , gipsy - face cousin might have be over head and ear in love with he ; and she might have tell he so , in some charming , roundabout , womanly fashion , a hundred time a day for all the three hundred and sixty - five day in the year ; but unless she have wait for some privileged 29th of February , and walk straight up to he , say , " Robert , please will you marry I ? " I very much doubt if he would ever have discover the state of her feeling . 

 again , have he be in love with she himself , I fancy that the tender passion would , with he , have be so vague and feeble a sentiment that he might have go down to his grave with a dim sense of some uneasy sensation which might be love or indigestion , and with , beyond this , no knowledge whatever of his state . 

 so it be not the least use , my poor Alicia , to ride about the lane around Audley during those three day which the two young man spend in Essex ; it be waste trouble to wear that pretty cavalier hat and plume , and to be always , by the most singular of chance , meet Robert and his friend . the black curl   nothing like Lady Audley 's feathery ringlet , but heavy clustering lock , that clung about your slender brown throat , the red and pouting lip , the nose incline to be retrousse , the dark complexion , with its bright crimson flush , always ready to glance up like a signal light in a dusky sky , when you come suddenly upon your apathetic cousin all this coquettish espiegle , brunette beauty be throw away upon the dull eye of Robert Audley , and you might as well have take your rest in the cool drawing - room at the Court , instead of work your pretty mare to death under the hot September sun . 

 now fish , except to the devoted disciple of Izaak Walton , be not the most lively of occupation ; therefore , it be scarcely , perhaps , to be wonder that on the day after Lady Audley 's departure , the two young man   one of whom be disable by that heart wound which he bear so quietly , from really take pleasure in anything , and the other of whom look upon almost all pleasure as a negative kind of trouble   begin to grow weary of the shade of the willow overhang the wind stream about Audley . 

 " Figtree Court be not gay in the long vacation , " say Robert , reflectively : " but I think , upon the whole , it be well than this ; at any rate , it be near a tobacconist 's , " he add , puff resignedly at an execrable cigar procure from the landlord of the Sun Inn . 

 George Talboys , who have only consent to the Essex expedition in passive submission to his friend , be by no mean incline to object to their immediate return to London . " I shall be glad to get back , Bob , " he say , " for I want to take a run down to Southampton ; I have not   see the little one for upward of a month . " 

 he always speak of his son as " the little one ; " always speak of he mournfully rather than hopefully . he account for this by say that he have a fancy that the child would never learn to love he ; and bad even than this fancy , a dim presentiment that he would not live to see his little Georgey reach manhood . 

 " I be not a romantic man , Bob , " he would say sometimes , " and I never read a line of poetry in my life that be any more to I than so many word and so much jingle ; but a feeling have come over I , since my wife 's death , that I be like a man stand upon a long , low shore , with hideous cliff frown down upon he from behind , and the rise tide crawl slowly but surely about his foot . it seem to grow near and nearer every day , that black , pitiless tide ; not rush upon I with a great noise and a mighty impetus , but crawl , creep , steal , glide toward I , ready to close in above my head when I be least prepared for the end . " 

 Robert Audley star at his friend in silent amazement ; and , after a pause of profound deliberation , say solemnly , " George Talboys , I could understand this if you have be eat heavy supper . cold pork , now , especially if underdone , might produce this sort of thing . you want change of air , my dear boy ; you want the refreshing breeze of Figtree Court , and the soothe air of Fleet street . or , stay , " he add , suddenly , " I have it ! you have   be smoke our friend the landlord 's cigar ; that account for everything . " 

 they meet Alicia Audley on her mare about half an hour after they have come to the determination of leave Essex early the next morning . the young lady be very much surprised and disappoint at hear her cousin 's determination , and for that very reason pretend to take the matter with supreme indifference . 

 " you be very soon tired of Audley , Robert , " she say , carelessly ; " but of course you have no friend here , except your relation at the Court ; while in London , no doubt , you have the most delightful society and " 

 " I get good tobacco , " murmur Robert , interrupt his cousin . " Audley be the dear old place , but when a man have to smoke dry cabbage leaf , you know , Alicia " 

 " then you be really go to - morrow morning ? " 

 " positively by the express train that leave at 10.50 . " 

 " then Lady Audley will lose an introduction to Mr. Talboys , and Mr. Talboys will lose the chance of see the prettiest woman in Essex . " 

 " really " stammer George . 

 " the prettiest woman in Essex would have a poor chance of get much admiration out of my friend , George Talboys , " say Robert . " his heart be at Southampton , where he have a curly - head little urchin , about as high as his knee , who call he ' the big gentleman , ' and ask he for sugar - plum . " 

 " I be go to write to my step - mother by to - night 's post , " say Alicia . " she ask I particularly in her letter how long you be go to stop , and whether there be any chance of she be back in time to receive you . " 

 Miss Audley take a letter from the pocket of her riding - jacket as she speak a pretty , fairy - like note , write on shin paper of a peculiar creamy hue . 

 " she say in her postcript , ' be sure you answer my question about Mr. Audley and his friend , you volatile , forgetful alicia ! ' " 

 " what a pretty hand she write ! " say Robert , as his cousin fold the note . 

 " yes , it be pretty , be it not ? look at it , Robert . " 

 she put the letter into his hand , and he contemplate it lazily for a few minute , while Alicia pat the graceful neck of her chestnut mare , which be anxious to be off once more . 

 " presently , Atalanta , presently . give I back my note , Bob . " 

 " it be the prettiest , most coquettish little hand I ever see . do you know , Alicia , I have no great belief in those fellow who ask you for thirteen postage stamp , and offer to tell you what you have never be able to find out yourself ; but upon my word I think that if I have never see your aunt , I should know what she be like by this slip of paper . yes , here it all be the feathery , gold - shot , flaxen curl , the pencil eyebrow , the tiny , straight nose , the win , childish smile ; all to be guess in these few graceful up - stroke and down - stroke . George , look here ! " 

 but absent - minded and gloomy George Talboys have stroll away along the margin of the ditch , and stand strike the bulrush with his cane , half a dozen pace away from Robert and Alicia . 

 " nevermind , " say the young lady , impatiently ; for she by no mean relish this long disquisition upon my lady 's note . " give I the letter , and let I go ; it be past eight , and I must answer it by to - night 's post . Come , Atalanta ! good - by , Robert good - by , Mr. Talboys . a pleasant journey to town . " 

 the chestnut mare canter briskly through the lane , and Miss Audley be out of sight before those two big , bright tear that stand in her eye for one moment , before her pride send they , back again , rise from her angry heart . 

 " to have only one cousin in the world , " she cry , passionately , " my near relation after papa , and for he to care about as much for I as he would for a dog ! " 

 by the merest of accident , however , Robert and his friend do not go by the 10.50 express on the follow morning , for the young barrister awake with such a splitting headache , that he ask George to send he a cup of the strong green tea that have ever be make at the Sun , and to be furthermore so good as to defer their journey until the next day . of course George assent , and Robert Audley spend the forenoon in a darken room with a five - days'-old Chelmsford paper to entertain himself withal . 

 " it be nothing but the cigar , George , " he say , repeatedly . " get I out of the place without my see the landlord ; for if that man and I meet there will be bloodshe . " 

 fortunately for the peace of Audley , it happen to be market - day at Chelmsford ; and the worthy landlord have ride off in his chaise - cart to purchase supply for his house among other thing , perhaps , a fresh stock of those very cigar which have be so fatal in their effect upon Robert . 

 the young man spend a dull , dawdling , stupid , unprofitable day ; and toward dusk Mr. Audley propose that they should stroll down to the Court , and ask Alicia to take they over the house . 

 " it will kill a couple of hour , you know , George : and it seem a great pity to drag you away from Audley without have show you the old place , which , I give you my honor , be very well worth see . " 

 the sun be low in the sky as they take a short cut through the meadow , and cross a stile into the avenue lead to the archway a lurid , heavy - look , ominous sunset , and a deathly stillness in the air , which frighten the bird that have a mind to sing , and leave the field open to a few captious frog croak in the ditch . still as the atmosphere be , the leaf rustle with that sinister , shiver motion which proceed from no outer cause , but be rather an instinctive shudder of the frail branch , prescient of a come storm . that stupid clock , which know no middle course , and always skip from one hour to the other , point to seven as the young man pass under the archway ; but , for all that , it be nearer eight . 

 they find Alicia in the lime - walk , wander listlessly up and down under the black shadow of the tree , from which every now and then a wither leaf flap slowly to the ground . 

 strange to say , George Talboys , who very seldom observe anything , take particular notice of this place . 

 " it ought to be an avenue in a churchyard , " he say . " how peacefully the dead might sleep under this somber shade ! I wish the churchyard at Ventnor be like this . " 

 they walk on to the ruin well ; and Alicia tell they some old legend connect with the spot some gloomy story , such as those always attach to an old house , as if the past be one dark page of sorrow and crime . 

 " we want to see the house before it be dark , Alicia , " say Robert . 

 " then we must be quick . " she answer . " come . " 

 she lead the way through an open french window , modernize a few year before , into the library , and thence to the hall . 

 in the hall they pass my lady 's pale - face maid , who look furtively under her white eyelash at the two young man . 

 they be go up - stair , when Alicia turn and speak to the girl . 

 " after we have be in the drawing - room , I should like to show these gentleman Lady Audley 's room . be they in good order , Phoebe ? " 

 " yes , miss ; but the door of the anteroom be lock , and I fancy that my lady have take the key to London . " 

 " take the key ! impossible ! " cry Alicia . 

 " indeed , miss , I think she have . I can not find it , and it always use to be in the door . " 

 " I declare , " say Alicia , impatiently , " that be not at all unlike my lady to have take this silly freak into her head . I dare say she be afraid we should go into her room , and pry about among her pretty dress , and meddle with her jewelry . it be very provoking , for the good picture in the house be in that antechamber . there be her own portrait , too , unfinished but wonderfully like . " 

 " her portrait ! " exclaim Robert Audley . " I would give anything to see it , for I have only an imperfect notion of her face . be there no other way of get into the room , Alicia ? " 

 " another way ? " 

 " yes ; be there any door , lead through some of the other room , by which we can contrive to get into her ? " 

 his cousin shake her head , and conduct they into a corridor where there be some family portrait . she show they a tapestried chamber , the large figure upon the fade canvas look threaten in the dusky light . 

 " that fellow with the battle - ax look as if he want to split George 's head open , " say Mr. Audley , point to a fierce warrior , whose uplifted arm appear above George Talboys ' dark hair . 

 " come out of this room , Alicia , " add the young man , nervously ; " I believe it be damp , or else haunt . indeed , I believe all ghost to be the result of damp or dyspepsia . you sleep in a damp bed you awake suddenly in the dead of the night with a cold shiver , and see an old lady in the court costume of George the First 's time , sit at the foot of the bed . the old lady 's indigestion , and the cold shiver be a damp sheet . " 

 there be light candle in the drawing - room . no new - fangle lamp have ever make their appearance at Audley Court . Sir Michael 's room be light by honest , thick , yellow - look wax candle , in massive silver candlestick , and in sconce against the wall . 

 there be very little to see in the drawing - room ; and George Talboys soon grow tired of star at the handsome modern furniture , and at a few picture of some of the Academicians . 

 " be not   there a secret passage , or an old oak chest , or something of that kind , somewhere about the place , Alicia ? " ask Robert . 

 " to be sure ! " cry Miss Audley , with a vehemence that startle her cousin ; " of course . why do not   I think of it before ? how stupid of I , to be sure ! " 

 " why stupid ? " 

 " because , if you do not   mind crawl upon your hand and knee , you can see my lady 's apartment , for that passage communicate with her dressing - room . she do not   know of it herself , I believe . how astonished she would be if some black - visore burglar , with a dark - lantern , be to rise through the floor some night as she sit before her look - glass , have her hair dress for a party ! " 

 " shall we try the secret passage , George ? " ask Mr. Audley . 

 " yes , if you wish it . " 

 Alicia lead they into the room which have once be her nursery . it be now disuse , except on very rare occasion when the house be full of company . 

 Robert Audley lift a corner of the carpet , accord to his cousin 's direction , and disclose a rudely - cut trap - door in the oak flooring . 

 " now listen to I , " say Alicia . " you must let yourself down by the hand into the passage , which be about four foot high ; stoop your head , walk straight along it till you come to a sharp turn which will take you to the left , and at the extreme end of it you will find a short ladder below a trap - door like this , which you will have to unbolt ; that door open into the flooring of my lady 's dressing - room , which be only cover with a square persian carpet that you can easily manage to raise . you understand I ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " then take the light ; Mr. Talboys will follow you . I give you twenty minute for your inspection of the painting that be , about a minute apiece and at the end of that time I shall expect to see you return . " 

 Robert obey she implicitly , and George submissively follow his friend , find himself , in five minute , stand amidst the elegant disorder of Lady Audley 's dressing - room . 

 she have leave the house in a hurry on her unlooked - for journey to London , and the whole of her glitter toilette apparatus lie about on the marble dressing - table . the atmosphere of the room be almost oppressive for the rich odor of perfume in bottle whose gold stopper have not be replace . a bunch of hot - house flower be wither upon a tiny writing - table . two or three handsome dress lie in a heap upon the ground , and the open door of a wardrobe reveal the treasure within . jewelry , ivory - back hair - brush , and exquisite china be scatter here and there about the apartment . George Talboys see his bearded face and tall , gaunt figure reflect in the glass , and wonder to see how out of place he seem among all these womanly luxury . 

 they go from the dressing - room to the boudoir , and through the boudoir into the ante - chamber , in which there be , as Alicia have say , about twenty valuable painting , besides my lady 's portrait . 

 my lady 's portrait stand on an easel , cover with a green baize in the center of the octagonal chamber . it have be a fancy of the artist to paint she stand in this very room , and to make his background a faithful reproduction of the picture wall . I be afraid the young man belong to the pre - raphaelite brotherhood , for he have spend a most unconscionable time upon the accessory of this picture upon my lady 's crispy ringlet and the heavy fold of her crimson velvet dress . 

 the two young man look at the painting on the wall first , leave this unfinished portrait for a bonne bouche . 

 by this time it be dark , the candle carry by Robert only make one nucleus of light as he move about hold it before the picture one by one . the broad , bare window look out upon the pale sky , ting with the last cold flicker of the twilight . the ivy rustle against the glass with the same ominous shiver as that which agitate every leaf in the garden , prophetic of the storm that be to come . 

 " there be our friend 's eternal white horse , " say Robert , stand beside a Wouvermans . " Nicholas Poussin Salvator ha hum ! now for the portrait . " 

 he pause with his hand on the baize , and solemnly address his friend . 

 " George Talboys , " he say , " we have between we only one wax candle , a very inadequate light with which to look at a painting . let I , therefore , request that you will suffer we to look at it one at a time ; if there be one thing more disagreeable than another , it be to have a person dodge behind your back and peer over your shoulder , when you be try to see what a picture 's make of . " 

 George fall back immediately . he take no more interest in any lady 's picture than in all the other weariness of this troublesome world . he fall back , and lean his forehead against the window - pane , look out at the night . 

 when he turn round he see that Robert have arrange the easel very conveniently , and that he have seat himself on a chair before it for the purpose of contemplate the painting at his leisure . 

 he rise as George turn round . 

 " now , then , for your turn , talboy , " he say . " it be an extraordinary picture . " 

 he take George 's place at the window , and George seat himself in the chair before the easel . 

 yes , the painter must have be a pre - raphaelite . no one but a pre - raphaelite would have paint , hair by hair , those feathery mass of ringlet , with every glimmer of gold , and every shadow of pale brown . no one but a pre - raphaelite would have so exaggerated every attribute of that delicate face as to give a lurid brightness to the blonde complexion , and a strange , sinister light to the deep blue eye . no one but a pre - raphaelite could have give to that pretty pouting mouth the hard and almost wicked look it have in the portrait . 

 it be so like , and yet so unlike . it be as if you have burn strange - color fire before my lady 's face , and by their influence bring out new line and new expression never see in it before . the perfection of feature , the brilliancy of coloring , be there ; but I suppose the painter have copy quaint mediaeval monstrosity until his brain have grow bewilder , for my lady , in his portrait of she , have something of the aspect of a beautiful fiend . 

 her crimson dress , exaggerate like all the rest in this strange picture , hang about she in fold that look like flame , her fair head peep out of the lurid mass of color as if out of a rag furnace . indeed the crimson dress , the sunshine on the face , the red gold gleam in the yellow hair , the ripe scarlet of the pouting lip , the glowing color of each accessory of the minutely paint background , all combine to render the first effect of the painting by no mean an agreeable one . 

 but strange as the picture be , it could not have make any great impression on George Talboys , for he sit before it for about a quarter of an hour without utter a word only star blankly at the paint canvas , with the candlestick grasp in his strong right hand , and his left arm hang loosely by his side . he sit so long in this attitude , that Robert turn round at last . 

 " why , George , I think you have go to sleep ! " 

 " I have almost . " 

 " you have   catch a cold from stand in that damp tapestried room . mark my word , George Talboys , you have   catch a cold ; you be as hoarse as a raven . but come along . " 

 Robert Audley take the candle from his friend 's hand , and creep back through the secret passage , follow by George very quiet , but scarcely more quiet than usual . 

 they find Alicia in the nursery wait for they . 

 " well ? " she say , interrogatively . 

 " we manage it capitally . but I do not   like the portrait ; there be something odd about it . " 

 " there be , " say Alicia ; " I have   a strange fancy on that point . I think that sometimes a painter be in a manner inspire , and be able to see , through the normal expression of the face , another expression that be equally a part of it , though not to be perceive by common eye . we have never see my lady look as she do in that picture ; but I think that she could look so . " 

 " Alicia , " say Robert Audley , imploringly , " do not   be german ! " 

 " but , Robert " 

 " do not   be german , Alicia , if you love I . the picture be the picture : and my lady be my lady . that be my way of take thing , and I be not metaphysical ; do not   unsettle I . " 

 he repeat this several time with an air of terror that be perfectly sincere ; and then , have borrow an umbrella in case of be overtake by the come storm , leave the Court , lead passive George Talboys away with he . the one hand of the stupid clock have skip to nine by the time they reach the archway ; but before they could pass under its shadow they have to step aside to allow a carriage to dash past they . it be a fly from the village , but Lady Audley 's fair face peep out at the window . dark as it be , she could see the two figure of the young man black against the dusk . 

 " who be that ? " she ask , put out her head . " be it the gardener ? " 

 " no , my dear aunt , " say Robert , laugh ; " it be your most dutiful nephew . " 

 he and George stop by the archway while the fly draw up at the door , and the surprised servant come out to welcome their master and mistress . 

 " I think the storm will hold off to - night , " say the baronet look up at the sky ; " but we shall certainly have it tomorrow . " 

 CHAPTER IX . 

 after the storm . 

 Sir Michael be mistaken in his prophecy upon the weather . the storm do not hold off until next day , but burst with terrible fury over the village of Audley about half an hour before midnight . 

 Robert Audley take the thunder and lightning with the same composure with which he accept all the other ill of life . he lie on a sofa in the sitting - room , ostensibly read the five - day - old Chelmsford paper , and regale himself occasionally with a few sip from a large tumbler of cold punch . but the storm have quite a different effect upon George Talboys . his friend be startle when he look at the young man 's white face as he sit opposite the open window listen to the thunder , and star at the black sky , rent every now and then by fork streak of steel - blue lightning . 

 " George , " say Robert , after watch he for some time , " be you frightened of the lightning ? " 

 " no , " he answer , curtly . 

 " but , dear boy , some of the most courageous man have be frightened of it . it be scarcely to be call a fear : it be constitutional . I be sure you be frightened of it . " 

 " no , I be not . " 

 " but , George , if you could see yourself , white and haggard , with your great hollow eye star out at the sky as if they be fix upon a ghost . I tell you I know that you be frightened . " 

 " and I tell you that I be not . " 

 " George Talboys , you be not only afraid of the lightning , but you be savage with yourself for be afraid , and with I for tell you of your fear . " 

 " Robert Audley , if you say another word to I , I shall knock you down , " cry George , furiously ; have say which , Mr. Talboys stride out of the room , bang the door after he with a violence that shake the house . those inky cloud , which have shut in the sultry earth as if with a roof of hot iron , pour out their blackness in a sudden deluge as George leave the room ; but if the young man be afraid of the lightning , he certainly be not afraid of the rain ; for he walk straight down - stair to the inn door , and go out into the wet high road . he walk up and down , up and down , in the soak shower for about twenty minute , and then , re - enter the inn , stride up to his bedroom . 

 Robert Audley meet he on the landing , with his hair beat about his white face , and his garment dripping wet . 

 " be you go to bed , George ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " but you have no candle . " 

 " I do not   want one . " 

 " but look at your clothe , man ! do you see the wet streaming down your coat - sleeve ? what on earth make you go out upon such a night ? " 

 " I be tired , and want to go to bed do not   bother I . " 

 " you will take some hot brandy - and - water , George ? " 

 Robert Audley stand in his friend 's way as he speak , anxious to prevent his go to bed in the state he be in ; but George push he fiercely aside , and , stride past he , say , in the same hoarse voice Robert have notice at the Court : 

 " let I alone , Robert Audley , and keep clear of I if you can . " 

 Robert follow George to his bedroom , but the young man bang the door in his face , so there be nothing for it but to leave Mr. Talboys to himself , to recover his temper as well he might . 

 " he be irritated at my notice his terror of the lightning , " think Robert , as he calmly retire to rest , serenely indifferent to the thunder , which seem to shake he in his bed , and the lightning play fitfully round the razor in his open dressing - case . 

 the storm roll away from the quiet village of Audley , and when Robert awake the next morning it be to see bright sunshine , and a peep of cloudless sky between the white curtain of his bedroom window . 

 it be one of those serene and lovely morning that sometimes succeed a storm . the bird sing loud and cheerily , the yellow corn uplift itself in the broad field , and wave proudly after its sharp tussle with the temp , which have do its good to beat down the heavy ear with cruel wind and drive rain half the night through . the vine - leaf cluster round Robert 's window flutter with a joyous rustling , shake the rain - drop in diamond shower from every spray and tendril . 

 Robert Audley find his friend wait for he at the breakfast - table . 

 George be very pale , but perfectly tranquil if anything , indeed , more cheerful than usual . 

 he shake Robert by the hand with something of that hearty manner for which he have be distinguish before the one affliction of his life overtake and shipwreck he . 

 " forgive I , Bob , " he say , frankly , " for my surly temper of last night . you be quite correct in your assertion ; the thunderstorm do upset I . it always have the same effect upon I in my youth . " 

 " poor old boy ! shall we go up by the express , or shall we stop here and dine with my uncle to - night ? " ask Robert . 

 " to tell the truth , Bob , I would rather do neither . it be a glorious morning . suppose we stroll about all day , take another turn with the rod and line , and go up to town by the train that leave here at 6.15 in the evening ? " 

 Robert Audley would have assent to a far more disagreeable proposition than this , rather than have take the trouble to oppose his friend , so the matter be immediately agree upon ; and after they have finish their breakfast , and order a four o'clock dinner , George Talboys take the fishing - rod across his broad shoulder , and stride out of the house with his friend and companion . 

 but if the equable temperament of Mr. Robert Audley have be undisturbe by the crackling peal of thunder that shake the very foundation of the Sun Inn , it have not be so with the more delicate sensibiltie of his uncle 's young wife . Lady Audley confess herself terribly frightened of the lightning . she have her bedstead wheel into a corner of the room , and with the heavy curtain draw tightly round she , she lie with her face bury in the pillow , shudder convulsively at every sound of the temp without . Sir Michael , whose stout heart have never know a fear , almost tremble for this fragile creature , whom it be his happy privilege to protect and defend . my lady would not consent to undress till nearly three o'clock in the morning , when the last linger peal of thunder have die away among the distant hill . until that hour she lie in the handsome silk dress in which she have travel , huddle together among the bedclothe , only look up now and then with a scared face to ask if the storm be over . 

 toward four o'clock her husband , who spend the night in watch by her bedside , see she drop off into a deep sleep , from which she do not awake for nearly five hour . 

 but she come into the breakfast - room , at half - past nine o'clock , sing a little Scotch melody , her cheek ting with as delicate a pink as the pale hue of her muslin morning dress . like the bird and the flower , she seem to recover her beauty and joyousness in the morning sunshine . she trip lightly out onto the lawn , gather a last linger rosebud here and there , and a sprig or two of geranium , and return through the dewy grass , warble long cadence for very happiness of heart , and look as fresh and radiant as the flower in her hand . the baronet catch she in his strong arm as she come in through the open window . 

 " my pretty one , " he say , " my darling , what happiness to see you your own merry self again ! do you know , Lucy , that once last night , when you look out through the dark - green bed - curtain , with your poor , white face , and the purple rim round your hollow eye , I have almost a difficulty to recognize my little wife in that terrify , agonize - look creature , cry out about the storm . thank God for the morning sun , which have bring back the rosy cheek and bright smile ! I hope to Heaven , Lucy , I shall never again see you look as you do last night . " 

 she stand on tiptoe to kiss he , and then be only tall enough to reach his white beard . she tell he , laugh , that she have always be a silly , frightened creature frightened of dog , frighten of cattle , frighten of a thunderstorm , frighten of a rough sea . " frightened of everything and everybody but my dear , noble , handsome husband , " she say . 

 she have find the carpet in her dressing - room disarrange , and have inquire into the mystery of the secret passage . she chide Miss Alicia in a playful , laugh way , for her boldness in introduce two great man into my lady 's room . 

 " and they have the audacity to look at my picture , Alicia , " she say , with mock indignation . " I find the baize throw on the ground , and a great man 's glove on the carpet . look ! " 

 " she hold up a thick driving glove as she speak . it be George 's , which he have drop look at the picture . 

 " I shall go up to the Sun , and ask those boy to dinner , " Sir Michael say , as he leave the Court upon his morning walk around his farm . 

 Lady Audley flit from room to room in the bright September sunshine now sit down to the piano to trill out a ballad , or the first page of an italian bravura , or run with rapid finger through a brilliant waltz now hover about a stand of hot - house flower , do amateur gardening with a pair of fairy - like , silver - mount embroidery scissor now stroll into her dressing - room to talk to Phoebe Marks , and have her curl rearrange for the third or fourth time ; for the ringlet be always get into disorder , and give no little trouble to Lady Audley 's maid . 

 my dear lady seem , on this particular September day , restless from very joyousness of spirit , and unable to stay long in one place , or occupy herself with one thing . 

 while Lady Audley amuse herself in her own frivolous fashion , the two young man stroll slowly along the margin of the stream until they reach a shady corner where the water be deep and still , and the long branch of the willow trail into the brook . 

 George Talboys take the fishing - rod , while Robert stretch himself at full length on a railway rug , and balance his hat upon his nose as a screen from the sunshine , fall fast asleep . 

 those be happy fish in the stream on the bank of which Mr. Talboys be seat . they might have amuse themselves to their heart ' content with timid nibble at this gentleman 's bait without in any manner endanger their safety ; for George only star vacantly in the water , hold his rod in a loose , listless hand , and with a strange , far - away look in his eye . as the church clock strike two he throw down his rod , and , stride away along the bank , leave Robert Audley to enjoy a nap which , accord to that gentleman 's habit , be by no mean unlikely to last for two or three hour . about a quarter of a mile far on George cross a rustic bridge , and strike into the meadow which lead to Audley Court . 

 the bird have sing so much all the morning , that they have , perhaps , by this time grow tired ; the lazy cattle be asleep in the meadow ; Sir Michael be still away on his morning 's ramble ; Miss Alicia have scamper off an hour before on her chestnut mare ; the servant be all at dinner in the back part of the house ; and my lady have stroll , book in hand , into the shadowy lime - walk ; so the gray old building have never wear a more peaceful aspect than on that bright afternoon when George Talboys walk across the lawn to ring a sonorous peal at the sturdy , iron - bind oak door . 

 the servant who answer his summon tell he that Sir Michael be out , and my lady walk in the lime - tree avenue . 

 he look a little disappointed at this intelligence , and mutter something about wish to see my lady , or go to look for my lady   the servant do not clearly distinguish his word , stride away from the door without leave either card or message for the family . 

 it be full an hour and a half after this when Lady Audley return to the house , not come from the lime - walk , but from exactly the opposite direction , carry her open book in her hand , and sing as she come . Alicia have just dismount from her mare , and stand in the low - arch doorway , with her great Newfoundland dog by her side . 

 the dog , which have never like my lady , show his tooth with a suppress growl . 

 " send that horrid animal away , Alicia , " Lady Audley say , impatiently . " the brute know that I be frightened of he , and take advantage of my terror . and yet they call the creature generous and noble - hearted ! Bah , Caesar ! I hate you , and you hate I ; and if you meet I in the dark in some narrow passage you would fly at my throat and strangle I , would not   you ? " 

 my lady , safely shelter behind her step - daughter , shake her yellow curl at the angry animal , and defy he maliciously . 

 " do you know , Lady Audley , that Mr. Talboys , the young widower , have be here ask for Sir Michael and you ? " 

 Lucy Audley lift her pencil eyebrow . " I think they be come to dinner , " she say . " surely we shall have enough of they then . " 

 she have a heap of wild autumn flower in the skirt of her muslin dress . she have come through the field at the back of the Court , gather the hedge - row blossom in her way . she run lightly up the broad staircase to her own room . George 's glove lie on her boudoir table . Lady Audley ring the bell violently , and it be answer by Phoebe Marks . " take that litter away , " she say , sharply . the girl collect the glove and a few withered flower and tear paper lie on the table into her apron . 

 " what have you be do all this morning ? " ask my lady . " not waste your time , I hope ? " 

 " no , my lady , I have be alter the blue dress . it be rather dark on this side of the house , so I take it up to my own room , and work at the window . " 

 the girl be leave the room as she speak , but she turn around and look at Lady Audley as if wait for further order . 

 Lucy look up at the same moment , and the eye of the two woman meet . 

 " Phoebe Marks , " say my lady , throw herself into an easy - chair , and trifle with the wild flower in her lap , " you be a good , industrious girl , and while I live and be prosperous , you shall never want a firm friend or a twenty - pound note . " 

 CHAPTER X. 

 miss . 

 when Robert Audley awake he be surprised to see the fishing - rod lying on the bank , the line trail idly in the water , and the float bob harmlessly up and down in the afternoon sunshine . the young barrister be a long time stretch his arm and leg in various direction to convince himself , by mean of such exercise , that he still retain the proper use of those member ; then , with a mighty effort , he contrive to rise from the grass , and have deliberately fold his railway rug into a convenient shape for carry over his shoulder , he stroll away to look for George Talboys . 

 once or twice he give a sleepy shout , scarcely loud enough to scare the bird in the branch above his head , or the trout in the stream at his foot : but receive no answer , grow tired of the exertion , and dawdle on , yawn as he go , and still look for George Talboys . 

 by - and - by he take out his watch , and be surprised to find that it be a quarter past four . 

 " why , the selfish beggar must have go home to his dinner ! " he mutter , reflectively ; " and yet that be not   much like he , for he seldom remember even his meal unless I jog his memory . " 

 even a good appetite , and the knowledge that his dinner would very likely suffer by this delay , could not quicken Mr. Robert Audley 's constitutional dawdle , and by the time he stroll in at the front door of the Sun , the clock be strike five . he so fully expect to find George Talboys wait for he in the little sitting - room , that the absence of that gentleman seem to give the apartment a dreary look , and Robert groan aloud . 

 " this be lively ! " he say . " a cold dinner , and nobody to eat it with ! " 

 the landlord of the Sun come himself to apologize for his ruin dish . 

 " as fine a pair of duck , Mr. Audley , as ever you clap eye on , but burn up to a cinder , along of be kep ' hot . " 

 " never mind the duck , " Robert say impatiently ; " where be Mr. Talboys ? " 

 " he be not   be in , sir , since you go out together this morning . " 

 " what ! " cry Robert . " why , in heaven 's name , what have the man do with himself ? " 

 he walk to the window and look out upon the broad , white high road . there be a wagon laden with truss of hay crawl slowly past , the lazy horse and the lazy wagoner droop their head with a weary stoop under the afternoon 's sunshine . there be a flock of sheep straggle about the road , with a dog run himself into a fever in the endeavor to keep they decently together . there be some bricklayer just release from work a tinker mend some kettle by the roadside ; there be a dog - cart dashing down the road , carry the master of the Audley hound to his seven o'clock dinner ; there be a dozen common village sight and sound that mix themselves up into a cheerful bustle and confusion ; but there be no George Talboys . 

 " of all the extraordinary thing that ever happen to I in the whole course of my life , " say Mr. Robert Audley , " this be the most miraculous ! " 

 the landlord still in attendance , open his eye as Robert make this remark . what could there be extraordinary in the simple fact of a gentleman be late for his dinner ? 

 " I shall go and look for he , " say Robert , snatch up his hat and walk straight out of the house . 

 but the question be where to look for he . he certainly be not by the trout stream , so it be no good go back there in search of he . Robert be stand before the inn , deliberate on what be good to be do , when the landlord come out after he . 

 " I forgot to tell you , Mr. Audley , as how your uncle call here five minute after you be go , and leave a message , ask of you and the other gentleman to go down to dinner at the Court . " 

 " then I should not   wonder , " say Robert , " if George Talboys have go down to the Court to call upon my uncle . it be not   like he , but it be just possible that he have do it . " 

 it be six o'clock when Robert knock at the door of his uncle 's house . he do not ask to see any of the family , but inquire at once for his friend . 

 yes , the servant tell he ; Mr. Talboys have be there at two o'clock or a little after . 

 " and not since ? " 

 " no , not since . " 

 be the man sure that it be at two Mr. Talboys call ? Robert ask . 

 yes , perfectly sure . he remember the hour because it be the servant ' dinner hour , and he have leave the table to open the door to Mr. Talboys . 

 " why , what can have become of the man ? " think Robert , as he turn his back upon the Court . " from two till six four good hour and no sign of he ! " 

 if any one have venture to tell Mr. Robert Audley that he could possibly feel a strong attachment to any creature breathing , that cynical gentleman would have elevate his eyebrow in supreme contempt at the preposterous notion . yet here he be , flurry and anxious , bewilder his brain by all manner of conjecture about his miss friend ; and false to every attribute of his nature , walk fast . 

 " I have not   walk fast since I be at Eton , " he murmur , as he hurry across one of Sir Michael 's meadow in the direction of the village ; " and the bad of it be , that I have not   the most remote idea where I be go . " 

 here he cross another meadow , and then seat himself upon a stile , rest his elbow upon his knee , bury his face in his hand , and set himself seriously to think the matter out . 

 " I have it , " he say , after a few minute ' thought ; " the railway station ! " he spring over the stile , and start off in the direction of the little red brick building . 

 there be no train expect for another half hour , and the clerk be take his tea in an apartment on one side of the office , on the door of which be inscribe in large , white letter , " private . " 

 but Mr. Audley be too much occupy with the one idea of look for his friend to pay any attention to this warning . he stride at once to the door , and rattle his cane against it , bring the clerk out of his sanctum in a perspiration from hot tea , and with his mouth full of bread and butter . 

 " do you remember the gentleman that come down to Audley with I , Smithers ? " ask Robert . 

 " well , to tell you the real truth , Mr. Audley , I can not   say that I do . you come by the four o'clock , if you remember , and there be always a good many passenger by that train . " 

 " you do not   remember he , then ? " 

 " not to my knowledge , sir . " 

 " that be provoking ! I want to know , Smithers , whether he have take a ticket for London since two o'clock to - day . he be a tall , broad - cheste young fellow , with a big brown beard . you could not   well mistake he . " 

 " there be four or five gentleman as take ticket for the 3.30 up , " say the clerk rather vaguely , cast an anxious glance over his shoulder at his wife , who look by no mean pleased at this interruption to the harmony of the tea - table . 

 " four or five gentleman ! but do either of they answer to the description of my friend ? " 

 " well , I think one of they have a beard , sir . " 

 " a dark - brown beard ? " 

 " well , I do not   know , but it be brownish - like . " 

 " be he dress in gray ? " 

 " I believe it be gray ; a great many gent wear gray . he ask for the ticket sharp and short - like , and when he would get it walk straight out onto the platform whistling . " 

 " that be George , " say Robert . " thank you , Smithers ; I need not   trouble you any more . it be as clear as daylight , " he mutter , as he leave the station ; " he be get one of his gloomy fit on he , and he be go back to London without say a word about it . I will leave Audley myself to - morrow morning ; and for to - night why , I may as well go down to the Court and make the acquaintance of my uncle 's young wife . they do not   dine till seven ; if I get back across the field I shall be in time . Bob otherwise Robert Audley this sort of thing will never do ; you be fall over head and ear in love with your aunt . " 

 CHAPTER XI . 

 the mark upon MY LADY 's wrist . 

 Robert find Sir Michael and Lady Audley in the drawing - room . my lady be sit on a music - stool before the grand piano , turn over the leaf of some new music . she twirl upon the revolving seat , make a rustling with her silk flounce , as Mr. Robert Audley 's name be announce ; then , leave the piano , she make her nephew a pretty , mock ceremonious courtesy . 

 " thank you so much for the sable , " she say , hold out her little finger , all glitter and twinkle with the diamond she wear upon they ; " thank you for those beautiful sable . how good it be of you to get they for I . " 

 Robert have almost forget the commission he have execute for Lady Audley during his russian expedition . his mind be so full of George Talboys that he only acknowledge my lady 's gratitude by a bow . 

 " would you believe it , Sir Michael ? " he say . " that foolish chum of mine have go back to London leave I in the lurch . " 

 " Mr. George Talboys return to town ? " exclaim my lady , lift her eyebrow . " what a dreadful catastrophe ! " say Alicia , maliciously , ' since Pythias , in the person of Mr. Robert Audley , can not exist for half an hour without Damon , commonly know as George Talboys . " 

 " he be a very good fellow , " Robert say , stoutly ; " and to tell the honest truth , I be rather uneasy about he . " 

 " uneasy about he ! " my lady be quite anxious to know why Robert be uneasy about his friend . 

 " I will tell you why , Lady Audley , " answer the young barrister . " George have a bitter blow a year ago in the death of his wife . he have never get over that trouble . he take life pretty quietly almost as quietly as I do but he often talk very strangely , and I sometimes think that one day this grief will get the well of he , and he will do something rash . " 

 Mr. Robert Audley speak vaguely , but all three of his listener know that the something rash to which he allude be that one deed for which there be no repentance . 

 there be a brief pause , during which Lady Audley arrange her yellow ringlet by the aid of the glass over the console table opposite to she . 

 " dear I ! " she say , " this be very strange . I do not think man be capable of these deep and lasting affection . I think that one pretty face be as good as another pretty face to they ; and that when number one with blue eye and fair hair die , they have only to look out for number two , with dark eye and black hair , by way of variety . " 

 " George Talboys be not one of those man . I firmly believe that his wife 's death break his heart . " 

 " how sad ! " murmur Lady Audley . " it seem almost cruel of Mrs. Talboys to die , and grieve her poor husband so much . " 

 " Alicia be right , she be childish , " think Robert as he look at his aunt 's pretty face . 

 my lady be very charming at the dinner - table ; she profess the most bewitch incapacity for carve the pheasant set before she , and call Robert to her assistance . 

 " I could carve a leg of mutton at Mr. Dawson 's , " she say , laugh ; " but a leg of mutton be so easy , and then I use to stand up . " 

 Sir Michael watch the impression my lady make upon his nephew with a proud delight in her beauty and fascination . 

 " I be so glad to see my poor little woman in her usual good spirit once more , " he say . " she be very down - hearted yesterday at a disappointment she meet with in London . " 

 " a disappointment ! " 

 " yes , Mr. Audley , a very cruel one , " answer my lady . " I receive the other morning a telegraphic message from my dear old friend and school - mistress , tell I that she be die , and that if I want to see she again , I must hasten to she immediately . the telegraphic dispatch contain no address , and of course , from that very circumstance , I imagine that she must be live in the house in which I leave she three year ago . Sir Michael and I hurry up to town immediately , and drive straight to the old address . the house be occupy by strange people , who could give I no tiding of my friend . it be in a retired place , where there be very few tradespeople about . Sir Michael make inquiry at the few shop there be , but , after take an immense deal of trouble , could discover nothing whatever likely to lead to the information we want . I have no friend in London , and have therefore no one to assist I except my dear , generous husband , who do all in his power , but in vain , to find my friend 's new residence . " 

 " it be very foolish not to send the address in the telegraphic message , " say Robert . 

 " when people be die it be not so easy to think of all these thing , " murmur my lady , look reproachfully at Mr. Audley with her soft blue eye . 

 in spite of Lady Audley 's fascination , and in spite of Robert 's very unqualified admiration of she , the barrister could not overcome a vague feeling of uneasiness on this quiet September evening . 

 as he sit in the deep embrasure of a mullioned window , talk to my lady , his mind wander away to shady Figtree Court , and he think of poor George Talboys smoke his solitary cigar in the room with the bird and canary . 

 " I wish I would never feel any friendliness for the fellow , " he think . " I feel like a man who have an only son whose life have go wrong with he . I wish to Heaven I could give he back his wife , and send he down to Ventnor to finish his day in peace . " 

 still my lady 's pretty musical prattle run on as merrily and continuously as the babble in some brook ; and still Robert 's thought wander , in spite of himself , to George Talboys . 

 he think of he hurry down to Southampton by the mail train to see his boy . he think of he as he have often see he spell over the shipping advertisement in the Times , look for a vessel to take he back to Australia . once he think of he with a shudder , lie cold and stiff at the bottom of some shallow stream with his dead face turn toward the darken sky . 

 Lady Audley notice his abstraction , and ask he what he be think of . 

 " George Talboys , " he answer abruptly . 

 she give a little nervous shudder . 

 " upon my word , " she say , " you make I quite uncomfortable by the way in which you talk of Mr. Talboys . one would think that something extraordinary have happen to he . " 

 " God forbid ! but I can not help feel uneasy about he . " 

 later in the evening Sir Michael ask for some music , and my lady go to the piano . Robert Audley stroll after she to the instrument to turn over the leaf of her music ; but she play from memory , and he be spar the trouble his gallantry would have impose upon he . 

 he carry a pair of light candle to the piano , and arrange they conveniently for the pretty musician . she strike a few chord , and then wander into a pensive sonata of Beethoven 's . it be one of the many paradox in her character , that love of somber and melancholy melody , so opposite to her gay nature . 

 Robert Audley linger by her side , and as he have no occupation in turn over the leaf of her music , he amuse himself by watch she jewel , white hand glide softly over the key , with the lace sleeve drop away from , her graceful , arch wrist . he look at her pretty finger one by one ; this one glitter with a ruby heart ; that encircle by an emerald serpent ; and about they all a starry glitter of diamond . from the finger his eye wander to the rounded wrist : the broad , flat , gold bracelet upon her right wrist drop over her hand , as she execute a rapid passage . she stop abruptly to rearrange it ; but before she could do so Robert Audley notice a bruise upon her delicate skin . 

 " you have hurt your arm , Lady Audley ! " he exclaim . she hastily replace the bracelet . 

 " it be nothing , " she say . " I be unfortunate in have a skin which the slight touch bruise . " 

 she go on playing , but Sir Michael come across the room to look into the matter of the bruise upon his wife 's pretty wrist . 

 " what be it , Lucy ? " he ask ; " and how do it happen ? " 

 " how foolish you all be to trouble yourselves about anything so absurd ! " say Lady Audley , laugh . " I be rather absent in mind , and amuse myself a few day ago by tie a piece of ribbon around my arm so tightly , that it leave a bruise when I remove it . " 

 " Hum ! " think Robert . " my lady tell little childish white lie ; the bruise be of a more recent date than a few day ago ; the skin have only just begin to change color . " 

 Sir Michael take the slender wrist in his strong hand . 

 " hold the candle , Robert , " he say , " and let we look at this poor little arm . " 

 it be not one bruise , but four slender , purple mark , such as might have be make by the four finger of a powerful hand , that have grasp the delicate wrist a shade too roughly . a narrow ribbon , bind tightly , might have leave some such mark , it be true , and my lady protest once more that , to the good of her recollection , that must have be how they be make . 

 across one of the faint purple mark there be a dark tinge , as if a ring wear on one of those strong and cruel finger have be grind into the tender flesh . 

 " I be sure my lady must tell white lie , " think Robert , " for I can not   believe the story of the ribbon . " 

 he wish his relation good - night and good - by at about half past ten o'clock ; he should run up to London by the first train to look for George in Figtree Court . 

 " if I do not   find he there I shall go to Southampton , " he say ; " and if I do not   find he there " 

 " what then ? " ask my lady . 

 " I shall think that something strange have happen . " 

 Robert Audley feel very low - spirited as he walk slowly home between the shadowy meadow ; more low - spirited still when he re - enter the sitting room at Sun Inn , where he and George have lounge together , star out of the window and smoke their cigar . 

 " to think , " he say , meditatively , " that it be possible to care so much for a fellow ! but come what may , I will go up to town after he the first thing to - morrow morning ; and , soon than be balk in find he , I will go to the very end of the world . " 

 with Mr. Audley 's lymphatic nature , determination be so much the exception rather than the rule , that when he do for once in his life resolve upon any course of action , he have a certain dog , iron - like obstinacy that push he on to the fulfillment of his purpose . 

 the lazy bent of his mind , which prevent he from think of half a dozen thing at a time , and not think thoroughly of any one of they , as be the manner of your more energetic people , make he remarkably clear - sight upon any point to which he ever give his serious attention . 

 indeed , after all , though solemn bencher laugh at he , and rise barrister shrug their shoulder under rustle silk gown , when people speak of Robert Audley , I doubt if , have he ever take the trouble to get a brief , he might not have rather surprise the magnate who underrate his ability . 

 CHAPTER XII . 

 still miss . 

 the September sunlight sparkle upon the fountain in the Temple Gardens when Robert Audley return to Figtree Court early the follow morning . 

 he find the canary sing in the pretty little room in which George have sleep , but the apartment be in the same prim order in which the laundress have arrange it after the departure of the two young man not a chair displace , or so much as the lid of a cigar - box lift , to bespeak the presence of George Talboys . with a last , linger hope , he search upon the mantelpiece and table of his room , on the chance of find some letter leave by George . 

 " he may have sleep here last night , and start for Southampton early this morning , " he think . " Mrs. Maloney have be here , very likely , to make everything tidy after he . " 

 but as he sit look lazily around the room , now and then whistle to his delighted canary , a slipshod foot upon the staircase without bespoke the advent of that very Mrs. Maloney who wait upon the two young man . 

 no , Mr. Talboys have not come home ; she have look in as early as six o'clock that morning , and find the chamber empty . 

 " have anything happen to the poor , dear gentleman ? " she ask , see Robert Audley 's pale face . 

 he turn around upon she quite savagely at this question . 

 happen to he ! what should happen to he ? they have only part at two o'clock the day before . 

 Mrs. Maloney would have relate to he the history of a poor dear young engine - driver , who have once lodge with she , and who go out , after eat a hearty dinner , in the good of spirit , to meet with his death from the concussion of an express and a luggage train ; but Robert put on his hat again , and walk straight out of the house before the honest Irishwoman could begin her pitiful story . 

 it be grow dusk when he reach Southampton . he know his way to the poor little terrace of house , in a full street lead down to the water , where George 's father - in - law live . little Georgey be play at the open parlor window as the young man walk down the street . 

 perhaps it be this fact , and the dull and silent aspect of the house , which fill Robert Audley 's mind with a vague conviction that the man he come to look for be not there . the old man himself open the door , and the child peep out of the parlor to see the strange gentleman . 

 he be a handsome boy , with his father 's brown eye and dark wave hair , and with some latent expression which be not his father 's and which pervade his whole face , so that although each feature of the child resemble the same feature in George Talboys , the boy be not actually like he . 

 Mr. Maldon be delighted to see Robert Audley ; he remember have have the pleasure of meet he at Ventnor , on the melancholy occasion of he wipe his watery old eye by way of conclusion to the sentence . would Mr. Audley walk in ? Robert stride into the parlor . the furniture be shabby and dingy , and the place reek with the smell of stale tobacco and brandy - and - water . the boy 's break plaything , and the old man 's break clay pipe and tear , brandy - and - water - stain newspaper be scatter upon the dirty carpet . little Georgey creep toward the visitor , watch he furtively out of his big , brown eye . Robert take the boy on his knee , and give he his watch - chain to play with while he talk to the old man . 

 " I need scarcely ask the question that I come to ask , " he say ; " I be in hope I should have find your son - in - law here . " 

 " what ! you know that he be come to Southampton ? " 

 " know that he be come ? " cry Robert , brighten up . " he be here , then ? " 

 " no , he be not here now ; but he have be here . " 

 " when ? " 

 " late last night ; he come by the mail . " 

 " and leave again immediately ? " 

 " he stay little well than an hour . " 

 " Good Heaven ! " say Robert , " what useless anxiety that man have give I ! what can be the meaning of all this ? " 

 " you know nothing of his intention , then ? " 

 " of what intention ? " 

 " I mean of his determination to go to Australia . " 

 " I know that it be always in his mind more or less , but not more just now than usual . " 

 " he sail to - night from Liverpool . he come here at one o'clock this morning to have a look at the boy , he say , before he leave England , perhaps never to return . he tell I he be sick of the world , and that the rough life out there be the only thing to suit he . he stay an hour , kiss the boy without awake he , and leave Southampton by the mail that start at a quarter - past two . " 

 " what can be the meaning of all this ? " say Robert . " what could be his motive for leave England in this manner , without a word to I , his most intimate friend without even a change of clothe ; for he have leave everything at my chamber ? it be the most extraordinary proceeding ! " 

 the old man look very grave . " do you know , Mr. Audley , " he say , tap his forehead significantly , " I sometimes fancy that Helen 's death have a strange effect upon poor George . " 

 " Pshaw ! " cry Robert , contemptuously ; " he feel the blow most cruelly , but his brain be as sound as your or mine . " 

 " perhaps he will write to you from Liverpool , " say George 's father - in - law . he seem anxious to smooth over any indignation that Robert might feel at his friend 's conduct . 

 " he ought , " say Robert , gravely , " for we have   be good friend from the day when we be together at Eton . it be not   kind of George Talboys to treat I like this . " 

 but even at the moment that he utter the reproach a strange thrill of remorse shoot through his heart . 

 " it be not   like he , " he say , " it be not   like George Talboys . " 

 little Georgey catch at the sound . " that be my name , " he say , " and my papa 's name the big gentleman 's name . " 

 " yes , little Georgey , and your papa come last night and kiss you in your sleep . do you remember ? " 

 " no , " say the boy , shake his curly little head . 

 " you must have be very fast asleep , little Georgey , not to see poor papa . " 

 the child do not answer , but presently , fix his eye upon Robert 's face , he say abruptly : 

 " where be the pretty lady ? " 

 " what pretty lady ? " 

 " the pretty lady that use to come a long while ago . " 

 " he mean his poor mamma , " say the old man . 

 " no , " cry the boy resolutely , " not mamma . Mamma be always cry . I do not   like mamma " 

 " hush , little Georgey ! " 

 " but I do not , and she do not   like I . she be always cry . I mean the pretty lady ; the lady that be dress so fine , and that give I my gold watch . " 

 " he mean the wife of my old captain an excellent creature , who take a great fancy to Georgey , and give he some handsome present . " 

 " where be my gold watch ? let I show the gentleman my gold watch , " cry Georgey . 

 " it be go to be clean , Georgey , " answer his grandfather . 

 " it be always go to be clean , " say the boy . 

 " the watch be perfectly safe , I assure you , Mr. Audley , " murmur the old man , apologetically ; and take out a pawnbroker 's duplicate , he hand it to Robert . 

 it be make out in the name of Captain Mortimer : " Watch , set with diamond , L11 . " 

 " I be often hard press for a few shilling , Mr. Audley , " say the old man . " my son - in - law have be very liberal to I ; but there be other , there be other , Mr. Audley and and I have   not be treat well . " he wipe away some genuine tear as he say this in a pitiful , cry voice . " come , Georgey , it be time the brave little man be in bed . come along with grandpa . excuse I for a quarter of an hour , Mr. Audley . " 

 the boy go very willingly . at the door of the room the old man look back at his visitor , and say in the same peevish voice , " this be a poor place for I to pass my decline year in , Mr. Audley . I have   make many sacrifice , and I make they still , but I have   not be treat well . " 

 leave alone in the dusky little sitting - room , Robert Audley fold his arm , and sit absently star at the floor . 

 George be go , then ; he might receive some letter of explanation perhaps , when he return to London ; but the chance be that he would never see his old friend again . 

 " and to think that I should care so much for the fellow ! " he say , lift his eyebrow to the center of his forehead . 

 " the place smell of stale tobacco like a tap - room , " he mutter presently ; " there can be no harm in my smoking a cigar here . " 

 he take one from the case in his pocket : there be a spark of fire in the little grate , and he look about for something to light his cigar with . 

 a twisted piece of paper lie half burn upon the hearthrug ; he pick it up , and unfold it , in order to get a well pipe - light by fold it the other way of the paper . as he do so , absently glance at the pencil writing upon the fragment of thin paper , a portion of a name catch his eye a portion of the name that be most in his thought . he take the scrap of paper to the window , and examine it by the decline light . 

 it be part of a telegraphic dispatch . the upper portion have be burn away , but the more important part , the great part of the message itself , remain . 

 " alboy come to last night , and leave by the mail for London , on his way to Liverpool , whence he be to sail for Sydney . " 

 the date and the name and address of the sender of the message have be burn with the heading . Robert Audley 's face blanch to a deathly whiteness . he carefully fold the scrap of paper , and place it between the leaf of his pocket - book . 

 " my God ! " he say , " what be the meaning of this ? I shall go to Liverpool to - night , and make inquiry there ! " 

 CHAPTER XIII . 

 trouble dreams . 

 Robert Audley leave Southampton by the mail , and let himself into his chamber just as the dawn be creep cold and gray into the solitary room , and the canary be begin to rustle their feather feebly in the early morning . 

 there be several letter in the box behind the door , but there be none from George Talboys . 

 the young barrister be wear out by a long day spend in hurrying from place to place . the usual lazy monotony of his life have be break as it have never be break before in eight - and - twenty tranquil , easy - go year . his mind be begin to grow confuse upon the point of time . it seem to he month since he have lose sight of George Talboys . it be so difficult to believe that it be less than forty - eight hour ago that the young man have leave he asleep under the willow by the trout stream . 

 his eye be painfully weary for want of sleep . he search about the room for some time , look in all sort of impossible place for a letter from George Talboys , and then throw himself dress upon his friend 's bed , in the room with the canary and geranium . 

 " I shall wait for to - morrow morning 's post , " he say ; " and if that bring no letter from George , I shall start for Liverpool without a moment 's delay . " 

 he be thoroughly exhausted , and fall into a heavy sleep a sleep which be profound without be in any way refresh , for he be torment all the time by disagreeable dream dream which be painful , not from any horror in themselves , but from a vague and wearying sense of their confusion and absurdity . 

 at one time he be pursue strange people and enter strange house in the endeavor to unravel the mystery of the telegraphic dispatch ; at another time he be in the church - yard at Ventnor , gaze at the headstone George have order for the grave of his dead wife . once in the long , ramble mystery of these dream he go to the grave , and find this headstone go , and on remonstrate with the stonemason , be tell that the man have a reason for remove the inscription ; a reason that Robert would some day learn . 

 in another dream he see the grave of Helen Talboys open , and while he wait , with the cold horror lift up his hair , to see the dead woman rise and stand before he with her stiff , charnel - house drapery cling about her rigid limb , his uncle 's wife trip gaily out of the open grave , dress in the crimson velvet robe in which the artist have paint she , and with her ringlet flash like red gold in the unearthly light that shine about she . 

 but into all these dream the place he have last be in , and the people with whom he have last be concern , be dimly interweave sometimes his uncle ; sometimes Alicia ; oftenest of all my lady ; the trout stream in Essex ; the lime - walk at the Court . once he be walk in the black shadow of this long avenue , with Lady Audley hang on his arm , when suddenly they hear a great knocking in the distance , and his uncle 's wife wind her slender arm around he , cry out that it be the day of judgment , and that all wicked secret must now be tell . look at she as she shriek this in his ear , he see that her face have grow ghastly white , and that her beautiful golden ringlet be change into serpent , and slowly creep down her fair neck . 

 he start from his dream to find that there be some one really knock at the outer door of his chamber . 

 it be a dreary , wet morning , the rain beat against the window , and the canary twitter dismally to each other complaining , perhaps , of the bad weather . Robert could not tell how long the person have be knock . he have mix the sound with his dream , and when he wake he be only half conscious of other thing . 

 " it be that stupid Mrs. Maloney , I dare say , " he mutter . " she may knock again for all I care . why can not   she use her duplicate key , instead of drag a man out of bed when he be half dead with fatigue . " 

 the person , whoever it be , do knock again , and then desist , apparently tired out ; but about a minute afterward a key turn in the door . 

 " she have her key with she all the time , then , " say Robert . " I be very glad I do not   get up . " 

 the door between the sitting - room and bed - room be half open , and he could see the laundress bustle about , dust the furniture , and rearrange thing that have never be disarrange . 

 " be that you , Mrs. Maloney ? " he ask . 

 " yes , sir , " 

 " then why , in goodness ' name , do you make that row at the door , when you have a key with you all the time ? " 

 " a row at the door , sir ? " 

 " yes ; that infernal knock . " 

 " sure I never knock , Mister Audley , but walk straight in with my kay " 

 " then who do knock ? there be be some one kicking up a row at that door for a quarter of an hour , I should think ; you must have meet he go down - stair . " 

 " but I be rather late this morning , sir , for I have   be in Mr. Martin 's room first , and I have   come straight from the floor above . " 

 " then you do not   see any one at the door , or on the stair ? " 

 " not a mortal soul , sir . " 

 " be ever anything so provoking ? " say Robert . " to think that I should have let this person go away without ascertain who he be , or what he want ! how do I know that it be not some one with a message or a letter from George Talboys ? " 

 " sure if it be , sir , he will come again , " say Mrs. Maloney , soothingly . 

 " yes , of course , if it be anything of consequence he will come again , " mutter Robert . the fact be , that from the moment of find the telegraphic message at Southampton , all hope of hearing of George have fade out of his mind . he feel that there be some mystery involve in the disappearance of his friend some treachery toward himself , or toward George . what if the young man 's greedy old father - in - law have try to separate they on account of the monetary trust lodge in Robert Audley 's hand ? or what if , since even in these civilized day all kind of unsuspected horror be constantly commit what if the old man have decoy George down to Southampton , and make away with he in order to get possession of that L20,000 , leave in Robert 's custody for little Georgey 's use ? 

 but neither of these supposition explain the telegraphic message , and it be the telegraphic message which have fill Robert 's mind with a vague sense of alarm . the postman bring no letter from George Talboys , and the person who have knock at the door of the chamber do not return between seven and nine o'clock , so Robert Audley leave Figtree Court once more in search of his friend . this time he tell the cabman to drive to the Euston Station , and in twenty minute he be on the platform , make inquiry about the train . 

 the Liverpool express have start half an hour before he reach the station , and he have to wait an hour and a quarter for a slow train to take he to his destination . 

 Robert Audley chafe cruelly at this delay . half a dozen vessel might sail for Australia while he roam up and down the long platform , tumble over truck and porter , and swear at his ill - luck . 

 he buy the Times newspaper , and look instinctively at the second column , with a morbid interest in the advertisement of people miss son , brother , and husband who have leave their home , never to return or to be hear of more . 

 there be one advertisement of a young man find drown somewhere on the Lambeth shore . 

 what if that should have be George 's fate ? no ; the telegraphic message involve his father - in - law in the fact of his disappearance , and every speculation about he must start from that one point . 

 it be eight o'clock in the evening when Robert get into Liverpool ; too late for anything except to make inquiry as to what vessel have sail within the last two day for the antipode . 

 an emigrant ship have sail at four o'clock that afternoon the Victoria Regia , bind for Melbourne . 

 the result of his inquiry amount to this if he want to find out who have sail in the Victoria Regia , he must wait till the next morning , and apply for information of that vessel . 

 Robert Audley be at the office at nine o'clock the next morning , and be the first person after the clerk who enter it . 

 he meet with every civility from the clerk to whom he apply . the young man refer to his book , and run his pen down the list of passenger who have sail in the Victoria Regia , tell Robert that there be no one among they of the name of Talboys . he push his inquiry far . have any of the passenger enter their name within a short time of the vessel 's sailing ? 

 one of the other clerk look up from his desk as Robert ask this question . yes , he say ; he remember a young man 's come into the office at half - past three o'clock in the afternoon , and pay his passage money . his name be the last on the list Thomas Brown . 

 Robert Audley shrug his shoulder . there could have be no possible reason for George 's take a feigned name . he ask the clerk who have last speak if he could remember the appearance of this Mr. Thomas Brown . 

 no ; the office be crowd at the time ; people be run in and out , and he have not take any particular notice of this last passenger . 

 Robert thank they for their civility , and wish they good - morning . as he be leave the office , one of the young man call after he : 

 " oh , by - the - by , sir , " he say , " I remember one thing about this Mr. Thomas Brown his arm be in a sling . " 

 there be nothing more for Robert Audley to do but to return to town . he re - enter his chamber at six o'clock that evening , thoroughly wear out once more with his useless search . 

 Mrs. Maloney bring he his dinner and a pint of wine from a tavern in the Strand . the evening be raw and chilly , and the laundress have light a good fire in the sitting - room grate . 

 after eat about half a mutton - chop , Robert sit with his wine untaste upon the table before he , smoke cigar and star into the blaze . 

 " George Talboys never sail for Australia , " he say , after long and painful reflection . " if he be alive , he be still in England ; and if he be dead , his body be hide in some corner of England . " 

 he sit for hour smoking and think trouble and gloomy thought leave a dark shadow upon his moody face , which neither the brilliant light of the gas nor the red blaze of the fire could dispel . 

 very late in the evening he rise from his chair , push away the table , wheel his desk over to the fire - place , take out a sheet of fool - cap , and dip a pen in the ink . 

 but after do this he pause , lean his forehead upon his hand , and once more relapse into thought . 

 " I shall draw up a record of all that have occur between our go down to Essex and to - night , begin at the very beginning . " 

 he draw up this record in short , detach sentence , which he number as he write . 

 it run thus : 

 " Journal of Facts connect with the Disappearance of George Talboys , inclusive of Facts which have no apparent Relation to that circumstance . " 

 in spite of the troubled state of his mind , he be rather inclined to be proud of the official appearance of this heading . he sit for some time look at it with affection , and with the feather of his pen in his mouth . " upon my word , " he say , " I begin to think that I ought to have pursue my profession , instead of dawdle my life away as I have do . " 

 he smoke half a cigar before he have get his thought in proper train , and then begin to write : 

 " 1 . I write to Alicia , propose to take George down to the Court . " 

 " 2 . Alicia write , object to the visit , on the part of Lady Audley . " 

 " 3 . we go to Essex in spite of that objection . I see my lady . my lady refuse to be introduce to George on that particular evening on the score of fatigue . " 

 " 4 . Sir Michael invite George and I to dinner for the following evening . " 

 " 5 . my lady receive a telegraphic dispatch the next morning which summon she to London . " 

 " 6 . Alicia show I a letter from my lady , in which she request to be tell when I and my friend , Mr. Talboys , mean to leave Essex . to this letter be subjoin a postscript , reiterate the above request . " 

 " 7 . we call at the Court , and ask to see the house . my lady 's apartment be lock . " 

 " 8 . we get at the aforesaid apartment by mean of a secret passage , the existence of which be unknown to my lady . in one of the room we find her portrait . " 

 " 9 . George be frightened at the storm . his conduct be exceedingly strange for the rest of the evening . " 

 " 10 . George quite himself again the follow morning . I propose leave Audley Court immediately ; he prefer remain till the evening . " 

 " 11 . we go out fish . George leave I to go to the Court . " 

 " 12 . the last positive information I can obtain of he in Essex be at the Court , where the servant say he think Mr. Talboys tell he he would go and look for my lady in the ground . " 

 " 13 . I receive information about he at the station which may or may not be correct . " 

 " 14 . I hear of he positively once more at Southampton , where , accord to his father - in - law , he have be for an hour on the previous night . " 

 " 15 . the telegraphic message . " 

 when Robert Audley have complete this brief record , which he draw up with great deliberation , and with frequent pause for reflection , alteration and erasure , he sit for a long time contemplate the write page . 

 at last he read it carefully over , stop at some of the numbered paragraph , and mark some of they with a pencil cross ; then he fold the sheet of foolscap , go over to a cabinet on the opposite side of the room , unlock it , and place the paper in that very pigeon - hole into which he have thrust Alicia 's letter the pigeon - hole mark Important . 

 have do this , he return to his easy - chair by the fire , push away his desk , and light a cigar . " it be as dark as midnight from first to last , " he say ; " and the clew to the mystery must be find either at Southampton or in Essex . be it how it may , my mind be make up . I shall first go to Audley Court , and look for George Talboys in a narrow radius . " 

 CHAPTER XIV . 

 PHOEBE 'S SUITOR . 

 " Mr. George Talboys . any person who have meet this gentleman since the 7th inst . , or who possess any information respect he subsequent to that date , will be liberally reward on communicate with A.Z. , 14 Chancery Lane . " 

 Sir Michael Audley read the above advertisement in the second column of the Times , as he sit at breakfast with my lady and Alicia two or three day after Robert 's return to town . 

 " Robert 's friend have not yet be hear of , then , " say the baronet , after read the advertisement to his wife and daughter . 

 " as for that , " reply my lady , " I can not help wonder that any one can be silly enough to advertise for he . the young man be evidently of a restless , rove disposition a sort of Bamfyld Moore Carew of modern life , whom no attraction could ever keep in one spot . " 

 though the advertisement appear three successive time , the party at the Court attach very little importance to Mr. Talboys ' disappearance ; and after this one occasion his name be never again mention by either Sir Michael , my lady , or Alicia . 

 Alicia Audley and her pretty stepmother be by no mean any well friend after that quiet evening on which the young barrister have din at the Court . 

 " she be a vain , frivolous , heartless little coquette , " say Alicia , address herself to her Newfoundland dog Caesar , who be the sole recipient of the young lady 's confidence ; ' she be a practiced and consummate flirt , Caesar ; and not content with set her yellow ringlet and her silly giggle at half the man in Essex , she must need make that stupid cousin of mine dance attendance upon she . I have not   common patience with she . " 

 in proof of which last assertion Miss Alicia Audley treat her stepmother with such very palpable impertinence that Sir Michael feel himself call upon to remonstrate with his only daughter . 

 " the poor little woman be very sensitive , you know , Alicia , " the baronet say , gravely , " and she feel your conduct most acutely . " 

 " I do not   believe it a bit , papa , " answer Alicia , stoutly . " you think her sensitive because she have soft little white hand , and big blue eye with long lash , and all manner of affected , fantastical way , which you stupid man call fascinating . sensitive ! why , I have   see she do cruel thing with those slender white finger , and laugh at the pain she inflict . I be very sorry , papa , " she add , soften a little by her father 's look of distress ; " though she have come between we , and rob poor Alicia of the love of that dear , generous heart , I wish I could like she for your sake ; but I can not , I can not , and no more can Caesar . she come up to he once with her red lip apart , and her little white tooth glisten between they , and stroke his great head with her soft hand ; but if I have not have hold of his collar , he would have fly at her throat and strangle she . she may bewitch every man in Essex , but she would never make friend with my dog . " 

 " your dog shall be shoot , " answer Sir Michael angrily , " if his vicious temper ever endanger Lucy . " 

 the Newfoundland roll his eye slowly round in the direction of the speaker , as if he understand every word that have be say . Lady Audley happen to enter the room at this very moment , and the animal cower down by the side of his mistress with a suppress growl . there be something in the manner of the dog which be , if anything , more indicative of terror than of fury ; incredible as it appear that Caesar should be frighten by so fragile a creature as Lucy Audley . 

 Amicable as be my lady 's nature , she could not live long at the Court without discover Alicia 's dislike to she . she never allude to it but once ; then , shrug her graceful white shoulder , she say , with a sigh : 

 " it seem very hard that you can not love I , Alicia , for I have never be use to make enemy ; but since it seem that it must be so , I can not help it . if we can not be friend , let we be neutral . you will not   try to injure I ? " 

 " injure you ! " exclaim Alicia ; " how should I injure you ? " 

 " you will not try to deprive I of your father 's affection ? " 

 " I may not be as amiable as you be , my lady , and I may not have the same sweet smile and pretty word for every stranger I meet , but I be not capable of a contemptible meanness ; and even if I be , I think you be so secure of my father 's love , that nothing but your own act will ever deprive you of it . " 

 " what a severe creature you be , Alicia ! " say my lady , make a little grimace . " I suppose you mean to infer by all that , that I be deceitful . why , I can not   help smile at people , and speak prettily to they . I know I be no well than the rest of the world ; but I can not   help it if I be pleasantťr . it be constitutional . " 

 Alicia have thus entirely shut the door upon all intimacy between Lady Audley and herself , and Sir Michael be chiefly occupy in agricultural pursuit and manly sport , which keep he away from home , it be perhaps natural that my lady , be of an eminently social disposition , should find herself throw a good deal upon her white - eyelashe maid for society . 

 Phoebe Marks be exactly the sort of a girl who be generally promote from the post of lady 's maid to that of companion . she have just sufficient education to enable she to understand her mistress when Lucy choose to allow herself to run riot in a species of intellectual tarantella , in which her tongue go mad to the sound of its own rattle , as the spanish dancer at the noise of his castanet . Phoebe know enough of the french language to be able to dip into the yellow - paper - cover novel which my lady order from the Burlington Arcade , and to discourse with her mistress upon the questionable subject of these romance . the likeness which the lady 's maid bore to Lucy Audley be , perhaps , a point of sympathy between the two woman . it be not to be call a striking likeness ; a stranger might have see they both together , and yet have fail to remark it . but there be certain dim and shadowy light in which , meet Phoebe Marks glide softly through the dark oak passage of the Court , or under the shroud avenue in the garden , you might have easily mistake she for my lady . 

 Sharp October wind be sweep the leaf from the lime in the long avenue , and drive they in wither heap with a ghostly rustle noise along the dry gravel walk . the old well must have be half choke up with the leaf that drift about it , and whirl in eddying circle into its black , broken mouth . on the still bosom of the fish - pond the same withered leaf slowly rot away , mix themselves with the tangle weed that discolor the surface of the water . all the gardener Sir Michael could employ could not keep the impress of autumn 's destroy hand from the ground about the Court . 

 " how I hate this desolate month ! " my lady say , as she walk about the garden , shiver beneath her sable mantle . " every thing drop to ruin and decay , and the cold flicker of the sun light up the ugliness of the earth , as the glare of gas - lamp light the wrinkle of an old woman . shall I ever grow old , Phoebe ? will my hair ever drop off as the leaf be fall from those tree , and leave I wan and bare like they ? what be to become of I when I grow old ? " 

 she shiver at the thought of this more than she have do at the cold , wintry breeze , and muffle herself closely in her fur , walk so fast that her maid have some difficulty in keep up with she . 

 " do you remember , Phoebe , " she say , presently , relax her pace , " do you remember that french story we read the story of a beautiful woman who have commit some crime I forget what in the zenith of her power and loveliness , when all Paris drink to she every night , and when the people run away from the carriage of the king to flock about her , and get a peep at her face ? do you remember how she keep the secret of what she have do for nearly half a century , spend her old age in her family chateau , beloved and honor by all the province as an uncanonized saint and benefactress to the poor ; and how , when her hair be white , and her eye almost blind with age , the secret be reveal through one of those strange accident by which such secret always be reveal in romance , and she be try , find guilty , and condemn to be burn alive ? the king who have wear her color be dead and go ; the court of which she have be a star have pass away ; powerful functionary and great magistrate , who might perhaps have help she , be molder in the graf ; brave young cavalier , who would have die for she , have fall upon distant battle - field ; she have live to see the age to which she have belong fade like a dream ; and she go to the stake , follow by only a few ignorant country people , who forget all her bounty , and hoot at she for a wicked sorceress . " 

 " I do not   care for such dismal story , my lady , " say Phoebe Marks with a shudder . " one have no need to read book to give one the horror in this dull place . " 

 Lady Audley shrug her shoulder and laugh at her maid 's candor . 

 " it be a dull place , Phoebe , " she say , " though it do not   do to say so to my dear old husband . though I be the wife of one of the most influential man in the county , I do not   know that I be not   nearly as well off at Mr. Dawson 's ; and yet it be something to wear sable that cost sixty guineas , and have a thousand pound spend on the decoration of one 's apartment . " 

 treat as a companion by her mistress , in the receipt of the most liberal wage , and with perquisite such as perhaps lady 's maid never have before , it be strange that Phoebe Marks should wish to leave her situation ; but it be not the less a fact that she be anxious to exchange all the advantage of Audley Court for the very unpromising prospect which await she as the wife of her Cousin Luke . 

 the young man have contrive in some manner to associate himself with the improved fortune of his sweetheart . he have never allow Phoebe any peace till she have obtain for he , by the aid of my lady 's interference , a situation as undergroom of the Court . 

 he never ride out with either Alicia or Sir Michael ; but on one of the few occasion upon which my lady mount the pretty little gray thoroughbred reserve for her use , he contrive to attend she in her ride . he see enough , in the very first half hour they be out , to discover that , graceful as Lucy Audley might look in her long blue cloth habit , she be a timid horsewoman , and utterly unable to manage the animal she ride . 

 Lady Audley remonstrate with she maid upon her folly in wish to marry the uncouth groom . 

 the two woman be seat together over the fire in my lady 's dressing - room , the gray sky close in upon the October afternoon , and the black tracery of ivy darken the casement window . 

 " you surely be not in love with the awkward , ugly creature be you , Phoebe ? " ask my lady sharply . 

 the girl be sit on a low stool at her mistress foot . she do not answer my lady 's question immediately , but sit for some time look vacantly into the red abyss in the hollow fire . 

 presently she say , rather as if she have be think aloud than answer Lucy 's question : 

 " I do not   think I can love he . we have be together from child , and I promise , when I be little well than fifteen , that I would be his wife . I dare not   break that promise now . there have be time when I have   make up the very sentence I mean to say to he , tell he that I could not   keep my faith with he ; but the word have die upon my lip , and I have   sit look at he , with a choke sensation , in my throat that would not   let I speak . I dare not   refuse to marry he . I have   often watch and watch he , as he have sit slice away at a hedge - stake with his great clasp - knife , till I have think that it be just such man as he who have decoy their sweetheart into lonely place , and murder they for be false to their word . when he be a boy he be always violent and revengeful . I see he once take up that very knife in a quarrel with his mother . I tell you , my lady , I must marry he . " 

 " you silly girl , you shall do nothing of the kind ! " answer Lucy . " you think he will murder you , do you ? do you think , then , if murder be in he , you would be any safe as his wife ? if you thwart he , or make he jealous ; if he want to marry another woman , or to get hold of some poor , pitiful bit of money of your , could not   he murder you then ? I tell you you sha'n't   marry he , Phoebe . in the first place I hate the man ; and , in the next place I can not   afford to part with you . we will give he a few pound and send he about his business . " 

 Phoebe Marks catch my lady 's hand in her , and clasp they convulsively . 

 " my lady my good , kind mistress ! " she cry , vehemently , " do not   try to thwart I in this do not   ask I to thwart he . I tell you I must marry he . you do not   know what he be . it will be my ruin , and the ruin of other , if I break my word . I must marry he ! " 

 " very well , then , Phoebe , " answer her mistress , " I can not   oppose you . there must be some secret at the bottom of all this . " " there be , my lady , " say the girl , with her face turn away from Lucy . 

 " I shall be very sorry to lose you ; but I have promise to stand your friend in all thing . what do your cousin mean to do for a living when , you be marry ? " 

 " he would like to take a public house . " 

 " then he shall take a public house , and the soon he drink himself to death the well . Sir Michael dine at a bachelor 's party at Major Margrave 's this evening , and my step - daughter be away with her friend at the Grange . you can bring your cousin into the drawing - room after dinner , and I will tell he what I mean to do for he . " 

 " you be very good , my lady , " Phoebe answer with a sigh . 

 Lady Audley sit in the glow of firelight and wax candle in the luxurious drawing - room ; the amber damask cushion of the sofa contrast with her dark violet velvet dress , and her ripple hair fall about her neck in a golden haze . everywhere around she be the evidence of wealth and splendor ; while in strange contrast to all this , and to her own beauty ; the awkward groom stand rub his bullet head as my lady explain to he what she intend to do for her confidential maid . Lucy 's promise be very liberal , and she have expect that , uncouth as the man be , he would , in his own rough manner , have express his gratitude . 

 to her surprise he stand star at the floor without utter a word in answer to her offer . Phoebe be stand close to his elbow , and seem distressed at the man 's rudeness . 

 " tell my lady how thankful you be , Luke , " she say . 

 " but I be not so over and above thankful , " answer her lover , savagely . " fifty pound be not   much to start a public . you will make it a hundred , my lady ? " 

 " I shall do nothing of the kind , " say Lady Audley , her clear blue eye flash with indignation , " and I wonder at your impertinence in ask it . " 

 " oh , yes , you will , though , " answer Luke , with quiet insolence that have a hide meaning . " you will make it a hundred , my lady . " 

 Lady Audley rise from her seat , look the man steadfastly in the face till his determined gaze sink under her ; then walk straight up to she maid , she say in a high , pierce voice , peculiar to she in moment of intense agitation : 

 " Phoebe Marks , you have tell this man ! " 

 the girl fall on her knee at my lady 's foot . 

 " oh , forgive I , forgive I ! " she cry . " he force it from I , or I would never , never have tell ! " 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 on THE WATCH . 

 upon a lower morning late in November , with the yellow fog low upon the flat meadow , and the blinded cattle grope their way through the dim obscurity , and blunder stupidly against black and leafless hedge , or stumble into ditch , undistinguishable in the hazy atmosphere ; with the village church loom brown and dingy through the uncertain light ; with every wind path and cottage door , every gable end and gray old chimney , every village child and straggle cur seem strange and weird of aspect in the semi - darkness , Phoebe Marks and her Cousin Luke make their way through the churchyard of Audley , and present themselves before a shivering curate , whose surplice hang in damp fold , soddene by the morning mist , and whose temper be not improve by his have wait five minute for the bride and bridegroom . 

 Luke Marks , dress in his ill - fitting Sunday clothe , look by no means handsomer than in his every - day apparel ; but Phoebe , array in a rustle silk of delicate gray , that have be wear about half a dozen time by her mistress , look , as the few spectator of the ceremony remark , " quite the lady . " 

 a very dim and shadowy lady , vague of outline , and faint of color , with eye , hair , complexion and dress all melt into such pale and uncertain shade that , in the obscure light of the foggy November morning a superstitious stranger might have mistake the bride for the ghost of some other bride , dead and bury in the vault below the church . 

 Mr. Luke Marks , the hero of the occasion , think very little of all this . he have secure the wife of his choice , and the object of his life - long ambition a public house . my lady have provide the seventy - five pound necessary for the purchase of the good - will and fixture , with the stock of ale and spirit , of a small inn in the center of a lonely little village , perch on the summit of a hill , and call Mount Stanning . it be not a very pretty house to look at ; it have something of a tumble - down , weather - beat appearance , stand , as it do , upon high ground , shelter only by four or five bare and overgrown poplar , that have shoot up too rapidly for their strength , and have a blighted , forlorn look in consequence . the wind have have its own way with the Castle Inn , and have sometimes make cruel use of its power . it be the wind that batter and bend the low , thatched roof of outhouse and stable , till they hang over and lurch forward , as a slouch hat hang over the low forehead of some village ruffian ; it be the wind that shake and rattle the wooden shutter before the narrow casement , till they hang break and dilapidate upon their rusty hinge ; it be the wind that overthrow the pigeon house , and break the vane that have be imprudently set up to tell the movement of its mightiness ; it be the wind that make light of any little bit of wooden trelli - work , or creep plant , or tiny balcony , or any modest decoration whatsoever , and tear and scatter it in its scornful fury ; it be the wind that leave mossy secretion on the discolored surface of the plaster wall ; it be the wind , in short , that shatter , and ruin , and rent , and trample upon the tottering pile of building , and then fly shriek off , to riot and glory in its destroy strength . the dispirit proprietor grow tired of his long struggle with this mighty enemy ; so the wind be leave to work its own will , and the Castle Inn fall slowly to decay . but for all that it suffer without , it be not the less prosperous within door . sturdy drover stop to drink at the little bar ; well - to - do farmer spend their evening and talk politic in the low , wainscoted parlor , while their horse munch some suspicious mixture of moldy hay and tolerable bean in the tumble - down stable . sometimes even the member of the Audley hunt stop to drink and bait their horse at the Castle Inn ; while , on one grand and never - to - be - forget occasion , a dinner have be order by the master of the hound for some thirty gentleman , and the proprietor drive nearly mad by the importance of the demand . 

 so Luke Marks , who be by no mean trouble with an eye for the beautiful , think himself very fortunate in become the landlord of the Castle Inn , Mount Stanning . 

 a chaise - cart be wait in the fog to convey the bride and bridegroom to their new home ; and a few of the villager , who have know Phoebe from a child , be linger around the churchyard gate to bid her good - by . her pale eye be still pale from the tear she have shed , and the red rim which surround they . the bridegroom be annoy at this exhibition of emotion . 

 " what be you blubber for , lass ? " he say , fiercely . " if you do not   want to marry I you should have tell I so . I be not   go to murder you , be I ? " 

 the lady 's maid shiver as he speak to she , and drag she little silk mantle closely around she . 

 " you be cold in all this here finery , " say Luke , star at her costly dress with no expression of good - will . " why can not   woman dress accord to their station ? you will not   have no silk gownd out of my pocket , I can tell you . " 

 he lift the shiver girl into the chaise , wrap a rough great - coat about she , and drive off through the yellow fog , follow by a feeble cheer from two or three urchin cluster around the gate . 

 a new maid be bring from London to replace Phoebe Marks about the person of my lady a very showy damsel , who wear a black satin gown , and rose - color ribbon in her cap , and complain bitterly of the dullness of Audley Court . 

 but Christmas bring visitor to the ramble old mansion . a country squire and his fat wife occupy the tapestried chamber ; merry girl scamper up and down the long passage , and young man star out of the latticed window , watch for southerly wind and cloudy sky ; there be not an empty stall in the roomy old stable ; an extempore forge have be set up in the yard for the shoeing of hunter ; yelp dog make the place noisy with their perpetual clamor ; strange servant herd together on the garret story ; and every little casement hide away under some pointed gable , and every dormer window in the quaint old roof , glimmer upon the winter 's night with its separate taper , till , come suddenly upon Audley Court , the benighted stranger , mislead by the light , and noise , and bustle of the place , might have easily fall into young Marlowe 's error , and have mistake the hospitable mansion for a good , old - fashioned inn , such as have fade from this earth since the last mail coach and prance tit take their last melancholy journey to the knacker 's yard . 

 among other visitor Mr. Robert Audley come down to Essex for the hunting season , with half a dozen french novel , a case of cigar , and three pound of turkish tobacco in his portmanteau . 

 the honest young country squire , who talk all breakfast time of Flying Dutchman filly and Voltigeur colt ; of glorious run of seven hour ' hard riding over three county , and a midnight homeward ride of thirty mile upon their covert hack ; and who run away from the well - spread table with their mouth full of cold sirloin , to look at that off pastern , or that sprain forearm , or the colt that have just come back from the veterinary surgeon 's , set down Robert Audley , dawdle over a slice of bread and marmalade , as a person utterly unworthy of any remark whatsoever . 

 the young barrister have bring a couple of dog with he ; and the country gentleman who give fifty pound for a pointer ; and travel a couple of hundred mile to look at a leash of setter before he strike a bargain , laugh aloud at the two miserable cur , one of which have follow Robert Audley through Chancery Lane , and half the length of Holborn ; while his companion have be take by the barrister vi et armis from a coster - monger who be ill - use he . and as Robert furthermore insist on have these two deplorable animal under his easy - chair in the drawing - room , much to the annoyance of my lady , who , as we know , hat all dog , the visitor at Audley Court look upon the baronet 's nephew as an inoffensive specie of maniac . 

 during other visit to the Court Robert Audley have make a feeble show of join in the sport of the merry assembly . he have jog across half a dozen plough field on a quiet gray pony of Sir Michael 's , and draw up breathless and pant at the door of some farm - house , have express his intention of follow the hound no far that morning . he have even go so far as to put on , with great labor , a pair of skate , with a view to take a turn on the frozen surface of the fishpond , and have fall ignominously at the first attempt , lie placidly extend on the flat of his back until such time as the bystander should think fit to pick he up . he have occupy the back seat in a dog - cart during a pleasant morning drive , vehemently protest against be take up hill , and require the vehicle to be stop every ten minute in order to readjust the cushion . but this year he show no inclination for any of these outdoor amusement , and he spend his time entirely in lounge in the drawing - room , and make himself agreeable , after his own lazy fashion , to my lady and Alicia . 

 Lady Audley receive her nephew 's attention in that graceful half - childish fashion which her admirer find so charming ; but Alicia be indignant at the change in her cousin 's conduct . 

 " you be always a poor , spiritless fellow , Bob , " say the young lady , contemptuously , as she bounce into the drawing - room in her riding - habit , after a hunting breakfast , from which Robert have absent himself , prefer a cup of tea in my lady 's boudoir ; " but this year I do not   know what have come to you . you be good for nothing but to hold a skein of silk or read Tennyson to Lady Audley . " 

 " my dear , hasty , impetuous Alicia , do not   be violent , " say the young man imploringly . " a conclusion be not   a five - bar gate ; and you need not   give your judgment its head , as you give your mare Atalanta hers , when you be fly across country at the heel of an unfortunate fox . Lady Audley interest I , and my uncle 's county friend do not . be that a sufficient answer , Alicia ? " 

 Miss Audley give her head a little scornful toss . 

 " it be as good an answer as I shall ever get from , you , Bob , " she say , impatiently ; " but pray amuse yourself in your own way ; loll in an easy - chair all day , with those two absurd dog asleep on your knee ; spoil my lady 's window - curtain with your cigar and annoy everybody in the house with your stupid , inanimate countenance . " 

 Mr. Robert Audley open his handsome gray eye to their wide extent at this tirade , and look helplessly at Miss Alicia . 

 the young lady be walk up and down the room , slash the skirt of her habit with her riding - whip . her eye sparkle with an angry flash , and a crimson glow burn under her clear brown skin . the young barrister know very well , by these diagnostic , that his cousin be in a passion . 

 " yes , " she repeat , " your stupid , inanimate countenance . do you know , Robert Audley , that with all your mock amiability , you be brimful of conceit and superciliousness . you look down upon our amusement ; you lift up your eyebrow , and shrug your shoulder , and throw yourself back in your chair , and wash your hand of we and our pleasure . you be a selfish , cold - hearted Sybarite " 

 " Alicia ! good gracious I ! " 

 the morning paper drop out of his hand , and he sit feebly star at his assailant . 

 " yes , selfish , Robert Audley ! you take home half - starve dog , because you like half - starve dog . you stoop down , and pat the head of every good - for - nothing cur in the village street , because you like good - for - nothing cur . you notice little child , and give they halfpence , because it amuse you to do so . but you lift your eyebrow a quarter of a yard when poor Sir Harry Towers tell a stupid story , and stare the poor fellow out of countenance with your lazy insolence . as to your amiability , you would let a man hit you , and say ' thank you ' for the blow , rather than take the trouble to hit he again ; but you would not   go half a mile out of your way to serve your dear friend . Sir Harry be worth twenty of you , though he do write to ask if my m - a - i - r Atalanta have recover from the sprain . he can not   spell , or lift his eyebrow to the root of his hair ; but he would go through fire and water for the girl he love ; while you " 

 at this very point , when Robert be most prepared to encounter his cousin 's violence , and when Miss Alicia seem about to make her strong attack , the young lady break down altogether , and burst into tear . 

 Robert spring from his easy - chair , upset his dog on the carpet . 

 " Alicia , my darling , what be it ? " 

 " it be it be it be the feather of my hat that get into my eye , " sob his cousin ; and before he could investigate the truth of this assertion Alicia have dart out of the room . 

 Robert Audley be prepare to follow she , when he hear her voice in the court - yard below , amidst the tramping of horse and the clamor of visitor , dog , and groom . Sir Harry Towers , the most aristocratic young sportsman in the neighborhood , have just take her little foot in his hand as she spring into her saddle . 

 " Good Heaven ! " exclaim Robert , as he watch the merry party of equestrian until they disappear under the archway . " what do all this mean ? how charmingly she sit her horse ! what a pretty figure , too , and a fine , candid , brown , rosy face : but to fly at a fellow like that , without the least provocation ! that be the consequence of let a girl follow the hound . she learn to look at everything in life as she do at six foot of timber or a sunk fence ; she go through the world as she go across country straight ahead , and over everything . such a nice girl as she might have be , too , if she have be bring up in Figtree Court ! if ever I marry , and have daughter   which remote contingency may Heaven forefend !   they shall be educate in Paper Buildings , take their sole exercise in the Temple Gardens , and they shall never go beyond the gate till they be marriageable , when I will walk they straight across Fleet street to St. Dunstan 's church , and deliver they into the hand of their husband . " 

 with such reflection as these do Mr. Robert Audley beguile the time until my lady re - enter the drawing - room , fresh and radiant in her elegant morning costume , her yellow curl glisten with the perfume water in which she have bath , and her velvet - cover sketch - book in her arm . she plant a little easel upon a table by the window , seat herself before it , and begin to mix the color upon her palette , Robert watch she out of his half - close eye . 

 " you be sure my cigar do not annoy you , Lady Audley ? " 

 " oh , no indeed ; I be quite used to the smell of tobacco . Mr. Dawson , the surgeon , smoke all the evening when I live in his house . " 

 " Dawson be a good fellow , be not   he ? " Robert ask , carelessly . 

 my lady burst into her pretty , gush laugh . 

 " the dearest of good creature , " she say . " he pay I five - and - twenty pound a year only fancy , five - and - twenty pound ! that make six pound five a quarter . how well I remember receive the money six dingy old sovereign , and a little heap of untidy , dirty silver , that come straight from the till in the surgery ! and then how glad I be to get it ! while now I can not   help laugh while I think of it these color I be use cost a guinea each at Winsor    Newton 's the carmine and ultramarine thirty shilling . I give Mrs. Dawson one of my silk dress the other day , and the poor thing kiss I , and the surgeon carry the bundle home under his cloak . " 

 my lady laugh long and joyously at the thought . her color be mixed ; she be copy a water - color sketch of an impossibly Turneresque atmosphere . the sketch be nearly finish , and she have only to put in some critical little touch with the most delicate of her sable pencil . she prepare herself daintily for the work , look sideways at the painting . 

 all this time Mr. Robert Audley 's eye be fix intently on her pretty face . 

 " it be a change , " he say , after so long a pause that my lady might have forget what she have be talk of , " it be a change ! some woman would do a great deal to accomplish such a change as that . " 

 Lady Audley 's clear blue eye dilate as she fix they suddenly on the young barrister . the wintry sunlight , gleam full upon her face from a side window , light up the azure of those beautiful eye , till their color seem to flicker and tremble betwixt blue and green , as the opal tint of the sea change upon a summer 's day . the small brush fall from her hand , and blot out the peasant 's face under a widen circle of crimson lake . 

 Robert Audley be tenderly coax the crumble leaf of his cigar with cautious finger . 

 " my friend at the corner of Chancery Lane have not give I such good Manillas as usual , " he murmur . " if ever you smoke , my dear aunt   and I be tell that many woman take a quiet weed under the rose , be very careful how you choose your cigar . " 

 my lady draw a long breath , pick up her brush , and laugh aloud at Robert 's advice . 

 " what an eccentric creature you be , Mr. Audley I do you know that you sometimes puzzle I " 

 " not more than you puzzle I , dear aunt . " 

 my lady put away her color and sketch book , and seat herself in the deep recess of another window , at a considerable distance from Robert Audley , settle to a large piece of Berlin - wool work a piece of embroidery which the penelope of ten or twelve year ago be very fond of exercise their ingenuity upon the Olden Time at Bolton Abbey . 

 seat in the embrasure of this window , my lady be separate from Robert Audley by the whole length of the room , and the young man could only catch an occasional glimpse of her fair face , surround by its bright aureole of hazy , golden hair . 

 Robert Audley have be a week at the Court , but as yet neither he nor my lady have mention the name of George Talboys . 

 this morning , however , after exhaust the usual topic of conversation , Lady Audley make an inquiry about her nephew 's friend ; " that Mr. George George " she say , hesitate . 

 " talboy , " suggest Robert . 

 " yes , to be sure Mr. George Talboys . rather a singular name , by - the - by , and certainly , by all account , a very singular person . have you see he lately ? " 

 " I have not see he since the 7th of September last the day upon which he leave I asleep in the meadow on the other side of the village . " 

 " dear I ! " exclaim my lady , " what a very strange young man this Mr. George Talboys must be ! pray tell I all about it . " 

 Robert tell , in a few word , of his visit to Southampton and his journey to Liverpool , with their different result , my lady listen very attentively . 

 in order to tell this story to well advantage , the young man leave his chair , and , cross the room , take up his place opposite to Lady Audley , in the embrasure of the window . 

 " and what do you infer from all this ? " ask my lady , after a pause . 

 " it be so great a mystery to I , " he answer , " that I scarcely dare to draw any conclusion whatever ; but in the obscurity I think I can grope my way to two supposition , which to I seem almost certainty . " 

 " and they be " 

 " first , that George Talboys never go beyond Southampton . second , that he never go to Southampton at all . " 

 " but you trace he there . his father - in - law have see he . " 

 " I have reason to doubt his father - in - law 's integrity . " 

 " good gracious I ! " cry my lady , piteously . " what do you mean by all this ? " 

 " Lady Audley , " answer the young man , gravely , " I have never practice as a barrister . I have enrol myself in the rank of a profession , the member of which hold solemn responsibility and have sacred duty to perform ; and I have shrink from those responsibility and duty , as I have from all the fatigue of this troublesome life . but we be sometimes force into the very position we have most avoid , and I have find myself lately compel to think of these thing . Lady Audley , do you ever study the theory of circumstantial evidence ? " 

 " how can you ask a poor little woman about such horrid thing ? " exclaim my lady . 

 " circumstantial evidence , " continue the young man , as if he scarcely hear Lady Audley 's interruption " that wonderful fabric which be build out of straw collect at every point of the compass , and which be yet strong enough to hang a man . upon what infinitesimal trifle may sometimes hang the whole secret of some wicked mystery , inexplicable heretofore to the wise upon the earth ! a scrap of paper , a shred of some tear garment , the button off a coat , a word drop incautiously from the overcautious lip of guilt , the fragment of a letter , the shutting or opening of a door , a shadow on a window - blind , the accuracy of a moment test by one of Benson 's watch a thousand circumstance so slight as to be forget by the criminal , but link of iron in the wonderful chain forge by the science of the detective officer ; and lo ! the gallow be build up ; the solemn bell toll through the dismal gray of the early morning , the drop creak under the guilty foot , and the penalty of crime be pay . " 

 faint shadow of green and crimson fall upon my lady 's face from the paint escutcheon in the mullioned window by which she sit ; but every trace of the natural color of that face have fade out , leave it a ghastly ashen gray . 

 sit quietly in her chair , her head fall back upon the amber damask cushion , and her little hand lie powerless in her lap , Lady Audley have faint away . 

 " the radius grow narrow day by day , " say Robert Audley . " George Talboys never reach Southampton . " 

 CHAPTER XVI . 

 ROBERT AUDLEY get his CONGE . 

 the Christmas week be over , and one by one the country visitor drop away from Audley Court . the fat squire and his wife abandon the gray , tapestried chamber , and leave the black - browe warrior loom from the wall to scowl upon and threaten new guest , or to glare vengefully upon vacancy . the merry girl on the second story pack , or cause to be pack , their trunk and imperial , and tumble gauze ball - dress be take home that have be bring fresh to Audley . blunder old family chariot , with horse whose untrimmed fetlock tell of rougher work than even country road , be bring round to the broad space before the grim oak door , and laden with chaotic heap of womanly luggage . pretty rosy face peep out of carriage window to smile the last farewell upon the group at the hall door , as the vehicle rattle and rumble under the ivied archway . Sir Michael be in request everywhere . shake hand with the young sportsman ; kiss the rosy - cheeked girl ; sometimes even embrace portly matron who come to thank he for their pleasant visit ; everywhere genial , hospitable , generous , happy , and belove , the baronet hurry from room to room , from the hall to the stable , from the stable to the court - yard , from the court - yard to the arched gateway to speed the parting guest . 

 my lady 's yellow curl flash hither and thither like wander gleam of sunshine on these busy day of farewell . her great blue eye have a pretty , mournful look , in charming unison with the soft pressure of her little hand , and that friendly , though perhaps rather stereotyped speech , in which she tell her visitor how she be so sorry to lose they , and how she do not   know what she should do till they come once more to enliven the court by their charming society . 

 but however sorry my lady might be to lose her visitor , there be at least one guest whose society she be not deprive of . Robert Audley show no intention of leave his uncle 's house . he have no professional duty , he say ; Figtree Court be delightfully shady in hot weather , but there be a sharp corner round which the wind come in the summer month , arm with avenge rheumatism and influenzas . everybody be so good to he at the Court , that really he have no inclination to hurry away . 

 Sir Michael have but one answer to this : " stay , my dear boy ; stay , my dear Bob , as long as ever you like . I have no son , and you stand to I in the place of one . make yourself agreeable to Lucy , and make the Court your home as long as you live . " 

 to which Robert would merely reply by grasp his uncle 's hand vehemently , and mutter something about " a jolly old prince . " 

 it be to be observe that there be sometimes a certain vague sadness in the young man 's tone when he call Sir Michael " a jolly old prince ; " some shadow of affectionate regret that bring a mist into Robert 's eye , as he sit in a corner of the room look thoughtfully at the white - bearded baronet . 

 before the last of the young sportsman depart , Sir Harry Towers demand and obtain an interview with Miss Alicia Audley in the oak library an interview in which considerable emotion be display by the stalwart young fox - hunter ; so much emotion , indeed , and of such a genuine and honest character , that Alicia fairly break down as she tell he she should forever esteem and respect he for his true and noble heart , but that he must never , never , unless he wish to cause she the most cruel distress , ask more from she than this esteem and respect . 

 Sir Harry leave the library by the french window opening into the pond - garden . he stroll into that very lime - walk which George Talboys have compare to an avenue in a churchyard , and under the leafless tree fight the battle of his brave young heart . 

 " what a fool I be to feel it like this ! " he cry , stamp his foot upon the frosty ground . " I always know it would be so ; I always know that she be a hundred time too good for I . God bless she ! how nobly and tenderly she speak ; how beautiful she look with the crimson blush under her brown skin , and the tear in her big , gray eye almost as handsome as the day she take the sunk fence , and let I put the brush in her hat as we ride home ! God bless she ! I can get over anything as long as she do not   care for that sneak lawyer . but I could not   stand that . " 

 that sneak lawyer , by which appellation Sir Harry allude to Mr. Robert Audley , be stand in the hall , look at a map of the midland county , when Alicia come out of the library , with red eye , after her interview with the fox - hunting baronet . 

 Robert , who be short - sighted , have his eye within half an inch of the surface of the map as the young lady approach he . 

 " yes , " he say , " Norwich be in Norfolk , and that fool , young Vincent , say it be in Herefordshire . ha , Alicia , be that you ? " 

 he turn round so as to intercept Miss Audley on her way to the staircase . 

 " yes , " reply his cousin curtly , try to pass he . 

 " Alicia , you have be cry . " 

 the young lady do not condescend to reply . 

 " you have be cry , Alicia . Sir Harry Towers , of Towers Park , in the county of Herts , have be make you an offer of his hand , eh ? " 

 " have you be listen at the door , Mr. Audley ? " 

 " I have not , Miss Audley . on principle , I object to listen , and in practice I believe it to be a very troublesome proceeding ; but I be a barrister , Miss Alicia , and able to draw a conclusion by induction . do you know what inductive evidence be , Miss Audley ? " 

 " no , " reply Alicia , look at her cousin as a handsome young panther might look at its daring tormentor . 

 " I think not . I dare say Sir Harry would ask if it be a new kind of horse - ball . I know by induction that the baronet be go to make you an offer ; first , because he come downstairs with his hair part on the wrong side , and his face as pale as a tablecloth ; secondly , because he could not   eat any breakfast , and let his coffee go the wrong way ; and , thirdly , because he ask for an interview with you before he leave the Court . well , how be it to be , Alicia ? do we marry the baronet , and be poor Cousin Bob to be the good man at the wedding ? " 

 " Sir Harry Towers be a noble - hearted young man , " say Alicia , still try to pass her cousin . 

 " but do we accept he yes or no ? be we to be Lady Towers , with a superb estate in Hertfordshire , summer quarter for our hunter , and a drag with outrider to drive we across to papa 's place in Essex ? be it to be so , Alicia , or not ? " 

 " what be that to you , Mr. Robert Audley ? " cry Alicia , passionately . " what do you care what become of I , or whom I marry ? if I marry a chimney - sweep you would only lift up your eyebrow and say , ' bless my soul , she be always eccentric . ' I have refuse Sir Harry Towers ; but when I think of his generous and unselfish affection , and compare it with the heartless , lazy , selfish , supercilious indifference of other man , I have   a good mind to run after he and tell he " 

 " that you will retract , and be my Lady Towers ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " then do not , Alicia , do not , " say Robert Audley , grasp his cousin 's slender little wrist , and lead she up - stair . " come into the drawing - room with I , Alicia , my poor little cousin ; my charming , impetuous , alarm little cousin . sit down here in this mullioned window , and let we talk seriously and leave off quarrel if we can . " 

 the cousin have the drawing - room all to themselves . Sir Michael be out , my lady in her own apartment , and poor Sir Harry tower walk up and down upon the gravel walk , darken with the flickering shadow of the leafless branch in the cold winter sunshine . 

 " my poor little Alicia , " say Robert , as tenderly as if he have be address some spoiled child , " do you suppose that because people do not   wear vinegar top , or part their hair on the wrong side , or conduct themselves altogether after the manner of well - mean maniacs , by way of prove the vehemence of their passion do you suppose because of this , Alicia Audley , that they may not be just as sensible of the merit of a dear little warm - hearted and affectionate girl as ever their neighbor can be ? life be such a very troublesome matter , when all be say and do , that it be as well even to take its blessing quietly . I do not   make a great howling because I can get good cigar one door from the corner of Chancery Lane , and have a dear , good girl for my cousin ; but I be not the less grateful to Providence that it be so . " 

 Alicia open her gray eye to their wide extent , look her cousin full in the face with a bewildered stare . Robert have pick up the ugly and leanest of his attendant cur , and be placidly stroke the animal 's ear . 

 " be this all you have to say to I , Robert ? " ask Miss Audley , meekly . 

 " well , yes , I think so , " reply her cousin , after considerable deliberation . " I fancy that what I want to say be this do not   marry the fox - hunting baronet if you like anybody else well ; for if you will only be patient and take life easily , and try and reform yourself of bang door , bounce in and out room , talk of the stable , and rid across country , I have   no doubt the person you prefer will make you a very excellent husband . " 

 " thank you , cousin , " say Miss Audley , crimson with bright , indignant blush up to the root of her wave brown hair ; " but as you may not know the person I prefer , I think you have well not take upon yourself to answer for he . " 

 Robert pull the dog 's ear thoughtfully for some moment . 

 " no , to be sure , " he say , after a pause . " of course , if I do not   know he I think I do . " 

 " do you ? " exclaim Alicia ; and open the door with a violence that make her cousin shiver , she bounce out of the drawing - room . 

 " I only say I think I know he , " Robert call after she ; and , then , as he sink into an easy - chair , he murmur thoughtfully : " such a nice girl , too , if she do not   bounce . " 

 so poor Sir Harry Towers ride away from Audley Court , look very crestfallen and dismal . 

 he have very little pleasure in return to the stately mansion , hide among shelter oak and venerable beech . the square , red brick house , gleam at the end of a long arcade of leafless tree be to be forever desolate , he think , since Alicia would not come to be its mistress . 

 a hundred improvement plan and think of be dismiss from his mind as useless now . the hunter that Jim the trainer be break in for a lady ; the two pointer pup that be be rear for the next shooting season ; the big black retriever that would have carry Alicia 's parasol ; the pavilion in the garden , disuse since his mother 's death , but which he have mean to have restore for Miss Audley all these thing be now so much vanity and vexation of spirit . 

 " what be the good of be rich if one have no one to help spend one 's money ? " say the young baronet . " one only grow a selfish beggar , and take to drink too much port . it be a hard thing that a girl can refuse a true heart and such stable as we have   get at the park . it unsettle a man somehow . " 

 indeed , this unlooked for rejection have very much unsettle the few idea which make up the small sum of the baronet 's mind . 

 he have be desperately in love with Alicia ever since the last hunting season , when he have meet she at the county ball . his passion , cherish through the slow monotony of a summer , have break out afresh in the merry winter month , and the young man 's mauvaise honte alone have delay the offer of his hand . but he have never for a moment suppose that he would be refuse ; he be so used to the adulation of mother who have daughter to marry , and of even the daughter themselves ; he have be so accustomed to feel himself the lead personage in an assembly , although half the wit of the age have be there , and he could only say " haw , to be sure ! " and " by Jove hum ! " he have be so spoil by the flattery of bright eye that look , or seem to look , the brighter when he draw near , that without be possess of one shadow of personal vanity , he have yet come to think that he have only to make an offer to the prettiest girl in Essex to behold himself immediately accept . 

 " yes , " he would say complacently to some admire satellite , " I know I be a good match , and I know what make the gal so civil . they be very pretty , and they be very friendly to a fellow ; but I do not   care about them . they be all alike they can only drop their eye and say , ' Lor ' , Sir Harry , why do you call that curly black dog a retriever ? ' or ' oh Sir Harry , and do the poor mare really sprain her pastern shoulder - blade ? ' I have not   get much brain myself , I know , " the baronet would add deprecatingly ; " and I do not   want a strong - minded woman , who write book and wear green spectacle ; but , hang it ! I like a gal who know what she be talk about . " 

 so when Alicia say " no , " or rather make that pretty speech about esteem and respect , which well - breed young lady substitute for the obnoxious monosyllable , Sir Harry Towers feel that the whole fabric of the future he have build so complacently be shiver into a heap of dingy ruin . 

 Sir Michael grasp he warmly by the hand just before the young man mount his horse in the court - yard . 

 " I be very sorry , tower , " he say . " you be as good a fellow as ever breathe , and would have make my girl an excellent husband ; but you know there be a cousin , and I think that " 

 " do not   say that , Sir Michael , " interrupt the fox - hunter , energetically . " I can get over anything but that . a fellow whose hand upon the curb weigh half a ton   why , he pull the Cavalier 's mouth to piece , sir , the day you let he ride the horse ; a fellow who turn his collar down , and eat bread and marmalade ! no , no , Sir Michael ; it be a queer world , but I can not   think that of Miss Audley . there must be some one in the background , sir ; it can not   be the cousin . " 

 Sir Michael shake his head as the reject suitor ride away . 

 " I do not   know about that , " he mutter . " Bob be a good lad , and the girl might do bad ; but he hang back as if he do not   care for she . there be some mystery there be some mystery ! " 

 the old baronet say this in that semi - thoughtful tone with which we speak of other people 's affair . the shadow of the early winter twilight , gather thickest under the low oak ceiling of the hall , and the quaint curve of the arched doorway , fall darkly round his handsome head ; but the light of his decline life , his beautiful and beloved young wife , be near he , and he could see no shadow when she be by . 

 she come skip through the hall to meet he , and , shake her golden ringlet , bury her bright head on her husband 's breast . 

 " so the last of our visitor be go , dear , and we be all alone , " she say . " be not   that nice ? " 

 " yes , darling , " he answer fondly , stroke her bright hair . 

 " except Mr. Robert Audley . how long be that nephew of yours go to stay here ? " 

 " as long as he like , my pet ; he be always welcome , " say the baronet ; and then , as if remember himself , he add , tenderly : " but not unless his visit be agreeable to you , darling ; not if his lazy habit , or his smoking , or his dog , or anything about he be displease to you . " 

 Lady Audley purse up her rosy lip and look thoughtfully at the ground . 

 " it be not   that , " she say , hesitatingly . " Mr. Audley be a very agreeable young man , and a very honorable young man ; but you know , Sir Michael , I be rather a young aunt for such a nephew , and " 

 " and what , Lucy ? " ask the baronet , fiercely . 

 " Poor Alicia be rather jealous of any attention Mr. Audley pay I , and and I think it would be well for her happiness if your nephew be to bring his visit to a close . " 

 " he shall go to - night , Lucy , " exclaim Sir Michael . " I be a blind , neglectful fool not to have think of this before . my lovely little darling , it be scarcely just to Bob to expose the poor lad to your fascination . I know he to be as good and true - hearte a fellow as ever breathe , but but he shall go tonight . " 

 " but you will not   be too abrupt , dear ? you will not   be rude ? " 

 " rude ! no , Lucy . I leave he smoke in the lime - walk . I will go and tell he that he must get out of the house in an hour . " 

 so in that leafless avenue , under whose gloomy shade George Talboys have stand on that thunderous evening before the day of his disappearance , Sir Michael Audley tell his nephew that the Court be no home for he , and that my lady be too young and pretty to accept the attention of a handsome nephew of eight - and - twenty . 

 Robert only shrug his shoulder and elevate his thick , black eyebrow as Sir Michael delicately hint all this . 

 " I have be attentive to my lady , " he say . " she interest I ; " and then , with a change in his voice , and an emotion not common to he , he turn to the baronet , and grasp his hand , exclaim , " God forbid , my dear uncle , that I should ever bring trouble upon such a noble heart as your ! God forbid that the slight shadow of dishonor should ever fall upon your honored head least of all through agency of mine . " 

 the young man utter these few word in a broken and disjoint fashion in which Sir Michael have never hear he speak , before , and then turn away his head , fairly break down . 

 he leave the court that night , but he do not go far . instead of take the evening train for London , he go straight up to the little village of Mount Stanning , and walk into the neatly - keep inn , ask Phoebe Marks if he could be accommodate with apartment . 

 CHAPTER XVII . 

 AT the CASTLE INN . 

 the little sitting - room into which Phoebe Marks usher the baronet 's nephew be situate on the ground floor , and only separate by a lath - and - plaster partition from the little bar - parlor occupy by the innkeeper and his wife . 

 it seem as though the wise architect who have superintend the building of the Castle Inn have take especial care that nothing but the frailest and most flimsy material should be use , and that the wind , have a special fancy for this unprotected spot , should have full play for the indulgence of its caprice . 

 to this end pitiful woodwork have be use instead of solid masonry ; rickety ceiling have be prop up by fragile rafter , and beam that threaten on every stormy night to fall upon the head of those beneath they ; door whose specialty be never to be shut , yet always to be bang ; window construct with a peculiar view to let in the draft when they be shut , and keep out the air when they be open . the hand of genius have devise this lonely country inn ; and there be not an inch of woodwork , or trowelful of plaster employ in all the rickety construction that do not offer its own peculiar weak point to every assault of its indefatigable foe . 

 Robert look about he with a feeble smile of resignation . 

 it be a change , decidedly , from the luxurious comfort of Audley Court , and it be rather a strange fancy of the young barrister to prefer loitering at this dreary village hostelry to return to his snug chamber in Figtree Court . 

 but he have bring his Lares and Penates with he , in the shape of his german pipe , his tobacco canister , half a dozen french novel , and his two ill - condition , canine favorite , which sit shiver before the smoky little fire , bark shortly and sharply now and then , by way of hint for some slight refreshment . 

 while Mr. Robert Audley contemplate his new quarter , Phoebe Marks summon a little village lad who be in the habit of run errand for she , and take he into the kitchen , give he a tiny note , carefully fold and seal . 

 " you know Audley Court ? " 

 " yes , mum . " 

 " if you will run there with this letter to - night , and see that it be put safely in Lady Audley 's hand , I will give you a shilling . " 

 " yes , mum . " 

 " you understand ? ask to see my lady ; you can say you have   a message not a note , mind but a message from Phoebe Marks ; and when you see she , give this into her own hand . " 

 " yes , mum . " 

 " you will not   forget ? " 

 " no , mum . " 

 " then be off with you . " 

 the boy wait for no second bidding , but in another moment be scud along the lonely high road , down the sharp descent that lead to Audley . 

 Phoebe Marks go to the window , and look out at the black figure of the lad hurrying through the dusky winter evening . 

 " if there be any bad meaning in his come here , " she think , " my lady will know of it in time , at any rate . " 

 Phoebe herself bring the neatly arrange tea - tray , and the little cover dish of ham and egg which have be prepare for this unlooke - for visitor . her pale hair be as smoothly braid , and her light gray dress fit as precisely as of old . the same neutral tint pervade her person and her dress ; no showy rose - color ribbon or rustle silk gown proclaim the well - to - do innkeeper 's wife . Phoebe Marks be a person who never lose her individuality . silent and self - constrain , she seem to hold herself within herself , and take no color from the outer world . 

 Robert look at she thoughtfully as she spread the cloth , and draw the table near to the fireplace . 

 " that , " he think , " be a woman who could keep a secret . " 

 the dog look rather suspiciously at the quiet figure of Mrs. Marks glide softly about the room , from the teapot to the caddy , and from the caddy to the kettle sing on the hob . 

 " will you pour out my tea for I , Mrs. Marks ? " say Robert , seat himself on a horsehair - cover arm - chair , which fit he as tightly in every direction as if he have be measure for it . 

 " you have come straight from the Court , sir ? " say Phoebe , as she hand Robert the sugar - basin . 

 " yes ; I only leave my uncle 's an hour ago . " 

 " and my lady , sir , be she quite well ? " 

 " yes , quite well . " 

 " as gay and light - hearted as ever , sir ? " 

 " as gay and light - hearted as ever . " 

 Phoebe retire respectfully after have give Mr. Audley his tea , but as she stand with her hand upon the lock of the door he speak again . 

 " you know Lady Audley when she be Miss Lucy Graham , do you not ? " he ask . 

 " yes , sir . I live at Mrs. Dawson 's when my lady be governess there . " 

 " indeed ! be she long in the surgeon 's family ? " 

 " a year and a half , sir . " 

 " and she come from London ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and she be an orphan , I believe ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " always as cheerful as she be now ? " 

 " always , sir . " 

 Robert empty his teacup and hand it to Mrs. Marks . their eye meet a lazy look in his , and an active , search glance in her . 

 " this woman would be good in a witness - box , " he think ; " it would take a clever lawyer to bother she in a cross - examination . " 

 he finish his second cup of tea , push away his plate , feed his dog , and light his pipe , while Phoebe carry off the tea - tray . 

 the wind come whistle up across the frosty open country , and through the leafless wood , and rattle fiercely at the window - frame . 

 " there be a triangular draught from those two window and the door that scarcely add to the comfort of this apartment , " murmur Robert ; " and there certainly be pleasantťr sensation than that of stand up to one 's knee in cold water . " 

 he poke the fire , pat his dog , put on his great coat , roll a rickety old sofa close to the hearth , wrap his leg in his railway rug , and stretch himself at full length upon the narrow horsehair cushion , smoke his pipe , and watch the bluish - gray wreath curl upward to the dingy ceiling . 

 " no , " he murmur , again ; " that be a woman who can keep a secret . a counsel for the prosecution could get very little out of she . " 

 I have say that the bar - parlor be only separate from the sitting - room occupy by Robert by a lath - and - plaster partition . the young barrister could hear the two or three village tradesman and a couple of farmer laugh and talk round the bar , while Luke Marks serve they from his stock of liquor . 

 very often he could even hear their word , especially the landlord 's , for he speak in a coarse , loud voice , and have a more boastful manner than any of his customer . 

 " the man be a fool , " say Robert , as he lay down his pipe . " I will go and talk to he by - and - by . " 

 he wait till the few visitor to the Castle have drop away one by one , and when Luke Marks have bolt the door upon the last of his customer , he stroll quietly into the bar - parlor , where the landlord be seat with his wife . 

 Phoebe be busy at a little table , upon which stand a prim work - box , with every reel of cotton and glisten steel bodkin in its appoint place . she be darn the coarse gray stocking that adorn her husband 's awkward foot , but she do her work as daintily as if they have be my lady 's delicate silken hose . 

 I say that she take no color from external thing , and that the vague air of refinement that pervade her nature clung to she as closely in the society of her boorish husband at the Castle Inn as in Lady Audley 's boudoir at the Court . 

 she look up suddenly as Robert enter the bar - parlor . there be some shade of vexation in her pale gray eye , which change to an expression of anxiety nay , rather of almost terror as she glance from Mr. Audley to Luke Marks . 

 " I have come in for a few minute ' chat before I go to bed , " say Robert , settle himself very comfortably before the cheerful fire . " would you object to a cigar , Mrs. Marks ? I mean , of course , to my smoking one , " he add , explanatorily . 

 " not at all , sir . " 

 " it would be a good ' un her objectin ' to a bit o ' ' bacca , " growl Mr. Marks , " when I and the customer smoke all day . " 

 Robert light his cigar with a gilt - paper match of Phoebe 's making that adorn the chimney - piece , and take half a dozen reflective puff before he speak . 

 " I want you to tell I all about Mount Stanning , Mr. Marks , " he say , presently . 

 " then that be pretty soon tell , " reply Luke , with a harsh , grating laugh . " of all the dull hole as ever a man set foot in , this be about the dull . not that the business do not   pay pretty tidy ; I do not   complain of that ; but I should ha ' like a public at Chelmsford , or Brentwood , or Romford , or some place where there be a bit of life in the street ; and I might have have it , " he add , discontentedly , " if folk have not   be so precious stingy . " 

 as her husband mutter this complaint in a grumble undertone , Phoebe look up from her work and speak to he . 

 " we forget the brew - house door , Luke , " she say . " will you come with I and help I put up the bar ? " 

 " the brew - house door can bide for to - night , " say Mr. Marks ; " I be not   agoin ' to move now . I have   seat myself for a comfortable smoke . " 

 he take a long clay pipe from a corner of the fender as he speak , and begin to fill it deliberately . 

 " I do not   feel easy about that brew - house door , Luke , " remonstrate his wife ; " there be always tramp about , and they can get in easily when the bar be not   up . " 

 " go and put the bar up yourself , then , can not   you ? " answer Mr. Marks . 

 " it be too heavy for I to lift . " 

 " then let it bide , if you be too fine a lady to see to it yourself . you be very anxious all of a sudden about this here brew - house door . I suppose you do not   want I to open my mouth to this here gent , that be about it . oh , you need not   frown at I to stop my speaking ! you be always put in your tongue and clip off my word before I have   half say them ; but I will not   stand it . " 

 " do you hear ? I will not   stand it ! " 

 Phoebe Marks shrug her shoulder , fold her work , shut her work - box , and cross her hand in her lap , sit with her gray eye fix upon her husband 's bull - like face . 

 " then you do not   particularly care to live at Mount Stanning ? " say Robert , politely , as if anxious to change the conversation . 

 " no , I do not , " answer Luke ; " and I do not   care who know it ; and , as I say before , if folk have not   be so precious stingy , I might have have a public in a thrivin ' market town , instead of this tumble - down old place , where a man have his hair blow off his head on a windy day . what be fifty pound , or what be a hundred pound " 

 " Luke ! Luke ! " 

 " no , you be not go to stop my mouth with all your ' Luke , Lukes ! ' " answer Mr. Marks to his wife 's remonstrance . " I say again , what be a hundred pound ? " 

 " no , " answer Robert Audley , with wonderful distinctness , and address his word to Luke Marks , but fix his eye upon Phoebe 's anxious face . " what , indeed , be a hundred pound to a man possess of the power which you hold , or rather which your wife hold , over the person in question . " 

 Phoebe 's face , at all time almost colorless , seem scarcely capable of grow paler ; but as her eyelid droop under Robert Audley 's search glance , a visible change come over the pallid hue of her complexion . 

 " a quarter to twelve , " say Robert , look at his watch . 

 " late hour for such a quiet village as Mount Stanning . good - night , my worthy host . good - night , Mrs. Marks . you need not   send I my shaving water till nine o'clock to - morrow morning . " 

 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 ROBERT RECEIVES a VISITOR whom he have SCARCELY expect . 

 Eleven o'clock strike the next morning , and find Mr. Robert Audley still lounge over the well order little breakfast table , with one of his dog at each side of his arm - chair , regard he with watchful eye and open mouth , await the expect morsel of ham or toast . Robert have a county paper on his knee , and make a feeble effort now and then to read the first page , which be fill with advertisement of farming stock , quack medicine , and other interesting matter . 

 the weather have change , and the snow , which have for the last few day be loom blackly in the frosty sky , fall in great feathery flake against the window , and lie pile in the little bit of garden - ground without . 

 the long , lonely road lead toward Audley seem untrodden by a footstep , as Robert Audley look out at the wintry landscape . 

 " Lively , " he say , " for a man use to the fascination of Temple Bar . " 

 as he watch the snow - flake fall every moment thick and fast upon the lonely road , he be surprise by see a brougham drive slowly up the hill . 

 " I wonder what unhappy wretch have too restless a spirit to stop at home on such a morning as this , " he mutter , as he return to the arm - chair by the fire . 

 he have only reseat himself a few moment when Phoebe Marks enter the room to announce Lady Audley . 

 " Lady Audley ! pray beg she to come in , " say Robert ; and then , as Phoebe leave the room to usher in this unexpected visitor , he mutter between his tooth " a false move , my lady , and one I never look for from you . " 

 Lucy Audley be radiant on this cold and snowy January morning . other people 's nose be rudely assail by the sharp finger of the grim ice - king , but not my lady 's ; other people 's lip turn pale and blue with the chilling influence of the bitter weather , but my lady 's pretty little rosebud of a mouth retain its bright coloring and cheery freshness . 

 she be wrap in the very sable which Robert Audley have bring from Russia , and carry a muff that the young man think seem almost as big as herself . 

 she look a childish , helpless , babyfied little creature ; and Robert look down upon she with some touch of pity in his eye , as she come up to the hearth by which he be stand , and warm her tiny gloved hand at the blaze . 

 " what a morning , Mr. Audley ! " she say , " what a morning ! " 

 " yes , indeed ! why do you come out in such weather ? " 

 " because I wish to see you particularly . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " yes , " say my lady , with an air of considerable embarrassment , play with the button of her glove , and almost wrench it off in her restlessness " yes , Mr. Audley , I feel that you have not be well treat ; that that you have , in short , reason to complain ; and that an apology be due to you . " 

 " I do not wish for any apology , Lady Audley . " 

 " but you be entitle to one , " answer my lady , quietly . " why , my dear Robert , should we be so ceremonious toward each other ? you be very comfortable at Audley ; we be very glad to have you there ; but , my dear , silly husband must need take it into his foolish head that it be dangerous for his poor little wife 's peace of mind to have a nephew of eight or nine and twenty smoke his cigar in her boudoir , and , behold ! our pleasant little family circle be break up . " 

 Lucy Audley speak with that peculiar childish vivacity which seem so natural to she , Robert look down almost sadly at her bright , animate face . 

 " Lady Audley , " he say , " Heaven forbid that either you or I should ever bring grief or dishonor upon my uncle 's generous heart ! well , perhaps , that I should be out of the house well , perhaps , that I have never enter it ! " 

 my lady have be look at the fire while her nephew speak , but at his last word she lift her head suddenly , and look he full in the face with a wonder expression an earnest , question gaze , whose full meaning the young barrister understand . 

 " oh , pray do not be alarm , Lady Audley , " he say , gravely . " you have no sentimental nonsense , no silly infatuation , borrow from Balzac or Dumas fil , to fear from I . the bencher of the Inner Temple will tell you that Robert Audley be trouble with none of the epidemic whose outward sign be turn - down collar and byronic necktie . I say that I wish I have never enter my uncle 's house during the last year ; but I say it with a far more solemn meaning than any sentimental one . " 

 my lady shrug her shoulder . 

 " if you insist on talk in enigma , Mr. Audley , " she say , " you must forgive a poor little woman if she decline to answer they . " 

 Robert make no reply to this speech . 

 " but tell I , " say my lady , with an entire change of tone , " what could have induce you to come up to this dismal place ? " 

 " Curiosity . " 

 " curiosity ? " 

 " yes ; I feel an interest in that bull - neck man , with the dark - red hair and wicked gray eye . a dangerous man , my lady a man in whose power I should not like to be . " 

 a sudden change come over Lady Audley 's face ; the pretty , roseate flush fade out from her cheek , and leave they waxen white , and angry flash lighten in her blue eye . 

 " what have I do to you , Robert Audley , " she cry , passionately " what have I do to you that you should hate I so ? " 

 he answer she very gravely : 

 " I have a friend , Lady Audley , whom I love very dearly , and since I have lose he I fear that my feeling toward other people be strangely embitter . " 

 " you mean the Mr. Talboys who go to Australia ? " 

 " yes , I mean the Mr. Talboys who I be tell set out for Liverpool with the idea of go to Australia . " 

 " and you do not believe in his have sail for Australia ? " 

 " I do not . " 

 " but why not ? " 

 " forgive I , Lady Audley , if I decline to answer that question . " 

 " as you please , " she say , carelessly . 

 " a week after my friend disappear , " continue Robert , " I post an advertisement to the Sydney and Melbourne paper , call upon he if he be in either city when the advertisement appear , to write and tell I of his whereabouts , and also call on any one who have meet he , either in the colony or on the voyage out , to give I any information respect he . George Talboys leave Essex , or disappear from Essex , on the 6th of September last . I ought to receive some answer to this advertisement by the end of this month . to - day be the 27th ; the time draw very near . " 

 " and if you receive no answer ? " ask Lady Audley . 

 " if I receive no answer I shall think that my fear have be not unfounded , and I shall do my good to act . " 

 " what do you mean by that ? " 

 " ah , Lady Audley , you remind I how very powerless I be in this matter . my friend might have be make away with in this very inn , and I might stay here for a twelvemonth , and go away at the last as ignorant of his fate as if I have never cross the threshold . what do we know of the mystery that may hang about the house we enter ? if I be to go to - morrow into that commonplace , plebeian , eight - room house in which Maria Manning and her husband murder their guest , I should have no awful prescience of that bygone horror . foul deed have be do under the most hospitable roof ; terrible crime have be commit amid the fair scene , and have leave no trace upon the spot where they be do . I do not believe in mandrake , or in bloodstain that no time can efface . I believe rather that we may walk unconsciously in an atmosphere of crime , and breathe none the less freely . I believe that we may look into the smile face of a murderer , and admire its tranquil beauty . " 

 my lady laugh at Robert 's earnestness . 

 " you seem to have quite a taste for discuss these horrible subject , " she say , rather scornfully ; " you ought to have be a detective police officer . " 

 " I sometimes think I should have be a good one . " 

 " why ? " 

 " because I be patient . " 

 " but to return to Mr. George Talboys , whom we lose sight of in your eloquent discussion . what if you receive no answer to your advertisement ? " 

 " I shall then consider myself justify in conclude my friend be dead . " 

 " yes , and then ? " 

 " I shall examine the effect he leave at my chamber . " 

 " indeed ! and what be they ? coat , waistcoat , varnish boot , and meerschaum pipe , I suppose , " say Lady Audley , laugh . 

 " no ; letter letter from his friend , his old schoolfellow , his father , his brother officer . " 

 " yes ? " 

 " letter , too , from his wife . " 

 my lady be silent for some few moment , look thoughtfully at the fire . 

 " have you ever see any of the letter write by the late Mrs. Talboys ? " she ask presently . 

 " never . poor soul ! her letter be not likely to throw much light upon my friend 's fate . I dare say she write the usual womanly scrawl . there be very few who write so charming and uncommon a hand as your , Lady Audley . " 

 " ah , you know my hand , of course . " 

 " yes , I know it very well indeed . " 

 my lady warm her hand once more , and then take up the big muff which she have lay aside upon a chair , prepare to take her departure . 

 " you have refuse to accept my apology , Mr. Audley , " she say ; " but I trust you be not the less assured of my feeling toward you . " 

 " perfectly assure , Lady Audley . " 

 " then good - by , and let I recommend you not to stay long in this miserable draughty place , if you do not wish to take rheumatism back to Figtree Court . " 

 " I shall return to town to - morrow morning to see after my letter . " 

 " then once more good - by . " 

 she hold out her hand ; he take it loosely in his own . it seem such a feeble little hand that he might have crush it in his strong grasp , have he choose to be so pitiless . 

 he attend she to her carriage , and watch it as it drive off , not toward Audley , but in the direction of Brentwood , which be about six mile from Mount Stanning . 

 about an hour and a half after this , as Robert stand at the door of the inn , smoke a cigar and watch the snow fall in the whitened field opposite , he see the brougham drive back , empty this time , to the door of the inn . 

 " have you take Lady Audley back to the Court ? " he say to the coachman , who have stop to call for a mug of hot spice ale . 

 " no , sir ; I have   just come from the Brentwood station . my lady start for London by the 12.40 train . " 

 " for town ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " my lady go to London ! " say Robert , as he return to the little sitting - room . " then I will follow she by the next train ; and if I be not very much mistaken , I know where to find she . " 

 he pack his portmanteau , pay his bill , fasten his dog together with a couple of leathern collar and a chain , and step into the rumble fly keep by the Castle Inn for the convenience of Mount Stanning . he catch an express that leave Brentwood at three o'clock , and settle himself comfortably in a corner of an empty first - class carriage , coil up in a couple of railway rug , and smoke a cigar in mild defiance of the authority . 

 CHAPTER XIX . 

 the writing in the BOOK . 

 it be exactly five minute past four as Mr. Robert Audley step out upon the platform at Shoreditch , and wait placidly until such time as his dog and his portmanteau should be deliver up to the attendant porter who have call his cab , and undertake the general conduct of his affair , with that disintereste courtesy which do such infinite credit to a class of servitor who be forbid to accept the tribute of a grateful public . 

 Robert Audley wait with consummate patience for a considerable time ; but as the express be generally a long train , and as there be a great many passenger from Norfolk carry gun and pointer , and other paraphernalia of a critical description , it take a long while to make matter agreeable to all claimant , and even the barrister 's seraphic indifference to mundane affair nearly give way . 

 " perhaps , when that gentleman who be make such a noise about a pointer with liver - color spot , have discover the particular pointer and spot that he want which happy combination of event scarcely seem likely to arrive they will give I my luggage and let I go . the design wretch know at a glance that I be bear to be impose upon ; and that if they be to trample the life out of I upon this very platform , I should never have the spirit to bring an action against the company . " 

 suddenly an idea seem to strike he , and he leave the porter to struggle for the custody of his good , and walk round to the other side of the station . 

 he hear a bell ring , and look at the clock , have remember that the down train for Colchester start at this time . he have learn what it be to have an earnest purpose since the disappearance of George Talboys ; and he reach the opposite platform in time to see the passenger take their seat . 

 there be one lady who have evidently only just arrive at the station ; for she hurry on to the platform at the very moment that Robert approach the train , and almost run against that gentleman in her haste and excitement . 

 " I beg your pardon , " she begin , ceremoniously ; then raise her eye from Mr. Audley 's waistcoat , which be about on a level with her pretty face , she exclaim , " Robert , you in London already ? " 

 " yes , Lady Audley ; you be quite right ; the Castle Inn be a dismal place , and " 

 " you get tired of it I know you would . please open the carriage door for I : the train will start in two minute . " 

 Robert Audley be look at his uncle 's wife with rather a puzzled expression of countenance . 

 " what do it mean ? " he think . " she be altogether a different being to the wretched , helpless creature who drop her mask for a moment , and look at I with her own pitiful face , in the little room at Mount Stanning , four hour ago . what have happen to cause the change ? " 

 he open the door for she while he think this , and help she to settle herself in her seat , spread her fur over her knee , and arrange the huge velvet mantle in which her slender little figure be almost hidden . 

 " thank you very much ; how good you be to I , " she say , as he do this . " you will think I very foolish to travel upon such a day , without my dear darling 's knowledge too ; but I go up to town to settle a very terrific milliner 's bill , which I do not wish my good of husband to see ; for , indulgent as he be , he might think I extravagant ; and I can not bear to suffer even in his thought . " 

 " Heaven forbid that you ever should , Lady Audley , " Robert say , gravely . 

 she look at he for a moment with a smile , which have something defiant in its brightness . 

 " Heaven forbid it , indeed , " she murmur . " I do not   think I ever shall . " 

 the second bell rung , and the train move as she speak . the last Robert Audley see of she be that bright defiant smile . 

 " whatever object bring she to London have be successfully accomplish , " he think . " have she baffle I by some piece of womanly jugglery ? be I never to get any nearer to the truth , but be I to be torment all my life by vague doubt , and wretched suspicion , which may grow upon I till I become a monomaniac ? why do she come to London ? " 

 he be still mentally ask himself this question as he ascend the stair in Figtree Court , with one of his dog under each arm , and his railway rug over his shoulder . 

 he find his chamber in their accustomed order . the geranium have be carefully tend , and the canary have retire for the night under cover of a square of green baize , testify to the care of honest Mrs. Maloney . Robert cast a hurried glance round the sitting - room ; then set down the dog upon the hearth - rug , he walk straight into the little inner chamber which serve as his dressing - room . 

 it be in this room that he keep disuse portmanteau , battered japanned case , and other lumber ; and it be in this room that George Talboys have leave his luggage . Robert lift a portmanteau from the top of a large trunk , and kneel down before it with a light candle in his hand , carefully examine the lock . 

 to all appearance it be exactly in the same condition in which George have leave it , when he lay his mourning garment aside and place they in this shabby repository with all other memorial of his dead wife . Robert brush his coat sleeve across the worn , leather - cover lid , upon which the initial G. T. be inscribe with big brass - head nail ; but Mrs. Maloney , the laundress , must have be the most precise of housewife , for neither the portmanteau nor the trunk be dusty . 

 Mr. Audley dispatch a boy to fetch his irish attendant , and pace up and down his sitting - room wait anxiously for her arrival . 

 she come in about ten minute , and , after express her delight in the return of " the master , " humbly await his order . 

 " I only send for you to ask if anybody have be here ; that be to say , if anybody have apply to you for the key of my room to - day any lady ? " 

 " Lady ? no , indeed , yer honor ; there be be no lady for the kay ; barrin ' it be the blacksmith . " 

 " the blacksmith ! " 

 " yes ; the blacksmith your honor order to come to - day . " 

 " I order a blacksmith ! " exclaim Robert . " I leave a bottle of french brandy in the cupboard , " he think , " and Mrs. M. have be evidently enjoy herself . " 

 " sure , and the blacksmith your honor tould to see to the lock , " reply Mrs. Maloney . " it be he that live down in one of the little street by the bridge , " she add , give a very lucid description of the man 's whereabout . 

 Robert lift his eyebrow in mute despair . 

 " if you will sit down and compose yourself , Mrs. M. , " he say he abbreviate her name thus on principle , for the avoidance of unnecessary labor " perhaps we shall be able by and by to understand each other . you say a blacksmith have be here ? " 

 " sure and I do , sir . " 

 " to - day ? " 

 " quite correct , sir . " 

 step by step Mr. Audley elicit the follow information . a locksmith have call upon Mrs. Maloney that afternoon at three o'clock , and have ask for the key of Mr. Audley 's chamber , in order that he might look to the lock of the door , which he state be all out of repair . he declare that he be act upon Mr. Audley 's own order , convey to he by a letter from the country , where the gentleman be spend his Christmas . Mrs. Maloney , believe in the truth of this statement , have admit the man to the chamber , where he stay about half an hour . 

 " but you be with he while he examine the lock , I suppose ? " Mr. Audley ask . 

 " sure I be , sir , in and out , as you may say , all the time , for I have   be clean the stair this afternoon , and I take the opportunity to begin my scouring while the man be at work . " 

 " oh , you be in and out all the time . if you could conveniently give I a plain answer , Mrs. M. , I should be glad to know what be the long time that you be out while the locksmith be in my chamber ? " 

 but Mrs. Maloney could not give a plain answer . it might have be ten minute ; though she do not   think it be as much . it might have be a quarter of an hour ; but she be sure it be not   more . it do not   seem to she more than five minute , but " thim stair , your honor ; " and here she ramble off into a disquisition upon the scouring of stair in general , and the stair outside Robert 's chamber in particular . 

 Mr. Audley sigh the weary sigh of mournful resignation . 

 " never mind , Mrs. M. , " he say ; " the locksmith have plenty of time to do anything he want to do , I dare say , without your be any the wiser . " 

 Mrs. Maloney star at her employer with mingled surprise and alarm . 

 " sure , there be not   anything for he to stale , your honor , barrin ' the bird and the geran'um , and " 

 " no , no , I understand . there , that will do , Mrs. M. tell I where the man live , and I will go and see he . " 

 " but you will have a bit of dinner first , sir ? " 

 " I will go and see the locksmith before I have my dinner . " 

 he take up his hat as he announce his determination , and walk toward the door . 

 " the man 's address , Mrs. M ? " 

 the Irishwoman direct he to a small street at the back of St. Bride 's Church , and thither Mr. Robert Audley quietly stroll , through the miry slush which simple Londoners call snow . 

 he find the locksmith , and , at the sacrifice of the crown of his hat , contrive to enter the low , narrow doorway of a little open shop . a jet of gas be flare in the unglazed window , and there be a very merry party in the little room behind the shop ; but no one respond to Robert 's " Hulloa ! " the reason of this be sufficiently obvious . the merry party be so much absorb in its own merriment as to be deaf to all commonplace summons from the outer world ; and it be only when Robert , advance far into the cavernous little shop , make so bold as to open the half - glass door which separate he from the merry - maker , that he succeed in obtain their attention . 

 a very jovial picture of the Teniers school be present to Mr. Robert Audley upon the opening of this door . 

 the locksmith , with his wife and family , and two or three dropper - in of the female sex , be cluster about a table , which be adorn by two bottle ; not vulgar bottle of that colorless extract of the juniper berry , much affect by the mass ; but of bona fide port and sherry fiercely strong sherry , which leave a fiery taste in the mouth , nut - brown sherry rather unnaturally brown , if anything and fine old port ; no sickly vintage , fade and thin from excessive age : but a rich , full - bodied wine , sweet and substantial and high color . 

 the locksmith be speak as Robert Audley open the door . 

 " and with that , " he say , ' she walk off , as graceful as you please . " 

 the whole party be throw into confusion by the appearance of Mr. Audley , but it be to be observe that the locksmith be more embarrassed than his companion . he set down his glass so hurriedly , that he spill his wine , and wipe his mouth nervously with the back of his dirty hand . 

 " you call at my chamber to - day , " Robert say , quietly . " do not   let I disturb you , lady . " this to the dropper - in . " you call at my chamber to - day , Mr. White , and " 

 the man interrupt he . 

 " I hope , sir , you will be so good as to look over the mistake , " he stammer . " I be sure , sir , I be very sorry it should have occur . I be send for to another gentleman 's chamber , Mr. Aulwin , in Garden Court ; and the name slip my memory ; and havin' do odd job before for you , I think it must be you as want I to - day ; and I call at Mrs. Maloney 's for the key accordin ' ; but directly I see the lock in your chamber , I say to myself , the gentleman 's lock be not   out of order ; the gentleman do not   want all his lock repair . " 

 " but you stay half an hour . " 

 " yes , sir ; for there be one lock out of order the door nigh the staircase and I take it off and clean it and put it on again . I will not   charge you nothing for the job , and I hope as you will be as good as to look over the mistake as have occur , which I have   be in business thirteen year come July , and " 

 " nothing of this kind ever happen before , I suppose , " say Robert , gravely . " no , it be altogether a singular kind of business , not likely to come about every day . you have   be enjoy yourself this evening I see , Mr. White . you have   do a good stroke of work to - day , I will wager make a lucky hit , and you be what you call ' standing treat , ' eh ? " 

 Robert Audley look straight into the man 's dingy face as he speak . the locksmith be not a bad - look fellow , and there be nothing that he need have be ashamed of in his face , except the dirt , and that , as Hamlet 's mother say , " be common ; " but in spite of this , Mr. White 's eyelid drop under the young barrister 's calm scrutiny , and he stammer out some apologetic sort of speech about his " missus , " and his missus ' neighbor , and port wine and sherry wine , with as much confusion as if he , an honest mechanic in a free country , be call upon to excuse himself to Robert Audley for be catch in the act of enjoy himself in his own parlor . 

 Robert cut he short with a careless nod . 

 " pray do not   apologize , " he say ; " I like to see people enjoy themselves . good - night , Mr. White good - night , lady . " 

 he lift his hat to " the missus , " and the missus ' neighbor , who be much fascinated by his easy manner and his handsome face , and leave the shop . 

 " and so , " he mutter to himself as he go back to his chamber , " ' with that she walk off as graceful as you please . 'Who be it that walk off ; and what be the story which the locksmith be tell when I interrupt he at that sentence ? oh , George Talboys , George Talboys , be I ever to come any nearer to the secret of your fate ? be I come near to it now , slowly but surely ? be the radius to grow narrow day by day until it draw a dark circle around the home of those I love ? how be it all to end ? " 

 he sigh wearily as he walk slowly back across the flagged quadrangle in the Temple to his own solitary chamber . 

 Mrs. Maloney have prepare for he that bachelor 's dinner , which , however excellent and nutritious in itself , have no claim to the special charm of novelty . she have cook for he a mutton - chop , which be soddene itself between two plate upon the little table near the fire . 

 Robert Audley sigh as he sit down to the familiar meal , remember his uncle 's cook with a fond , regretful sorrow . 

 " her cutlet a la Maintenon make mutton seem more than mutton ; a sublimated meat that could scarcely have grow upon any mundane sheep , " he murmur sentimentally , " and Mrs. Maloney 's chop be apt to be tough ; but such be life what do it matter ? " 

 he push away his plate impatiently after eat a few mouthful . 

 " I have never eat a good dinner at this table since I lose George Talboys , " he say . " the place seem as gloomy as if the poor fellow have die in the next room , and have never be take away to be bury . how long ago that September afternoon appear as I look back at it that September afternoon upon which I part with he alive and well ; and lose he as suddenly and unaccountably as if a trap - door have open in the solid earth and let he through to the antipode ! " 

 Mr. Audley rise from the dinner - table and walk over to the cabinet in which he keep the document he have draw up relate to George Talboys . he unlock the door of his cabinet , take the paper from the pigeon - hole mark important , and seat himself at his desk to write . he add several paragraph to those in the document , number the fresh paragraph as carefully as he have number the old one . 

 " Heaven help we all , " he mutter once ; " be this paper with which no attorney have have any hand to be my first brief ? " 

 he write for about half an hour , then replace the document in the pigeon - hole , and lock the cabinet . when he have do this , he take a candle in his hand , and go into the room in which be his own portmanteau and the trunk belong to George Talboys . 

 he take a bunch of key from his pocket , and try they one by one . the lock of the shabby old trunk be a common one , and at the fifth trial the key turn easily . 

 " there would be no need for any one to break open such a lock as this , " mutter Robert , as he lift the lid of the trunk . 

 he slowly empty it of its content , take out each article separately , and lay it carefully upon a chair by his side . he handle the thing with a respectful tenderness , as if he have be lift the dead body of his lose friend . one by one he lay the neatly fold mourning garment on the chair . he find old meerschaum pipe , and soil , crumpled glove that have once be fresh from the parisian maker ; old play - bill , whose big letter spell the name of actor who be dead and go ; old perfume - bottle , fragrant with essence , whose fashion have pass away ; neat little parcel of letter , each carefully label with the name of the writer ; fragment of old newspaper ; and a little heap of shabby , dilapidated book , each of which tumble into as many piece as a pack of card in Robert 's incautious hand . but among all the mass of worthless litter , each scrap of which have once have its separate purpose , Robert Audley look in vain for that which he seek the packet of letter write to the miss man by his dead wife Helen Talboys . he have hear George allude more than once to the existence of these letter . he have see he once sort the faded paper with a reverent hand ; and he have see he replace they , carefully tie together with a fade ribbon which have once be Helen 's , among the mourning garment in the trunk . whether he have afterward remove they , or whether they have be remove since his disappearance by some other hand , it be not easy to say ; but they be go . 

 Robert Audley sigh wearily as he replace the thing in the empty box , one by one , as he have take they out . he stop with the little heap of tattered book in his hand , and hesitate for a moment . 

 " I will keep these out , " he mutter , " there may be something to help I in one of they . " 

 George 's library be no very brilliant collection of literature . there be an old Greek Testament and the Eton Latin Grammar ; a french pamphlet on the cavalry sword - exercise ; an odd volume of Tom Jones with one half of its stiff leather cover hang to it by a thread ; Byron 's Don Juan , print in a murderous type , which must have be invent for the special advantage of oculist and optician ; and a fat book in a fade gilt and crimson cover . 

 Robert Audley lock the trunk and take the book under his arm . Mrs. Maloney be clear away the remain of his repast when he return to the sitting - room . he put the book aside on a little table in a corner of the fire - place , and wait patiently while the laundress finish her work . he be in no humor even for his meerschaum , consoler ; the yellow - paper fiction on the shelf above his head seem stale and profitless he open a volume of Balzac , but his uncle 's wife 's golden curl dance and tremble in a glitter haze , alike upon the metaphysical diablerie of the Peau de Chagrin , and the hideous social horror of " Cousine Bette . " the volume drop from his hand , and he sit wearily watch Mrs. Maloney as she sweep up the ash on the hearth , replenish the fire , draw the dark damask curtain , supply the simple want of the canary , and put on her bonnet in the disuse clerk 's office , prior to bid her employer good - night . as the door close upon the Irishwoman , he arise impatiently from his chair , and pace up and down the room . 

 " why do I go on with this , " he say , " when I know that it be lead I , step by step , day by day , hour by hour , near to that conclusion which , of all other , I should avoid ? be I tie to a wheel , and must I go with its every revolution , let it take I where it will ? or can I sit down here to - night and say I have do my duty to my miss friend , I have search for he patiently , but I have search in vain ? should I be justify in do this ? should I be justify in let the chain which I have slowly put together , link by link , drop at this point , or must I go on add fresh link to that fatal chain until the last rivet drop into its place and the circle be complete ? I think , and I believe , that I shall never see my friend 's face again ; and that no exertion of mine can ever be of any benefit to he . in plainer , crueler word I believe he to be dead . be I bind to discover how and where he die ? or be , as I think , on the road to that discovery , shall I do a wrong to the memory of George Talboys by turn back or stop still ? what be I to do ? what be I to do ? " 

 he rest his elbow on his knee , and bury his face in his hand . the one purpose which have slowly grow up in his careless nature until it have become powerful enough to work a change in that very nature , make he what he have never be before a Christian ; conscious of his own weakness ; anxious to keep to the strict line of duty ; fearful to swerve from the conscientious discharge of the strange task that have be force upon he ; and reliant on a strong hand than his own to point the way which he be to go . perhaps he utter his first earnest prayer that night , seat by his lonely fireside , think of George Talboys . when he raise his head from that long and silent revery , his eye have a bright , determined glance , and every feature in his face seem to wear a new expression . 

 " justice to the dead first , " he say ; " mercy to the living afterward . " 

 he wheel his easy - chair to the table , trim the lamp , and settle himself to the examination of the book . 

 he take they up , one by one , and look carefully through they , first look at the page on which the name of the owner be ordinarily write , and then search for any scrap of paper which might have be leave within the leaf . on the first page of the Eton Latin Grammar the name of Master Talboys be write in a prim , scholastic hand ; the french pamphlet have a careless G.T. scrawl on the cover in pencil , in George 's big , slovenly calligraphy : the Tom Jones have evidently be buy at a book - stall , and bear an inscription , date March 14th , 1788 , set forth that the book be a tribute of respect to Mr. Thos . Scrowton , from his obedient servant , James Anderley ; the Don Juan and the Testament be blank . Robert Audley breathe more freely ; he have arrive at the last but one of the book without any result whatever , and there only remain the fat gilt - and - crimson - bind volume to be examine before his task be finish . 

 it be an annual of the year 1845 . the copper - plate engraving of lovely lady , who have flourish in that day , be yellow and spot with mildew ; the costume grotesque and outlandish ; the simper beauty fade and commonplace . even the little cluster of verse   in which the poet 's feeble candle shed its sickly light upon the obscurity of the artist 's meaning   have an old - fashioned twang ; like music on a lyre , whose string be slacken by the damp of time . Robert Audley do not stop to read any of the mild production . he run rapidly through the leaf , look for any scrap of writing or fragment of a letter which might have be use to mark a place . he find nothing but a bright ring of golden hair , of that glitter hue which be so rarely see except upon the head of a child a sunny lock , which curl as naturally as the tendril of a vine ; and be very opposite in texture , if not different in hue , to the soft , smooth tress which the landlady at Ventnor have give to George Talboys after his wife 's death . Robert Audley suspend his examination of the book , and fold this yellow lock in a sheet of letter paper , which he seal with his signet - ring , and lay aside , with the memorandum about George Talboys and Alicia 's letter , in the pigeon - hole mark important . he be go to replace the fat annual among the other book , when he discover that the two blank leaf at the beginning be stick together . he be so determined to prosecute his search to the very uttermost , that he take the trouble to part these leaf with the sharp end of his paper - knife , and he be reward for his perseverance by find an inscription upon one of they . this inscription be in three part , and in three different hand . the first paragraph be date as far back as the year in which the annual have be publish , and set forth that the book be the property of a certain Miss Elizabeth Ann Bince , who have obtain the precious volume as a reward for habit of order , and for obedience to the authority of Camford House Seminary , Torquay . the second paragraph be date five year later , and be in the handwriting of Miss Bince herself , who present the book , as a mark of undye affection and unfading esteem   Miss Bince be evidently of a romantic temperament   to her beloved friend , Helen Maldon . the third paragraph be date September , 1853 , and be in the hand of Helen Maldon , who give the annual to George Talboys ; and it be at the sight of this third paragraph that Mr. Robert Audley 's face change from its natural hue to a sickly , leaden pallor . 

 " I think it would be so , " say the young man , shut the book with a weary sigh . " God know I be prepare for the bad , and the bad have come . I can understand all now . my next visit must be to Southampton . I must place the boy in well hand . " 

 CHAPTER XX . 

 MRS . PLOWSON . 

 among the packet of letter which Robert Audley have find in George 's trunk , there be one label with the name of the missing man 's father the father , who have never be too indulgent a friend to his young son , and who have gladly avail himself of the excuse afford by George 's imprudent marriage to abandon the young man to his own resource . Robert Audley have never see Mr. Harcourt Talboys ; but George 's careless talk of his father have give his friend some notion of that gentleman 's character . he have write to Mr. Talboys immediately after the disappearance of George , carefully word his letter , which vaguely hint at the writer 's fear of some foul play in the mysterious business ; and , after the lapse of several week , he have receive a formal epistle , in which Mr. Harcourt Talboys expressly declare that he have wash his hand of all responsibility in his son George 's affair upon the young man 's wedding - day ; and that his absurd disappearance be only in character with his preposterous marriage . the writer of this fatherly letter add in a postscript that if George Talboys have any low design of alarm his friend by this pretend disappearance , and thereby play on their feeling with a view to pecuniary advantage , he be most egregiously deceive in the character of those person with whom he have to deal . 

 Robert Audley have answer this letter by a few indignant line , inform Mr. Talboys that his son be scarcely likely to hide himself for the furtherance of any deep - lay design on the pocket of his relative , as he have leave twenty thousand pound in his banker ' hand at the time of his disappearance . after dispatch this letter , Robert have abandon all thought of assistance from the man who , in the natural course of thing , should have be most interested in George 's fate ; but now that he find himself advance every day some step near to the end that lie so darkly before he , his mind revert to this heartlessly indifferent Mr. Harcourt Talboys . 

 " I will run into dorsetshire after I leave Southampton , " he say , " and see this man . if he be content to let his son 's fate rest a dark and cruel mystery to all who know he if he be content to go down to his grave uncertain to the last of this poor fellow 's end why should I try to unravel the tangled skein , to fit the piece of the terrible puzzle , and gather together the stray fragment which , when collect , may make such a hideous whole ? I will go to he and lie my darkest doubt freely before he . it will be for he to say what I be to do . " 

 Robert Audley start by an early express for Southampton . the snow lie thick and white upon the pleasant country through which he go ; and the young barrister have wrap himself in so many comforter and railway rug as to appear a perambulating mass of woollen good , rather than a live member of a learn profession . he look gloomily out of the misty window , opaque with the breath of himself and an elderly indian officer , who be his only companion , and watch the fleeting landscape , which have a certain phantom - like appearance in its shroud of snow . he wrap himself in the vast fold of his railway rug , with a peevish shiver , and feel inclined to quarrel with the destiny which compel he to travel by an early train upon a pitiless winter 's day . 

 " who would have think that I could have grow so fond of the fellow , " he mutter , " or feel so lonely without he ? I have   a comfortable little fortune in the three per cent . ; I be heir presumptive to my uncle 's title ; and I know of a certain dear little girl who , as I think , would do she good to make I happy ; but I declare that I would freely give up all , and stand penniless in the world to - morrow , if this mystery could be satisfactorily clear away , and George Talboys could stand by my side . " 

 he reach Southampton between eleven and twelve o'clock , and walk across the platform , with the snow drift in his face , toward the pier and the low end of the town . the clock of St. Michael 's Church be strike twelve as he cross the quaint old square in which that edifice stand , and grope his way through the narrow street lead down to the water . 

 Mr. Maldon have establish his slovenly household god in one of those dreary thoroughfare which speculative builder love to raise upon some miserable fragment of waste ground hang to the skirt of a prosperous town . Brigsome 's Terrace be , perhaps , one of the most dismal block of building that be ever compose of brick and mortar since the first mason ply his trowel and the first architect draw his plan . the builder who have speculate in the ten dreary eight - room prison - house have hang himself behind the parlor door of an adjacent tavern while the carcase be yet unfinished . the man who have buy the brick and mortar skeleton have go through the bankruptcy court while the paper - hanger be still busy in Brigsome 's Terrace , and have whitewash his ceiling and himself simultaneously . ill luck and insolvency clung to the wretched habitation . the bailiff and the broker 's man be as well know as the butcher and the baker to the noisy child who play upon the waste ground in front of the parlor window . solvent tenant be disturb at unhallowed hour by the noise of ghostly furniture van creep stealthily away in the moonless night . insolvent tenant openly defy the collector of the water - rate from their ten - roomed stronghold , and exist for week without any visible mean of procure that necessary fluid . 

 Robert Audley look about he with a shudder as he turn from the waterside into this poverty - stricken locality . a child 's funeral be leave one of the house as he approach , and he think with a thrill of horror that if the little coffin have hold George 's son , he would have be in some measure responsible for the boy 's death . 

 " the poor child shall not sleep another night in this wretched hovel , " he think , as he knock at the door of Mr. Maldon 's house . " he be the legacy of my good friend , and it shall be my business to secure his safety . " 

 a slipshod servant girl open the door and look at Mr. Audley rather suspiciously as she ask he , very much through her nose , what he please to want . the door of the little sit room be ajar , and Robert could hear the clattering of knife and fork and the childish voice of little George prattling gayly . he tell the servant that he have come from London , that he want to see Master Talboys , and that he would announce himself ; and walk past she , without further ceremony he open the door of the parlor . the girl star at he aghast as he do this ; and as if strike by some sudden and terrible conviction , throw her apron over her head and run out into the snow . she dart across the waste ground , plunge into a narrow alley , and never draw breath till she find herself upon the threshold of a certain tavern call the Coach and horse , and much affect by Mr. Maldon . the lieutenant 's faithful retainer have take Robert Audley for some new and determined collector of poor 's rate reject that gentleman 's account of himself as an artful fiction devise for the destruction of parochial defaulter and have hurry off to give her master timely warning of the enemy 's approach . 

 when Robert enter the sitting - room he be surprised to find little George seat opposite to a woman who be do the honor of a shabby repast , spread upon a dirty table - cloth , and flank by a pewter beer measure . the woman rise as Robert enter , and courtesie very humbly to the young barrister . she look about fifty year of age , and be dress in rusty widow 's weed . her complexion be insipidly fair , and the two smooth band of hair beneath her cap be of that sunless , flaxen hue which generally accompany pink cheek and white eyelash . she have be a rustic beauty , perhaps , in her time , but her feature , although tolerably regular in their shape , have a mean , pinch look , as if they have be make too small for her face . this defect be peculiarly noticeable in her mouth , which be an obvious misfit for the set of tooth it contain . she smile as she courtesie to Mr. Robert Audley , and her smile , which lay bare the great part of this set of square , hungry - look tooth , by no mean add to the beauty of her personal appearance . 

 " Mr. Maldon be not at home , sir , " she say , with insinuate civility ; " but if it be for the water - rate , he request I to say that " 

 she be interrupt by little George Talboys , who scramble down from the high chair upon which he have be perch , and run to Robert Audley . 

 " I know you , " he say ; " you come to Ventnor with the big gentleman , and you come here once , and you give I some money , and I give it to gran'pa to take care of , and gran'pa keep it , and he always do . " 

 Robert Audley take the boy in his arm , and carry he to a little table in the window . 

 " stand there , Georgey , " he say , " I want to have a good look at you . " 

 he turn the boy 's face to the light , and push the brown curl off his forehead with both hand . 

 " you be grow more like your father every day , Georgey ; and you be grow quite a man , too , " he say ; " would you like to go to school ? " 

 " oh , yes , please , I should like it very much , " the boy answer , eagerly . " I go to school at Miss Pevins ' once day - school , you know round the corner in the next street ; but I catch the measle , and gran'pa would not   let I go any more , for fear I should catch the measle again ; and gran'pa will not   let I play with the little boy in the street , because they be rude boy ; he say blackguard boy ; but he say I must not   say blackguard boy , because it be naughty . he say damn and devil , but he say he may because he be old . I shall say damn and devil when I be old ; and I should like to go to school , please , and I can go to - day , if you like ; Mrs. Plowson will get my frock ready , will not   you , Mrs. Plowson ? " 

 " certainly , Master Georgey , if your grandpapa wish it , " the woman answer , look rather uneasily at Mr. Robert Audley . 

 " what on earth be the matter with this woman , " think Robert as he turn from the boy to the fair - haired widow , who be edge herself slowly toward the table upon which little George Talboys stand talk to his guardian . " do she still take I for a tax - collector with inimical intention toward these wretched good and chattel ; or can the cause of her fidgety manner lie deeply still . that be scarcely likely , though ; for whatever secret Lieutenant Maldon may have , it be not very probable that this woman have any knowledge of they . " 

 Mrs. Plowson have edge herself close to the little table by this time , and be make a stealthy descent upon the boy , when Robert turn sharply round . 

 " what be you go to do with the child ? " he say . 

 " I be only go to take he away to wash his pretty face , sir , and smooth his hair , " answer the woman , in the most insinuating tone in which she have speak of the water - rate . " you do not   see he to any advantage , sir , while his precious face be dirty . I will not   be five minute make he as neat as a new pin . " 

 she have her long , thin arm about the boy as she speak , and she be evidently go to carry he off bodily , when Robert stop she . 

 " I would rather see he as he be , thank you , " he say . " my time in Southampton be not   very long , and I want to hear all that the little man can tell I . " 

 the little man creep close to Robert , and look confidingly into the barrister 's gray eye . 

 " I like you very much , " he say . " I be frightened of you when you come before , because I be shy . I be not shy now I be nearly six year old . " 

 Robert pat the boy 's head encouragingly , but he be not look at little George ; he be watch the fair - haired widow , who have move to the window , and be look out at the patch of waste ground . 

 " you be rather fidgety about some one , ma'am , I be afraid , " say Robert . 

 she color violently as the barrister make this remark , and answer he in a confused manner . 

 " I be look for Mr. Maldon , sir , " she say ; " he will be so disappointed if he do not   see you . " 

 " you know who I be , then ? " 

 " no , sir , but " 

 the boy interrupt she by drag a little jeweled watch from his bosom and show it to Robert . 

 " this be the watch the pretty lady give I , " he say . " I have   get it now but I have not   have it long , because the jeweler who clean it be an idle man , gran'pa say , and always keep it such a long time ; and gran'pa say it will have to be clean again , because of the taxis . he always take it to be clean when there be taxis but he say if he be to lose it the pretty lady would give I another . do you know the pretty lady ? " 

 " no , Georgey , but tell I about she . " 

 Mrs. Plowson make another descent upon the boy . she be arm with a pocket - handkerchief this time , and display great anxiety about the state of little George 's nose , but Robert ward off the dread weapon , and draw the child away from his tormentor . 

 " the boy will do very well , ma'am , " he say , " if you will be good enough to let he alone for five minute . now , Georgey , suppose you sit on my knee , and tell I all about the pretty lady . " 

 the child clamber from the table onto Mr. Audley 's knee , assist his descent by a very unceremonious manipulation of his guardian 's coat - collar . 

 " I will tell you all about the pretty lady , " he say , " because I like you very much . Gran'pa tell I not to tell anybody , but I will tell you , you know , because I like you , and because you be go to take I to school . the pretty lady come here one night long ago oh , so long ago , " say the boy , shake his head , with a face whose solemnity be expressive of some prodigious lapse of time . " she come when I be not nearly so big as I be now and she come at night after I have go to bed , and she come up into my room , and sit upon the bed , and cry and she leave the watch under my pillow , and she why do you make face at I , Mrs. Plowson ? I may tell this gentleman , " Georgey add , suddenly address the widow , who be stand behind Robert 's shoulder . 

 Mrs. Plowson mumble some confused apology to the effect that she be afraid Master George be troublesome . 

 " suppose you wait till I say so , ma'am , before you stop the little fellow 's mouth , " say Robert Audley , sharply . " a suspicious person might think from your manner that Mr. Maldon and you have some conspiracy between you , and that you be afraid of what the boy 's talk may let slip . " 

 he rise from his chair , and look full at Mrs. Plowson as he say this . the fair - haired widow 's face be as white as her cap when she try to answer he , and her pale lip be so dry that she be compel to wet they with her tongue before the word would come . 

 the little boy relieve her embarrassment . 

 " do not   be cross to Mrs. Plowson , " he say . " Mrs. Plowson be very kind to I . Mrs. Plowson be Matilda 's mother . you do not   know Matilda . Poor Matilda be always cry ; she be ill , she " 

 the boy be stop by the sudden appearance of Mr. Maldon , who stand on the threshold of the parlor door star at Robert Audley with a half - drunken , half - terrify aspect , scarcely consistent with the dignity of a retire naval officer . the servant girl , breathless and panting , stand close behind her master . early in the day though it be , the old man 's speech be thick and confused , as he address himself fiercely to Mrs. Plowson . 

 " you be a prett ' creature to call yoursel ' sensible woman ? " he say . " why do not   you take th ' chile ' way , er wash 's face ? d'yer want to ruin I ? d'yer want to ' stroy I ? take th ' chile ' way ! Mr. Audley , sir , I be ver ' glad to see yer ; ver ' ' appy to ' ceive yer in m ' humbl ' ' bode , " the old man add with tipsy politeness , drop into a chair as he speak , and try to look steadily at his unexpected visitor . 

 " whatever this man 's secret be , " think Robert , as Mrs. Plowson hustle little George Talboys out of the room , " that woman have no unimportant share of they . whatever the mystery may be , it grow dark and thick at every step ; but I try in vain to draw back or to stop short upon the road , for a strong hand than my own be point the way to my lose friend 's unknown grave . " 

 CHAPTER XXI . 

 little georgey leave his OLD home . 

 " I be go to take your grandson away with I , Mr. Maldon , " Robert say gravely , as Mrs. Plowson retire with her young charge . 

 the old man 's drunken imbecility be slowly clear away like the heavy mist of a London fog , through which the feeble sunshine struggle dimly to appear . the very uncertain radiance of Lieutenant Maldon 's intellect take a considerable time in pierce the hazy vapor of rum - and - water ; but the flickering light at last faintly glimmered athwart the cloud , and the old man screw his poor wit to the sticking - point . 

 " yes , yes , " he say , feebly ; " take the boy away from his poor old grandfather ; I always think so . " 

 " you always think that I should take he away ? " scrutinize the half - drunken countenance with a searching glance . " why do you think so , Mr. Maldon ? " 

 the fog of intoxication get the well of the light of sobriety for a moment , and the lieutenant answer vaguely : 

 " thought so 'cause I think so . " 

 meet the young barrister 's impatient frown , he make another effort , and the light glimmer again . 

 " because I think you or his father would fetch ' m away . " 

 " when I be last in this house , Mr. Maldon , you tell I that George Talboys have sail for Australia . " 

 " yes , yes I know , I know , " the old man answer , confusedly , shuffle his scanty limp gray hair with his two wandering hand " I know ; but he might have come back might not   he ? he be restless , and and queer in his mind , perhaps , sometimes . he might have come back . " 

 he repeat this two or three time in feeble , mutter tone ; grope about on the littered mantle - piece for a dirty - look clay pipe , and fill and light it with hand that tremble violently . 

 Robert Audley watch those poor , withered , tremulous finger drop shred of tobacco upon the hearth rug , and scarcely able to kindle a lucifer for their unsteadiness . then walk once or twice up and down the little room , he leave the old man to take a few puff from the great consoler . 

 presently he turn suddenly upon the half - pay lieutenant with a dark solemnity in his handsome face . 

 " Mr. Maldon , " he say , slowly watch the effect of every syllable as he speak , " George Talboys never sail for Australia that I know . More than this , he never come to Southampton ; and the lie you tell I on the 8th of last September be dictate to you by the telegraphic message which you receive on that day . " 

 the dirty clay pipe drop from the tremulous hand , and shiver against the iron fender , but the old man make no effort to find a fresh one ; he sit tremble in every limb , and look , Heaven know how piteously , at Robert Audley . 

 " the lie be dictate to you , and you repeat your lesson . but you no more see George Talboys here on the 7th of September than I see he in this room now . you think you have burn the telegraphic message , but you have only burn a part of it the remainder be in my possession . " 

 Lieutenant Maldon be quite sober now . 

 " what have I do ? " he murmur , hopelessly . " oh , my God ! what have I do ? " 

 " at two o'clock on the 7th of September last , " continue the pitiless , accuse voice , " George Talboys be see alive and well at a house in Essex . " 

 Robert pause to see the effect of these word . they have produce no change in the old man . he still sit tremble from head to foot , and star with the fixed and solid gaze of some helpless wretch whose every sense be gradually become numb by terror . 

 " at two o'clock on that day , " remark Robert Audley , " my poor friend be see alive and well at , at the house of which I speak . from that hour to this I have never be able to hear that he have be see by any live creature . I have take such step as must have result in procure the information of his whereabouts , be he alive . I have do this patiently and carefully at first , even hopefully . now I know that he be dead . " 

 Robert Audley have be prepare to witness some considerable agitation in the old man 's manner , but he be not prepare for the terrible anguish , the ghastly terror , which convulse Mr. Maldon 's haggard face as he utter the last word . 

 " no , no , no , no , " reiterate the lieutenant , in a shrill , half - scream voice ; " no , no ! for God 's sake , do not   say that ! do not   think it do not   let I think it do not   let I dream of it ! not dead anything but dead ! hide away , perhaps bribe to keep out of the way , perhaps ; but not dead not dead not dead ! " 

 he cry these word aloud , like one beside himself , beat his hand upon his gray head , and rock backward and forward in his chair . his feeble hand tremble no long they be strengthen by some convulsive force that give they a new power . 

 " I believe , " say Robert , in the same solemn , relentless voice , " that my friend leave Essex ; and I believe he die on the 7th of September last . " 

 the wretched old man , still beat his hand among his thin gray hair , slide from his chair to the ground , and grovel at Robert 's foot . 

 " oh ! no , no for God 's , no ! " he shriek hoarsely . " no ! you do not   know what you say you do not   know what your word mean ! " 

 " I know their weight and value only too well as well as I see you do , Mr. Maldon . God help we ! " 

 " oh , what be I do ? what be I do ? " mutter the old man , feebly ; then raise himself from the ground with an effort , he draw himself to his full height , and say , in a manner which be new to he , and which be not without a certain dignity of his own that dignity which must be always attach to unutterable misery , in whatever form it may appear he say , gravely : 

 " you have no right to come here and terrify a man who have be drink , and who be not quite himself . you have no right to do it , Mr. Audley . even the the officer , sir , who who . " he do not stammer , but his lip tremble so violently that his word seem to be shake into piece by their motion . " the officer , I repeat , sir , who arrest a thief , or a . " he stop to wipe his lip , and to still they if he could by do so , which he could not . " a thief or a murderer " his voice die suddenly away upon the last word , and it be only by the motion of those trembling lip that Robert know what he mean . " give he warning , sir , fair warning , that he may say nothing which shall commit himself or or other people . the the law , sir , have that amount of mercy for a a suspect criminal . but you , sir , you come to my house , and you come at a time when when contrary to my usual habit which , as people will tell you , be sober you take the opportunity to terrify I and it be not right , sir it be " 

 whatever he would have say die away into inarticulate gasp , which seem to choke he , and sink into a chair , he drop his face upon the table , and weep aloud . perhaps in all the dismal scene of domestic misery which have be act in those spare and dreary house in all the petty misery , the burn shame , the cruel sorrow , the bitter disgrace which own poverty for their father there have never be such a scene as this . an old man hide his face from the light of day , and sob aloud in his wretchedness . Robert Audley contemplate the painful picture with a hopeless and pity face . 

 " if I have know this , " he think , " I might have spar he . it would have be well , perhaps , to have spar he . " 

 the shabby room , the dirt , the confusion , the figure of the old man , with his gray head upon the soil tablecloth , amid the muddle dťbris of a wretched dinner , grow blur before the sight of Robert Audley as he think of another man , as old as this one , but , ah ! how widely different in every other quality ! who might come by and by to feel the same , or even a bad anguish , and to shed , perhaps , yet bitterer tear . the moment in which the tear rise to his eye and dim the piteous scene before he , be long enough to take he back to Essex , and to show he the image of his uncle , stricken by agony and shame . 

 " why do I go on with this ? " he think ; " how pitiless I be , and how relentlessly I be carry on . it be not myself ; it be the hand which be beckon I far and far upon the dark road , whose end I dare not dream of . " 

 he think this , and a hundred time more than this , while the old man sit with his face still hide , wrestle with his anguish , but without power to keep it down . 

 " Mr. Maldon , " Robert Audley say , after a pause , " I do not ask you to forgive I for what I have bring upon you , for the feeling be strong within I that it must have come to you soon or later if not through I , through some one else . there be " he stop for a moment hesitating . the sobbing do not cease ; it be sometimes low , sometimes loud , burst out with fresh violence , or die away for an instant , but never cease . " there be some thing which , as people say , can not be hide . I think there be truth in that common saying which have its origin in that old worldly wisdom which people gather from experience and not from book . if if I be content to let my friend rest in his hidden grave , it be but likely that some stranger who have never hear the name of George Talboys , might fall by the remotest accident upon the secret of his death . to - morrow , perhaps ; or ten year hence , or in another generation , when the the hand that wrong he be as cold as his own . if I could let the matter rest ; if if I could leave England forever , and purposely fly from the possibility of ever come across another clew to the secret , I would do it I would gladly , thankfully do it but I can not ! a hand which be strong than my own beckon I on . I wish to take no base advantage of you , less than of all other people ; but I must go on ; I must go on . if there be any warning you would give to any one , give it . if the secret toward which I be travel day by day , hour by hour , involve any one in whom you have an interest , let that person fly before I come to the end . let they leave this country ; let they leave all who know they all whose peace their wickedness have endanger ; let they go away they shall not be pursue . but if they slight your warning if they try to hold their present position in defiance of what it will be in your power to tell they let they beware of I , for , when the hour come , I swear that I will not spare they . " 

 the old man look up for the first time , and wipe his wrinkle face upon a ragged silk handkerchief . 

 " I declare to you that I do not understand you , " he say . " I solemnly declare to you that I can not understand ; and I do not believe that George Talboys be dead . " 

 " I would give ten year of my own life if I could see he alive , " answer Robert , sadly . " I be sorry for you , Mr. Maldon I be sorry for all of we . " 

 " I do not believe that my son - in - law be dead , " say the lieutenant ; " I do not believe that the poor lad be dead . " 

 he endeavor in a feeble manner to show to Robert Audley that his wild outburst of anguish have be cause by his grief for the loss of George ; but the pretense be miserably shallow . 

 Mrs. Plowson re - enter the room , lead little Georgey , whose face shine with that brilliant polish which yellow soap and friction can produce upon the human countenance . 

 " dear heart alive ! " exclaim Mrs. Plowson , " what have the poor old gentleman be take on about ? we could hear he in the passage , sobbin ' awful . " 

 Little George creep up to his grandfather , and smooth the wet and wrinkle face with his pudgy hand . 

 " do not   cry , gran'pa , " he say , " do not   cry . you shall have my watch to be clean , and the kind jeweler shall lend you the money to pay the taxman while he clean the watch I do not   mind , gran'pa . let us go to the jeweler , the jeweler in High street , you know , with golden ball paint upon his door , to show that he come from Lombar Lombardshire , " say the boy , make a dash at the name . " come , gran'pa . " 

 the little fellow take the jewel toy from his bosom and make for the door , proud of be possess of a talisman , which he have see so often make useful . 

 " there be wolf at Southampton , " he say , with rather a triumphant nod to Robert Audley . " my gran'pa say when he take my watch that he do it to keep the wolf from the door . be there wolf where you live ? " 

 the young barrister do not answer the child 's question , but stop he as he be drag his grandfather toward the door . 

 " your grandpapa do not want the watch to - day , Georgey , " he say , gravely . 

 " why be he sorry , then ? " ask Georgey , naively ; " when he want the watch he be always sorry , and beat his poor forehead so " the boy stop to pantomime with his small fist " and say that she the pretty lady , I think he mean use he very hard , and that he can not   keep the wolf from the door ; and then I say , ' Gran'pa , have the watch ; ' and then he take I in his arm , and say , ' oh , my bless angel ! how can I rob my bless angel ? ' and then he cry , but not like to - day not loud , you know ; only tear run down his poor cheek , not so that you could hear he in the passage . " 

 painful as the child 's prattle be to Robert Audley , it seem a relief to the old man . he do not hear the boy 's talk , but walk two or three time up and down the little room and smooth his rumpled hair and suffer his cravat to be arrange by Mrs. Plowson , who seem very anxious to find out the cause of his agitation . 

 " poor dear old gentleman , " she say , look at Robert . 

 " what have happen to upset he so ? " 

 " his son - in - law be dead , " answer Mr. Audley , fix his eye upon Mrs. Plowson 's sympathetic face . " he die , within a year and a half after the death of Helen Talboys , who lie burried in Ventnor churchyard . " 

 the face into which he be look change very slightly , but the eye that have be look at he shift away as he speak , and Mrs. Plowson be oblige to moisten her white lip with her tongue before she answer he . 

 " poor Mr. Talboys dead ! " she say ; " that be bad news indeed , sir . " 

 Little George look wistfully up at his guardian 's face as this be say . 

 " who be dead ? " he say . " George Talboys be my name . who be dead ? " 

 " another person whose name be Talboys , Georgey . " 

 " poor person ! will he go to the pit - hole ? " 

 the boy have that notion of death which be generally impart to child by their wise elder , and which always lead the infant mind to the open grave and rarely carry it any higher . 

 " I should like to see he put in the pit - hole , " Georgey remark , after a pause . he have attend several infant funeral in the neighborhood , and be consider valuable as a mourner on account of his interesting appearance . he have come , therefore , to look upon the ceremony of interment as a solemn festivity ; in which cake and wine , and a carriage drive be the lead feature . 

 " you have no objection to my take Georgey away with I , Mr. Maldon ? " ask Robert Audley . 

 the old man 's agitation have very much subside by this time . he have find another pipe stick behind the tawdry frame of the look - glass , and be try to light it with a bit of twisted newspaper . 

 " you do not object , Mr. Maldon ? " 

 " no , sir no , sir ; you be his guardian , and you have a right to take he where you please . he have be a very great comfort to I in my lonely old age , but I have be prepare to lose he . I I may not have always do my duty to he , sir , in in the way of schooling , and and boot . the number of boot which boy of his age wear out , sir , be not easily realize by the mind of a young man like yourself ; he have be keep away from school , perhaps , sometimes , and occasionally wear shabby boot when our fund have get low ; but he have not be unkindly treat . no , sir ; if you be to question he for a week , I do not   think you would hear that his poor old grandfather ever say a harsh word to he . " 

 upon this , Georgie , perceive the distress of his old protector , set up a terrible howl , and declare that he would never leave he . 

 " Mr. Maldon , " say Robert Audley , with a tone which be half - mournful , half - compassionate , " when I look at my position last night , I do not believe that I could ever come to think it more painful than I think it then . I can only say God have mercy upon we all . I feel it my duty to take the child away , but I shall take he straight from your house to the good school in Southampton ; and I give you my honor that I will extort nothing from his innocent simplicity which can in any manner I mean , " he say , break off abruptly , " I mean this . I will not seek to come one step nearer the secret through he . I I be not a detective officer , and I do not think the most accomplished detective would like to get his information from a child . " 

 the old man do not answer ; he sit with his face shade by his hand , and with his extinguished pipe between the listless finger of the other . 

 " take the boy away , Mrs. Plowson , " he say , after a pause ; " take he away and put his thing on . he be go with Mr. Audley . " 

 " which I do say that it be not kind of the gentleman to take his poor grandpa 's pet away , " Mrs. Plowson exclaim , suddenly , with respectful indignation . 

 " Hush , Mrs. Plowson , " the old man answer , piteously ; " Mr. Audley be the good judge . I I have not   many year to live ; I sha'n't   trouble anybody long . " 

 the tear ooze slowly through the dirty finger with which he shade his blood - shoot eye , as he say this . 

 " God know , I never injure your friend , sir , " he say , by - and - by , when Mrs. Plowson and Georgey have return , " nor even wish he any ill . he be a good son - in - law to I well than many a son . I never do he any wilful wrong , sir . I I spend his money , perhaps , but I be sorry for it I be very sorry for it now . but I do not   believe he be dead no , sir ; no , I do not   believe it ! " exclaim the old man , drop his hand from his eye , and look with new energy at Robert Audley . " I I do not   believe it , sir ! how how should he be dead ? " 

 Robert do not answer this eager questioning . he shake his head mournfully , and , walk to the little window , look out across a row of straggle geranium at the dreary patch of waste ground on which the child be at play . 

 Mrs. Plowson return with little Georgey muffle in a coat and comforter , and Robert take the boy 's hand . 

 the little fellow sprung toward the old man , and cling about he , kiss the dirty tear from his fade cheek . 

 " do not   be sorry for I , gran'pa , " he say ; " I be go to school to learn to be a clever man , and I shall come home to see you and Mrs. Plowson , sha'n't   I ? " he add , turn to Robert . 

 " yes , my dear , by - and - by . " 

 " take he away , sir take he away , " cry Mr. Maldon ; " you be break my heart . " 

 the little fellow trot away contentedly at Robert 's side . he be very well pleased at the idea of go to school , though he have be happy enough with his drunken old grandfather , who have always display a maudlin affection for the pretty child , and have do his good to spoil Georgey , by let he have his own way in everything ; in consequence of which indulgence , Master Talboys have acquire a taste for late hour , hot supper of the most indigestible nature , and sip of rum - and - water from his grandfather 's glass . 

 he communicate his sentiment upon many subject to Robert Audley , as they walk to the Dolphin Hotel ; but the barrister do not encourage he to talk . 

 it be no very difficult matter to find a good school in such a place as Southampton . Robert Audley be direct to a pretty house between the Bar and the Avenue , and leave Georgey to the care of a good - natured waiter , who seem to have nothing to do but to look out of the window , and whisk invisible dust off the brightly polished table , the barrister walk up the high street toward Mr. Marchmont 's academy for young gentleman . 

 he find Mr. Marchmont a very sensible man , and he meet a file of orderly - look young gentleman walk townward under the escort of a couple of usher as he enter the house . 

 he tell the schoolmaster that little George Talboys have be leave in his charge by a dear friend , who have sail for Australia some month before , and whom he believe to be dead . he confide he to Mr. Marchmont 's especial care , and he far request that no visitor should be admit to see the boy unless accredit by a letter from himself . have arrange the matter in a very few business - like word , he return to the hotel to fetch Georgey . 

 he find the little man on intimate term with the idle waiter , who have be direct Master Georgey 's attention to the different object of interest in the high street . 

 Poor Robert have about as much notion of the requirement of a child as he have of those of a white elephant . he have cater for silkworm , guinea - pig , dormice , canary - bird , and dog , without number , during his boyhood , but he have never be call upon to provide for a young person of five year old . 

 he look back five - and - twenty year , and try to remember his own diet at the age of five . 

 " I have   a vague recollection of get a good deal of bread and milk and boil mutton , " he think ; " and I have   another vague recollection of not like they . I wonder if this boy like bread and milk and boil mutton . " 

 he stand pull his thick mustache and star thoughtfully at the child for some minute before he could get any far . 

 " I dare say you be hungry , Georgey ? " he say , at last . 

 the boy nod , and the waiter whisk some more invisible dust from the near table as a preparatory step toward lay a cloth . 

 " perhaps you would like some lunch ? " Mr. Audley suggest , still pull his mustache . 

 the boy burst out laugh . 

 " Lunch ! " he cry . " why , it be afternoon , and I have   have my dinner . " 

 Robert Audley feel himself bring to a standstill . what refreshment could he possibly provide for a boy who call it afternoon at three o'clock ? 

 " you shall have some bread and milk , Georgey , " he say , presently . " waiter , bread and milk , and a pint of hock . " 

 Master Talboys make a wry face . 

 " I never have bread and milk , " he say , " I do not   like it . I like what gran'pa call something savory . I should like a veal cutlet . Gran'pa tell I he din here once , and the veal cutlet be lovely , gran'pa say . please may I have a veal cutlet , with egg and bread - crumb , you know , and lemon - juice you know ? " he add to the waiter : " Gran'pa know the cook here . the cook 's such a nice gentleman , and once give I a shilling , when gran'pa bring I here . the cook wear well clothe than gran'pa well than your , even , " say Master Georgey , point to Robert 's rough great - coat with a depreciate nod . 

 Robert Audley star aghast . how be he to deal with this epicure of five year old , who reject bread and milk and ask for veal cutlet ? 

 " I will tell you what I will do with you , little Georgey , " he exclaim , after a pause " I will give you a dinner ! " 

 the waiter nod briskly . 

 " upon my word , sir , " he say , approvingly , " I think the little gentleman will know how to eat it . " 

 " I will give you a dinner , Georgey , " repeat Robert ' some stew eel , a little Julienne , a dish of cutlet , a bird , and a pudding . what do you say to that , Georgey ? " 

 " I do not   think the young gentleman will object to it when he see it , sir , " say the waiter . " Eels , Julienne , cutlet , bird , pudde I will go and tell the cook , sir . what time , sir ? " 

 " well , we will say six , and Master Georgey will get to his new school by bedtime . you can contrive to amuse the child for this afternoon , I dare say . I have some business to settle , and sha'n't   be able to take he out . I shall sleep here to - night . good - by , Georgey ; take care of yourself and try and get your appetite in order against six o'clock . " 

 Robert Audley leave the boy in charge of the idle waiter , and stroll down to the water side , choose that lonely bank which lead away under the molder wall of the town toward the little village beside the narrow river . 

 he have purposely avoid the society of the child , and he walk through the light drift snow till the early darkness close upon he . 

 he go back to the town , and make inquiry at the station about the train for dorsetshire . 

 " I shall start early to - morrow morning , " he think , " and see George 's father before nightfall . I will tell he all all but the interest which I take in in the suspect person , and he shall decide what be next to be do . " 

 Master Georgey do very good justice to the dinner which Robert have order . he drink Bass ' pale ale to an extent which considerably alarm his entertainer , and enjoy himself amazingly , show an appreciation of roast pheasant and bread - sauce which be beyond his year . at eight o'clock a fly be bring out for his accommodation , and he depart in the high spirit , with a sovereign in his pocket , and a letter from Robert to Mr. Marchmont , inclose a check for the young gentleman 's outfit . 

 " I be glad I be go to have new clothe , " he say , as he bid Robert good - by ; " for Mrs. Plowson have mend the old one ever so many time . she can have they now , for Billy . " 

 " who be Billy ? " Robert ask , laugh at the boy 's chatter . 

 " Billy be poor Matilda 's little boy . he be a common boy , you know . Matilda be common , but she " 

 but the flyman snap his whip at this moment , the old horse jog off , and Robert Audley hear no more of Matilda . 

 CHAPTER XXII . 

 come to a STANDSTILL . 

 Mr. Harcourt Talboys live in a prim , square , red - brick mansion , within a mile of a little village call Grange Heath , in dorsetshire . the prim , square , red - brick mansion stand in the center of prim , square ground , scarcely large enough to be call a park , too large to be call anything else so neither the house nor the ground have any name , and the estate be simply designate Squire Talboys ' . 

 perhaps Mr. Harcourt Talboys be the last person in this world with whom it be possible to associate the homely , hearty , rural old english title of squire . he neither hunt nor farm . he have never wear crimson , pink , or top - boot in his life . a southerly wind and a cloudy sky be matter of supreme indifference to he , so long as they do not in any way interfere with his own prim comfort ; and he only care for the state of the crop inasmuch as it involve the hazard of certain rent which he receive for the farm upon his estate . he be a man of about fifty year of age , tall , straight , bony and angular , with a square , pale face , light gray eye , and scanty dark hair , brush from either ear across a bald crown , and thus impart to his physiognomy some faint resemblance to that of a terri a sharp , uncompromising , hard - head terri a terri not to be take in by the clever dog - stealer who ever distinguish himself in his profession . 

 nobody ever remember get upon what be popularly call the blind side of Harcourt Talboys . he be like his own square - build , northern - fronted , shelterless house . there be no shady nook in his character into which one could creep for shelter from his hard daylight . he be all daylight . he look at everything in the same broad glare of intellectual sunlight , and would see no soften shadow that might alter the sharp outline of cruel fact , subdue they to beauty . I do not know if I express what I mean , when I say that there be no curve in his character that his mind run in straight line , never diverge to the right or the left to round off their pitiless angle . with he right be right , and wrong be wrong . he have never in his merciless , conscientious life admit the idea that circumstance might mitigate the blackness of wrong or weaken the force of right . he have cast off his only son because his only son have disobey he , and he be ready to cast off his only daughter at five minute ' notice for the same reason . 

 if this square - build , hard - head man could be possess of such a weakness as vanity , he be certainly vain of his hardness . he be vain of that inflexible squareness of intellect , which make he the disagreeable creature that he be . he be vain of that unwavere obstinacy which no influence of love or pity have ever be know to bend from its remorseless purpose . he be vain of the negative force of a nature which have never know the weakness of the affection , or the strength which may be bear of that very weakness . 

 if he have regret his son 's marriage , and the breach of his own making , between himself and George , his vanity have be more powerful than his regret , and have enable he to conceal it . indeed , unlikely as it appear at the first glance that such a man as this could have be vain , I have little doubt that vanity be the center from which radiate all the disagreeable line in the character of Mr. Harcourt Talboys . I dare say Junius Brutus be vain , and enjoy the approval of awe - stricken Rome when he order his son off for execution . Harcourt Talboys would have send poor George from his presence between the reversed fasce of the lictor , and grimly relish his own agony . Heaven only know how bitterly this hard man may have feel the separation between himself and his only son , or how much the more terrible the anguish might have be make by that unflinche self - conceit which conceal the torture . 

 " my son do I an unpardonable wrong by marry the daughter of a drunken pauper , " Mr. Talboys would answer to any one who have the temerity to speak to he about George , " and from that hour I have no long a son . I wish he no ill . he be simply dead to I . I be sorry for he , as I be sorry for his mother who die nineteen year ago . if you talk to I of he as you would talk of the dead , I shall be ready to hear you . if you speak of he as you would speak of the living , I must decline to listen . " 

 I believe that Harcourt Talboys hug himself upon the gloomy roman grandeur of this speech , and that he would like to have wear a toga , and wrap himself sternly in its fold , as he turn his back upon poor George 's intercessor . George never in his own person make any effort to soften his father 's verdict . he know his father well enough to know that the case be hopeless . 

 " if I write to he , he will fold my letter with the envelope inside , and indorse it with my name and the date of its arrival , " the young man would say , " and call everybody in the house to witness that it have not move he to one soften recollection or one pitiful thought . he will stick to his resolution to his die day . I dare say , if the truth be know , he be glad that his only son have offend he and give he the opportunity of parade his roman virtue . " 

 George have answer his wife thus when she and her father have urge he to ask assistance from Harcourt Talboys . 

 " no my darling , " he would say , conclusively . " it be very hard , perhaps , to be poor , but we will bear it . we will not   go with pitiful face to the stern father , and ask he to give we food and shelter , only to be refuse in long , johnsonian sentence , and make a classical example for the benefit of the neighborhood . no , my pretty one ; it be easy to starve , but it be difficult to stoop . " 

 perhaps poor Mrs. George do not agree very heartily to the first of these two proposition . she have no great fancy for starving , and she whimper pitifully when the pretty pint bottle of champagne , with Cliquot 's and Moet 's brand upon their cork , be exchange for sixpenny ale , procure by a slipshod attendant from the near beer - shop . George have be oblige to carry his own burden and lend a help hand with that of his wife , who have no idea of keep her regret or disappointment a secret . 

 " I think dragoon be always rich , " she use to say , peevishly . " girl always want to marry dragoon ; and tradespeople always want to serve dragoon ; and hotel - keeper to entertain dragoon ; and theatrical manager to be patronize by dragoon . who could have ever expect that a dragoon would drink sixpenny ale , smoke horrid bird's - eye tobacco , and let his wife wear a shabby bonnet ? " 

 if there be any selfish feeling display in such speech as these , George Talboys have never discover it . he have love and believe in his wife from the first to the last hour of his brief married life . the love that be not blind be perhaps only a spurious divinity after all ; for when Cupid take the fillet from his eye it be a fatally certain indication that he be prepare to spread his wing for a flight . George never forget the hour in which he have first become bewitch by Lieutenant Maldon 's pretty daughter , and however she might have change , the image which have charm he then , unchanged and unchanging , represent she in his heart . 

 Robert Audley leave Southampton by a train which start before daybreak , and reach Wareham station early in the day . he hire a vehicle at Wareham to take he over to Grange Heath . 

 the snow have harden upon the ground , and the day be clear and frosty , every object in the landscape stand in sharp outline against the cold blue sky . the horse ' hoof clatter upon the ice - bind road , the iron shoe strike on the ground that be almost as iron as themselves . the wintry day bear some resemblance to the man to whom Robert be go . like he , it be sharp , frigid , and uncompromising : like he , it be merciless to distress and impregnable to the soften power of sunshine . it would accept no sunshine but such January radiance as would light up the bleak , bare country without brighten it ; and thus resemble Harcourt Talboys , who take the stern side of every truth , and declare loudly to the disbelieving world that there never have be , and never could be , any other side . 

 Robert Audley 's heart sink within he as the shabby hire vehicle stop at a stern - look bar fence , and the driver dismount to open a broad iron gate which swing back with a clanking noise and be catch by a great iron tooth , plant in the ground , which snap at the low bar of the gate as if it want to bite . 

 this iron gate open into a scanty plantation of straight - limbe fir - tree , that grow in row and shake their sturdy winter foliage defiantly in the very tooth of the frosty breeze . a straight graveled carriage - drive ran between these straight tree across a smoothly keep lawn to a square red - brick mansion , every window of which wink and glitter in the January sunlight as if it have be that moment clean by some indefatigable housemaid . 

 I do not   know whether Junius Brutus be a nuisance in his own house , but among other of his roman virtue , Mr. Talboys own an extreme aversion to disorder , and be the terror of every domestic in his establishment . 

 the window wink and the flight of stone step glare in the sunlight , the prim garden walk be so freshly graveled that they give a sandy , gingery aspect to the place , remind one unpleasantly of red hair . the lawn be chiefly ornament with dark , wintry shrub of a funereal aspect which grow in bed that look like problem in algebra ; and the flight of stone step lead to the square half - glass door of the hall be adorn with dark - green wooden tub contain the same sturdy evergreen . 

 " if the man be anything like his house , " Robert think , " I do not   wonder that poor George and he part . " 

 at the end of a scanty avenue the carriage - drive turn a sharp corner   it would have be make to describe a curve in any other man 's ground   and run before the low window of the house . the flyman dismount at the step , ascend they , and ring a brass - handle bell , which fly back to its socket , with an angry , metallic snap , as if it have be insult by the plebeian touch of the man 's hand . 

 a man in black trouser and a striped linen jacket , which be evidently fresh from the hand of the laundress , open the door . Mr. Talboys be at home . would the gentleman send in his card ? 

 Robert wait in the hall while his card be take to the master of the house . 

 the hall be large and lofty , pave with stone . the panel of the oaken wainscot shine with the same uncompromising polish which be on every object within and without the red - bricke mansion . 

 some people be so weak - minded as to affect picture and statue . Mr. Harcourt Talboys be far too practical to indulge in any foolish fancy . a barometer and an umbrella - stand be the only adornment of his entrance - hall . 

 Robert Audley look at these while his name be be submit to George 's father . 

 the linen - jacket servant return presently . he be a square , pale - face man of almost forty , and have the appearance of have outlive every emotion to which humanity be subject . 

 " if you will step this way , sir , " he say , " Mr. Talboys will see you , although he be at breakfast . he beg I to state that everybody in Dorsetshire be acquaint with his breakfast hour . " 

 this be intend as a stately reproof to Mr. Robert Audley . it have , however , very small effect upon the young barrister . he merely lift his eyebrow in placid deprecation of himself and everybody else . 

 " I do not   belong to dorsetshire , " he say . " Mr. Talboys might have know that , if he have do I the honor to exercise his power of ratiocination . drive on , my friend . " 

 the emotionless man look at Robert Audley with a vacant stare of unmitigated horror , and open one of the heavy oak door , lead the way into a large dining - room furnish with the severe simplicity of an apartment which be mean to be eat in , but never live in ; and at top of a table which would have accommodate eighteen person Robert beheld Mr. Harcourt Talboys . 

 Mr. Talboys be rob in a dressing - gown of gray cloth , fasten about his waist with a girdle . it be a severe look garment , and be perhaps the near approach to the toga to be obtain within the range of modern costume . he wear a buff waistcoat , a stiffly starch cambric cravat , and a faultless shirt collar . the cold gray of his dress gown be almost the same as the cold gray of his eye , and the pale buff of his waistcoat be the pale buff of his complexion . 

 Robert Audley have not expect to find Harcourt Talboys at all like George in his manner or disposition , but he have expect to see some family likeness between the father and the son . there be none . it would have be impossible to imagine any one more unlike George than the author of his existence . Robert scarcely wonder at the cruel letter he receive from Mr. Talboys when he see the writer of it . such a man could scarcely have write otherwise . 

 there be a second person in the large room , toward whom Robert glance after salute Harcourt Talboys , doubtful how to proceed . this second person be a lady , who sit at the last of a range of four window , employ with some needlework , the kind which be generally call plain work , and with a large wicker basket , fill with calico and flannel , stand by she . 

 the whole length of the room divide this lady from Robert , but he could see that she be young , and that she be like George Talboys . 

 " his sister ! " he think in that one moment , during which he venture to glance away from the master of the house toward the female figure at the window . " his sister , no doubt . he be fond of she , I know . surely , she be not utterly indifferent as to his fate ? " 

 the lady half rise from her seat , let her work , which be large and awkward , fall from her lap as she do so , and drop a reel of cotton , which roll away upon the polished oaken floor beyond the margin of the Turkey carpet . 

 " sit down , Clara , " say the hard voice of Mr. Talboys . 

 that gentleman do not appear to address his daughter , nor have his face be turn toward she when she rise . it seem as if he have know it by some social magnetism peculiar to himself ; it seem , as his servant be apt disrespectfully to observe , as if he have eye in the back of his head . 

 " sit down , Clara , " he repeat , " and keep your cotton in your workbox . " 

 the lady blush at this reproof , and stoop to look for the cotton . Mr. Robert Audley , who be unabashe by the stern presence of the master of the house , kneel on the carpet , find the reel , and restore it to its owner ; Harcourt talboy star at the proceeding with an expression of unmitigated astonishment . 

 " perhaps , Mr. , Mr. Robert Audley ! " he say , look at the card which he hold between his finger and thumb , " perhaps when you have finish look for reel of cotton , you will be good enough to tell I to what I owe the honor of this visit ? " 

 he wave his well - shape hand with a gesture which might have be admire in the stately John Kemble ; and the servant , understand the gesture , bring forward a ponderous red - morocco chair . 

 the proceeding be so slow and solemn , that Robert have at first thought that something extraordinary be about to be do ; but the truth dawn upon he at last , and he drop into the massive chair . 

 " you may remain , Wilson , " say Mr. Talboys , as the servant be about to withdraw ; " Mr. Audley would perhaps like coffee . " 

 Robert have eat nothing that morning , but he glance at the long expanse of dreary table - cloth , the silver tea and coffee equipage , the stiff splendor , and the very little appearance of any substantial entertainment , and he decline Mr. Talboys ' invitation . 

 " Mr. Audley will not take coffee , Wilson , " say the master of the house . " you may go . " 

 the man bow and retire , open and shut the door as cautiously as if he be take a liberty in do it at all , or as if the respect due to Mr. Talboys demand his walk straight through the oaken panel like a ghost in a german story . 

 Mr. Harcourt Talboys sit with his gray eye fix severely on his visitor , his elbow on the red - morocco arm of his chair , and his finger - tip join . it be the attitude in which , have he be Junius Brutus , he would have sit at the trial of his son . have Robert Audley be easily to be embarrassed , Mr. Talboys might have succeed in make he feel so : as he would have sit with perfect tranquility upon an open gunpowder barrel light his cigar , he be not at all disturb upon this occasion . the father 's dignity seem a very small thing to he when he think of the possible cause of the son 's disappearance . 

 " I write to you some time since , Mr. Talboys , " he say quietly , when he see that he be expect to open the conversation . 

 Harcourt talboy bow . he know that it be of his lost son that Robert come to speak . Heaven grant that his icy stoicism be the paltry affectation of a vain man , rather than the utter heartlessness which Robert think it . he bow across his finger - tip at his visitor . the trial have begin , and Junius Brutus be enjoy himself . 

 " I receive your communication , Mr. Audley , " he say . " it be among other business letter : it be duly answer . " 

 " that letter concern your son . " 

 there be a little rustle noise at the window where the lady sit , as Robert say this : he look at she almost instantaneously , but she do not seem to have stir . she be not work , but she be perfectly quiet . 

 " she be as heartless as her father , I expect , though she be like George , " think Mr. Audley . 

 " if your letter concern the person who be once my son , perhaps , sir , " say Harcourt Talboys , " I must ask you to remember that I have no long a son . " 

 " you have no reason to remind I of that , Mr. Talboys , " answer Robert , gravely ; " I remember it only too well . I have fatal reason to believe that you have no long a son . I have bitter cause to think that he be dead . " 

 it may be that Mr. Talboys ' complexion fade to a pale shade of buff as Robert say this ; but he only elevate his bristling gray eyebrow and shake his head gently . 

 " no , " he say , " no , I assure you , no . " 

 " I believe that George Talboys die in the month of September . " 

 the girl who have be address as Clara , sit with work primly fold upon her lap , and her hand lie clasp together on her work , and never stir when Robert speak of his friend 's death . he could not distinctly see her face , for she be seat at some distance from he , and with she back to the window . 

 " no , no , I assure you , " repeat Mr. Talboys , " you labor under a sad mistake . " 

 " you believe that I be mistake in think your son dead ? " ask Robert . 

 " most certainly , " reply Mr. Talboys , with a smile , expressive of the serenity of wisdom . " most certainly , my dear sir . the disappearance be a very clever trick , no doubt , but it be not sufficiently clever to deceive I . you must permit I to understand this matter a little well than you , Mr. Audley , and you must also permit I to assure you of three thing . in the first place , your friend be not dead . in the second place , he be keep out of the way for the purpose of alarm I , of trifle with my feeling as a as a man who be once his father , and of ultimately obtain my forgiveness . in the third place , he will not obtain that forgiveness , however long he may please to keep out of the way ; and he would therefore act wisely by return to his ordinary residence and avocation without delay . " 

 " then you imagine he to purposely hide himself from all who know he , for the purpose of " 

 " for the purpose of influence I , " exclaim Mr. Talboys , who , take a stand upon his own vanity , trace every event in life from that one center , and resolutely decline to look at it from any other point of view . " for the purpose of influence I . he know the inflexibility of my character ; to a certain degree he be acquaint with I , and know that all attempt at soften my decision , or move I from the fix purpose of my life , would fail . he therefore try extraordinary mean ; he have keep out of the way in order to alarm I , and when after due time he discover that he have not alarm I , he will return to his old haunt . when he do so , " say Mr. Talboys , rise to sublimity , " I will forgive he . yes , sir , I will forgive he . I shall say to he : you have attempt to deceive I , and I have show you that I be not to be deceive ; you have try to frighten I , and I have convince you that I be not to be frighten ; you do not believe in my generosity , I will show you that I can be generous . " 

 Harcourt Talboys deliver himself of these superb period with a studied manner , that show they have be carefully compose long ago . 

 Robert Audley sigh as he hear they . 

 " heaven grant that you may have an opportunity of say this to your son , sir , " he answer sadly . " I be very glad to find that you be willing to forgive he , but I fear that you will never see he again upon this earth . I have a great deal to say to you upon this this sad subject , Mr. Talboys ; but I would rather say it to you alone , " he add , glance at the lady in the window . 

 " my daughter know my idea upon this subject , Mr. Audley , " say Harcourt Talboys ; " there be no reason why she should not hear all you have to say . Miss Clara Talboys , Mr. Robert Audley , " he add , wave his hand majestically . 

 the young lady bend her head in recognition of Robert 's bow . 

 " let she hear it , " he think . " if she have so little feeling as to show no emotion upon such a subject , let she hear the bad I have to tell . " 

 there be a few minute ' pause , during which Robert take some paper from his pocket ; among they the document which he have write immediately after George 's disappearance . 

 " I shall require all your attention , Mr. Talboys , " he say , " for that which I have to disclose to you be of a very painful nature . your son be my very dear friend dear to I for many reason . perhaps most of all dear , because I have know he and be with he through the great trouble of his life ; and because he stand comparatively alone in the world cast off by you who should have be his good friend , bereft of the only woman he have ever love . " 

 " the daughter of a drunken pauper , " Mr. Talboys remark , parenthetically . 

 " have he die in his bed , as I sometimes think he would , " continue Robert Audley , " of a broken heart , I should have mourn for he very sincerely , even though I have close his eye with my own hand , and have see he lay in his quiet resting - place . I should have grieve for my old schoolfellow , and for the companion who have be dear to I . but this grief would have be a very small one compare to that which I feel now , believe , as I do only too firmly , that my poor friend have be murder . " 

 " murder ! " 

 the father and daughter simultaneously repeat the horrible word . the father 's face change to a ghastly duskiness of hue ; the daughter 's face drop upon her clasp hand , and be never lift again throughout the interview . 

 " Mr. Audley , you be mad ! " exclaim Harcourt Talboys ; " you be mad , or else you be commission by your friend to play upon my feeling . I protest against this proceeding as a conspiracy , and I I revoke my intended forgiveness of the person who be once my son ! " 

 he be himself again as he say this . the blow have be a sharp one , but its effect have be momentary . 

 " it be far from my wish to alarm you unnecessarily , sir , " answer Robert . " heaven grant that you may be right and I wrong . I pray for it , but I can not think it I can not even hope it . I come to you for advice . I will state to you plainly and dispassionately the circumstance which have arouse my suspicion . if you say those suspicion be foolish and unfounded I be ready to submit to your well judgment . I will leave England ; and I abandon my search for the evidence want to to confirm my fear . if you say go on , I will go on . " 

 nothing could be more gratifying to the vanity of Mr. Harcourt Talboys than this appeal . he declare himself ready to listen to all that Robert might have to say , and ready to assist he to the uttermost of his power . 

 he lay some stress upon this last assurance , deprecate the value of his advice with an affectation that be as transparent as his vanity itself . 

 Robert Audley draw his chair nearer to that of Mr. Talboys , and commence a minutely detailed account of all that have occur to George from the time of his arrival in England to the hour of his disappearance , as well as all that have occur since his disappearance in any way touch upon that particular subject . Harcourt talboy listen with demonstrative attention , now and then interrupt the speaker to ask some magisterial kind of question . Clara Talboys never once lift her face from her clasp hand . 

 the hand of the clock point to a quarter past eleven when Robert begin his story . the clock strike twelve as he finish . 

 he have carefully suppress the name of his uncle and his uncle 's wife in relate the circumstance in which they have be concern . 

 " now , sir , " he say , when the story have be tell , " I await your decision . you have hear my reason for come to this terrible conclusion . in what manner do these reason influence you ? " 

 " they do not   in any way turn I from my previous opinion , " answer Mr. Harcourt Talboys , with the unreasone pride of an obstinate man . " I still think , as I think before , that my son be alive , and that his disappearance be a conspiracy against myself . I decline to become the victim of that conspiracy . " 

 " and you tell I to stop ? " ask Robert , solemnly . 

 " I tell you only this : if you go on , you go on for your own satisfaction , not for mine . I see nothing in what you have tell I to alarm I for the safety of your friend . " 

 " so be it , then ! " exclaim Robert , suddenly ; " from this moment I wash my hand of this business . from this moment the purpose of my life shall be to forget it . " 

 he rise as he speak , and take his hat from the table on which he have place it . he look at Clara Talboys . her attitude have never change since she have drop her face upon her hand . " good morning , Mr. Talboys , " he say , gravely . " God grant that you be right . God grant that I be wrong . but I fear a day will come when you will have reason to regret your apathy respect the untimely fate of your only son . " 

 he bow gravely to Mr. Harcourt Talboys and to the lady , whose face be hide by her hand . 

 he linger for a moment look at Miss Talboys , think that she would look up , that she would make some sign , or show some desire to detain he . 

 Mr. Talboys ring for the emotionless servant , who lead Robert off to the hall - door with the solemnity of manner which would have be in perfect keeping have he be lead he to execution . 

 " she be like her father , " think Mr. Audley , as he glance for the last time at the droop head . " Poor George , you have need of one friend in this world , for you have have very few to love you . " 

 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 CLARA . 

 Robert Audley find the driver asleep upon the box of his lumber vehicle . he have be entertain with beer of so hard a nature as to induce temporary strangulation in the daring imbiber thereof , and he be very glad to welcome the return of his fare . the old white horse , who look as if he have be foal in the year in which the carriage have be build , and seem , like the carriage , to have outlive the fashion , be as fast asleep as his master , and wake up with a jerk as Robert come down the stony flight of step , attend by his executioner , who wait respectfully till Mr. Audley have enter the vehicle and be turn off . 

 the horse , rouse by a smack of his driver 's whip and a shake of the shabby rein , crawl off in a semi - somnambulent state ; and Robert , with his hat very much over his eye , think of his missing friend . 

 he have play in these stiff garden , and under these dreary fir , year ago , perhaps if it be possible for the most frolicsome youth to be playful within the range of Mr. Harcourt Talboys ' hard gray eye . he have play beneath these dark tree , perhaps , with the sister who have hear of his fate to - day without a tear . Robert Audley look at the rigid primness of the orderly ground , wonder how George could have grow up in such a place to be the frank , generous , careless friend whom he have know . how be it that with his father perpetually before his eye , he have not grow up after the father 's disagreeable model , to be a nuisance to his fellow - man ? how be it ? because we have some one high than our parent to thank for the soul which make we great or small ; and because , while family nose and family chin may descend in orderly sequence from father to son , from grandsire to grandchild , as the fashion of the fade flower of one year be reproduce in the bud blossom of the next , the spirit , more subtle than the wind which blow among those flower , independent of all earthly rule , own no order but the harmonious law of God . 

 " thank God ! " think Robert Audley ; " thank God ! it be over . my poor friend must rest in his unknown grave ; and I shall not be the mean of bring disgrace upon those I love . it will come , perhaps , soon or later , but it will not come through I . the crisis be past , and I be free . " 

 he feel an unutterable relief in this thought . his generous nature revolt at the office into which he have find himself draw the office of spy , the collector of damn fact that lead on to horrible deduction . 

 he draw a long breath a sigh of relief at his release . it be all over now . 

 the fly be crawl out of the gate of the plantation as he think this , and he stand up in the vehicle to look back at the dreary fir - tree , the gravel path , the smooth grass , and the great desolate - look , red - brick mansion . 

 he be startle by the appearance of a woman run , almost fly , along the carriage - drive by which he have come , and wave a handkerchief in her uplifted hand . 

 he star at this singular apparition for some moment in silent wonder before he be able to reduce his stupefaction into word . 

 " be it I the fly female want ? " he exclaim , at last . " you would well stop , perhaps , " he add , to the flyman . " it be an age of eccentricity , an abnormal era of the world 's history . she may want I . very likely I leave my pocket - handkerchief behind I , and Mr. Talboys have send this person with it . perhaps I would well get out and go and meet she . it be civil to send my handkerchief . " 

 Mr. Robert Audley deliberately descend from the fly and walk slowly toward the hurrying female figure , which gain upon he rapidly . 

 he be rather short sight , and it be not until she come very near to he that he see who she be . 

 " Good Heaven ! " he exclaim , " it be Miss Talboys . " 

 it be Miss Talboys , flushed and breathless , with a woolen shawl throw over her head . 

 Robert Audley now see her face clearly for the first time , and he see that she be very handsome . she have brown eye , like George 's , a pale complexion   she have be flush when she approach he , but the color fade away as she recover her breath , regular feature , with a mobility of expression which bear record of every change of feeling . he see all this in a few moment , and he wonder only the more at the stoicism of her manner during his interview with Mr. Talboys . there be no tear in her eye , but they be bright with a feverish luster terribly bright and dry and he could see that her lip tremble as she speak to he . 

 " Miss Talboys , " he say , " what can I why " 

 she interrupt he suddenly , catch at his wrist with her disengage hand she be hold her shawl in the other . 

 " oh , let I speak to you , " she cry " let I speak to you , or I shall go mad . I hear it all . I believe what you believe , and I shall go mad unless I can do something something toward avenge his death . " 

 for a few moment Robert Audley be too much bewilder to answer she . of all thing possible upon earth he have least expect to behold she thus . 

 " take my arm , Miss Talboys , " he say . " pray calm yourself . let we walk a little way back toward the house , and talk quietly . I would not have speak as I do before you have I know " 

 " have you know that I love my brother ? " she say , quickly . " how should you know that I love he ? how should any one think that I love he , when I have never have power to give he a welcome beneath that roof , or a kindly word from his father ? how should I dare to betray my love for he in that house when I know that even a sister 's affection would be turn to his disadvantage ? you do not know my father , Mr. Audley . I do . I know that to intercede for George would have be to ruin his cause . I know that to leave matter in my father 's hand , and to trust to time , be my only chance of ever see that dear brother again . and I wait wait patiently , always hop for the good ; for I know that my father love his only son . I see your contemptuous smile , Mr. Audley , and I dare say it be difficult for a stranger to believe that underneath his affected stoicism my father conceal some degree of affection for his child no very warm attachment perhaps , for he have always rule his life by the strict law of duty . stop , " she say , suddenly , lay her hand upon his arm , and look back through the straight avenue of pine ; " I run out of the house by the back way . papa must not see I talk to you , Mr. Audley , and he must not see the fly stand at the gate . will you go into the high - road and tell the man to drive on a little way ? I will come out of the plantation by a little gate far on , and meet you in the road . " 

 " but you will catch cold , Miss Talboys , " remonstrate Robert , look at she anxiously , for he see that she be tremble . " you be shiver now . " 

 " not with cold , " she answer . " I be think of my brother George . if you have any pity for the only sister of your lose friend , do what I ask you , Mr. Audley . I must speak to you I must speak to you calmly , if I can . " 

 she put her hand to her head as if try to collect her thought , and then point to the gate . Robert bow and leave she . he tell the man to drive slowly toward the station , and walk on by the side of the tarred fence surround Mr. Talboys ' ground . about a hundred yard beyond the principal entrance he come to a little wooden gate in the fence , and wait at it for Miss Talboys . 

 she join he presently , with her shawl still over her head , and her eye still bright and tearless . 

 " will you walk with I inside the plantation ? " she say . " we might be observe on the high - road . " 

 he bow , pass through the gate , and shut it behind he . 

 when she take his offer arm he find that she be still tremble tremble very violently . 

 " pray , pray calm yourself , Miss Talboys , " he say ; " I may have be deceive in the opinion which I have form ; I may " 

 " no , no , no , " she exclaim , " you be not deceive . my brother have be murder . tell I the name of that woman the woman whom you suspect of be concern in his disappearance in his murder . " 

 " that I can not do until " 

 " until when ? " 

 " until I know that she be guilty . " 

 " you tell my father that you would abandon all idea of discover the truth that you would rest satisfied to leave my brother 's fate a horrible mystery never to be solve upon this earth ; but you will not do so , Mr. Audley you will not be false to the memory of your friend . you will see vengeance do upon those who have destroy he . you will do this , will you not ? " 

 a gloomy shadow spread itself like a dark veil over Robert Audley 's handsome face . 

 he remember what he have say the day before at Southampton : 

 " a hand that be strong than my own be beckon I onward , upon the dark road . " 

 a quarter of an hour before , he have believe that all be over , and that he be release from the dreadful duty of discover the secret of George 's death . now this girl , this apparently passionless girl , have find a voice , and be urge he on toward his fate . 

 " if you know what misery to I may be involve in discover the truth , Miss Talboys , " he say , " you would scarcely ask I to pursue this business any far ? " 

 " but I do ask you , " she answer , with suppress passion " I do ask you . I ask you to avenge my brother 's untimely death . will you do so ? yes or no ? " 

 " what if I answer no ? " 

 " then I will do it myself , " she exclaim , look at he with her bright brown eye . " I myself will follow up the clew to this mystery ; I will find this woman though you refuse to tell I in what part of England my brother disappear . I will travel from one end of the world to the other to find the secret of his fate , if you refuse to find it for I . I be of age ; my own mistress ; rich , for I have money leave I by one of my aunt ; I shall be able to employ those who will help I in my search , and I will make it to their interest to serve I well . choose between the two alternative , Mr. Audley . shall you or I find my brother 's murderer ? " 

 he look in her face , and see that her resolution be the fruit of no transient womanish enthusiasm which would give way under the iron hand of difficulty . her beautiful feature , naturally statuesque in their noble outline , seem transform into marble by the rigidity of her expression . the face in which he look be the face of a woman whom death only could turn from her purpose . 

 " I have grow up in an atmosphere of suppression , " she say , quietly ; " I have stifle and dwarf the natural feeling of my heart , until they have become unnatural in their intensity ; I have be allow neither friend nor lover . my mother die when I be very young . my father have always be to I what you see he to - day . I have have no one but my brother . all the love that my heart can hold have be center upon he . do you wonder , then , that when I hear that his young life have be end by the hand of treachery , that I wish to see vengeance do upon the traitor ? oh , my God , " she cry , suddenly clasp her hand , and look up at the cold winter sky , " lead I to the murderer of my brother , and let mine be the hand to avenge his untimely death . " 

 Robert Audley stand look at she with awe - stricken admiration . her beauty be elevate into sublimity by the intensity of her suppress passion . she be different to all other woman that he have ever see . his cousin be pretty , his uncle 's wife be lovely , but Clara Talboys be beautiful . Niobe 's face , sublimate by sorrow , could scarcely have be more purely classical than her . even her dress , puritan in its gray simplicity , become her beauty well than a more beautiful dress would have become a less beautiful woman . 

 " Miss Talboys , " say Robert , after a pause , " your brother shall not be unavenge . he shall not be forget . I do not think that any professional aid which you could procure would lead you as surely to the secret of this mystery as I can lead you , if you be patient and trust I . " 

 " I will trust you , " she answer , " for I see that you will help I . " 

 " I believe that it be my destiny to do so , " he say , solemnly . 

 in the whole course of his conversation with Harcourt Talboys , Robert Audley have carefully avoid make any deduction from the circumstance which he have submit to George 's father . he have simply tell the story of the missing man 's life , from the hour of his arrive in London to that of his disappearance ; but he see that Clara Talboys have arrive at the same conclusion as himself , and that it be tacitly understand between they . 

 " have you any letter of your brother 's , Miss Talboys ? " he ask . 

 " Two . one write soon after his marriage , the other write at Liverpool , the night before he sail for Australia . " 

 " will you let I see they ? " 

 " yes , I will send they to you if you will give I your address . you will write to I from time to time , will you not , to tell I whether you be approach the truth . I shall be oblige to act secretly here , but I be go to leave home in two or three month , and I shall be perfectly free then to act as I please . " 

 " you be not go to leave England ? " Robert ask . 

 " oh no ! I be only go to pay a long - promise visit to some friend in Essex . " 

 Robert start so violently as Clara Talboys say this , that she look suddenly at his face . the agitation visible there , betray a part of his secret . 

 " my brother George disappear in Essex , " she say . 

 he could not contradict she . 

 " I be sorry you have discover so much , " he reply . " my position become every day more complicated , every day more painful . good - bye . " 

 she give he her hand mechanically , when he hold out his ; but it be cold as marble , and lie listlessly in his own , and fall like a log at her side when he release it . 

 " pray lose no time in return to the house , " he say earnestly . " I fear you will suffer from this morning 's work . " 

 " suffer ! " she exclaim , scornfully . " you talk to I of suffering , when the only creature in this world who ever love I have be take from it in the bloom of youth . what can there be for I henceforth but suffer ? what be the cold to I ? " she say , fling back her shawl and bar her beautiful head to the bitter wind . " I would walk from here to London barefoot through the snow , and never stop by the way , if I could bring he back to life . what would I not do to bring he back ? what would I not do ? " 

 the word break from she in a wail of passionate sorrow ; and clasp her hand before her face , she weep for the first time that day . the violence of her sob shake her slender frame , and she be oblige to lean against the trunk of a tree for support . 

 Robert look at she with a tender compassion in his face ; she be so like the friend whom he have love and lose , that it be impossible for he to think of she as a stranger ; impossible to remember that they have meet that morning for the first time . 

 " pray , pray be calm , " he say : " hope even against hope . we may both be deceive ; your brother may still live . " 

 " oh ! if it be so , " she murmur , passionately ; " if it could be so . " 

 " let we try and hope that it may be so . " 

 " no , " she answer , look at he through her tear , " let we hope for nothing but revenge . good - by , Mr. Audley . stop ; your address . " 

 he give she a card , which she put into the pocket of her dress . 

 " I will send you George 's letter , " she say ; " they may help you . good - by . " 

 she leave he half bewilder by the passionate energy of her manner , and the noble beauty of her face . he watch she as she disappear among the straight trunk of the fir - tree , and then walk slowly out of the plantation . 

 " heaven help those who stand between I and the secret , " he think , " for they will be sacrifice to the memory of George Talboys . " 

 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 GEORGE 'S letter . 

 Robert Audley do not return to Southampton , but take a ticket for the first up town train that leave Wareham , and reach Waterloo Bridge an hour or two after dark . the snow , which have be hard and crisp in dorsetshire , be a black and greasy slush in the Waterloo Road , thaw by the flare lamp of the gin - palace and the glare gas in the butcher ' shop . 

 Robert Audley shrug his shoulder as he look at the dingy street through which the Hansom carry he , the cab - man choose with that delicious instinct which seem innate in the driver of hackney vehicle all those dark and hideous thoroughfare utterly unknown to the ordinary pedestrian . 

 " what a pleasant thing life be , " think the barrister . " what an unspeakable boon what an overpowering blessing ! let any man make a calculation of his existence , subtract the hour in which he have be thoroughly happy really and entirely at his ease , without one arriere pensťe to mar his enjoyment without the most infinitesimal cloud to overshadow the brightness of his horizon . let he do this , and surely he will laugh in utter bitterness of soul when he set down the sum of his felicity , and discover the pitiful smallness of the amount . he will have enjoy himself for a week or ten day in thirty year , perhaps . in thirty year of dull December , and bluster March , and showery April , and dark November weather , there may have be seven or eight glorious August day , through which the sun have blaze in cloudless radiance , and the summer breeze have breathe perpetual balm . how fondly we recollect these solitary day of pleasure , and hope for their recurrence , and try to plan the circumstance that make they bright ; and arrange , and predestinate , and diplomatize with fate for a renewal of the remembered joy . as if any joy could ever be build up out of such and such constituent part ! as if happiness be not essentially accidental a bright and wandering bird , utterly irregular in its migration ; with we one summer 's day , and forever go from we on the next ! look at marriage , for instance , " muse Robert , who be as meditative in the jolting vehicle , for whose occupation he be to pay sixpence a mile , as if he have be rid a mustang on the wild loneliness of the prairie . " look at marriage ! who be to say which shall be the one judicious selection out of nine hundred and ninety - nine mistake ! who shall decide from the first aspect of the slimy creature , which be to be the one eel out of the colossal bag of snake ? that girl on the curbstone yonder , wait to cross the street when my chariot shall have pass , may be the one woman out of every female creature in this vast universe who could make I a happy man . yet I pass she by bespatt she with the mud from my wheel , in my helpless ignorance , in my blind submission to the awful hand of fatality . if that girl , Clara Talboys , have be five minute later , I should have leave dorsetshire think she cold , hard , and unwomanly , and should have go to my grave with that mistake part and parcel of my mind . I take she for a stately and heartless automaton ; I know she now to be a noble and beautiful woman . what an incalculable difference this may make in my life . when I leave that house , I go out into the winter day with the determination of abandon all further thought of the secret of George 's death . I see she , and she force I onward upon the loathsome path the crooked by - way of watchfulness and suspicion . how can I say to this sister of my dead friend , ' I believe that your brother have be murder ! I believe that I know by whom , but I will take no step to set my doubt at rest , or to confirm my fear ' ? I can not say this . this woman know half my secret ; she will soon possess herself of the rest , and then and then " 

 the cab stop in the midst of Robert Audley 's meditation , and he have to pay the cabman , and submit to all the dreary mechanism of life , which be the same whether we be glad or sorry whether we be to be marry or hung , elevate to the woolsack , or disbar by our brother bencher on some mysterious technical tangle of wrong - doing , which be a social enigma to those outside the forum domesticum of the Middle Temple . 

 we be apt to be angry with this cruel hardness in our life this unflinche regularity in the small wheel and mean mechanism of the human machine , which know no stoppage or cessation , though the mainspring be forever hollow , and the hand point to purposeless figure on a shattered dial . 

 who have not feel , in the first madness of sorrow , an unreasone rage against the mute propriety of chair and table , the stiff squareness of Turkey carpet , the unbending obstinacy of the outward apparatus of existence ? we want to root up gigantic tree in a primeval forest , and to tear their huge branch asunder in our convulsive grasp ; and the utmost that we can do for the relief of our passion be to knock over an easy - chair , or smash a few shilling ' worth of Mr. Copeland 's manufacture . 

 madhouse be large and only too numerous ; yet surely it be strange they be not large , when we think of how many helpless wretch must beat their brain against this hopeless persistency of the orderly outward world , as compare with the storm and tempest , the riot and confusion within when we remember how many mind must tremble upon the narrow boundary between reason and unreason , mad to - day and sane to - morrow , mad yesterday and sane to - day . 

 Robert Audley have direct the cabman to drop he at the corner of Chancery Lane , and he ascend the brilliantly - light staircase lead to the dining - saloon of the London , and seat himself at one of the snug table with a confused sense of emptiness and weariness , rather than any agreeable sensation of healthy hunger . he have come to the luxurious eating - house to dine , because it be absolutely necessary to eat something somewhere , and a great deal easy to get a very good dinner from Mr. Sawyer than a very bad one from Mrs. Maloney , whose mind run in one narrow channel of chop and steak , only variable by small creek and outlet in the way of " broil sole " or " boil mack'-rill . " the solicitous waiter try in vain to rouse poor Robert to a proper sense of the solemnity of the dinner question . he mutter something to the effect that the man might bring he anything he like , and the friendly waiter , who know Robert as a frequent guest at the little table , go back to his master with a doleful face , to say that Mr. Audley , from Figtree Court , be evidently out of spirit . Robert eat his dinner , and drink a pint of Moselle ; but he have poor appreciation of the excellence of the viand or the delicate fragrance of the wine . the mental monologue still go on , and the young philosopher of the modern school be argue the favorite modern question of the nothingness of everything , and the folly of take too much trouble to walk upon a road that go nowhere , or to compass a work that mean nothing . 

 " I accept the dominion of that pale girl , with the statuesque feature and the calm brown eye , " he think . " I recognize the power of a mind superior to my own , and I yield to it , and bow down to it . I have   be act for myself , and think for myself , for the last few month , and I be tired of the unnatural business . I have   be false to the lead principle of my life , and I have   suffer for the folly . I find two gray hair in my head the week before last , and an impertinent crow have plant a delicate impression of his foot under my right eye . yes , I be get old upon the right side ; and why why should it be so ? " 

 he push away his plate and lift his eyebrow , star at the crumb upon the glistening damask , as he ponder the question . 

 " what the devil be I do in this galere ? " he ask . " but I be in it , and I can not   get out of it ; so I well submit myself to the brown - eyed girl , and do what she tell I patiently and faithfully . what a wonderful solution to life 's enigma there be in petticoat government ! man might lie in the sunshine , and eat lotus , and fancy it ' always afternoon , ' if his wife would let he ! but she will not , bless her impulsive heart and active mind ! she know well than that . who ever hear of a woman take life as it ought to be take ? instead of support it as an unavoidable nuisance , only redeemable by its brevity , she go through it as if it be a pageant or a procession . she dress for it , and simper and grin , and gesticulate for it . she push her neighbor , and struggle for a good place in the dismal march ; she elbow , and writhe , and trample , and prance to the one end of make the most of the misery . she get up early and sit up late , and be loud , and restless , and noisy , and unpitying . she drag her husband on to the woolsack , or push he into Parliament . she drive he full butt at the dear , lazy machinery of government , and knock and buffet he about the wheel , and crank , and screw , and pulley ; until somebody , for quiet 's sake , make he something that she want he to be make . that be why incompetent man sometimes sit in high place , and interpose their poor , muddle intellect between the thing to be do and the people that can do they , make universal confusion in the helpless innocence of well - place incapacity . the square man in the round hole be push into they by their wife . the Eastern potentate who declare that woman be at the bottom of all mischief , should have go a little far and see why it be so . it be because woman be never lazy . they do not   know what it be to be quiet . they be Semiramides , and cleopatra , and Joans of Arc , Queen Elizabeths , and catharine the Second , and they riot in battle , and murder , and clamor and desperation . if they can not   agitate the universe and play at ball with hemisphere , they will make mountain of warfare and vexation out of domestic molehill , and social storm in household teacup . forbid they to hold forth upon the freedom of nation and the wrong of mankind , and they will quarrel with Mrs. Jones about the shape of a mantle or the character of a small maid - servant . to call they the weak sex be to utter a hideous mockery . they be the strong sex , the noisier , the more persevering , the most self - assertive sex . they want freedom of opinion , variety of occupation , do they ? let they have it . let they be lawyer , doctor , preacher , teacher , soldier , legislator anything they like but let they be quiet if they can . " 

 Mr. Audley push his hand through the thick luxuriance of his straight brown hair , and uplift the dark mass in his despair . 

 " I hate woman , " he think , savagely . " they be bold , brazen , abominable creature , invent for the annoyance and destruction of their superior . look at this business of poor George 's ! it be all woman 's work from one end to the other . he marry a woman , and his father cast he off penniless and professionless . he hear of the woman 's death and he break his heart his good honest , manly heart , worth a million of the treacherous lump of self - interest and mercenary calculation which beat in woman 's breast . he go to a woman 's house and he be never see alive again . and now I find myself drive into a corner by another woman , of whose existence I have never think until this day . and and then , " muse Mr. Audley , rather irrelevantly , " there be Alicia , too ; she be another nuisance . she would like I to marry she I know ; and she will make I do it , I dare say , before she be do with I . but I would much rather not ; though she be a dear , bounce , generous thing , bless her poor little heart . " 

 Robert pay his bill and reward the waiter liberally . the young barrister be very willing to distribute his comfortable little income among the people who serve he , for he carry his indifference to all thing in the universe , even to the matter of pound , shilling and penny . perhaps he be rather exceptional in this , as you may frequently find that the philosopher who call life an empty delusion be pretty sharp in the investment of his money , and recognize the tangible nature of India bond , spanish certificate , and egyptian scrip as contrast with the painful uncertainty of an Ego or a non - ego in metaphysics . 

 the snug room in Figtree Court seem dreary in their orderly quiet to Robert Audley upon this particular evening . he have no inclination for his french novel , though there be a packet of uncut romance , comic and sentimental , order a month before , wait his pleasure upon one of the table . he take his favorite meerschaum and drop into his favorite chair with a sigh . 

 " it be comfortable , but it seem so deuced lonely to - night . if poor George be sit opposite to I , or or even George 's sister she be very like he existence might be a little more endurable . but when a fellow 's live by himself for eight or ten year he begin to be bad company . " 

 he burst out laugh presently as he finish his first pipe . 

 " the idea of my thinking of George 's sister , " he think ; " what a preposterous idiot I be ! " 

 the next day 's post bring he a letter in a firm but feminine hand , which be strange to he . he find the little packet lie on his breakfast - table , beside the warm french roll wrap in a napkin by Mrs. Maloney 's careful but rather dirty hand . he contemplate the envelope for some minute before open it not in any wonder as to his correspondent , for the letter bear the postmark of Grange Heath , and he know that there be only one person who be likely to write to he from that obscure village , but in that lazy dreaminess which be a part of his character . 

 " from Clara Talboys , " he murmur slowly , as he look critically at the clearly - shape letter of his name and address . " yes , from Clara Talboys , most decidedly ; I recognize a feminine resemblance to poor George 's hand ; neater than his , and more decide than his , but very like , very like . " 

 he turn the letter over and examine the seal , which bear his friend 's familiar crest . 

 " I wonder what she say to I ? " he think . " it be a long letter , I dare say ; she be the kind of woman who would write a long letter a letter that will urge I on , drive I forward , wrench I out of myself , I have   no doubt . but that can not   be help so here go ! " 

 he tear open the envelope with a sigh of resignation . it contain nothing but George 's two letter , and a few word write on the flap : " I send the letter ; please preserve and return they C.T. " 

 the letter , write from Liverpool , tell nothing of the writer 's life except his sudden determination of start for a new world , to redeem the fortune that have be ruin in the old . the letter write almost immediately after George 's marriage , contain a full description of his wife such a description as a man could only write within three week of a love match a description in which every feature be minutely catalogue , every grace of form or beauty of expression fondly dwelt upon , every charm of manner lovingly depict . 

 Robert Audley read the letter three time before he lay it down . 

 " if George could have know for what a purpose this description would serve when he write it , " think the young barrister , ' surely his hand would have fall paralyze by horror , and powerless to shape one syllable of these tender word . " 

 CHAPTER XXV . 

 RETROGRADE INVESTIGATION . 

 the dreary London January drag its dull length slowly out . the last slender record of Christmas time be sweep away , and Robert Audley still linger in town still spend his lonely evening in his quiet sitting - room in Figtree Court still wander listlessly in the Temple Gardens on sunny morning , absently listen to the child 's babble , idly watch their play . he have many friend among the inhabitant of the quaint old building round he ; he have other friend far away in pleasant country place , whose spare bedroom be always at Bob 's service , whose cheerful fireside have snugly luxurious chair specially allotted to he . but he seem to have lose all taste for companionship , all sympathy with the pleasure and occupation of his class , since the disappearance of George Talboys . elderly bencher indulge in facetious observation upon the young man 's pale face and moody manner . they suggest the probability of some unhappy attachment , some feminine ill - usage as the secret cause of the change . they tell he to be of good cheer , and invite he to supper - party , at which " lovely woman , with all her fault , God bless she , " be drunk by gentleman who shed tear as they propose the toast , and be maudlin and unhappy in their cup toward the close of the entertainment . Robert have no inclination for the wine - bibbing and the punch - making . the one idea of his life have become his master . he be the bonden slave of one gloomy think one horrible presentiment . a dark cloud be brood above his uncle 's house , and it be his hand which be to give the signal for the thunder - clap , and the tempest that be to ruin that noble life . 

 " if she would only take warning and run away , " he say to himself sometimes . " Heaven know , I have give she a fair chance . why do not   she take it and run away ? " 

 he hear sometimes from Sir Michael , sometimes from Alicia . the young lady 's letter rarely contain more than a few curt line inform he that her papa be well ; and that Lady Audley be in very high spirit , amuse herself in her usual frivolous manner , and with her usual disregard for other people . 

 a letter from Mr. Marchmont , the Southampton schoolmaster , inform Robert that little Georgey be go on very well , but that he be behindhand in his education , and have not yet pass the intellectual Rubicon of word of two syllable . Captain Maldon have call to see his grandson , but that privilege have be withhold from he , in accordance with Mr. Audley 's instruction . the old man have furthermore send a parcel of pastry and sweetmeat to the little boy , which have also be reject on the ground of indigestible and bilious tendency in the edible . 

 toward the close of February , Robert receive a letter from his cousin Alicia , which hurry he one step far forward toward his destiny , by cause he to return to the house from which he have become in a manner exile at the instigation of his uncle 's wife . 

 " Papa be very ill , " Alicia write ; " not dangerously ill , thank God ; but confine to his room by an attack of low fever which have succeed a violent cold . come and see he , Robert , if you have any regard for your near relation . he have speak about you several time ; and I know he will be glad to have you with he . come at once , but say nothing about this letter . 

 " from your affectionate cousin , ALICIA . " 

 a sick and deadly terror chill Robert Audley 's heart , as he read this letter a vague yet hideous fear , which he dare not shape into any definite form . 

 " have I do right ? " he think , in the first agony of this new horror " have I do right to tamper with justice ; and to keep the secret of my doubt in the hope that I be shield those I love from sorrow and disgrace ? what shall I do if I find he ill , very ill , die perhaps , die upon her breast ! what shall I do ? " 

 one course lie clear before he ; and the first step of that course be a rapid journey to Audley Court . he pack his portmanteau , jump into a cab , and reach the railway station within an hour of his receipt of Alicia 's letter , which have come by the afternoon post . 

 the dim village light flicker faintly through the grow dusk when Robert reach Audley . he leave his portmanteau with the station - master , and walk at a leisurely pace through the quiet lane that lead away to the still loneliness of the Court . the over - arching tree stretch their leafless branch above his head , bare and weird in the dusky light . a low moan wind sweep across the flat meadow land , and toss those rugged branch hither and thither against the dark gray sky . they look like the ghostly arm of shrunken and withered giant , beckon Robert to his uncle 's house . they look like threaten phantom in the chill winter twilight , gesticulate to he to hasten upon his journey . the long avenue so bright and pleasant when the perfume lime scatter their light bloom upon the pathway , and the dog - rose leaf float on the summer air , be terribly bleak and desolate in the cheerless interregnum that divide the homely joy of Christmas from the pale blush of come spring a dead pause in the year , in which nature seem to lie in a trance sleep , await the wondrous signal for the budding of the flower . 

 a mournful presentiment creep into Robert Audley 's heart as he draw near to his uncle 's house . every change outline in the landscape be familiar to he ; every bend of the tree ; every caprice of the untrammeled branch ; every undulation in the bare hawthorn hedge , break by dwarf horse - chestnut , stunt willow , blackberry and hazel bush . 

 Sir Michael have be a second father to the young man , a generous and noble friend , a grave and earnest adviser ; and perhaps the strong sentiment of Robert 's heart be his love for the gray - bearded baronet . but the grateful affection be so much a part of himself , that it seldom find an outlet in word , and a stranger would never have fathom the depth of feeling which lay , a deep and powerful current , beneath the stagnant surface of the barrister 's character . 

 " what would become of this place if my uncle be to die ? " he think , and he draw near to the ivied archway , and the still water - pool , coldly gray in the twilight . " would other people live in the old house , and sit under the low oak ceiling in the homely familiar room ? " 

 that wonderful faculty of association , so interweave with the inmost fiber of even the hard nature , fill the young man 's breast with a prophetic pain as he remember that , however long or late , the day must come on which the oaken shutter would be close for awhile , and the sunshine shut out of the house he love . it be painful to he even to remember this ; as it must always be painful to think of the narrow lease the great upon this earth can ever hold of its grandeur . be it so wonderful that some wayfarer drop asleep under the hedge , scarcely care to toil onward on a journey that lead to no abide habitation ? be it wonderful that there have be quietist in the world ever since Christ 's religion be first preach upon earth . be it strange that there be a patient endurance and tranquil resignation , calm expectation of that which be to come on the further shore of the dark flow river ? be it not rather to be wonder that anybody should ever care to be great for greatness ' sake ; for any other reason than pure conscientiousness ; the simple fidelity of the servant who fear to lay his talent by in a napkin , know that indifference be near akin to dishonesty ? if Robert Audley have live in the time of Thomas a Kempis , he would very likely have build himself a narrow hermitage amid some forest loneliness , and spend his life in tranquil imitation of the reputed author of the Imitation . as it be , Figtree Court be a pleasant hermitage in its way , and for breviary and book of Hours , I be ashamed to say the young barrister substitute Paul de Kock and Dumas , fil . but his sin be of so simply negative an order , that it would have be very easy for he to have abandon they for negative virtue . 

 only one solitary light be visible in the long irregular range of window face the archway , as Robert pass under the gloomy shade of the rustle ivy , restless in the chill moaning of the wind . he recognize that light window as the large oriel in his uncle 's room . when last he have look at the old house it have be gay with visitor , every window glitter like a low star in the dusk ; now , dark and silent , it face the winter 's night like some dismal baronial habitation , deep in a woodland solitude . 

 the man who open the door to the unlooke - for visitor , brighten as he recognize his master 's nephew . 

 " Sir Michael will be cheer up a bit , sir , by the sight of you , " he say , as he usher Robert Audley into the fire - light library , which seem desolate by reason of the baronet 's easy - chair standing empty on the broad hearth - rug . " shall I bring you some dinner here , sir , before you go up - stair ? " the servant ask . " my lady and Miss Audley have din early during my master 's illness , but I can bring you anything you would please to take , sir . " 

 " I will take nothing until I have see my uncle , " Robert answer , hurriedly ; " that be to say , if I can see he at once . he be not too ill to receive I , I suppose ? " he add , anxiously . 

 " oh , no , sir not too ill ; only a little low , sir . this way , if you please . " 

 he conduct Robert up the short flight of shallow oaken stair to the octagon chamber in which George Talboys have sit long five month before , star absently at my lady 's portrait . the picture be finish now , and hang in the post of honor opposite the window , amidst Claudes , Poussins and Wouvermans , whose less brilliant hue be kill by the vivid coloring of the modern artist . the bright face look out of that tangled glitter of golden hair , in which the Pre - Raphaelites delight , with a mocking smile , as Robert pause for a moment to glance at the well - remember picture . two or three moment afterward he have pass through my lady 's boudoir and dressing - room and stand upon the threshold of Sir Michael 's room . the baronet lie in a quiet sleep , his arm lay outside the bed , and his strong hand clasp in his young wife 's delicate finger . Alicia sit in a low chair beside the broad open hearth , on which the huge log burn fiercely in the frosty atmosphere . the interior of this luxurious bedchamber might have make a striking picture for an artist 's pencil . the massive furniture , dark and somber , yet break up and relieve here and there by scrap of gilding , and mass of glow color ; the elegance of every detail , in which wealth be subservient to purity of taste ; and last , but great in importance , the graceful figure of the two woman , and the noble form of the old man would have form a worthy study for any painter . 

 Lucy Audley , with her disorder hair in a pale haze of yellow gold about her thoughtful face , the flow line of her soft muslin dressing - gown fall in straight fold to her foot , and clasp at the waist by a narrow circlet of agate link might have serve as a model for a mediaeval saint , in one of the tiny chapel hide away in the nook and corner of a gray old cathedral , unchanged by Reformation or Cromwell ; and what saintly martyr of the Middle Ages could have bear a holy aspect than the man whose gray beard lie upon the dark silken coverlet of the stately bed ? 

 Robert pause upon the threshold , fearful of awake his uncle . the two lady have hear his step , cautious though he have be , and lift their head to look at he . my lady 's face , quietly watch the sick man , have wear an anxious earnestness which make it only more beautiful ; but the same face recognize Robert Audley , fade from its delicate brightness , and look scared and wan in the lamplight . 

 " Mr. Audley ! " she cry , in a faint , tremulous voice . 

 " hush ! " whisper Alicia , with a warning gesture ; " you will wake papa . how good of you to come , Robert , " she add , in the same whisper tone , beckon to her cousin to take an empty chair near the bed . 

 the young man seat himself in the indicate seat at the bottom of the bed , and opposite to my lady , who sit close beside the pillow . he look long and earnestly at the face of the sleeper ; still long , still more earnestly at the face of Lady Audley , which be slowly recover its natural hue . 

 " he have not be very ill , have he ? " Robert ask , in the same key as that in which Alicia have speak . 

 my lady answer the question . 

 " oh , no , not dangerously ill , " she say , without take her eye from her husband 's face ; " but still we have be anxious , very , very anxious . " 

 Robert never relax his scrutiny of that pale face . 

 " she shall look at I , " he think ; " I will make she meet my eye , and I will read she as I have read she before . she shall know how useless her artifice be with I . " 

 he pause for a few minute before he speak again . the regular breathing of the sleeper the ticking of a gold hunting - watch at the head of the bed , and the crackling of the burn log , be the only sound that break the stillness . 

 " I have no doubt you have be anxious , Lady Audley , " Robert say , after a pause , fix my lady 's eye as they wander furtively to his face . " there be no one to whom my uncle 's life can be of more value than to you . your happiness , your prosperity , your safety depend alike upon his existence . " 

 the whisper in which he utter these word be too low to reach the other side of the room , where Alicia sit . 

 Lucy Audley 's eye meet those of the speaker with some gleam of triumph in their light . 

 " I know that , " she say . " those who strike I must strike through he . " 

 she point to the sleeper as she speak , still look at Robert Audley . she defy he with her blue eye , their brightness intensify by the triumph in their glance . she defy he with her quiet smile a smile of fatal beauty , full of lurk significance and mysterious meaning the smile which the artist have exaggerate in his portrait of Sir Michael 's wife . 

 Robert turn away from the lovely face , and shade his eye with his hand ; put a barrier between my lady and himself ; a screen which baffle her penetration and provoke her curiosity . be he still watch she or be he think ? and of what be he think ? 

 Robert have be seat at the bedside for upward of an hour before his uncle awake . the baronet be delighted at his nephew 's come . 

 " it be very good of you to come to I , Bob , " he say . " I have be think of you a good deal since I have be ill . you and Lucy must be good friend , you know , Bob ; and you must learn to think of she as your aunt , sir ; though she be young and beautiful ; and and you understand , eh ? " 

 Robert grasp his uncle 's hand , but he look down as he answer : " I do understand you , sir , " he say , quietly ; " and I give you my word of honor that I be steel against my lady 's fascination . she know that as well as I do . " 

 Lucy Audley make a little grimace with her pretty little lip . " Bah , you silly Robert , " she exclaim ; " you take everything au serieux . if I think you be rather too young for a nephew , it be only in my fear of other people 's foolish gossip ; not from any " 

 she hesitate for a moment , and escape any conclusion to her sentence by the timely intervention of Mr. Dawson , her late employer , who enter the room upon his evening visit while she be speak . 

 he feel the patient 's pulse ; ask two or three question ; pronounce the baronet to be steadily improve ; exchange a few commonplace remark with Alicia and Lady Audley , and prepare to leave the room . Robert rise and accompany he to the door . 

 " I will light you to the staircase , " he say , take a candle from one of the table , and light it at the lamp . 

 " no , no , Mr. Audley , pray do not trouble yourself , " expostulate the surgeon ; " I know my way very well indeed . " 

 Robert insist , and the two man leave the room together . as they enter the octagon ante - chamber the barrister pause and shut the door behind he . 

 " will you see that the door be close , Mr. Dawson ? " he say , point to that which open upon the staircase . " I wish to have a few moment ' private conversation with you . " 

 " with much pleasure , " reply the surgeon , comply with Robert 's request ; " but if you be at all alarmed about your uncle , Mr. Audley , I can set your mind at rest . there be no occasion for the least uneasiness . have his illness be at all serious I should have telegraph immediately for the family physician . " 

 " I be sure that you would have do your duty , sir , " answer Robert , gravely . " but I be not go to speak of my uncle . I wish to ask you two or three question about another person . " 

 " indeed . " 

 " the person who once live in your family as Miss Lucy Graham ; the person who be now Lady Audley . " 

 Mr. Dawson look up with an expression of surprise upon his quiet face . 

 " pardon I , Mr. Audley , " he answer ; " you can scarcely expect I to answer any question about your uncle 's wife without Sir Michael 's express permission . I can understand no motive which can prompt you to ask such question no worthy motive , at least . " he look severely at the young man , as much as to say : " you have be fall in love with your uncle 's pretty wife , sir , and you want to make I a go - between in some treacherous flirtation ; but it will not   do , sir , it will not   do . " 

 " I always respect the lady as Miss Graham , sir , " he say , " and I esteem she doubly as Lady Audley not on account of her altered position , but because she be the wife of one of the noble man in Christendom . " 

 " you can not respect my uncle or my uncle 's honor more sincerely than I do , " answer Robert . " I have no unworthy motive for the question I be about to ask ; and you must answer they . " 

 " Must ! " echo Mr. Dawson , indignantly . 

 " yes , you be my uncle 's friend . it be at your house he meet the woman who be now his wife . she call herself an orphan , I believe , and enlist his pity as well as his admiration in her behalf . she tell he that she stand alone in the world , do she not ? without a friend or relative . this be all I could ever learn of her antecedent . " 

 " what reason have you to wish to know more ? " ask the surgeon . 

 " a very terrible reason , " answer Robert Audley . " for some month past I have struggle with doubt and suspicion which have embitter my life . they have grow strong every day ; and they will not be set at rest by the commonplace sophistry and the shallow argument with which man try to deceive themselves rather than believe that which of all thing upon earth they most fear to believe . I do not think that the woman who bear my uncle 's name , be worthy to be his wife . I may wrong she . Heaven grant that it be so . but if I do , the fatal chain of circumstantial evidence never yet link itself so closely about an innocent person . I wish to set my doubt at rest or or to confirm my fear . there be but one manner in which I can do this . I must trace the life of my uncle 's wife backward , minutely and carefully , from this night to a period of six year ago . this be the twenty - fourth of February , fifty - nine . I want to know every record of her life between to - night and the February of the year fifty - three . " 

 " and your motive be a worthy one ? " 

 " yes , I wish to clear she from a very dreadful suspicion . " 

 " which exist only in your mind ? " 

 " and in the mind of one other person . " 

 " may I ask who that person be ? " 

 " no , Mr. Dawson , " answer Robert , decisively ; " I can not reveal anything more than what I have already tell you . I be a very irresolute , vacillate man in most thing . in this matter I be compel to be decide . I repeat once more that I must know the history of Lucy Graham 's life . if you refuse to help I to the small extent in your power , I will find other who will help I . painful as it would become , I will ask my uncle for the information which you would withhold , rather than be baffle in the first step of my investigation . " 

 Mr. Dawson be silent for some minute . 

 " I can not express how much you have astonish and alarm I , Mr. Audley . " he say . " I can tell you so little about Lady Audley 's antecedent , that it would be mere obstinacy to withhold the small amount of information I possess . I have always consider your uncle 's wife one of the most amiable of woman . I can not bring myself to think she otherwise . it would be an uprooting of one of the strong conviction of my life be I compel to think she otherwise . you wish to follow her life backward from the present hour to the year fifty - three ? " 

 " I do . " 

 " she be married to your uncle last June twelvemonth , in the midsummer of fifty - seven . she have live in my house a little more than thirteen month . she become a member of my household upon the fourteenth of May , in the year fifty - six . " 

 " and she come to you " 

 " from a school at Brompton , a school keep by a lady of the name of Vincent . it be Mrs. Vincent 's strong recommendation that induce I to receive Miss Graham into my family without any more special knowledge of her antecedent . " 

 " do you see this Mrs. Vincent ? " 

 " I do not . I advertise for a governess , and Miss Graham answer my advertisement . in her letter she refer I to Mrs. Vincent , the proprietress of a school in which she be then reside as junior teacher . my time be always so fully occupy , that I be glad to escape the necessity of a day 's loss in go from Audley to London to inquire about the young lady 's qualification . I look for Mrs. Vincent 's name in the directory , find it , and conclude that she be a responsible person , and write to she . her reply be perfectly satisfactory ; Miss Lucy Graham be assiduous and conscientious ; as well as fully qualified for the situation I offer . I accept this reference , and I have no cause to regret what may have be an indiscretion . and now , Mr. Audley , I have tell you all that I have the power to tell . " 

 " will you be so kind as to give I the address of this Mrs. Vincent ? " ask Robert , take out his pocketbook . 

 " certainly ; she be then live at No . 9 Crescent Villas , Brompton . " 

 " ah , to be sure , " mutter Mr. Audley , a recollection of last September flash suddenly back upon he as the surgeon speak . 

 " Crescent Villas yes , I have hear the address before from Lady Audley herself . this Mrs. Vincent telegraph to my uncle 's wife early in last September . she be ill dying , I believe and send for my lady ; but have remove from her old house and be not to be find . " 

 " indeed ! I never hear Lady Audley mention the circumstance . " 

 " perhaps not . it occur while I be down here . thank you , Mr. Dawson , for the information you have so kindly and honestly give I . it take I back two and a - half year in the history of my lady 's life ; but I have still a blank of three year to fill up before I can exonerate she from my terrible suspicion . good evening . " 

 Robert shake hand with the surgeon and return to his uncle 's room . he have be away about a quarter of an hour . Sir Michael have fall asleep once more , and my lady 's love hand have lower the heavy curtain and shade the lamp by the bedside . Alicia and her father 's wife be take tea in Lady Audley 's boudoir , the room next to the antechamber in which Robert and Mr. Dawson have be seat . 

 Lucy Audley look up from her occupation among the fragile china cup and watch Robert rather anxiously as he walk softly to his uncle 's room and back again to the boudoir . she look very pretty and innocent , seat behind the graceful group of delicate opal china and glitter silver . surely a pretty woman never look pretty than when make tea . the most feminine and most domestic of all occupation impart a magic harmony to she every movement , a witchery to she every glance . the float mist from the boiling liquid in which she infuse the soothe herb ; whose secret be know to she alone , envelope she in a cloud of scented vapor , through which she seem a social fairy , weave potent spell with Gunpowder and Bohea . at the tea - table she reign omnipotent , unapproachable . what do man know of the mysterious beverage ? read how poor Hazlitt make his tea , and shudder at the dreadful barbarism . how clumsily the wretched creature attempt to assist the witch president of the tea - tray ; how hopelessly they hold the kettle , how continually they imperil the frail cup and saucer , or the taper hand of the priestess . to do away with the tea - table be to rob woman of her legitimate empire . to send a couple of hulk man about among your visitor , distribute a mixture make in the housekeeper 's room , be to reduce the most social and friendly of ceremony to a formal giving out of ration . well the pretty influence of the tea cup and saucer gracefully wield in a woman 's hand than all the inappropriate power snatch at the point of the pen from the unwilling sterner sex . imagine all the woman of England elevate to the high level of masculine intellectuality , superior to crinoline ; above pearl powder and Mrs. Rachael Levison ; above take the pain to be pretty ; above tea - table and that cruelly scandalous and rather satirical gossip which even strong man delight in ; and what a drear , utilitarian , ugly life the sterner sex must lead . 

 my lady be by no mean strong - minded . the starry diamond upon her white finger flash hither and thither among the tea - thing , and she bend her pretty head over the marvelous indian tea - caddy of sandal - wood and silver , with as much earnestness as if life hold no high purpose than the infusion of Bohea . 

 " you will take a cup of tea with we , Mr. Audley ? " she ask , pause with the teapot in her hand to look up at Robert , who be stand near the door . 

 " if you please . " 

 " but you have not din , perhaps ? shall I ring and tell they to bring you something a little more substantial than biscuit and transparent bread and butter ? " 

 " no , thank you , Lady Audley . I take some lunch before I leave town . I will trouble you for nothing but a cup of tea . " 

 he seat himself at the little table and look across it at his Cousin Alicia , who sit with a book in her lap , and have the air of be very much absorb by its page . the bright brunette complexion have lose its glowing crimson , and the animation of the young lady 's manner be suppress on account of her father 's illness , no doubt , Robert think . 

 " Alicia , my dear , " the barrister say , after a very leisurely contemplation of his cousin , " you be not look well . " 

 Miss Audley shrug her shoulder , but do not condescend to lift her eye from her book . 

 " perhaps not , " she answer , contemptuously . " what do it matter ? I be grow a philosopher of your school , Robert Audley . what do it matter ? who care whether I be well or ill ? " 

 " what a spitfire she be , " think the barrister . he always know his cousin be angry with he when she address he as " Robert Audley . " 

 " you need not   pitch into a fellow because he ask you a civil question , Alicia , " he say , reproachfully . " as to nobody care about your health , that be nonsense . I care . " Miss Audley look up with a bright smile . " Sir Harry Towers care . " Miss Audley return to her book with a frown . 

 " what be you read there , Alicia ? " Robert ask , after a pause , during which he have sit thoughtfully stir his tea . 

 " Changes and Chances . " 

 " a novel ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " who be it by ? " 

 " the author of Follies and fault , " answer Alicia , still pursue her study of the romance upon her lap . 

 " be it interesting ? " 

 Miss Audley purse up her mouth and shrug her shoulder . 

 " not particularly , " she say . 

 " then I think you might have well manner than to read it while your first cousin be sit opposite you , " observe Mr. Audley , with some gravity , " especially as he have only come to pay you a fly visit , and will be off to - morrow morning . " 

 " to - morrow morning ! " exclaim my lady , look up suddenly . 

 though the look of joy upon Lady Audley 's face be as brief as a flash of lightning on a summer sky , it be not unperceive by Robert . 

 " yes , " he say ; " I shall be oblige to run up to London to - morrow on business , but I shall return the next day , if you will allow I , Lady Audley , and stay here till my uncle recover . " 

 " but you be not seriously alarmed about he , be you ? " ask my lady , anxiously . 

 " you do not think he very ill ? " 

 " no , " answer Robert . " thank Heaven , I think there be not the slight cause for apprehension . " 

 my lady sit silent for a few moment , look at the empty teacup with a prettily thoughtful face a face grave with the innocent seriousness of a musing child . 

 " but you be closet such a long time with Mr. Dawson , just now , " she say , after this brief pause . " I be quite alarmed at the length of your conversation . be you talk of Sir Michael all the time ? " 

 " no ; not all the time ? " 

 my lady look down at the teacup once more . 

 " why , what could you find to say to Mr. Dawson , or he to say to you ? " she ask , after another pause . " you be almost stranger to each other . " 

 " suppose Mr. Dawson wish to consult I about some law business . " 

 " be it that ? " cry Lady Audley , eagerly . 

 " it would be rather unprofessional to tell you if it be so , my lady , " answer Robert , gravely . 

 my lady bite her lip , and relapse into silence . Alicia throw down her book , and watch her cousin 's preoccupied face . he talk to she now and then for a few minute , but it be evidently an effort to he to arouse himself from his revery . 

 " upon my word , Robert Audley , you be a very agreeable companion , " exclaim Alicia at length , her rather limited stock of patience quite exhausted by two or three of these abortive attempt at conversation . " perhaps the next time you come to the Court you will be good enough to bring your mind with you . by your present inanimate appearance , I should imagine that you have leave your intellect , such as it be , somewhere in the Temple . you be never one of the lively of people , but latterly you have really grow almost unendurable . I suppose you be in love , Mr. Audley , and be think of the honor object of your affection . " 

 he be think of Clara Talboys ' uplifted face , sublime in its unutterable grief ; of her impassioned word still ring in his ear as clearly as when they be first speak . again he see she look at he with her bright brown eye . again he hear that solemn question : " shall you or I find my brother 's murderer ? " and he be in Essex ; in the little village from which he firmly believe George Talboys have never depart . he be on the spot at which all record of his friend 's life end as suddenly as a story end when the reader shut the book . and could he withdraw now from the investigation in which he find himself involve ? could he stop now ? for any consideration ? no ; a thousand time no ! not with the image of that grief - stricken face imprint on his mind . not with the accent of that earnest appeal ring on his ear . 

 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 so far and no FARTHER . 

 Robert leave Audley the next morning by an early train , and reach Shoreditch a little after nine o'clock . he do not return to his chamber , but call a cab and drive straight to Crescent Villas , West Brompton . he know that he should fail in find the lady he go to seek at this address , as his uncle have fail a few month before , but he think it possible to obtain some clew to the schoolmistress ' new residence , in spite of Sir Michael 's ill - success . 

 " Mrs. Vincent be in a die state , accord to the telegraphic message , " Robert think . " if I do find she , I shall at least succeed in discover whether that message be genuine . " 

 he find Crescent Villas after some difficulty . the house be large , but they lie half imbed among the chaos of brick and rise mortar around they . new terrace , new street , new square lead away into hopeless mass of stone and plaster on every side . the road be sticky with damp clay , which clog the wheel of the cab and bury the fetlock of the horse . the desolation that awful aspect of incompleteness and discomfort which pervade a new and unfinished neighborhood have set its dismal seal upon the surround street which have arise about and intrench Crescent Villas ; and Robert waste forty minute by his watch , and an hour and a quarter by the cabman 's reckoning , in drive up and down uninhabited street and terrace , try to find the Villas ; whose chimney - top be frown down upon he black and venerable , amid grove of virgin plaster , undimmed by time or smoke . 

 but have at last succeed in reach his destination , Mr. Audley alight from the cab , direct the driver to wait for he at a certain corner , and set out upon his voyage of discovery . 

 " if I be a distinguished Q.C. , I could not do this sort of thing , " he think ; " my time would be worth a guinea or so a minute , and I should be retain in the great case of Hoggs vs. Boggs , go forward this very day before a special jury at Westminster Hall . as it be , I can afford to be patient . " 

 he inquire for Mrs. Vincent at the number which Mr. Dawson have give he . the maid who open the door have never hear that lady 's name ; but after go to inquire of her mistress , she return to tell Robert that Mrs. Vincent have live there , but that she have leave two month before the present occupant have enter the house , " and missus have be here fifteen month , " the girl add emphatically . 

 " but you can not tell where she go on leave here ? " Robert ask , despondingly . 

 " no , sir ; missus say she believe the lady fail , and that she leave sudden like , and do not   want her address to be know in the neighborhood . " 

 Mr. Audley feel himself at a standstill once more . if Mrs. Vincent have leave the place in debt , she have no doubt scrupulously conceal her whereabouts . there be little hope , then , of learn her address from the tradespeople ; and yet , on the other hand , it be just possible that some of her sharp creditor might have make it their business to discover the defaulter 's retreat . 

 he look about he for the near shop , and find a baker 's , a stationer 's , and a fruiterer 's a few pace from the Crescent . three empty - look , pretentious shop , with plate - glass window , and a hopeless air of gentility . 

 he stop at the baker 's , who call himself a pastrycook and confectioner , and exhibit some specimen of petrified sponge - cake in glass bottle , and some highly - glaze tart , cover with green gauze . 

 " she must have buy bread , " Robert think , as he deliberate before the baker 's shop ; " and she be likely to have buy it at the handy place . I will try the baker . " 

 the baker be stand behind his counter , dispute the item of a bill with a shabby - genteel young woman . he do not trouble himself to attend to Robert Audley until he have settle the dispute , but he look up as he be receipt the bill , and ask the barrister what he please to want . 

 " can you tell I the address of a Mrs. Vincent , who live at No . 9 Crescent Villas a year and a half ago ? " Mr. Audley inquire , mildly . 

 " no , I can not , " answer the baker , grow very red in the face , and speak in an unnecessarily loud voice ; " and what be more , I wish I could . that lady owe I upward of eleven pound for bread , and it be rather more than I can afford to lose . if anybody can tell I where she live , I shall be much oblige to them for so do . " 

 Robert Audley shrug his shoulder and wish the man good - morning . he feel that his discovery of the lady 's whereabouts would involve more trouble than he have expect . he might have look for Mrs. Vincent 's name in the Post - Office directory , but he think it scarcely likely that a lady who be on such uncomfortable term with her creditor , would afford they so easy a means of ascertain her residence . 

 " if the baker can not   find she , how should I find she ? " he think , despairingly . " if a resolute , sanguine , active and energetic creature , such as the baker , fail to achieve this business , how can a lymphatic wretch like I hope to accomplish it ? where the baker have be defeat , what preposterous folly it would be for I to try to succeed . " 

 Mr. Audley abandon himself to these gloomy reflection as he walk slowly back toward the corner at which he have leave the cab . about half - way between the baker 's shop and this corner he be arrest by hear a woman 's step close at his side , and a woman 's voice ask he to stop . he turn and find himself face to face with the shabbily - dress woman whom he have leave settle her account with the baker . 

 " eh , what ? " he ask , vaguely . " can I do anything for you , ma'am ? do Mrs. Vincent owe you money , too ? " 

 " yes , sir , " the woman answer , with a semi - genteel manner which correspond with the shabby gentility of her dress . " Mrs. Vincent be in my debt ; but it be not   that , sir . I I want to know , please , what your business may be with she because because " 

 " you can give I her address if you choose , ma'am . that be what you mean to say , be not   it ? " 

 the woman hesitate a little , look rather suspiciously at Robert . 

 " you be not connect with with the tally business , be you , sir ? " she ask , after consider Mr. Audley 's personal appearance for a few moment . 

 " the what , ma'am ? " ask the young barrister , star aghast at his questioner . 

 " I be sure I beg your pardon , sir , " exclaim the little woman , see that she have make some awful mistake . " I think you might have be , you know . some of the gentleman who collect for the tally shop do dress so very handsome ; and I know Mrs. Vincent owe a good deal of money . " 

 Robert Audley lay his hand upon the speaker 's arm . 

 " my dear madam , " he say , " I want to know nothing of Mrs. Vincent 's affair . so far from be concern in what you call the tally business , I have not the remotest idea what you mean by that expression . you may mean a political conspiracy ; you may mean some new specie of taxis . Mrs. Vincent do not owe I any money , however badly she may stand with that awful - look baker . I never see she in my life ; but I wish to see she to - day for the simple purpose of ask she a few very plain question about a young lady who once reside in her house . if you know where Mrs. Vincent live and will give I her address , you will be do I a great favor . " 

 he take out his card - case and hand a card to the woman , who examine the slip of pasteboard anxiously before she speak again . 

 " I be sure you look and speak like a gentleman , sir , " she say , after a brief pause , " and I hope you will excuse I if I have   seem mistrustful like ; but poor Mrs. Vincent have have dreadful difficulty , and I be the only person hereabout that she be trust with her address . I be a dressmaker , sir , and I have   work for she for upward of six year , and though she do not   pay I regular , you know , sir , she give I a little money on account now and then , and I get on as well as I can . I may tell you where she live , then , sir ? you have not   deceive I , have you ? " 

 " on my honor , no . " 

 " well , then sir , " say the dressmaker , drop her voice as if she think the pavement beneath her foot , or the iron railing before the house by her side , might have ear to hear she , " it be Acacia Cottage , Peckham Grove . I take a dress there yesterday for Mrs. Vincent . " 

 " thank you , " say Robert , write the address in his pocketbook . " I be very much oblige to you , and you may rely upon it , Mrs. Vincent shall not suffer any inconvenience through I . " 

 he lift his hat , bow to the little dressmaker , and turn back to the cab . 

 " I have beat the baker , at any rate , " he think . " now for the second stage , travel backward , in my lady 's life . " 

 the drive from Brompton to the Peckham Road be a very long one , and between Crescent Villas and Acacia Cottage , Robert Audley have ample leisure for reflection . he think of his uncle lie weak and ill in the oak - room at Audley Court . he think of the beautiful blue eye watch Sir Michael 's slumber ; the soft , white hand tend on his wake moment ; the low musical voice soothe his loneliness , cheer and console his decline year . what a pleasant picture it might have be , have he be able to look upon it ignorantly , see no more than other see , look no far than a stranger could look . but with the black cloud which he see brood over it , what an arch mockery , what a diabolical delusion it seem . 

 Peckham Grove pleasant enough in the summer - time have rather a dismal aspect upon a dull February day , when the tree be bare and leafless , and the little garden desolate . Acacia Cottage bear small token of the fitness of its nomenclature , and face the road with its stuccoed wall shelter only by a couple of attenuate poplar . but it announce that it be Acacia Cottage by mean of a small brass plate upon one of the gate - post , which be sufficient indication for the sharp - sighted cabman , who drop Mr. Audley upon the pavement before the little gate . 

 Acacia Cottage be much low in the social scale than Crescent Villas , and the small maid - servant who come to the low wooden gate and parley with Mr. Audley , be evidently well use to the encounter of relentless creditor across the same feeble barricade . 

 she murmur the familiar domestic fiction of the uncertainty regard her mistress 's whereabout ; and tell Robert that if he would please to state his name and business , she would go and see if Mrs. Vincent be at home . 

 Mr. Audley produce a card , and write in pencil under his own name : " a connection of the late Miss Graham . " 

 he direct the small servant to carry his card to her mistress , and quietly await the result . 

 the servant return in about five minute with the key of the gate . her mistress be at home , she tell Robert as she admit he , and would be happy to see the gentleman . 

 the square parlor into which Robert be usher bore in every scrap of ornament , in every article of furniture , the unmistakable stamp of that specie of poverty which be most comfortless because it be never stationary . the mechanic who furnish his tiny sitting - room with half - a - dozen cane chair , a Pembroke table , a dutch clock , a tiny look - glass , a crockery shepherd and shepherdess , and a set of gaudily - japanned iron tea - tray , make the most of his limited possession , and generally contrive to get some degree of comfort out of they ; but the lady who lose the handsome furniture of the house she be compel to abandon and encamp in some small habitation with the shabby remainder buy in by some merciful friend at the sale of her effect carry with she an aspect of genteel desolation and tawdry misery not easily to be parallel in wretchedness by any other phase which poverty can assume . 

 the room which Robert Audley survey be furnish with the shabby scrap snatch from the ruin which have overtake the imprudent schoolmistress in Crescent Villas . a cottage piano , a chiffoni , six size too large for the room , and dismally gorgeous in gild molding that be chip and break ; a slim - legged card - table , place in the post of honor , form the principal piece of furniture . a threadbare patch of Brussels carpet cover the center of the room , and form an oasis of rose and lily upon a desert of shabby green drugget . knitted curtain shade the window , in which hang wire basket of horrible - look plant of the cactus species , that grow downward , like some demented class of vegetation , whose prickly and spider - like member have a fancy for stand on their head . 

 the green - baize cover card - table be adorn with gaudily - bind annual or book of beauty , place at right angle ; but Robert Audley do not avail himself of these literary distraction . he seat himself upon one of the rickety chair , and wait patiently for the advent of the schoolmistress . he could hear the hum of half - a - dozen voice in a room near he , and the jingle harmony of a set of variation in Deh Conte , upon a piano , whose every wire be evidently in the last stage of attenuation . 

 he have wait for about a quarter of an hour , when the door be open , and a lady , very much dress , and with the set sunlight of fade beauty upon her face , enter the room . 

 " Mr. Audley , I presume , " she say , motion to Robert to reseat himself , and place herself in an easy - chair opposite to he . " you will pardon I , I hope , for detain you so long ; my duty " 

 " it be I who should apologize for intrude upon you , " Robert answer , politely ; " but my motive for call upon you be a very serious one , and must plead my excuse . you remember the lady whose name I write upon my card ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " may I ask how much you know of that lady 's history since her departure from your house ? " 

 " very little . in point of fact , scarcely anything at all . Miss Graham , I believe , obtain a situation in the family of a surgeon resident in Essex . indeed , it be I who recommend she to that gentleman . I have never hear from she since she leave I . " 

 " but you have communicate with she ? " Robert ask , eagerly . 

 " no , indeed . " 

 Mr. Audley be silent for a few moment , the shadow of gloomy thought gather darkly on his face . 

 " may I ask if you send a telegraphic dispatch to Miss Graham early in last September , state that you be dangerously ill , and that you wish to see she ? " 

 Mrs. Vincent smile at her visitor 's question . 

 " I have no occasion to send such a message , " she say ; " I have never be seriously ill in my life . " 

 Robert Audley pause before he ask any further question , and scrawl a few pencil word in his note - book . 

 " if I ask you a few straightforward question about Miss Lucy Graham , madam , " he say . " will you do I the favor to answer they without ask my motive in make such inquiry ? " 

 " most certainly , " reply Mrs. Vincent . " I know nothing to Miss Graham 's disadvantage , and have no justification for make a mystery of the little I do know . " 

 " then will you tell I at what date the young lady first come to you ? " 

 Mrs. Vincent smile and shake her head . she have a pretty smile the frank smile of a woman who have be admire , and who have too long feel the certainty of be able to please , to be utterly subjugate by any worldly misfortune . 

 " it be not the least use to ask I , Mr. Audley , " she say . " I be the most careless creature in the world ; I never do , and never could remember date , though I do all in my power to impress upon my girl how important it be for their future welfare that they should know when William the Conqueror begin to reign , and all that kind of thing . but I have not   the remotest idea when Miss Graham come to I , although I know it be age ago , for it be the very summer I have my peach - color silk . but we must consult Tonks Tonks be sure to be right . " 

 Robert Audley wonder who or what Tonks could be ; a diary , perhaps , or a memorandum - book some obscure rival of Letsome . 

 Mrs. Vincent ring the bell , which be answer by the maid - servant who have admit Robert . 

 " ask Miss Tonks to come to I , " she say . " I want to see she particularly . " 

 in less than five minute Miss Tonks make her appearance . she be wintry and rather frost - bite in aspect , and seem to bring cold air in the scanty fold of her somber merino dress . she be no age in particular , and look as if she have never be young , and would never grow old , but would remain forever work backward and forward in her narrow groove , like some self - feed machine for the instruction of young lady . 

 " Tonks , my dear , " say Mrs. Vincent , without ceremony , " this gentleman be a relative of Miss Graham 's . do you remember how long it be since she come to we at Crescent Villas ? " 

 " she come in August , 1854 , " answer Miss Tonks ; " I think it be the eighteenth of August , but I be not quite sure that it be not   the seventeenth . I know it be on a Tuesday . " 

 " thank you , Tonks ; you be a most invaluable darling , " exclaim Mrs. Vincent , with her sweetest smile . it be , perhaps , because of the invaluable nature of Miss Tonks ' service that she have receive no remuneration whatever from her employer for the last three or four year . Mrs. Vincent might have hesitate to pay from very contempt for the pitiful nature of the stipend as compare with the merit of the teacher . 

 " be there anything else that tonk or I can tell you , Mr. Audley ? " ask the schoolmistress . " tonk have a far well memory than I have . " 

 " can you tell I where Miss Graham come from when she enter your household ? " Robert inquire . 

 " not very precisely , " answer Mrs. Vincent . " I have a vague notion that Miss Graham say something about come from the seaside , but she do not   say where , or if she do I have forget it . tonk , do Miss Graham tell you where she come from ? " 

 " oh , no ! " reply Miss Tonks , shake her grim little head significantly . " Miss Graham tell I nothing ; she be too clever for that . she know how to keep her own secret , in spite of her innocent way and her curly hair , " Miss Tonks add , spitefully . 

 " you think she have secret ? " Robert ask , rather eagerly . 

 " I know she have , " reply Miss Tonks , with frosty decision ; " all manner of secret . I would not   have engage such a person as junior teacher in a respectable school , without so much as one word of recommendation from any live creature . " 

 " you have no reference , then , from Miss Graham ? " ask Robert , address Mrs. Vincent . 

 " no , " the lady answer , with some little embarrassment ; " I waive that . Miss Graham waive the question of salary ; I could not do less than waive the question of reference . she quarrel with her papa , she tell I , and she want to find a home away from all the people she have ever know . she wish to keep herself quite separate from these people . she have endure so much , she say , young as she be , and she want to escape from her trouble . how could I press she for a reference under these circumstance , especially when I see that she be a perfect lady . you know that Lucy Graham be a perfect lady , Tonks , and it be very unkind for you to say such cruel thing about my take she without a reference . " 

 " when people make favorite , they be apt to be deceive in they , " Miss Tonks answer , with icy sententiousness , and with no very perceptible relevance to the point in discussion . 

 " I never make she a favorite , you jealous Tonks , " Mrs. Vincent answer , reproachfully . " I never say she be as useful as you , dear . you know I never do . " 

 " oh , no ! " reply Miss Tonks , with a chilling accent , " you never say she be useful . she be only ornamental ; a person to be show off to visitor , and to play fantasia on the drawing - room piano . " 

 " then you can give I no clew to Miss Graham 's previous history ? " Robert ask , look from the schoolmistress to her teacher . he see very clearly that Miss Tonks bear an envious grudge against Lucy Graham a grudge which even the lapse of time have not heal . 

 " if this woman know anything to my lady 's detriment , she will tell it , " he think . " she will tell it only too willingly . " 

 but Miss Tonks appear to know nothing whatever ; except that Miss Graham have sometimes declare herself an ill - use creature , deceive by the baseness of mankind , and the victim of unmerited suffering , in the way of poverty and deprivation . beyond this , Miss Tonks could tell nothing ; and although she make the most of what she do know , Robert soon sound the depth of her small stock of information . 

 " I have only one more question to ask , " he say at last . " it be this : do Miss Graham leave any book or knick - knack , or any other kind of property whatever , behind she , when she leave your establishment ? " 

 " not to my knowledge , " Mrs. Vincent reply . 

 " yes , " cry Miss Tonks , sharply . " she do leave something . she leave a box . it be up - stair in my room . I have   get an old bonnet in it . would you like to see the box ? " she ask , address Robert . 

 " if you will be so good as to allow I , " he answer , " I should very much like to see it . " 

 " I will fetch it down , " say Miss Tonks . " it be not very big . " 

 she run out of the room before Mr. Audley have time to utter any polite remonstrance . 

 " how pitiless these woman be to each other , " he think , while the teacher be absent . " this one know intuitively that there be some danger to the other lurking beneath my question . she sniff the come trouble to her fellow female creature , and rejoice in it , and would take any pain to help I . what a world it be , and how these woman take life out of her hand . Helen Maldon , Lady Audley , Clara Talboys , and now Miss Tonks all womankind from begin to end . " 

 Miss Tonks re - enter while the young barrister be meditate upon the infamy of her sex . she carry a dilapidate paper - cover bonnet - box , which she submit to Robert 's inspection . 

 Mr. Audley kneel down to examine the scrap of railway label and address which be paste here and there upon the box . it have be batter upon a great many different line of railway , and have evidently travel considerably . many of the label have be tear off , but fragment of some of they remain , and upon one yellow scrap of paper Robert read the letter , TURI . 

 " the box have be to Italy , " he think . " those be the first four letter of the word Turin , and the label be a foreign one . " 

 the only direction which have not be either deface or tear away be the last , which bear the name of Miss Graham , passenger to London . look very closely at this label , Mr. Audley discover that it have be paste over another . 

 " will you be so good as to let I have a little water and a piece of sponge ? " he say . " I want to get off this upper label . believe I that I be justify in what I be do . " 

 Miss Tonks run out of the room and return immediately with a basin of water and a sponge . 

 " shall I take off the label ? " she ask . 

 " no , thank you , " Robert answer , coldly . " I can do it very well myself . " 

 he damp the upper label several time before he could loosen the edge of the paper ; but after two or three careful attempt the moistened surface peel off , without injury to the underneath address . 

 Miss Tonks could not contrive to read this address across Robert 's shoulder , though she exhibit considerable dexterity in her endeavor to accomplish that object . 

 Mr. Audley repeat his operation upon the low label , which he remove from the box , and place very carefully between two blank leaf of his pocket - book . 

 " I need intrude upon you no long , lady , " he say , when he have do this . " I be extremely obliged to you for have afford I all the information in your power . I wish you good - morning . " 

 Mrs. Vincent smile and bow , murmur some complacent conventionality about the delight she have feel in Mr. Audley 's visit . Miss Tonks , more observant , star at the white change , which have come over the young man 's face since he have remove the upper label from the box . 

 Robert walk slowly away from Acacia Cottage . " if that which I have find to - day be no evidence for a jury , " he think , " it be surely enough to convince my uncle that he have marry a designing and infamous woman . " 

 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 begin AT the other END . 

 Robert Audley walk slowly through the leafless grove , under the bare and shadowless tree in the gray February atmosphere , think as he go of the discovery he have just make . 

 " I have that in my pocket - book , " he ponder , " which form the connect link between the woman whose death George Talboys read of in the Times newspaper and the woman who rule in my uncle 's house . the history of Lucy Graham end abruptly on the threshold of Mrs. Vincent 's school . she enter that establishment in August , 1854 . the schoolmistress and her assistant can tell I this but they can not tell I whence she come . they can not give I one clew to the secret of her life from the day of her birth until the day she enter that house . I can go no far in this backward investigation of my lady 's antecedent . what be I to do , then , if I mean to keep my promise to Clara Talboys ? " 

 he walk on for a few pace revolve this question in his mind , with a dark shadow than the shadow of the gathering winter twilight on his face , and a heavy oppression of mingled sorrow and dread weigh down his heart . 

 " my duty be clear enough , " he think " not the less clear because it lead I step by step , carry ruin and desolation with I , to the home I love . I must begin at the other end I must begin at the other end , and discover the history of Helen Talboys from the hour of George 's departure until the day of the funeral in the churchyard at Ventnor . " 

 Mr. Audley hail a pass hansom , and drive back to his chamber . 

 he reach Figtree Court in time to write a few line to Miss Talboys , and to post his letter at St. Martin's - le - Grand off before six o'clock . 

 " it will save I a day , " he think , as he drive to the General Post Office with this brief epistle . 

 he have write to Clara Talboys to inquire the name of the little seaport town in which George have meet Captain Maldon and his daughter ; for in spite of the intimacy between the two young man , Robert Audley know very few particular of his friend 's brief married life . 

 from the hour in which George Talboys have read the announcement of his wife 's death in the column of the Times , he have avoid all mention of the tender history which have be so cruelly break , the familiar record which have be so darkly blot out . 

 there be so much that be painful in that brief story ! there be such bitter self - reproach involve in the recollection of that desertion which must have seem so cruel to she who wait and watch at home ! Robert Audley comprehend this , and he do not wonder at his friend 's silence . the sorrowful story have be tacitly avoid by both , and Robert be as ignorant of the unhappy history of this one year in his schoolfellow 's life as if they have never live together in friendly companionship in those snug Temple chamber . 

 the letter , write to Miss Talboys by her brother George , within a month of his marriage , be date Harrowgate . it be at Harrowgate , therefore , Robert conclude , the young couple spend their honeymoon . 

 Robert Audley have request Clara Talboys to telegraph an answer to his question , in order to avoid the loss of a day in the accomplishment of the investigation he have promise to perform . 

 the telegraphic answer reach Figtree Court before twelve o'clock the next day . 

 the name of the seaport town be Wildernsea , Yorkshire . 

 within an hour of the receipt of this message , Mr. Audley arrive at the King's - cross station , and take his ticket for Wildernsea by an express train that start at a quarter before two . 

 the shriek engine bear he on the dreary northward journey , whirl he over desert waste of flat meadow - land and bare cornfield , faintly tint with fresh sprouting green . this northern road be strange and unfamiliar to the young barrister , and the wide expanse of the wintry landscape chill he by its aspect of bare loneliness . the knowledge of the purpose of his journey blight every object upon which his absent glance fix themselves for a moment , only to wander wearily away ; only to turn inward upon that far dark picture always present itself to his anxious mind . 

 it be dark when the train reach the Hull terminus , but Mr. Audley 's journey be not end . amidst a crowd of porter and scatter heap of that incongruous and heterogeneous luggage with which traveler incumber themselves , he be lead , bewildered and half asleep , to another train which be to convey he along the branch line that sweep past Wildernsea , and skirt the border of the German Ocean . 

 half an hour after leave Hull , Robert feel the briny freshness of the sea upon the breeze that blow in at the open window of the carriage , and an hour afterward the train stop at a melancholy station , build amid a sandy desert , and inhabit by two or three gloomy official , one of whom ring a terrific peal upon a harshly clang bell as the train approach . 

 Mr. Audley be the only passenger who alight at the dismal station . the train sweep on to the gayer scene before the barrister have time to collect his sens , or to pick up the portmanteau which have be discover with some difficulty amid a black cavern of baggage only illuminate by one lantern . 

 " I wonder whether settler in the backwood of America feel as solitary and strange as I feel to - night ? " he think , as he star hopelessly about he in the darkness . 

 he call to one of the official , and point to his portmanteau . 

 " will you carry that to the near hotel for I ? " he ask " that be to say , if I can get a good bed there . " 

 the man laugh as he shoulder the portmanteau . 

 " you can get thirty bed , I dare say , sir , if you want them , " he say . " we be not   over busy at Wildernsea at this time o ' year . this way , sir . " 

 the porter open a wooden door in the station wall , and Robert Audley find himself upon a wide bowling - green of smooth grass , which surround a huge , square building , that loom darkly on he through the winter 's night , its black solidity only relieve by two light window , far apart from each other , and glimmer redly like beacon on the darkness . 

 " this be the Victoria Hotel , sir , " say the porter . " you would not   believe the crowd of company we have down here in the summer . " 

 in the face of the bare grass - plat , the tenantless wooden alcove , and the dark window of the hotel , it be indeed rather difficult to imagine that the place be ever gay with merry people take pleasure in the bright summer weather ; but Robert Audley declare himself willing to believe anything the porter please to tell he , and follow his guide meekly to a little door at the side of the big hotel , which lead into a comfortable bar , where the humbler class of summer visitor be accommodate with such refreshment as they please to pay for , without run the gantlet of the prim , white - waistcoated waiter on guard at the principal entrance . 

 but there be very few attendant retain at the hotel in the bleak February season , and it be the landlord himself who usher Robert into a dreary wilderness of polished mahogany table and horsehair cushion chair , which he call the coffee - room . 

 Mr. Audley seat himself close to the wide steel fender , and stretch his cramped leg upon the hearth - rug , while the landlord drive the poker into the vast pile of coal , and send a ruddy blaze roar upward through the chimney . 

 " if you would prefer a private room , sir " the man begin . 

 " no , thank you , " say Robert , indifferently ; " this room seem quite private enough just now . if you will order I a mutton chop and a pint of sherry , I shall be oblige . " 

 " certainly , sir . " 

 " and I shall be still more obliged if you will favor I with a few minute ' conversation before you do so . " 

 " with very great pleasure , sir , " the landlord answer , good - naturedly . " we see so very little company at this season of the year , that we be only too glad to oblige those gentleman who do visit we . any information which I can afford you respect the neighborhood of Wildernsea and its attraction , " add the landlord , unconsciously quote a small hand - book of the watering - place which he sell in the bar , " I shall be most happy to " 

 " but I do not   want to know anything about the neighborhood of Wildernsea , " interrupt Robert , with a feeble protest against the landlord 's volubility . " I want to ask you a few question about some people who once live here . " 

 the landlord bow and smile , with an air which imply his readiness to recite the biography of all the inhabitant of the little seaport , if require by Mr. Audley to do so . 

 " how many year have you live here ? " Robert ask , take his memorandum book from his pocket . " will it annoy you if I make note of your reply to my question ? " 

 " not at all , sir , " reply the landlord , with a pompous enjoyment of the air of solemnity and importance which pervade this business . " any information which I can afford that be likely to be of ultimate value " 

 " yes , thank you , " Robert murmur , interrupt the flow of word . " you have live here " 

 " six year , sir . " 

 " since the year fifty - three ? " 

 " since November , in the year fifty - two , sir . I be in business at Hull prior to that time . this house be only complete in the October before I enter it . " 

 " do you remember a lieutenant in the navy , on half - pay , I believe , at that time , call Maldon ? " 

 " Captain Maldon , sir ? " 

 " yes , commonly call Captain Maldon . I see you do remember he . " 

 " yes , sir . Captain Maldon be one of our good customer . he use to spend his evening in this very room , though the wall be damp at that time , and we be not   able to paper the place for nearly a twelvemonth afterward . his daughter marry a young officer that come here with his regiment , at Christmas time in fifty - two . they be marry here , sir , and they travel on the continent for six month , and come back here again . but the gentleman run away to Australia , and leave the lady , a week or two after her baby be bear . the business make quite a sensation in Wildernsea , sir , and Mrs. Mrs. I forget the name " 

 " Mrs. Talboys , " suggest Robert . 

 " to be sure , sir , Mrs. Talboys . Mrs. Talboys be very much pity by the Wildernsea folk , sir , I be go to say , for she be very pretty , and have such nice win way that she be a favorite with everybody who know she . " 

 " can you tell I how long Mr. Maldon and his daughter remain at Wildernsea after Mr. Talboys leave they ? " Robert ask . 

 " well no , sir , " answer the landlord , after a few moment ' deliberation . " I can not   say exactly how long it be . I know Mr. Maldon use to sit here in this very parlor , and tell people how badly his daughter have be treat , and how he have be deceive by a young man he would put so much confidence in ; but I can not   say how long it be before he leave Wildernsea . but Mrs. Barkamb could tell you , sir , " add the landlord , briskly . 

 " Mrs. Barkamb . " 

 " yes , Mrs. Barkamb be the person who own no . 17 North Cottages , the house in which Mr. Maldon and his daughter live . she be a nice , civil spoken , motherly woman , sir , and I be sure she will tell you anything you may want to know . " 

 " thank you , I will call upon Mrs. Barkamb to - morrow . stay one more question . should you recognize Mrs. Talboys if you be to see she ? " 

 " certainly , sir . as sure as I should recognize one of my own daughter . " 

 Robert Audley write Mrs. Barkamb 's address in his pocket - book , eat his solitary dinner , drink a couple of glass of sherry , smoke a cigar , and then retire to the apartment in which a fire have be light for his comfort . 

 he soon fall asleep , wear out with the fatigue of hurrying from place to place during the last two day ; but his slumber be not a heavy one , and he hear the disconsolate moaning of the wind upon the sandy waste , and the long wave roll in monotonously upon the flat shore . mingle with these dismal sound , the melancholy thought engender by his joyless journey repeat themselves in never - vary succession in the chaos of his slumber brain , and make themselves into vision of thing that never have be and never could be upon this earth , but which have some vague relation to real event remember by the sleeper . 

 in those troublesome dream he see Audley Court , root up from amidst the green pasture and the shady hedgerow of Essex , stand bare and unprotecte upon that desolate northern shore , threaten by the rapid rise of a boisterous sea , whose wave seem gather upward to descend and crush the house he love . as the hurrying wave roll near and near to the stately mansion , the sleeper see a pale , starry face look out of the silvery foam , and know that it be my lady , transform into a mermaid , beckon his uncle to destruction . beyond that rise sea great mass of cloud , blacker than the black ink , more dense than the dark night , lower upon the dreamer 's eye ; but as he look at the dismal horizon the storm - cloud slowly part , and from a narrow rent in the darkness a ray of light stream out upon the hideous wave , which slowly , very slowly , recede , leave the old mansion safe and firmly rooted on the shore . 

 Robert awake with the memory of this dream in his mind , and a sensation of physical relief , as if some heavy weight , which have oppress he all the night , have be lift from his breast . 

 he fall asleep again , and do not awake until the broad winter sunlight shine upon the window - blind , and the shrill voice of the chambermaid at his door announce that it be half - past eight o'clock . at a quarter - before ten he have leave Victoria Hotel , and be make his way along the lonely platform in front of a row of shadowless house that face the sea . 

 this row of hard , uncompromising , square - build habitation stretch away to the little harbor , in which two or three merchant vessel and a couple of collier be anchor . beyond the harbor there loomed , gray and cold upon the wintry horizon , a dismal barrack , part from the Wildernsea house by a narrow creek , span by an iron drawbridge . the scarlet coat of the sentinel who walk backward and forward between two cannon , place at remote angle before the barrack wall , be the only scrap of color that relieve the neutral - tinted picture of the gray stone house and the leaden sea . 

 on one side of the harbor a long stone pier stretch out far away into the cruel loneliness of the sea , as if build for the especial accommodation of some modern Timon , too misanthropical to be satisfied even with the solitude of Wildernsea , and anxious to get still far away from his fellow - creature . 

 it be on that pier George Talboys have first meet his wife , under the blaze glory of a midsummer sky , and to the music of a bray band . it be there that the young cornet have first yield to that sweet delusion , that fatal infatuation which have exercise so dark an influence upon his after - life . 

 Robert look savagely at this solitary watering - place the shabby seaport . 

 " it be such a place as this , " he think , " that work a strong man 's ruin . he come here , heart whole and happy , with no well experience of woman than be to be learn at a flower - show or in a ball - room ; with no more familiar knowledge of the creature than he have of the far - away satellite or the remoter planet ; with a vague notion that she be a whirling teetotum in pink or blue gauze , or a graceful automaton for the display of milliner ' manufacture . he come to some place of this kind , and the universe be suddenly narrow into about half a dozen acre ; the mighty scheme of creation be crush into a bandbox . the far - away creature whom he have see float about he , beautiful and indistinct , be bring under his very nose ; and before he have time to recover his bewilderment , hey presto , the witchcraft have begin ; the magic circle be draw around he ! the spell be at work , the whole formula of sorcery be in full play , and the victim be as powerless to escape as the marble - legged prince in the eastern story . " 

 ruminate in this wise , Robert Audley reach the house to which he have be direct as the residence of Mrs. Barkamb . he be admit immediately by a prim , elderly servant , who usher he into a sitting - room as prim and elderly - look as herself . Mrs. Barkamb , a comfortable matron of about sixty year of age , be sit in an arm - chair before a bright handful of fire in the shin grate . an elderly terrier , whose black - and - tan coat be thickly sprinkle with gray , repose in Mrs. Barkamb 's lap . every object in the quiet sitting - room have an elderly aspect of simple comfort and precision , which be the evidence of outward repose . 

 " I should like to live here , " Robert think , " and watch the gray sea slowly roll over the gray sand under the still , gray sky . I should like to live here , and tell the bead upon my rosary , and repent and rest . " 

 he seat himself in the arm - chair opposite Mrs. Barkamb , at that lady 's invitation , and place his hat upon the ground . the elderly terri descend from his mistress ' lap to bark at and otherwise take objection to this hat . 

 " you be wish , I suppose , sir , to take one be quiet , Dash one of the cottage , " suggest Mrs. Barkamb , whose mind run in one narrow groove , and whose life during the last twenty year have be an unvarying round of house - letting . 

 Robert Audley explain the purpose of his visit . 

 " I come to ask one simple question , " he say , in conclusion , " I wish to discover the exact date of Mrs. Talboys ' departure from Wildernsea . the proprietor of the Victoria Hotel inform I that you be the most likely person to afford I that information . " 

 Mrs. Barkamb deliberate for some moment . 

 " I can give you the date of Captain Maldon 's departure , " she say , " for he leave no . 17 considerably in my debt , and I have the whole business in black and white ; but with regard to Mrs. Talboys " 

 Mrs. Barkamb pause for a few moment before resume . 

 " you be aware that Mrs. Talboys leave rather abruptly ? " she ask . 

 " I be not aware of that fact . " 

 " indeed ! yes , she leave abruptly , poor little woman ! she try to support herself after her husband 's desertion by give music lesson ; she be a very brilliant pianist , and succeed pretty well , I believe . but I suppose her father take her money from she , and spend it in public house . however that might be , they have a very serious misunderstanding one night ; and the next morning Mrs. Talboys leave Wildernsea , leave she little boy , who be out at nurse in the neighborhood . " 

 " but you can not tell I the date of her leave ? " 

 " I be afraid not , " answer Mrs. Barkamb ; " and yet , stay . Captain Maldon write to I upon the day his daughter leave . he be in very great distress , poor old gentleman , and he always come to I in his trouble . if I could find that letter , it might be date , you know might not   it , now ? " 

 Mr. Audley say that it be only probable the letter be date . 

 Mrs. Barkamb retire to a table in the window on which stand an old - fashioned mahogany desk , line with green baize , and suffer from a plethora of document , which ooze out of it in every direction . letter , receipt , bill , inventory and tax - paper be mingle in hopeless confusion ; and among these Mrs. Barkamb set to work to search for Captain Maldon 's letter . 

 Mr. Audley wait very patiently , watch the gray cloud sail across the gray sky , the gray vessel glide past upon the gray sea . 

 after about ten minute ' search , and a great deal of rustle , crackling , fold and unfolding of the paper , Mrs. Barkamb utter an exclamation of triumph . 

 " I have   get the letter , " she say ; " and there be a note inside it from Mrs. Talboys . " 

 Robert Audley 's pale face flush a vivid crimson as he stretch out his hand to receive the paper . 

 " the person who steal Helen Maldon 's love - letter from George 's trunk in my chamber might have save themselves the trouble , " he think . 

 the letter from the old lieutenant be not long , but almost every other word be underscored . 

 " my generous friend , " the writer begin Mr. Maldon have try the lady 's generosity pretty severely during his residence in her house , rarely pay his rent until threaten with the intrude presence of the broker 's man " I be in the depth of despair . my daughter have leave I ! you may imagine my feeling ! we have a few word last night upon the subject of money matter , which subject have always be a disagreeable one between we , and on rise this morning I find I be desert ! the enclose from Helen be wait for I on the parlor table . 

 " your in distraction and despair , 

 " HENRY MALDON . 

 " NORTH COTTAGES , August 16th , 1854 . " 

 the note from Mrs. Talboys be still more brief . it begin abruptly thus : 

 " I be weary of my life here , and wish , if I can , to find a new one . I go out into the world , dissever from every link which bind I to the hateful past , to seek another home and another fortune . forgive I if I have be fretful , capricious , changeable . you should forgive I , for you know why I have be so . you know the secret which be the key to my life . 

 " HELEN TALBOYS . " 

 these line be write in a hand that Robert Audley know only too well . 

 he sit for a long time ponder silently over the letter write by Helen Talboys . 

 what be the meaning of those two last sentence " you should forgive I , for you know why I have be so . you know the secret which be the key to my life ? " 

 he weary his brain in endeavor to find a clew to the signification of these two sentence . he could remember nothing , nor could he imagine anything that would throw a light upon their meaning . the date of Helen 's departure , accord to Mr. Maldon 's letter , be the 16th of August , 1854 . Miss Tonks have declare that Lucy Graham enter the school at Crescent Villas upon the 17th or 18th of August in the same year . between the departure of Helen Talboys from the Yorkshire watering - place and the arrival of Lucy Graham at the Brompton school , not more than eight - and - forty hour could have elapse . this make a very small link in the chain of circumstantial evidence , perhaps ; but it be a link , nevertheless , and it fit neatly into its place . 

 " do Mr. Maldon hear from his daughter after she have leave Wildernsea ? " Robert ask . 

 " well , I believe he do hear from she , " Mrs. Barkamb answer ; " but I do not   see much of the old gentleman after that August . I be oblige to sell he up in November , poor fellow , for he owe I fifteen month ' rent ; and it be only by sell his poor little bit of furniture that I could get he out of my place . we part very good friend , in spite of my sending in the broker ; and the old gentleman go to London with the child , who be scarcely a twelvemonth old . " 

 Mrs. Barkamb have nothing more to tell , and Robert have no further question to ask . he request permission to retain the two letter write by the lieutenant and his daughter , and leave the house with they in his pocket - book . 

 he walk straight back to the hotel , where he call for a time - table . an express for London leave Wildernsea at a quarter past one . Robert send his portmanteau to the station , pay his bill , and walk up and down the stone terrace front the sea , wait for the starting of the train . 

 " I have trace the history of Lucy Graham and Helen Talboys to a vanishing point , " he think ; " my next business be to discover the history of the woman who lie bury in Ventnor churchyard . " 

 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 HIDDEN in the GRAVE . 

 upon his return from Wildernsea , Robert Audley find a letter from his Cousin Alicia , await he at his chamber . 

 " Papa be much well , " the young lady write , " and be very anxious to have you at the Court . for some inexplicable reason , my stepmother have take it into her head that your presence be extremely desirable , and worry I with her frivolous question about your movement . so pray come without delay , and set these people at rest . your affectionate cousin , A.A. " 

 " so my lady be anxious to know my movement , " think Robert Audley , as he sit brood and smoking by his lonely fireside . " she be anxious ; and she question her step - daughter in that pretty , childlike manner which have such a bewitching air of innocent frivolity . poor little creature ; poor unhappy little golden - haired sinner ; the battle between we seem terribly unfair . why do not   she run away while there be still time ? I have give her fair warning , I have show she my card , and work openly enough in this business , Heaven know . why do not   she run away ? " 

 he repeat this question again and again as he fill and empty his meerschaum , surround himself with the blue vapor from his pipe until he look like some modern magician seat in his laboratory . 

 " why do not   she run away ? I would bring no needless shame upon that house , of all other house upon this wide earth . I would only do my duty to my miss friend , and to that brave and generous man who have pledge his faith to a worthless woman . Heaven know I have no wish to punish . Heaven know I be never bear to be the avenger of guilt or the persecutor of the guilty . I only wish to do my duty . I will give she one more warning , a full and fair one , and then " 

 his thought wander away to that gloomy prospect in which he see no gleam of brightness to relieve the dull , black obscurity that encompass the future , shut in his pathway on every side , and spread a dense curtain around and about he , which Hope be powerless to penetrate . he be forever haunt by the vision of his uncle 's anguish , forever torture by the thought of that ruin and desolation which , be bring about by his instrumentality , would seem in a manner his handiwork . but amid all , and through all , Clara Talboys , with an imperious gesture , beckon he onward to her brother 's unknown grave . 

 " shall I go down to Southampton , " he think , " and endeavor to discover the history of the woman who die at Ventnor ? shall I work underground , bribe the paltry assistant in that foul conspiracy , until I find my way to the thrice guilty principal ? no ! not till I have try other mean of discover the truth . shall I go to that miserable old man , and charge he with his share in the shameful trick which I believe to have be play upon my poor friend ? no ; I will not torture that terror - stricken wretch as I torture he a few week ago . I will go straight to that arch - conspirator , and will tear away the beautiful veil under which she hide her wickedness , and will wring from she the secret of my friend 's fate , and banish she forever from the house which her presence have pollute . " 

 he start early the next morning for Essex , and reach Audley before eleven o'clock . 

 early as it be , my lady be out . she have drive to Chelmsford upon a shopping expedition with her step - daughter . she have several call to make in the neighborhood of the town , and be not likely to return until dinner - time . Sir Michael 's health be very much improve , and he would come down stair in the afternoon . would Mr. Audley go to his uncle 's room ? 

 no ; Robert have no wish to meet that generous kinsman . what could he say to he ? how could he smooth the way to the trouble that be to come ? how soften the cruel blow of the great grief that be prepare for that noble and trust heart ? 

 " if I could forgive she the wrong do to my friend , " Robert think , " I should still abhor she for the misery her guilt must bring upon the man who have believe in she . " 

 he tell his uncle 's servant that he would stroll into the village , and return before dinner . he walk slowly away from the Court , wander across the meadow between his uncle 's house and the village , purposeless and indifferent , with the great trouble and perplexity of his life stamp upon his face and reflect in his manner . 

 " I will go into the churchyard , " he think , " and stare at the tombstone . there be nothing I can do that will make I more gloomy than I be . " 

 he be in those very meadow through which he have hurry from Audley Court to the station upon the September day in which George Talboys have disappear . he look at the pathway by which he have go upon that day , and remember his unaccustomed hurry , and the vague feeling of terror which have take possession of he immediately upon lose sight of his friend . 

 " why do that unaccountable terror seize upon I , " he think . " why be it that I see some strange mystery in my friend 's disappearance ? be it a monition , or a monomania ? what if I be wrong after all ? what if this chain of evidence which I have construct link by link , be weave out of my own folly ? what if this edifice of horror and suspicion be a mere collection of crotchet the nervous fancy of a hypochondriacal bachelor ? Mr. Harcourt Talboys see no meaning in the event out of which I have make myself a horrible mystery . I lie the separate link of the chain before he , and he can not recognize their fitness . he be unable to put they together . oh , my God , if it should be in myself all this time that the misery lie ; if " he smile bitterly , and shake his head . " I have the handwriting in my pocket - book which be the evidence of the conspiracy , " he think . " it remain for I to discover the dark half of my lady 's secret . " 

 he avoid the village , still keep to the meadow . the church lie a little way back from the straggling High street , and a rough wooden gate open from the churchyard into a broad meadow , that be border by a running stream , and slop down into a grassy valley dot by group of cattle . 

 Robert slowly ascend the narrow hillside pathway lead up to the gate in the churchyard . the quiet dullness of the lonely landscape harmonize with his own gloom . the solitary figure of an old man hobble toward a stile at the further end of the wide meadow be the only human creature visible upon the area over which the young barrister look . the smoke slowly ascend from the scatter house in the long high street be the only evidence of human life . the slow progress of the hand of the old clock in the church steeple be the only token by which a traveler could perceive that a sluggish course of rustic life have not come to a full stop in the village of Audley . 

 yes , there be one other sign . as Robert open the gate of the churchyard , and stroll listessly into the little inclosure , he become aware of the solemn music of an organ , audible through a half - open window in the steeple . 

 he stop and listen to the slow harmony of a dreamy melody that sound like an extempore composition of an accomplished player . 

 " who would have believe that Audley church could boast such an organ ? " think Robert . " when last I be here , the national schoolmaster use to accompany his child by a primitive performance of common chord . I do not   think the old organ have such music in it . " 

 he linger at the gate , not care to break the lazy spell weave about he by the monotonous melancholy of the organist 's performance . the tone of the instrument , now swell to their full power , now sink to a low , whispering softness , float toward he upon the misty winter atmosphere , and have a soothing influence , that seem to comfort he in his trouble . 

 he close the gate softly , and cross the little patch of gravel before the door of the church . the door have be leave ajar by the organist , perhaps . Robert Audley push it open , and walk into the square porch , from which a flight of narrow stone step wound upward to the organ - loft and the belfry . Mr. Audley take off his hat , and open the door between the porch and the body of the church . he step softly into the holy edifice , which have a damp , moldy smell upon week - day . he walk down the narrow aisle to the altar - rail , and from that point of observation take a survey of the church . the little gallery be exactly opposite to he , but the scanty green curtain before the organ be closely draw , and he could not get a glimpse of the player . 

 the music still roll on . the organist have wander into a melody of Mendelssohn 's , a strain whose dreamy sadness go straight to Robert 's heart . he loiter in the nook and corner of the church , examine the dilapidated memorial of the well - nigh forget dead , and listen to the music . 

 " if my poor friend , George Talboys , have die in my arm , and I have bury he in this quiet church , in one corner of the vault over which I tread to - day , how much anguish of mind , vacillation and torment I might have escape , " think Robert Audley , as he read the fade inscription upon tablet of discolor marble ; " I should have know his fate I should have know his fate ! ah , how much there would have be in that . it be this miserable uncertainty , this horrible suspicion which have poison my very life . " 

 he look at his watch . 

 " half - past one , " he mutter . " I shall have to wait four or five dreary hour before my lady come home from her morning call she pretty visit of ceremony or friendliness . Good Heaven ! what an actress this woman be . what an arch trickster what an all - accomplished deceiver . but she shall play her pretty comedy no long under my uncle 's roof . I have diplomatize long enough . she have refuse to accept an indirect warning . to - night I will speak plainly . " 

 the music of the organ cease , and Robert hear the closing of the instrument . 

 " I will have a look at this new organist , " he think , " who can afford to bury his talent at Audley , and play Mendelssohn 's fine fugue for a stipend of sixteen pound a year . " he linger in the porch , wait for the organist to descend the awkward little stair - case . in the weary trouble of his mind , and with the prospect of get through the five hour in the good way he could , Mr. Audley be glad to cultivate any diversion of thought , however idle . he therefore freely indulge his curiosity about the new organist . 

 the first person who appear upon the steep stone step be a boy in corduroy trouser and a dark linen smock - frock , who shamble down the stair with a good deal of unnecessary clatter of his hobnailed shoe , and who be red in the face from the exertion of blow the bellow of the old organ . close behind this boy come a young lady , very plainly dressed in a black silk gown and a large gray shawl , who start and turn pale at sight of Mr. Audley . 

 this young lady be Clara Talboys . 

 of all people in the world she be the last whom Robert either expect or wish to see . she have tell he that she be go to pay a visit to some friend who live in Essex ; but the county be a wide one , and the village of Audley one of the most obscure and least frequent spot in the whole of its extent . that the sister of his lost friend should be here here where she could watch his every action , and from those action deduce the secret working of his mind , trace his doubt home to their object , make a complication of his difficulty that he could never have anticipate . it bring he back to that consciousness of his own helplessness , in which he have exclaim : 

 " a hand that be strong than my own be beckon I onward on the dark road that lead to my lose friend 's unknown grave . " 

 Clara Talboys be the first to speak . 

 " you be surprised to see I here , Mr. Audley , " she say . 

 " very much surprised . " 

 " I tell you that I be come to Essex . I leave home day before yesterday . I be leave home when I receive your telegraphic message . the friend with whom I be stay be Mrs. Martyn , the wife of the new rector of Mount Stanning . I come down this morning to see the village and church , and as Mrs. Martyn have to pay a visit to the school with the curate and his wife , I stop here and amuse myself by try the old organ . I be not aware till I come here that there be a village call Audley . the place take its name from your family , I suppose ? " 

 " I believe so , " Robert answer , wonder at the lady 's calmness , in contradistinction to his own embarrassment . " I have a vague recollection of hear the story of some ancestor who be call Audley of Audley in the reign of Edward the Fourth . the tomb inside the rail near the altar belong to one of the knight of Audley , but I have never take the trouble to remember his achievement . be you go to wait here for your friend , Miss Talboys ? " 

 " yes ; they be to return here for I after they have finish their round . " 

 " and you go back to Mount Stanning with they this afternoon ? " 

 " yes . " 

 Robert stand with his hat in his hand , look absently out at the tombstone and the low wall of the church yard . Clara Talboys watch his pale face , haggard under the deepening shadow that have rest upon it so long . 

 " you have be ill since I see you last , Mr. Audley , " she say , in a low voice , that have the same melodious sadness as the note of the old organ under her touch . 

 " no , I have not be ill ; I have be only harass , weary by a hundred doubt and perplexity . " 

 he be think as he speak to she : 

 " how much do she guess ? how much do she suspect ? " 

 he have tell the story of George 's disappearance and of his own suspicion , suppress only the name of those concern in the mystery ; but what if this girl should fathom this slender disguise , and discover for herself that which he have choose to withhold . 

 her grave eye be fix upon his face , and he know that she be try to read the innermost secret of his mind . 

 " what be I in her hand ? " he think . " what be I in the hand of this woman , who have my lose friend 's face and the manner of Pallas Athene . she read my pitiful , vacillate soul , and pluck the thought out of my heart with the magic of her solemn brown eye . how unequal the fight must be between we , and how can I ever hope to conquer against the strength of her beauty and her wisdom ? " 

 Mr. Audley be clear his throat preparatory to bid his beautiful companion good - morning , and make his escape from the thraldom of her presence into the lonely meadow outside the churchyard , when Clara Talboys arrest he by speak upon that very subject which he be most anxious to avoid . 

 " you promise to write to I , Mr. Audley , " she say , " if you make any discovery which carry you near to the mystery of my brother 's disappearance . you have not write to I , and I imagine , therefore , that you have discover nothing . " 

 Robert Audley be silent for some moment . how could he answer this direct question ? 

 " the chain of circumstantial evidence which unite the mystery of your brother 's fate with the person whom I suspect , " he say , after a pause , " be form of very slight link . I think that I have add another link to that chain since I see you in dorsetshire . " 

 " and you refuse to tell I what it be that you have discover ? " 

 " only until I have discover more . " 

 " I think from your message that you be go to Wildernsea . " 

 " I have be there . " 

 " indeed ! it be there that you make some discovery , then ? " 

 " it be , " answer Robert . " you must remember , Miss Talboys that the sole ground upon which my suspicion rest be the identity of two individual who have no apparent connection the identity of a person who be suppose to be dead with one who be live . the conspiracy of which I believe your brother to have be the victim hinge upon this . if his wife , Helen Talboys , die when the paper record her death if the woman who lie bury in Ventnor churchyard be indeed the woman whose name be inscribe on the headstone of the grave I have no case , I have no clew to the mystery of your brother 's fate . I be about to put this to the test . I believe that I be now in a position to play a bold game , and I believe that I shall soon arrive at the truth . " 

 he speak in a low voice , and with a solemn emphasis that betray the intensity of his feeling . Miss Talboys stretch out her ungloved hand , and lay it in his own . the cold touch of that slender hand send a shivering thrill through his frame . 

 " you will not suffer my brother 's fate to remain a mystery , Mr. Audley , " she say , quietly . " I know that you will do your duty to your friend . " 

 the rector 's wife and her two companion enter the churchyard as Clara Talboys say this . Robert Audley press the hand that rest in his own , and raise it to his lip . 

 " I be a lazy , good - for - nothing fellow , Miss Talboys , " he say ; " but if I could restore your brother George to life and happiness , I should care very little for any sacrifice of my own feeling , fear that the most I can do be to fathom the secret of his fate and in do that I must sacrifice those who be dearer to I than myself . " 

 he put on his hat , and hurry through the gateway lead into the field as Mrs. Martyn come up to the porch . 

 " who be that handsome young man I catch tete - a - tete with you , Clara ? " she ask , laugh . 

 " he be a Mr. Audley , a friend of my poor brother 's . " 

 " indeed ! he be some relation of Sir Michael Audley , I suppose ? " 

 " Sir Michael Audley ! " 

 " yes , my dear ; the most important personage in the parish of Audley . but we will call at the Court in a day or two , and you shall see the baronet and his pretty young wife . " 

 " his young wife ! " reply Clara Talboys , look earnestly at her friend . " have Sir Michael Audley lately marry , then ? " 

 " yes . he be a widower for sixteen year , and marry a penniless young governess about a year and a half ago . the story be quite romantic , and Lady Audley be consider the belle of the county . but come , my dear Clara , the pony be tired of wait for we , and we have   a long drive before dinner . " 

 Clara Talboys take her seat in the little basket - carriage which be wait at the principal gate of the churchyard , in the care of the boy who have blow the organ - bellow . Mrs. Martyn shake the rein , and the sturdy chestnut cob trot off in the direction of Mount Stanning . 

 " will you tell I more about this Lady Audley , Fanny ? " Miss Talboys say , after a long pause . " I want to know all about she . have you hear her maiden name ? " 

 " yes ; she be a Miss Graham . " 

 " and she be very pretty ? " 

 " yes , very , very pretty . rather a childish beauty though , with large , clear blue eye , and pale golden ringlet , that fall in a feathery shower over her throat and shoulder . " 

 Clara Talboys be silent . she do not ask any further question about my lady . 

 she be think of a passage in that letter which George have write to she during his honeymoon a passage in which he say : " my childish little wife be watch I as I write this ah ! how I wish you could see she , Clara ! her eye be as blue and as clear as the sky on a bright summer 's day , and her hair fall about her face like the pale golden halo you see round the head of a Madonna in an italian picture . " 

 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 in the LIME - WALK . 

 Robert Audley be loiter upon the broad grass - plat in front of the Court as the carriage contain my lady and Alicia drive under the archway , and draw up at the low turret - door . Mr. Audley present himself in time to hand the lady out of the vehicle . 

 my lady look very pretty in a delicate blue bonnet and the sable which her nephew have buy for she at St. Petersburg . she seem very well pleased to see Robert , and smile most bewitchingly as she give he she exquisitely gloved little hand . 

 " so you have come back to we , truant ? " she say , laugh . " and now that you have return , we shall keep you prisoner . we will not   let he run away again , will we , Alicia ? " 

 Miss Audley give her head a scornful toss that shake the heavy curl under her cavalier hat . 

 " I have nothing to do with the movement of so erratic an individual , " she say . " since Robert Audley have take it into his head to conduct himself like some ghost - haunt hero in a german story , I have give up attempt to understand he . " 

 Mr. Audley look at his cousin with an expression of serio - comic perplexity . " she be a nice girl , " he think , " but she be a nuisance . I do not   know how it be , but she seem more a nuisance than she use to be . " 

 he pull his mustache reflectively as he consider this question . his mind wander away for a few moment from the great trouble of his life to dwell upon this minor perplexity . 

 " she be a dear girl , " he think ; " a generous - hearted , bounce , noble english lassie ; and yet " he lose himself in a quagmire of doubt and difficulty . there be some hitch in his mind which he could not understand ; some change in himself , beyond the change make in he by his anxiety about George Talboys , which mystify and bewilder he . 

 " and pray where have you be wander during the last day or two , Mr. Audley ? " ask my lady , as she linger with her step - daughter upon the threshold of the turret - door , wait until Robert should be pleased to stand aside and allow they to pass . the young man start as she ask this question and look up at she suddenly . something in the aspect of her bright young beauty , something in the childish innocence of her expression , seem to smite he to the heart , and his face grow ghastly pale as he look at she . 

 " I have be in Yorkshire , " he say ; " at the little watering place where my poor friend George Talboys live at the time of his marriage . " 

 the white change in my lady 's face be the only sign of she have hear these word . she smile , a faint , sickly smile , and try to pass her husband 's nephew . 

 " I must dress for dinner , " she say . " I be go to a dinner - party , Mr. Audley ; please let I go in . " 

 " I must ask you to spare I half an hour , Lady Audley , " Robert answer , in a low voice . " I come down to Essex on purpose to speak to you . " 

 " what about ? " ask my lady . 

 she have recover herself from any shock which she might have sustain a few moment before , and it be in her usual manner that she ask this question . her face express the mingled bewilderment and curiosity of a puzzled child , rather than the serious surprise of a woman . 

 " what can you want to talk to I about , Mr. Audley ? " she repeat . 

 " I will tell you when we be alone , " Robert say , glance at his cousin , who stand a little way behind my lady , watch this confidential little dialogue . 

 " he be in love with my step - mother 's wax - doll beauty , " think Alicia , " and it be for her sake he have become such a disconsolate object . he be just the sort of person to fall in love with his aunt . " 

 Miss Audley walk away to the grass - plat , turn she back upon Robert and my lady . 

 " the absurd creature turn as white as a sheet when he see she , " she think . " so he can be in love , after all . that slow lump of torpidity he call his heart can beat , I suppose , once in a quarter of a century ; but it seem that nothing but a blue - eyed wax - doll can set it go . I should have give he up long ago if I have know that his idea of beauty be to be find in a toy - shop . " 

 Poor Alicia cross the grass - plat and disappear upon the opposite side of the quadrangle , where there be a Gothic gate that communicate with the stable . I be sorry to say that Sir Michael Audley 's daughter go to seek consolation from her dog Caesar and her chestnut mare Atalanta , whose loose box the young lady be in the habit of visit every day . 

 " will you come into the lime - walk , Lady Audley ? " say Robert , as his cousin leave the garden . " I wish to talk to you without fear of interruption or observation . I think we could choose no safe place than that . will you come there with I ? " 

 " if you please , " answer my lady . Mr. Audley could see that she be tremble , and that she glance from side to side as if look for some outlet by which she might escape he . 

 " you be shiver , Lady Audley , " he say . 

 " yes , I be very cold . I would rather speak to you some other day , please . let it be to - morrow , if you will . I have to dress for dinner , and I want to see Sir Michael ; I have not see he since ten o'clock this morning . please let it be to - morrow . " 

 there be a painful piteousness in her tone . Heaven know how painful to Robert 's heart . Heaven know what horrible image arise in his mind as he look down at that fair young face and think of the task that lie before he . 

 " I must speak to you , Lady Audley , " he say . " if I be cruel , it be you who have make I cruel . you might have escape this ordeal . you might have avoid I . I give you fair warning . but you have choose to defy I , and it be your own folly which be to blame if I no long spare you . come with I . I tell you again I must speak to you . " 

 there be a cold determination in his tone which silence my lady 's objection . she follow he submissively to the little iron gate which communicate with the long garden behind the house the garden in which a little rustic wooden bridge lead across the quiet fish - pond into the lime - walk . 

 the early winter twilight be close in , and the intricate tracery of the leafless branch that overarch the lonely pathway look black against the cold gray of the evening sky . the lime - walk seem like some cloister in this uncertain light . 

 " why do you bring I to this horrible place to frighten I out of my poor wit ? " cry my lady , peevishly . " you ought to know how nervous I be . " 

 " you be nervous , my lady ? " 

 " yes , dreadfully nervous . I be worth a fortune to poor Mr. Dawson . he be always send I camphor , and sal volatile , and red lavender , and all kind of abominable mixture , but he can not   cure I . " 

 " do you remember what Macbeth tell his physician , my lady ? " ask Robert , gravely . " Mr. Dawson may be very much more clever than the scottish leech , but I doubt if even he can minister to the mind that be disease . " 

 " who say that my mind be disease ? " exclaim Lady Audley . 

 " I say so , my lady , " answer Robert . " you tell I that you be nervous , and that all the medicine your doctor can prescribe be only so much physic that might as well be throw to the dog . let I be the physician to strike to the root of your malady , Lady Audley . Heaven know that I wish to be merciful that I would spare you as far as it be in my power to spare you in do justice to other but justice must be do . shall I tell you why you be nervous in this house , my lady ? " 

 " if you can , " she answer , with a little laugh . 

 " because for you this house be haunt . " 

 " haunted ? " 

 " yes , haunt by the ghost of George Talboys . " 

 Robert Audley hear my lady 's quickened breathing , he fancy he could almost hear the loud beating of her heart as she walk by his side , shiver now and then , and with her sable cloak wrap tightly around she . 

 " what do you mean ? " she cry suddenly , after a pause of some moment . " why do you torment I about this George Talboys , who happen to have take it into his head to keep out of your way for a few month ? be you go mad , Mr. Audley , and do you select I as the victim of your monomania ? what be George Talboys to I that you should worry I about he ? " 

 " he be a stranger to you , my lady , be he not ? " 

 " of course ! " answer Lady Audley . " what should he be but a stranger ? " 

 " shall I tell you the story of my friend 's disappearance as I read that story , my lady ? " ask Robert . 

 " no , " cry Lady Audley ; " I wish to know nothing of your friend . if he be dead , I be sorry for he . if he live , I have no wish either to see he or to hear of he . let I go in to see my husband , if you please , Mr. Audley , unless you wish to detain I in this gloomy place until I catch my death of cold . " 

 " I wish to detain you until you have hear what I have to say , Lady Audley , " answer Robert , resolutely . " I will detain you no long than be necessary , and when you have hear I you shall take your own course of action . " 

 " very well , then ; pray lose no time in say what you have to say , " reply my lady , carelessly . " I promise you to attend very patiently . " 

 " when my friend , George Talboys , return to England , " Robert begin , gravely , " the thought which be uppermost in his mind be the thought of his wife . " 

 " whom he have desert , " say my lady , quickly . " at least , " she add , more deliberately , " I remember your tell we something to that effect when you first tell we your friend 's story . " 

 Robert Audley do not notice this observation . 

 " the thought that be uppermost in his mind be the thought of his wife , " he repeat . " his fair hope in the future be the hope of make she happy , and lavish upon she the pittance which he have win by the force of his own strong arm in the gold - field of Australia . I see he within a few hour of his reach England , and I be a witness to the joyful pride with which he look forward to his re - union with his wife . I be also a witness to the blow which strike he to the very heart which change he from the man he have be to a creature as unlike that former self as one human being can be unlike another . the blow which make that cruel change be the announcement of his wife 's death in the Times newspaper . I now believe that that announcement be a black and bitter lie . " 

 " indeed ! " say my lady ; " and what reason could any one have for announce the death of Mrs. Talboys , if Mrs. Talboys have be alive ? " 

 " the lady herself might have have a reason , " Robert answer , quietly . 

 " what reason ? " 

 " how if she have take advantage of George 's absence to win a rich husband ? how if she have marry again , and wish to throw my poor friend off the scent by this false announcement ? " 

 Lady Audley shrug her shoulder . 

 " your supposition be rather ridiculous , Mr. Audley , " she say ; " it be to be hop that you have some reasonable ground for they . " 

 " I have examine a file of each of the newspaper publish in Chelmsford and Colchester , " continue Robert , without reply to my lady 's last observation , " and I find in one of the Colchester paper , date July the 2d , 1857 , a brief paragraph among numerous miscellaneous scrap of information copy from other newspaper , to the effect that a Mr. George Talboys , an english gentleman , have arrive at Sydney from the gold - field , carry with he nugget and gold - dust to the amount of twenty thousand pound , and that he have realize his property and sail for Liverpool in the fast - sailing clipper Argus . this be a very small fact , of course , Lady Audley , but it be enough to prove that any person reside in Essex in the July of the year fifty - seven , be likely to become aware of George Talboys ' return from Australia . do you follow I ? " 

 " not very clearly , " say my lady . " what have the Essex paper to do with the death of Mrs. Talboys ? " 

 " we will come to that by - and - by , Lady Audley . I say that I believe the announcement in the Times to have be a false announcement , and a part of the conspiracy which be carry out by Helen Talboys and Lieutenant Maldon against my poor friend . " 

 " a conspiracy ! " 

 " yes , a conspiracy concoct by an artful woman , who have speculate upon the chance of her husband 's death , and have secure a splendid position at the risk of commit a crime ; a bold woman , my lady , who think to play her comedy out to the end without fear of detection ; a wicked woman , who do not care what misery she might inflict upon the honest heart of the man she betray ; but a foolish woman , who look at life as a game of chance , in which the good player be likely to hold the win card , forget that there be a Providence above the pitiful speculator , and that wicked secret be never permit to remain long hide . if this woman of whom I speak have never be guilty of any blacker sin than the publication of that lie announcement in the Times newspaper , I should still hold she as the most detestable and despicable of her sex the most pitiless and calculate of human creature . that cruel lie be a base and cowardly blow in the dark ; it be the treacherous dagger - thrust of an infamous assassin . " 

 " but how do you know that the announcement be a false one ? " ask my lady . " you tell we that you have be to Ventnor with Mr. Talboys to see his wife 's grave . who be it who die at Ventnor if it be not Mrs. Talboys ? " 

 " ah , Lady Audley , " say Robert , " that be a question which only two or three people can answer , and one or other of those person shall answer it to I before long . I tell you , my lady , that I be determined to unravel the mystery of George Talboy 's death . do you think I be to be put off by feminine prevarication by womanly trickery ? no ! link by link I have put together the chain of evidence , which want but a link here and there to be complete in its terrible strength . do you think I will suffer myself to be baffle ? do you think I shall fail to discover those miss link ? no , Lady Audley , I shall not fail , for I know where to look for they ! there be a fair - haired woman at Southampton a woman call Plowson , who have some share in the secret of the father of my friend 's wife . I have an idea that she can help I to discover the history of the woman who lie bury in Ventnor churchyard , and I will spare no trouble in make that discovery , unless " 

 " unless what ? " ask my lady , eagerly . 

 " unless the woman I wish to save from degradation and punishment accept the mercy I offer she , and take warning while there be still time . " 

 my lady shrug her graceful shoulder , and flash bright defiance out of her blue eye . 

 " she would be a very foolish woman if she suffer herself to be influence by any such absurdity , " she say . " you be hypochondriacal , Mr. Audley , and you must take camphor , or red lavender , or sal volatile . what can be more ridiculous than this idea which you have take into your head ? you lose your friend George Talboys in rather a mysterious manner that be to say , that gentleman choose to leave England without give you due notice . what of that ? you confess that he become an altered man after his wife 's death . he grow eccentric and misanthropical ; he affect an utter indifference as to what become of he . what more likely , then , than that he grow tired of the monotony of civilized life , and run away to those savage gold - field to find a distraction for his grief ? it be rather a romantic story , but by no mean an uncommon one . but you be not satisfied with this simple interpretation of your friend 's disappearance , and you build up some absurd theory of a conspiracy which have no existence except in your own overheat brain . Helen Talboys be dead . the Times newspaper declare she be dead . her own father tell you that she be dead . the headstone of the grave in Ventnor churchyard bear record of her death . by what right , " cry my lady , her voice rise to that shrill and pierce tone peculiar to she when affect by any intense agitation " by what right , Mr. Audley , do you come to I , and torment I about George Talboys by what right do you dare to say that his wife be still alive ? " 

 " by the right of circumstantial evidence , Lady Audley , " answer Robert " by the right of that circumstantial evidence which will sometimes fix the guilt of a man 's murder upon that person who , on the first hearing of the case , seem of all other man the most unlikely to be guilty . " 

 " what circumstantial evidence ? " 

 " the evidence of time and place . the evidence of handwriting . when Helen Talboys leave her father 's at Wildernsea , she leave a letter behind she a letter in which she declare that she be weary of her old life , and that she wish to seek a new home and a new fortune . that letter be in my possession . " 

 " indeed . " 

 " shall I tell you whose handwriting resemble that of Helen Talboys so closely , that the most dexterous expert could perceive no distinction between the two ? " 

 " a resemblance between the handwriting of two woman be no very uncommon circumstance now - a - day , " reply my lady carelessly . " I could show you the caligraphie of half - a - dozen female correspondent , and defy you to discover any great difference in they . " 

 " but what if the handwriting be a very uncommon one , present marked peculiarity by which it may be recognize among a hundred ? " 

 " why , in that case the coincidence be rather curious , " answer my lady ; " but it be nothing more than a coincidence . you can not deny the fact of Helen Talboys death on the ground that her handwriting resemble that of some survive person . " 

 " but if a series of such coincidence lead up to the same point , " say Robert . " Helen Talboys leave her father 's house , accord to the declaration in her own handwriting , because she be weary of her old life , and wish to begin a new one . do you know what I infer from this ? " 

 my lady shrug her shoulder . 

 " I have not the least idea , " she say ; " and as you have detain I in this gloomy place nearly half - an - hour , I must beg that you will release I , and let I go and dress for dinner . " 

 " no , Lady Audley , " answer Robert , with a cold sternness that be so strange to he as to transform he into another creature a pitiless embodiment of justice , a cruel instrument of retribution " no , Lady Audley , " he repeat , " I have tell you that womanly prevarication will not help you ; I tell you now that defiance will not serve you . I have deal fairly with you , and have give you fair warning . I give you indirect notice of your danger two month ago . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask my lady , suddenly . 

 " you do not choose to take that warning , Lady Audley , " pursue Robert , " and the time have come in which I must speak very plainly to you . do you think the gift which you have play against fortune be to hold you exempt from retribution ? no , my lady , your youth and beauty , your grace and refinement , only make the horrible secret of your life more horrible . I tell you that the evidence against you want only one link to be strong enough for your condemnation , and that link shall be add . Helen Talboys never return to her father 's house . when she desert that poor old father , she go away from his humble shelter with the declare intention of wash her hand of that old life . what do people generally do when they wish to begin a new existence to start for a second time in the race of life , free from the incumbrance that have fetter their first journey . they change their name , Lady Audley . Helen Talboys desert her infant son she go away from Wildernsea with the predetermination of sink her identity . she disappear as Helen Talboys upon the 16th of August , 1854 , and upon the 17th of that month she reappear as Lucy Graham , the friendless girl who undertake a profitless duty in consideration of a home in which she be ask no question . " 

 " you be mad , Mr. Audley ! " cry my lady . " you be mad , and my husband shall protect I from your insolence . what if this Helen Talboys run away from her home upon one day , and I enter my employer 's house upon the next , what do that prove ? " 

 " by itself , very little , " reply Robert Audley ; " but with the help of other evidence " 

 " what evidence ? " 

 " the evidence of two label , paste one over the other , upon a box leave by you in possession of Mrs. Vincent , the upper label bear the name of Miss Graham , the low that of Mrs. George Talboys . " 

 my lady be silent . Robert Audley could not see her face in the dusk , but he could see that her two small hand be clasp convulsively over her heart , and he know that the shot have go home to its mark . 

 " God help she , poor , wretched creature , " he think . " she know now that she be lose . I wonder if the judge of the land feel as I do now when they put on the black cap and pass sentence of death upon some poor , shiver wretch , who have never do they any wrong . do they feel a heroic fervor of virtuous indignation , or do they suffer this dull anguish which gnaw my vital as I talk to this helpless woman ? " 

 he walk by my lady 's side , silently , for some minute . they have be pace up and down the dim avenue , and they be now draw near the leafless shrubbery at one end of the lime - walk the shrubbery in which the ruin well shelter its unheeded decay among the tangled mass of briery underwood . 

 a winding pathway , neglect and half - choke with weed , lead toward this well . Robert leave the lime - walk , and strike into this pathway . there be more light in the shrubbery than in the avenue , and Mr. Audley wish to see my lady 's face . 

 he do not speak until they reach the patch of rank grass beside the well . the massive brickwork have fall away here and there , and loose fragment of masonry lie bury amidst weed and briar . the heavy post which have support the wooden roller still remain , but the iron spindle have be drag from its socket and lie a few pace from the well , rusty , discolor , and forget . 

 Robert Audley lean against one of the moss - grow post and look down at my lady 's face , very pale in the chill winter twilight . the moon have newly rise , a feebly luminous crescent in the gray heaven , and a faint , ghostly light mingle with the misty shadow of the decline day . my lady 's face seem like that face which Robert Audley have see in his dream look out of the white foam - flake on the green sea wave and lure his uncle to destruction . 

 " those two label be in my possession , Lady Audley , " he resume . " I take they from the box leave by you at Crescent Villas . I take they in the presence of Mrs. Vincent and Miss Tonks . have you any proof to offer against this evidence ? you say to I , ' I be Lucy Graham and I have nothing whatever to do with Helen Talboys . ' in that case you will produce witness who will declare your antecedent . where have you be live prior to your appearance at Crescent Villas ? you must have friend , relation , connection , who can come forward to prove as much as this for you ? if you be the most desolate creature upon this earth , you would be able to point to someone who could identify you with the past . " 

 " yes , " cry my lady , " if I be place in a criminal dock I could , no doubt , bring forward witness to refute your absurd accusation . but I be not in a criminal dock , Mr. Audley , and I do not choose to do anything but laugh at your ridiculous folly . I tell you that you be mad ! if you please to say that Helen Talboys be not dead , and that I be Helen Talboys , you may do so . if you choose to go wander about in the place in which I have live , and to the place in which this Mrs. Talboys have live , you must follow the bent of your own inclination , but I would warn you that such fancy have sometimes conduct people , as apparently sane as yourself , to the life - long imprisonment of a private lunatic - asylum . " 

 Robert Audley start and recoil a few pace among the weed and brushwood as my lady say this . 

 " she would be capable of any new crime to shield she from the consequence of the old one , " he think . " she would be capable of use her influence with my uncle to place I in a mad - house . " 

 I do not say that Robert Audley be a coward , but I will admit that a shiver of horror , something akin to fear , chill he to the heart as he remember the horrible thing that have be do by woman since that day upon which Eve be create to be Adam 's companion and help - meet in the garden of Eden . " what if this woman 's hellish power of dissimulation should be strong than the truth , and crush he ? she have not spar George Talboys when he stand in her way and menace she with a certain peril ; would she spare he who threaten she with a far great danger ? be woman merciful , or loving , or kind in proportion to their beauty and grace ? be there not a certain Monsieur Mazers de Latude , who have the bad fortune to offend the all - accomplish Madam de Pompadour , who expiate his youthful indiscretion by a life - long imprisonment ; who twice escape from prison , to be twice cast back into captivity ; who , trust in the tardy generosity of his beautiful foe , betray himself to an implacable fiend ? Robert Audley look at the pale face of the woman stand by his side ; that fair and beautiful face , illumine by starry - blue eye , that have a strange and surely a dangerous light in they ; and remember a hundred story of womanly perfidy , shudder as he think how unequal the struggle might be between himself and his uncle 's wife . 

 " I have show she my card , " he think , " but she have keep hers hide from I . the mask that she wear be not to be pluck away . my uncle would rather think I mad than believe her guilty . " 

 the pale face of Clara Talboys that grave and earnest face , so different in its character to my lady 's fragile beauty arise before he . 

 " what a coward I be to think of myself or my own danger , " he think . " the more I see of this woman the more reason I have to dread her influence upon other ; the more reason to wish she far away from this house . " 

 he look about he in the dusky obscurity . the lonely garden be as quiet as some solitary grave - yard , wall in and hide away from the world of the living . 

 " it be somewhere in this garden that she meet George Talboys upon the day of his disappearance , " he think . " I wonder where it be they meet ; I wonder where it be that he look into her cruel face and tax she with her falsehood ? " 

 my lady , with her little hand rest lightly upon the opposite post to that against which Robert lean , toy with her pretty foot among the long weed , but keep a furtive watch upon her enemy 's face . 

 " it be to be a duel to the death , then , my lady , " say Robert Audley , solemnly . " you refuse to accept my warning . you refuse to run away and repent of your wickedness in some foreign place , far from the generous gentleman you have deceive and fool by your false witchery . you choose to remain here and defy I . " 

 " I do , " answer Lady Audley , lift her head and look full at the young barrister . " it be no fault of mine if my husband 's nephew go mad , and choose I for the victim of his monomania . " 

 " so be it , then , my lady , " answer Robert . " my friend George Talboys be last see enter these garden by the little iron gate by which we come in to - night . he be last hear inquire for you . he be see to enter these garden , but he be never see to leave they . I believe that he meet his death within the boundary of these ground ; and that his body lie hide below some quiet water , or in some forget corner of this place . I will have such a search make as shall level that house to the earth and root up every tree in these garden , rather than I will fail in find the grave of my murder friend . " 

 Lucy Audley utter a long , low , wail cry , and throw up her arm above her head with a wild gesture of despair , but she make no answer to the ghastly charge of her accuser . her arm slowly drop , and she stand star at Robert Audley , her white face gleam through the dusk , her blue eye glitter and dilate . 

 " you shall never live to do this , " she say . " I will kill you first . why have you torment I so ? why could you not let I alone ? what harm have I ever do you that you should make yourself my persecutor , and dog my step , and watch my look , and play the spy upon I ? do you want to drive I mad ? do you know what it be to wrestle with a mad - woman ? no , " cry my lady , with a laugh , " you do not , or you would never " 

 she stop abruptly and draw herself suddenly to her full hight . it be the same action which Robert have see in the old half - drunken lieutenant ; and it have that same dignity the sublimity of extreme misery . 

 " go away , Mr. Audley , " she say . " you be mad , I tell you , you be mad . " 

 " I be go , my lady , " answer Robert , quietly . " I would have condone your crime out of pity to your wretcheness . you have refuse to accept my mercy . I wish to have pity upon the living . I shall henceforth only remember my duty to the dead . " 

 he walk away from the lonely well under the shadow of the lime . my lady follow he slowly down that long , gloomy avenue , and across the rustic bridge to the iron gate . as he pass through the gate , Alicia come out of a little half - glass door that open from an oak - panel breakfast - room at one angle of the house , and meet her cousin upon the threshold of the gateway . 

 " I have be look for you everywhere , Robert , " she say . " Papa have come down to the library , and will be glad to see you . " 

 the young man start at the sound of his cousin 's fresh young voice . " Good Heaven ! " he think , " can these two woman be of the same clay ? can this frank , generous - hearted girl , who can not conceal any impulse of her innocent nature , be of the same flesh and blood as that wretched creature whose shadow fall upon the path beside I ! " 

 he look from his cousin to Lady Audley , who stand near the gateway , wait for he to stand aside and let she pass he . 

 " I do not   know what have come to your cousin , my dear Alicia , " say my lady . " he be so absent - minded and eccentric as to be quite beyond my comprehension . " 

 " indeed , " exclaim Miss Audley ; " and yet I should imagine , from the length of your tete - a - tete , that you have make some effort to understand he . " 

 " oh , yes , " say Robert , quietly , " my lady and I understand each other very well ; but as it be grow late I will wish you good - evening , lady . I shall sleep to - night at Mount Stanning , as I have some business to attend to up there , and I will come down and see my uncle to - morrow . " 

 " what , Robert , " cry Alicia , " you surely will not   go away without see papa ? " 

 " yes , my dear , " answer the young man . " I be a little disturb by some disagreeable business in which I be very much concerned , and I would rather not see my uncle . good - night , Alicia . I will come or write to - morrow . " 

 he press his cousin 's hand , bow to Lady Audley , and walk away under the black shadow of the archway , and out into the quiet avenue beyond the Court . 

 my lady and Alicia stand watch he until he be out of sight . 

 " what in goodness ' name be the matter with my Cousin Robert ? " exclaim Miss Audley , impatiently , as the barrister disappear . " what do he mean by these absurd going - on ? some disagreeable business that disturb he , indeed ! I suppose the unhappy creature have have a brief force upon he by some evil - star attorney , and be sink into a state of imbecility from a dim consciousness of his own incompetence . " 

 " have you ever study your cousin 's character , Alicia ? " ask my lady , very seriously , after a pause . 

 " study his character ! no , Lady Audley . why should I study his character ? " say Alicia . " there be very little study require to convince anybody that he be a lazy , selfish Sybarite , who care for nothing in the world except his own ease and comfort . " 

 " but have you never think he eccentric ? " 

 " eccentric ! " repeat Alicia , purse up her red lip and shrug up her shoulder . " well , yes I believe that be the excuse generally make for such people . I suppose Bob be eccentric . " 

 " I have never hear you speak of his father and mother , " say my lady , thoughtfully . " do you remember they ? " 

 " I never see his mother . she be a Miss Dalrymple , a very dash girl , who run away with my uncle , and lose a very handsome fortune in consequence . she die at Nice when poor Bob be five year old . " 

 " do you ever hear anything particular about she ? " 

 " how do you mean ' particular ? ' " ask Alicia . 

 " do you ever hear that she be eccentric what people call ' odd ? ' " 

 " oh , no , " say Alicia , laugh . " my aunt be a very reasonable woman , I believe , though she do marry for love . but you must remember that she die before I be bear , and I have not , therefore , feel very much curiosity about she . " 

 " but you recollect your uncle , I suppose . " 

 " my Uncle Robert ? " say Alicia . " oh , yes , I remember he very well , indeed . " 

 " be he eccentric I mean to say , peculiar in his habit , like your cousin ? " 

 " yes , I believe Robert inherit all his absurdity from his father . my uncle express the same indifference for his fellow - creature as my cousin , but as he be a good husband , an affectionate father , and a kind master , nobody ever challenge his opinion . " 

 " but he be eccentric ? " 

 " yes ; I suppose he be generally think a little eccentric . " 

 " ah , " say my lady , gravely , " I think as much . do you know , Alicia , that madness be more often transmit from father to daughter , and from mother to daughter than from mother to son ? your cousin , Robert Audley , be a very handsome young man , and I believe , a very good - hearted young man , but he must be watch , Alicia , for he be mad ! " 

 " mad ! " cry Miss Audley , indignantly ; " you be dream , my lady , or or you be try to frighten I , " add the young lady , with considerable alarm . 

 " I only wish to put you on your guard , Alicia , " answer my lady . " Mr. Audley may be as you say , merely eccentric ; but he have talk to I this evening in a manner that have fill I with absolute terror , and I believe that he be go mad . I shall speak very seriously to Sir Michael this very night . " 

 " speak to papa , " exclaim Alicia ; " you surely will not   distress papa by suggest such a possibility ! " 

 " I shall only put he on his guard , my dear Alicia . " 

 " but he will never believe you , " say Miss Audley ; " he will laugh at such an idea . " 

 " no , Alicia ; he will believe anything that I tell he , " answer my lady , with a quiet smile . 

 CHAPTER XXX . 

 prepare the GROUND . 

 Lady Audley go from the garden to the library , a pleasant , oak - panel , homely apartment in which Sir Michael like to sit reading or writing , or arrange the business of his estate with his steward , a stalwart countryman , half agriculturalist , half lawyer , who rent a small farm a few mile from the Court . 

 the baronet be seat in a capacious easy - chair near the hearth . the bright blaze of the fire rise and fall , flash now upon the polished carving of the black - oak bookcase , now upon the gold and scarlet binding of the book ; sometimes glimmer upon the athenian helmet of a marble Pallas , sometimes light up the forehead of Sir Robert Peel . 

 the lamp upon the reading - table have not yet be light , and Sir Michael sit in the firelight wait for the coming of his young wife . 

 it be impossible for I ever to tell the purity of his generous love it be impossible to describe that affection which be as tender as the love of a young mother for her first bear , as brave and chivalrous as the heroic passion of a Bayard for his liege mistress . 

 the door open while he be think of this fondly - love wife , and look up , the baronet see the slender form stand in the doorway . 

 " why , my darling ! " he exclaim , as my lady close the door behind she , and come toward his chair , " I have be think of you and wait for you for an hour . where have you be , and what have you be do ? " 

 my lady , stand in the shadow rather than the light , pause a few moment before reply to this question . 

 " I have be to Chelmsford , " she say , ' shop ; and " 

 she hesitate twist her bonnet string in her thin white finger with an air of pretty embarrassment . 

 " and what , my dear ? " ask the baronet " what have you be do since you come from Chelmsford ? I hear a carriage stop at the door an hour ago . it be your , be it not ? " 

 " yes , I come home an hour ago , " answer my lady , with the same air of embarrassment . 

 " and what have you be do since you come home ? " 

 Sir Michael Audley ask this question with a slightly reproachful accent . his young wife 's presence make the sunshine of his life ; and though he could not bear to chain she to his side , it grieve he to think that she could willingly remain unnecessarily absent from he , fritter away her time in some childish talk or frivolous occupation . 

 " what have you be do since you come home , my dear ? " he repeat . " what have keep you so long away from I ? " 

 " I have be talk to Mr. Robert Audley . " 

 she still twist her bonnet - string round and round her finger . 

 she still speak with the same air of embarrassment . 

 " Robert ! " exclaim the baronet ; " be Robert here ? " 

 " he be here a little while ago . " 

 " and be here still , I suppose ? " 

 " no , he have go away . " 

 " gone away ! " cry Sir Michael . " what do you mean , my darling ? " 

 " I mean that your nephew come to the Court this afternoon . Alicia and I find he idle about the garden . he stay here till about a quarter of an hour ago talk to I , and then he hurry off without a word of explanation ; except , indeed , some ridiculous excuse about business at Mount Stanning . " 

 " business at Mount Stanning ! why , what business can he possibly have in that out - of - the - way place ? he have go to sleep at Mount Stanning , then , I suppose ? 

 " yes ; I think he say something to that effect . " 

 " upon my word , " exclaim the baronet , " I think that boy be half mad . " 

 my lady 's face be so much in shadow , that Sir Michael Audley be unaware of the bright change that come over its sickly pallor as he make this very commonplace observation . a triumphant smile illuminate Lucy Audley 's countenance , a smile that plainly say , " it be come it be come ; I can twist he which way I like . I can put black before he , and if I say it be white , he will believe I . " 

 but Sir Michael Audley in declare that his nephew 's wit be disorder , merely utter that commonplace ejaculation which be well - know to have very little meaning . the baronet have , it be true , no very great estimate of Robert 's faculty for the business of this everyday life . he be in the habit of look upon his nephew as a good - natured nonentity a man whose heart have be amply stock by liberal Nature with all the good thing the generous goddess have to bestow , but whose brain have be somewhat overlook in the distribution of intellectual gift . Sir Michael Audley make that mistake which be very commonly make by easy - go , well - to - do - observer , who have no occasion to look below the surface . he mistake laziness for incapacity . he think because his nephew be idle , he must necessarily be stupid . he conclude that if Robert do not distinguish himself , it be because he could not . 

 he forget the mute inglorious Miltons , who die voiceless and inarticulate for want of that dogged perseverance , that blind courage , which the poet must possess before he can find a publisher ; he forget the Cromwells , who see the noble vessel of the state flounder upon a sea of confusion , and go down in a tempest of noisy bewilderment , and who yet be powerless to get at the helm ; forbid even to send out a life - boat to the sink ship . surely it be a mistake to judge of what a man can do by that which he have do . 

 the world 's Valhalla be a close borough , and perhaps the great man may be those who perish silently far away from the sacred portal . perhaps the pure and bright spirit be those who shrink from the turmoil of the race - course the tumult and confusion of the struggle . the game of life be something like the game of ťcarte , and it may be that the very good card be sometimes leave in the pack . 

 my lady throw off her bonnet , and seat herself upon a velvet - cover footstool at Sir Michael 's foot . there be nothing study or affect in this girlish action . it be so natural to Lucy Audley to be childish , that no one would have wish to see she otherwise . it would have seem as foolish to expect dignified reserve or womanly gravity from this amber - haired siren , as to wish for rich bass amid the clear treble of a sky - lark 's song . 

 she sit with her pale face turn away from the firelight , and with her hand lock together upon the arm of her husband 's easy - chair . they be very restless , these slender white hand . my lady twist the jeweled finger in and out of each other as she talk to her husband . 

 " I want to come to you , you know , dear , " say she " I want to come to you directly I get home , but Mr. Audley insist upon my stopping to talk to he . " 

 " but what about , my love ? " ask the baronet . " what could Robert have to say to you ? " 

 my lady do not answer this question . her fair head drop upon her husband 's knee , her rippling , yellow curl fall over her face . 

 Sir Michael lift that beautiful head with his strong hand , and raise my lady 's face . the firelight shin on that pale face light up the large , soft blue eye and show they drown in tear . 

 " Lucy , Lucy ! " cry the baronet , " what be the meaning of this ? my love , my love ! what have happen to distress you in this manner ? " 

 Lady Audley try to speak , but the word die inarticulately upon her trembling lip . a choke sensation in her throat seem to strangle those false and plausible word , her only armor against her enemy . she could not speak . the agony she have endure silently in the dismal lime - walk have grow too strong for she , and she break into a tempest of hysterical sobbing . it be no simulated grief that shake her slender frame and tear at she like some ravenous beast that would have rent she piecemeal with its horrible strength . it be a storm of real anguish and terror , of remorse and misery . it be the one wild outcry , in which the woman 's feebler nature get the well of the siren 's art . 

 it be not thus that she have mean to fight her terrible duel with Robert Audley . those be not the weapon which she have intend to use ; but perhaps no artifice which she could have devise would have serve she so well as this one outburst of natural grief . it shake her husband to the very soul . it bewilder and terrify he . it reduce the strong intellect of the man to helpless confusion and perplexity . it strike at the one weak point in a good man 's nature . it appeal straight to Sir Michael Audley 's affection for his wife . 

 ah , Heaven help a strong man 's tender weakness for the woman he love ! Heaven pity he when the guilty creature have deceive he and come with her tear and lamentation to throw herself at his foot in self - abandonment and remorse ; torture he with the sight of her agony ; rend his heart with her sob , lacerate his breast with her groan multiply her suffering into a great anguish for he to bear ! multiply they by twenty - fold ; multiply they in a ratio of a brave man 's capacity for endurance . Heaven forgive he , if madden by that cruel agony , the balance waver for a moment , and he be ready to forgive anything ; ready to take this wretched one to the shelter of his breast , and to pardon that which the stern voice of manly honor urge must not be pardon . pity he , pity he ! the wife 's bad remorse when she stand without the threshold of the home she may never enter more be not equal to the agony of the husband who close the portal on that familiar and entreating face . the anguish of the mother who may never look again upon her child be less than the torment of the father who have to say to those little one , " my darling , you be henceforth motherless . " 

 Sir Michael Audley rise from his chair , tremble with indignation , and ready to do immediate battle with the person who have cause his wife 's grief . 

 " Lucy , " he say , " Lucy , I insist upon your tell I what and who have distress you . I insist upon it . whoever have annoy you shall answer to I for your grief . come , my love , tell I directly what it be . " 

 he seat himself and bent over the droop figure at his foot , calm his own agitation in his desire to soothe his wife 's distress . 

 " tell I what it be , my dear , " he whisper , tenderly . 

 the sharp paroxysm have pass away , and my lady look up . a glitter light shine through the tear in her eye , and the line about her pretty rosy mouth , those hard and cruel line which Robert Audley have observe in the pre - raphaelite portrait , be plainly visible in the firelight . 

 " I be very silly , " she say ; " but really he have make I quite hysterical . " 

 " who who have make you hysterical ? " 

 " your nephew Mr. Robert Audley . " 

 " Robert , " cry the baronet . " Lucy , what do you mean ? " 

 " I tell you that Mr. Audley insist upon my go into the lime - walk , dear , " say my lady . " he want to talk to I , he say , and I go , and he say such horrible thing that " 

 " what horrible thing , Lucy ? " 

 Lady Audley shudder , and clung with convulsive finger to the strong hand that have rest caressingly upon her shoulder . 

 " what do he say , Lucy ? " 

 " oh , my dear love , how can I tell you ? " cry my lady . " I know that I shall distress you or you will laugh at I , and then " 

 " Laugh at you ? no , Lucy . " 

 Lady Audley be silent for a moment . she sit look straight before she into the fire , with her finger still lock about her husband 's hand . 

 " my dear , " she say , slowly , hesitate now and then between her word , as if she almost shrunk from utter they , " have you ever I be so afraid of vex you have you ever think Mr. Audley a little a little " 

 " a little what , my darling ? " 

 " a little out of his mind ? " falter Lady Audley . 

 " out of his mind ! " cry Sir Michael . " my dear girl , what be you think of ? " 

 " you say just now , dear , that you think he be half mad . " 

 " do I , my love ? " say the baronet , laugh . " I do not   remember say it , and it be a mere faáon de parler , that mean nothing whatever . Robert may be a little eccentric a little stupid , perhaps he may not   be overburden with wit , but I do not   think he have brain enough for madness . I believe it be generally your great intellect that get out of order . " 

 " but madness be sometimes hereditary , " say my lady . " Mr. Audley may have inherit " 

 " he have inherit no madness from his father 's family , " interrupt Sir Michael . " the Audleys have never people private lunatic asylum or feed mad doctor . " 

 " nor from his mother 's family ? " 

 " not to my knowledge . " 

 " People generally keep these thing a secret , " say my lady , gravely . " there may have be madness in your sister - in - law 's family . " 

 " I do not   think so , my dear , " reply Sir Michael . " but , Lucy , tell I what , in Heaven 's name , have put this idea into your head . " 

 " I have be try to account for your nephew 's conduct . I can account for it in no other manner . if you have hear the thing he say to I to - night , Sir Michael , you too might have think he mad . " 

 " but what do he say , Lucy ? " 

 " I can scarcely tell you . you can see how much he have stupefy and bewilder I . I believe he have live too long alone in those solitary Temple chamber . perhaps he read too much , or smoke too much . you know that some physician declare madness to be a mere illness of the brain an illness to which any one be subject , and which may be produce by give cause , and cure by give mean . " 

 Lady Audley 's eye be still fix upon the burn coal in the wide grate . she speak as if she have be discuss a subject that she have often hear discuss before . she speak as if her mind have almost wander away from the thought of her husband 's nephew to the wide question of madness in the abstract . 

 " why should he not be mad ? " resume my lady . " People be insane for year and year before their insanity be find out . they know that they be mad , but they know how to keep their secret ; and , perhaps , they may sometimes keep it till they die . sometimes a paroxysm seize they , and in an evil hour they betray themselves . they commit a crime , perhaps . the horrible temptation of opportunity assail they ; the knife be in their hand , and the unconscious victim by their side . they may conquer the restless demon and go away and die innocent of any violent deed ; but they may yield to the horrible temptation the frightful , passionate , hungry craving for violence and horror . they sometimes yield and be lose . " 

 Lady Audley 's voice rise as she argue this dreadful question , the hysterical excitement from which she have only just recover have leave its effect upon she , but she control herself , and her tone grow calm as she resume : 

 " Robert Audley be mad , " she say , decisively . " what be one of the strange diagnostic of madness what be the first appalling sign of mental aberration ? the mind become stationary ; the brain stagnate ; the even current of reflection be interrupt ; the thinking power of the brain resolve itself into a monotone . as the water of a tideless pool putrefy by reason of their stagnation , the mind become turbid and corrupt through lack of action ; and the perpetual reflection upon one subject resolve itself into monomania . Robert Audley be a monomaniac . the disappearance of his friend , George Talboys , grieve and bewilder he . he dwell upon this one idea until he lose the power of thinking of anything else . the one idea look at perpetually become distorted to his mental vision . repeat the common word in the english language twenty time , and before the twentieth repetition you will have begin to wonder whether the word which you repeat be really the word you mean to utter . Robert Audley have think of his friend 's disappearance until the one idea have do its fatal and unhealthy work . he look at a common event with a vision that be disease , and he distort it into a gloomy horror engender of his own monomania . if you do not want to make I as mad as he be , you must never let I see he again . he declare to - night that George Talboys be murder in this place , and that he will root up every tree in the garden , and pull down every brick in the house in search for " 

 my lady pause . the word die away upon her lip . she have exhaust herself by the strange energy with which she have speak . she have be transform from a frivolous , childish beauty into a woman , strong to argue her own cause and plead her own defense . 

 " pull down this house ? " cry the baronet . " George Talboys murder at Audley Court ! do Robert say this , Lucy ? " 

 " he say something of that kind something that frighten I very much . " 

 " then he must be mad , " say Sir Michael , gravely . " I be bewilder by what you tell I . do he really say this , Lucy , or do you misunderstand he ? " 

 " I I do not   think I do , " falter my lady . " you see how frightened I be when I first come in . I should not have be so much agitated if he have not   say something horrible . " 

 Lady Audley have avail herself of the very strong argument by which she could help her cause . 

 " to be sure , my darling , to be sure , " answer the baronet . " what could have put such a horrible fancy into the unhappy boy 's head . this Mr. Talboys a perfect stranger to all of we murder at Audley Court ! I will go to Mount Stanning to - night , and see Robert . I have know he ever since he be a baby , and I can not be deceive in he . if there be really anything wrong , he will not be able to conceal it from I . " 

 my lady shrug her shoulder . 

 " that be rather an open question , " she say . " it be generally a stranger who be the first to observe any psychological peculiarity . " 

 the big word sound strange from my lady 's rosy lip ; but her newly - adopt wisdom have a certain quaint prettiness about it , which charm and bewilder her husband . 

 " but you must not go to Mount Stanning , my dear darling , " she say , tenderly . " remember that you be under strict order to stay in door until the weather be milder , and the sun shin upon this cruel ice - bind country . " 

 Sir Michael Audley sink back in his capacious chair with a sigh of resignation . 

 " that be true , Lucy , " he say ; " we must obey Mr. Dawson . I suppose Robert will come to see I to - morrow . " 

 " yes , dear . I think he say he would . " 

 " then we must wait till to - morrow , my darling . I can not   believe that there really be anything wrong with the poor boy I can not   believe it , Lucy . " 

 " then how do you account for this extraordinary delusion about this Mr. Talboys ? " ask my lady . 

 Sir Michael shake his head . 

 " I do not   know , Lucy I do not   know , " he answer . " it be always so difficult to believe that any one of the calamity that continually befall our fellow - man will ever happen to we . I can not   believe that my nephew 's mind be impair I can not   believe it . I I will get he to stop here , Lucy , and I will watch he closely . I tell you , my love , if there be anything wrong I be sure to find it out . I can not   be mistake in a young man who have always be the same to I as my own son . but , my darling , why be you so frightened by Robert 's wild talk ? it could not affect you . " 

 my lady sigh piteously . 

 " you must think I very strong - minded , Sir Michael , " she say , with rather an injure air , " if you imagine I can hear of these sort of thing indifferently . I know I shall never be able to see Mr. Audley again . " 

 " and you shall not , my dear you shall not . " 

 " you say just now you would have he here , " murmur Lady Audley . 

 " but I will not , my darling girl , if his presence annoy you . Good Heaven ! Lucy , can you imagine for a moment that I have any high wish than to promote your happiness ? I will consult some London physician about Robert , and let he discover if there be really anything the matter with my poor brother 's only son . you shall not be annoy , Lucy . " 

 " you must think I very unkind , dear , " say my lady , " and I know I ought not to be annoy by the poor fellow ; but he really seem to have take some absurd notion into his head about I . " 

 " about you , Lucy ! " cry Sir Michael . 

 " yes , dear . he seem to connect I in some vague manner which I can not quite understand with the disappearance of this Mr. Talboys . " 

 " impossible , Lucy ! you must have misunderstood he . " 

 " I do not   think so . " 

 " then he must be mad , " say the baronet " he must be mad . I will wait till he go back to town , and then send some one to his chamber to talk to he . Good Heaven ! what a mysterious business this be . " 

 " I fear I have distress you , darling , " murmur Lady Audley . 

 " yes , my dear , I be very much distressed by what you have tell I ; but you be quite right to talk to I frankly about this dreadful business . I must think it over , dearest , and try and decide what be good to be do . " 

 my lady rise from the low ottoman on which she have be seat . the fire have burn down , and there be only a faint glow of red light in the room . Lucy Audley bend over her husband 's chair , and put her lip to his broad forehead . 

 " how good you have always be to I , dear , " she whisper softly . " you would never let any one influence you against I , would you , dear ? " 

 " influence I against you ? " repeat the baronet . " no , my love . " 

 " because you know , dear , " pursue my lady , " there be wicked people as well as mad people in the world , and there may be some person to whose interest it would be to injure I . " 

 " they have well not try it , then , my dear , " answer Sir Michael ; " they would find themselves in rather a dangerous position if they do . " 

 Lady Audley laugh aloud , with a gay , triumphant , silvery peal of laughter that vibrate through the quiet room . 

 " my own dear darling , " she say , " I know you love I . and now I must run away , dear , for it be past seven o'clock . I be engage to dine at Mrs. Montford 's , but I must send a groom with a message of apology , for Mr. Audley have make I quite unfit for company . I shall stay at home and nurse you , dear . you will go to bed very early , will not   you , and take great care of yourself ? " 

 " yes , dear . " 

 my lady trip out of the room to give her order about the message that be to be carry to the house at which she be to have din . she pause for a moment as she close the library door she pause , and lay her hand upon her breast to check the rapid throbbing of her heart . 

 " I have be afraid of you , Mr. Robert Audley , " she think ; " but perhaps the time may come in which you will have cause to be afraid of I . " 

 CHAPTER XXXI . 

 PHOEBE 'S PETITION . 

 the division between Lady Audley and her step - daughter have not become any narrower in the two month which have elapse since the pleasant Christmas holiday time have be keep at Audley Court . there be no open warfare between the two woman ; there be only an armed neutrality , break every now and then by brief feminine skirmish and transient wordy tempest . I be sorry to say that Alicia would very much have prefer a hearty pitch battle to this silent and undemonstrative disunion ; but it be not very easy to quarrel with my lady . she have soft answer for the turning away of wrath . she could smile bewitchingly at her step - daughter 's open petulance , and laugh merrily at the young lady 's ill - temper . perhaps have she be less amiable , have she be more like Alicia in disposition , the two lady might have expend their enmity in one tremendous quarrel , and might ever afterward have be affectionate and friendly . but Lucy Audley would not make war . she carry forward the sum of her dislike , and put it out at a steady rate of interest , until the breach between her step - daughter and herself , widen a little every day , become a great gulf , utterly impassable by olive - branch - bear dove from either side of the abyss . there can be no reconciliation where there be no open warfare . there must be a battle , a brave , boisterous battle , with pennant wave and cannon roaring , before there can be peaceful treaty and enthusiastic shaking of hand . perhaps the union between France and England owe its great force to the recollection of Cressy and Waterloo , Navarino and Trafalgar . we have hat each other and lick each other and have it out , as the common phrase go ; and we can afford now to fall into each other ' arm and vow eternal friendship and everlaste brotherhood . let we hope that when Northern Yankeedom have decimate and be decimate , bluster Jonathan may fle himself upon his southern brother 's breast , forgiving and forgive . 

 Alicia Audley and her father 's pretty wife have plenty of room for the comfortable indulgence of their dislike in the spacious old mansion . my lady have her own apartment , as we know luxurious chamber , in which all conceivable elegancie have be gather for the comfort of their occupant . Alicia have her own room in another part of the large house . she have her favorite mare , her Newfoundland dog , and her draw material , and she make herself tolerably happy . she be not very happy , this frank , generous - hearted girl , for it be scarcely possible that she could be altogether at ease in the constrained atmosphere of the Court . her father be change ; that dear father over whom she have once reign supreme with the boundless authority of a spoiled child , have accept another ruler and submit to a new dynasty . little by little my lady 's petty power make itself feel in that narrow household ; and Alicia see her father gradually lure across the gulf that divide Lady Audley from her step - daughter , until he stand at last quite upon the other side of the abyss , and look coldly upon his only child across that widen chasm . 


 Alicia feel that he be lose to she . my lady 's beaming smile , my lady 's win word , my lady 's radiant glance and bewitch grace have do their work of enchantment , and Sir Michael have grow to look upon his daughter as a somewhat wilful and capricious young person who have behave with determined unkindness to the wife he love . 

 Poor Alicia see all this , and bear her burden as well as she could . it seem very hard to be a handsome , gray - eyed heiress , with dog and horse and servant at her command , and yet to be so much alone in the world as to know of not one friendly ear into which she might pour her sorrow . 

 " if Bob be good for anything I could have tell he how unhappy I be , " think Miss Audley ; " but I may just as well tell Caesar my trouble for any consolation I should get from Cousin Robert . " 

 Sir Michael Audley obey his pretty nurse , and go to bed a little after nine o'clock upon this bleak March evening . perhaps the baronet 's bedroom be about the pleasantťst retreat that an invalid could have choose in such cold and cheerless weather . the dark - green velvet curtain be draw before the window and about the ponderous bed . the wood fire burn redly upon the broad hearth . the reading lamp be light upon a delicious little table close to Sir Michael 's pillow , and a heap of magazine and newspaper have be arrange by my lady 's own fair hand for the pleasure of the invalid . 

 Lady Audley sit by the bedside for about ten minute , talk to her husband , talk very seriously , about this strange and awful question Robert Audley 's lunacy ; but at the end of that time she rise and bid her husband good - night . 

 she lower the green silk shade before the reading lamp , adjust it carefully for the repose of the baronet 's eye . 

 " I shall leave you , dear , " she say . " if you can sleep , so much the well . if you wish to read , the book and paper be close to you . I will leave the door between the room open , and I shall hear your voice if you call I . " 

 Lady Audley go through her dressing - room into the boudoir , where she have sit with her husband since dinner . 

 every evidence of womanly refinement be visible in the elegant chamber . my lady 's piano be open , cover with scattered sheet of music and exquisitely - bind collection of scena and fantasia which no master need have disdain to study . my lady 's easel stand near the window , bear witness to my lady 's artistic talent , in the shape of a water - color sketch of the Court and garden . my lady 's fairy - like embroidery of lace and muslin , rainbow - hue silk , and delicately - tint wool litter the luxurious apartment ; while the look - glass , cunningly place at angle and opposite corner by an artistic upholsterer , multiply my lady 's image , and in that image reflect the most beautiful object in the enchanted chamber . 

 amid all this lamplight , gilding , color , wealth , and beauty , Lucy Audley sit down on a low seat by the fire to think . 

 if Mr. Holman Hunt could have peep into the pretty boudoir , I think the picture would have be photograph upon his brain to be reproduce by - and - by upon a bishop 's half - length for the glorification of the pre - raphaelite brotherhood . my lady in that half - recumbent attitude , with her elbow rest on one knee , and her perfect chin support by her hand , the rich fold of drapery fall away in long undulating line from the exquisite outline of her figure , and the luminous , rose - color firelight envelop she in a soft haze , only break by the golden glitter of her yellow hair beautiful in herself , but make bewilderingly beautiful by the gorgeous surrounding which adorn the shrine of her loveliness . drinking - cup of gold and ivory , chisel by Benvenuto Cellini ; cabinet of buhl and porcelain , bear the cipher of Austrian Marie - Antoinette , amid device of rosebud and true - lover ' knot , bird and butterfly , cupidon and shepherdess , goddess , courtier , cottager , and milkmaid ; statuette of parian marble and biscuit china ; gild basket of hothouse flower ; fantastical casket of indian filigree - work ; fragile tea - cup of turquoise china , adorn by medallion miniature of Louis the Great and Louis the well - beloved , Louise de la Valliere , Athenais de Montespan , and Marie Jeanne Gomard de Vaubernier : cabinet picture and gild mirror , shimmer satin and diaphanous lace ; all that gold can buy or art devise have be gather together for the beautification of this quiet chamber in which my lady sit listen to the mourning of the shrill March wind , and the flapping of the ivy leave against the casement , and look into the red chasm in the burn coal . 

 I should be preach a very stale sermon , and harp upon a very familiar moral , if I be to seize this opportunity of declaim against art and beauty , because my lady be more wretched in this elegant apartment than many a half - starve seamstress in her dreary garret . she be wretche by reason of a wound which lie too deep for the possibility of any solace from such plaster as wealth and luxury ; but her wretchedness be of an abnormal nature , and I can see no occasion for seize upon the fact of her misery as an argument in favor of poverty and discomfort as oppose to opulence . the Benvenuto Cellini carving and the Sevres porcelain could not give her happiness , because she have pass out of their region . she be no long innocent ; and the pleasure we take in art and loveliness be an innocent pleasure , have pass beyond her reach . six or seven year before , she would have be happy in the possession of this little Aladdin 's palace ; but she have wander out of the circle of careless , pleasure seek creature , she have stray far away into a desolate labyrinth of guilt and treachery , terror and crime , and all the treasure that have be collect for she could have give she no pleasure but one , the pleasure of fling they into a heap beneath her foot and trample upon they and destroy they in her cruel despair . 

 there be some thing that would have inspire she with an awful joy , a horrible rejoicing . if Robert Audley , her pitiless enemy , her unrelenting pursuer , have lie dead in the adjoining chamber , she would have exult over his bier . 

 what pleasure could have remain for Lucretia Borgia and Catharine de Medici , when the dreadful boundary line between innocence and guilt be pass , and the lose creature stand upon the lonely outer side ? only horrible , vengeful joy , and treacherous delight be leave for these miserable woman . with what disdainful bitterness they must have watch the frivolous vanity , the petty deception , the paltry sin of ordinary offender . perhaps they take a horrible pride in the enormity of their wickedness ; in this " divinity of Hell , " which make they great among sinful creature . 

 my lady , brood by the fire in her lonely chamber , with her large , clear blue eye fix upon the yawning gulfs of lurid crimson in the burn coal , may have think of many thing very far away from the terribly silent struggle in which she be engage . she may have think of long - ago year of childish innocence , childish folly and selfishness , of frivolous , feminine sin that have weigh very lightly upon her conscience . perhaps in that retrospective revery she recall that early time in which she have first look in the glass and discover that she be beautiful ; that fatal early time in which she have first begin to look upon her loveliness as a right divine , a boundless possession which be to be a set - off against all girlish shortcoming , a counterbalance of every youthful sin . do she remember the day in which that fairy dower of beauty have first teach she to be selfish and cruel , indifferent to the joy and sorrow of other , cold - hearted and capricious , greedy of admiration , exact and tyrannical with that petty woman 's tyranny which be the bad of despotism ? do she trace every sin of her life back to its true source ? and do she discover that poison fountain in her own exaggerated estimate of the value of a pretty face ? surely , if her thought wander so far along the backward current of her life , she must have repent in bitterness and despair of that first day in which the master - passion of her life have become her ruler , and the three demon of Vanity , Selfishness , and Ambition , have join hand and say , " this woman be our slave , let we see what she will become under our guidance . " 

 how small those first youthful error seem as my lady look back upon they in that long revery by the lonely hearth ! what small vanity , what petty cruelty ! a triumph over a schoolfellow ; a flirtation with the lover of a friend ; an assertion of the right divine invest in blue eye and shimmer golden - tint hair . but how terribly that narrow pathway have widen out into the broad highroad of sin , and how swift the footstep have become upon the now familiar way ! 

 my lady twist her finger in her loose amber curl , and make as if she would have tear they from her head . but even in that moment of mute despair the unyielding dominion of beauty assert itself , and she release the poor tangle glitter of ringlet , leave they to make a halo round her head in the dim firelight . 

 " I be not wicked when I be young , " she think , as she star gloomingly at the fire , " I be only thoughtless . I never do any harm at least , wilfully . have I ever be really wicked , I wonder ? " she muse . " my bad wickedness have be the result of wild impulse , and not of deeply - lay plot . I be not like the woman I have read of , who have lie night after night in the horrible darkness and stillness , plan out treacherous deed , and arrange every circumstance of an appoint crime . I wonder whether they suffer those woman whether they ever suffer as " 

 her thought wander away into a weary maze of confusion . suddenly she draw herself up with a proud , defiant gesture , and her eye glitter with a light that be not entirely reflect from the fire . 

 " you be mad , Mr. Robert Audley , " she say , " you be mad , and your fancy be a madman 's fancy . I know what madness be . I know its sign and token , and I say that you be mad . " 

 she put her hand to her head , as if think of something which confuse and bewilder she , and which she find it difficult to contemplate with calmness . 

 " dare I defy he ? " she mutter . " dare I ? dare I ? will he stop , now that he have once go so far ? will he stop for fear of I ? will he stop for fear of I , when the thought of what his uncle must suffer have not stop he ? will anything stop he but death ? " 

 she pronounce the last word in an awful whisper ; and with her head bend forward , her eye dilate , and her lip still part as they have be part in her utterance of that final word " death , " she sit blankly star at the fire . 

 " I can not   plot horrible thing , " she mutter , presently ; " my brain be not   strong enough , or I be not wicked enough , or brave enough . if I meet Robert Audley in those lonely garden , as I " 

 the current of her thought be interrupt by a cautious knocking at her door . she rise suddenly , startle by any sound in the stillness of her room . she rise , and throw herself into a low chair near the fire . she fling her beautiful head back upon the soft cushion , and take a book from the table near she . insignificant as this action be , it speak very plainly . it speak very plainly of ever - recur fear of fatal necessity for concealment of a mind that in its silent agony be ever alive to the importance of outward effect . it tell more plainly than anything else could have tell how complete an actress my lady have be make by the awful necessity of her life . 

 the modest rap at the door be repeat . 

 " come in , " cry Lady Audley , in her lively tone . 

 the door be open with that respectful noiselessness peculiar to a well - breed servant , and a young woman , plainly dress , and carry some of the cold March wind in the fold of her garment , cross the threshold of the apartment and linger near the door , wait permission to approach the inner region of my lady 's retreat . 

 it be Phoebe Marks , the pale - face wife of the Mount Stanning innkeeper . 

 " I beg pardon , my lady , for intrude without leave , " she say ; " but I think I might venture to come straight up without wait for permission . " 

 " yes , yes , Phoebe , to be sure . take off your bonnet , you wretche , cold - look creature , and come sit down here . " 

 Lady Audley point to the low ottoman upon which she have herself be seat a few minute before . the lady 's maid have often sit upon it listen to her mistress ' prattle in the old day , when she have be my lady 's chief companion and confidante . 

 " sit down here , Phoebe , " Lady Audley repeat ; ' sit down here and talk to I ; I be very glad you come here to - night . I be horribly lonely in this dreary place . " 

 my lady shiver and look round at the bright collection of bric - a - brac , as if the Sevres and bronze , the buhl and ormolu , have be the moldering adornment of some ruin castle . the dreary wretchedness of her thought have communicate itself to every object about she , and all outer thing take their color from that weary inner life which hold its slow course of secret anguish in her breast . she have speak the entire truth in say that she be glad of her lady 's maid 's visit . her frivolous nature clung to this weak shelter in the hour of her fear and suffering . there be sympathy between she and this girl , who be like herself , inwardly as well as outwardly like herself , selfish , and cold , and cruel , eager for her own advancement , and greedy of opulence and elegance ; angry with the lot that have be cast she , and weary of dull dependence . my lady hat Alicia for her frank , passionate , generous , dare nature ; she hat her step - daughter , and clung to this pale - faced , pale - haired girl , whom she think neither well nor bad than herself . 

 Phoebe Marks obey her late mistress ' command , and take off her bonnet before seat herself on the ottoman at Lady Audley 's foot . her smooth band of light hair be unruffled by the March wind ; her trimly - make drab dress and linen collar be as neatly arrange as they could have be have she only that moment complete her toilet . 

 " Sir Michael be well , I hope , my lady , " she say . 

 " yes , Phoebe , much well . he be asleep . you may close that door , " add Lady Audley , with a motion of her head toward the door of communication between the room , which have be leave open . 

 Mrs. Marks obey submissively , and then return to her seat . 

 " I be very , very unhappy , Phoebe , " my lady say , fretfully ; " wretchedly miserable . " 

 " about the secret ? " ask Mrs. Marks , in a half whisper . 

 my lady do not notice that question . she resume in the same complain tone . she be glad to be able to complain even to this lady 's maid . she have brood over her fear , and have suffer in secret so long , that it be an inexpressible relief to she to bemoan her fate aloud . 

 " I be cruelly persecute and harass , Phoebe Marks , " she say . " I be pursue and torment by a man whom I never injure , whom I have never wish to injure . I be never suffer to rest by this relentless tormentor , and " 

 she pause , star at the fire again , as she have do in her loneliness . lose again in the dark intricacy of thought which wander hither and thither in a dreadful chaos of terrified bewilderment , she could not come to any fix conclusion . 

 Phoebe Marks watch my lady 's face , look upward at her late mistress with pale , anxious eye , that only relax their watchfulness when Lady Audley 's glance meet that of her companion . 

 " I think I know whom you mean , my lady , " say the innkeeper 's wife , after a pause ; " I think I know who it be who be so cruel to you . " 

 " oh , of course , " answer my lady , bitterly ; " my secret be everybody 's secret . you know all about it , no doubt . " 

 " the person be a gentleman be he not , my lady ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " a gentleman who come to the Castle Inn two month ago , when I warn you " 

 " yes , yes , " answer my lady , impatiently . 

 " I think so . the same gentleman be at our place to - night , my lady . " 

 Lady Audley start up from her chair start up as if she would have do something desperate in her despairing fury ; but she sink back again with a weary , querulous sigh . what warfare could such a feeble creature wage against her fate ? what could she do but wind like a hunted hare till she find her way back to the starting - point of the cruel chase , to be there trample down by her pursuer ? 

 " at the Castle Inn ? " she cry . " I might have know as much . he have go there to wring my secret from your husband . Fool ! " she exclaim , suddenly turn upon Phoebe Marks in a transport of anger , " do you want to destroy I that you have leave those two man together ? " 

 Mrs. Marks clasp her hand piteously . 

 " I do not   come away of my own free will , my lady , " she say ; " no one could have be more unwilling to leave the house than I be this night . I be send here . " 

 " who send you here ? " 

 " Luke , my lady . you can not   tell how hard he can be upon I if I go against he . " 

 " why do he send you ? " 

 the innkeeper 's wife drop her eyelid under Lady Audley 's angry glance , and hesitate confusedly before she answer this question . 

 " indeed , my lady , " she stammer , " I do not   want to come . I tell Luke that it be too bad for we to worry you , first ask this favor , and then ask that , and never leave you alone for a month together ; but but he bear I down with his loud , bluster talk , and he make I come . " 

 " yes , yes , " cry Lady Audley , impatiently . " I know that . I want to know why you have come . " 

 " why , you know , my lady , " answer Phoebe , half reluctantly , " Luke be very extravagant ; and all I can say to he , I can not   get he to be careful or steady . he be not sober ; and when he be drink with a lot of rough countryman , and drinking , perhaps even more than they do , it be not   likely that his head can be very clear for account . if it have not   be for I we should have be ruin before this ; and hard as I have   try , I have not   be able to keep the ruin off . you remember give I the money for the brewer 's bill , my lady ? " 

 " yes , I remember very well , " answer Lady Audley , with a bitter laugh , " for I want that money to pay my own bill . " 

 " I know you do , my lady , and it be very , very hard for I to have to come and ask you for it , after all that we have receive from you before . but that be not   the bad : when Luke send I down here to beg the favor of that help he never tell I that the Christmas rent be still owe ; but it be , my lady , and it be owe now , and and there be a bailiff in the house to - night , and we be to be sell up to - morrow unless " 

 " unless I pay your rent , I suppose , " cry Lucy Audley . " I might have guess what be come . " 

 " indeed , indeed , my lady , I would not   have ask it , " sob Phoebe Marks , " but he make I come . " 

 " yes , " answer my lady , bitterly , " he make you come ; and he will make you come whenever he please , and whenever he want money for the gratification of his low vice ; and you and he be my pensioner as long as I live , or as long as I have any money to give ; for I suppose when my purse be empty and my credit ruin , you and your husband will turn upon I and sell I to the high bidder . do you know , Phoebe Marks , that my jewel - case have be half empty to meet your claim ? do you know that my pin - money , which I think such a princely allowance when my marriage settlement be make , and when I be a poor governess at Mr. Dawson 's , Heaven help I ! my pin - money have be overdraw half a year to satisfy your demand ? what can I do to appease you ? shall I sell my Marie Antoinette cabinet , or my pompadour china , Leroy 's and Benson 's ormolu clock , or my Gobelin tapestrie chair and othman ? how shall I satisfy you next ? " 

 " oh , my lady , my lady , " cry Phoebe , piteously , " do not   be so cruel to I ; you know , you know that it be not   I who want to impose upon you . " 

 " I know nothing , " exclaim Lady Audley , " except that I be the most miserable of woman . let I think , " she cry , silence Phoebe 's consolatory murmur with an imperious gesture . " hold your tongue , girl , and let I think of this business , if I can . " 

 she put her hand to her forehead , clasp her slender finger across her brow , as if she would have control the action of her brain by their convulsive pressure . 

 " Robert Audley be with your husband , " she say , slowly , speak to herself rather than to her companion . " these two man be together , and there be bailiff in the house , and your brutal husband be no doubt brutally drunk by this time , and brutally obstinate and ferocious in his drunkenness . if I refuse to pay this money his ferocity will be multiply by a hundredfold . there be little use in discuss that matter . the money must be pay . " 

 " but if you do pay it , " say Phoebe , earnestly , " I hope you will impress upon Luke that it be the last money you will ever give he while he stop in that house . " 

 " why ? " ask Lady Audley , let her hand fall on her lap , and look inquiringly at Mrs. Marks . 

 " because I want Luke to leave the Castle . " 

 " but why do you want he to leave ? " 

 " oh , for ever so many reason , my lady , " answer Phoebe . " he be not fit to be the landlord of a public - house . I do not   know that when I marry he , or I would have go against the business , and try to persuade he to take to the farming line . not that I suppose he would have give up his own fancy , either ; for he be obstinate enough , as you know , my lady . he be not fit for his present business . he be scarcely ever sober after dark ; and when he be drunk he get almost wild , and do not   seem to know what he do . we have   have two or three narrow escape with he already . " 

 " narrow escape ! " repeat Lady Audley . " what do you mean ? " 

 " why , we have   run the risk of be burn in our bed through his carelessness . " 

 " burn in your bed through his carelessness ! why , how be that ? " ask my lady , rather listlessly . she be too selfish , and too deeply absorb in her own trouble to take much interest in any danger which have befall she some - time lady's - maid . 

 " you know what a queer old place the Castle be , my lady ; all tumble - down wood - work , and rotten rafter , and such like . the Chelmsford Insurance Company will not   insure it ; for they say if the place do happen to catch fire of a windy night it would blaze away like so much tinder , and nothing in the world could save it . well , Luke know this ; and the landlord have warn he of it time and often , for he live close against we , and he keep a pretty sharp eye upon all my husband 's going on ; but when Luke 's tipsy he do not   know what he be about , and only a week ago he leave a candle burn in one of the out - house , and the flame catch one of the rafter of the sloping roof , and if it have not   be for I find it out when I go round the house the last thing , we should have all be burn to death , perhaps . and that be the third time the same kind of thing have happen in the six month we have   have the place , and you can not   wonder that I be frightened , can you , my lady ? " 

 my lady have not wonder , she have not think about the business at all . she have scarcely listen to these commonplace detail ; why should she care for this low - bear waiting - woman 's peril and trouble ? have she not her own terror , her own soul - absorb perplexity to usurp every thought of which her brain be capable ? 

 she do not make any remark upon that which poor Phoebe just tell she ; she scarcely comprehend what have be say , until some moment after the girl have finish speak , when the word assume their full meaning , as some word do after they have be hear without be heed . 

 " burn in your bed , " say the young lady , at last . " it would have be a good thing for I if that precious creature , your husband , have be burn in his bed before to - night . " 

 a vivid picture have flash upon she as she speak . the picture of that frail wooden tenement , the Castle Inn , reduce to a roofless chaos of lath and plaster , vomit flame from its black mouth , and spit blazing spark upward toward the cold night sky . 

 she give a weary sigh as she dismiss this image from her restless brain . she would be no well off even if this enemy should be for ever silence . she have another and far more dangerous foe a foe who be not to be bribe or buy off , though she have be as rich as an empress . 

 " I will give you the money to send this bailiff away , " my lady say , after a pause . " I must give you the last sovereign in my purse , but what of that ? you know as well as I do that I dare not refuse you . " 

 Lady Audley rise and take the lighted lamp from her writing - table . " the money be in my dressing - room , " she say ; " I will go and fetch it . " 

 " oh , my lady , " exclaim Phoebe , suddenly , " I forgot something ; I be in such a way about this business that I quite forgot it . " 

 " quite forget what ? " 

 " a letter that be give I to bring to you , my lady , just before I leave home . " 

 " what letter ? " 

 " a letter from Mr. Audley . he hear my husband mention that I be come down here , and he ask I to carry this letter . " 

 Lady Audley set the lamp down upon the table near to she , and hold out her hand to receive the letter . Phoebe Marks could scarcely fail to observe that the little jeweled hand shake like a leaf . 

 " give it I give it I , " she cry ; " let I see what more he have to say . " 

 Lady Audley almost snatch the letter from Phoebe 's hand in her wild impatience . she tear open the envelope and fling it from she ; she could scarcely unfold the sheet of note - paper in her eager excitement . 

 the letter be very brief . it contain only these word : 

 " should Mrs. George Talboys really have survive the date of her suppose death , as record in the public print , and upon the tombstone in Ventnor churchyard , and should she exist in the person of the lady suspect and accuse by the writer of this , there can be no great difficulty in find some one able and willing to identify she . Mrs. Barkamb , the owner of North Cottages , Wildernsea , would no doubt consent to throw some light upon this matter ; either to dispel a delusion or to confirm a suspicion . 

 " ROBERT AUDLEY . 

 " March 3 , 1859 . 

 " the Castle Inn , Mount Stanning . " 

 CHAPTER XXXII . 

 the red light in the SKY . 

 my lady crush the letter fiercely in her hand , and fling it from she into the flame . 

 " if he stand before I now , and I could kill he , " she mutter in a strange , inward whisper , " I would do it I would do it ! " she snatch up the lamp and rush into the adjoining room . she shut the door behind she . she could not endure any witness of her horrible despair she could endure nothing , neither herself nor her surrounding . 

 the door between my lady 's dressing - room and the bed - chamber in which Sir Michael lie , have be leave open . the baronet sleep peacefully , his noble face plainly visible in the subdue lamplight . his breathing be low and regular , his lip curve into a half smile a smile of tender happiness which he often wear when he look at his beautiful wife , the smile of an all - indulgent father , who look admiringly at his favorite child . 

 some touch of womanly feeling , some sentiment of compassion soften Lady Audley 's glance as it fall upon that noble , reposing figure . for a moment the horrible egotism of her own misery yield to her pity tenderness for another . it be perhaps only a semi - selfish tenderness after all , in which pity for herself be as powerful as pity for her husband ; but for once in a way , her thought run out of the narrow groove of her own terror and her own trouble to dwell with prophetic grief upon the come sorrow of another . 

 " if they make he believe , how wretched he will be , " she think . but intermingle with that thought there be another there be the thought of her lovely face , her bewitching manner , her arch smile , her low , musical laugh , which be like a peal of silvery bell ring across a broad expanse of flat meadow - land and a ripple river in the misty summer evening . she think of all these thing with a transient thrill of triumph , which be strong even than her terror . 

 if Sir Michael Audley live to be a hundred year old , whatever he might learn to believe of she , however he might grow to despise she , would he ever be able to disassociate she from these attribute ? no ; a thousand time no . to the last hour of his life his memory would present she to he invest with the loveliness that have first win his enthusiastic admiration , his devoted affection . her bad enemy could not rob she of that fairy dower which have be so fatal in its influence upon her frivolous mind . 

 she pace up and down the dressing - room in the silvery lamplight , ponder upon the strange letter which she have receive from Robert Audley . she walk backward and forward in that monotonous wandering for some time before she be able to steady her thought before she be able to bring the scatter force of her narrow intellect to bear upon the one all - important subject of the threat contain in the barrister 's letter . 

 " he will do it , " she say , between her set tooth " he will do it , unless I get he into a lunatic - asylum first ; or unless " 

 she do not finish the thought in word . she do not even think out the sentence ; but some new and unnatural impulse in her heart seem to beat each syllable against her breast . 

 the thought be this : " he will do it , unless some strange calamity befall he , and silence he for ever . " the red blood flash up into my lady 's face with as sudden and transient a blaze as the flicker flame of a fire , and die as suddenly away , leave she more pale than winter snow . her hand , which have before be lock convulsively together , fall apart and drop heavily at her side . she stop in her rapid pacing to and fro stop as Lot 's wife may have stop , after that fatal backward glance at the perish city with every pulse slackening , with every drop of blood congeal in her vein , in the terrible process that be to transform she from a woman into a statue . 

 Lady Audley stand still for about five minute in that strangely statuesque attitude , her head erect , her eye star straight before her star far beyond the narrow boundary of her chamber wall , into dark distance of peril and horror . 

 but by - and - by she start from that rigid attitude almost as abruptly as she have fall into it . she rouse herself from that semi - lethargy . she walk rapidly to her dressing - table , and , seat herself before it , push away the litter of golden - stopper bottle and delicate china essence - box , and look at her reflection in the large , oval glass . she be very pale ; but there be no other trace of agitation visible in her girlish face . the line of her exquisitely mold lip be so beautiful , that it be only a very close observer who could have perceive a certain rigidity that be unusual to they . she see this herself , and try to smile away that statue - like immobility : but to - night the rosy lip refuse to obey she ; they be firmly locked , and be no long the slave of her will and pleasure . all the latent force of her character concentrate themselves in this one feature . she might command her eye , but she could not control the muscle of her mouth . she rise from before her dressing - table , and take a dark velvet cloak and bonnet from the recess of her wardrobe , and dress herself for walk . the little ormolu clock on the chimney - piece strike the quarter after eleven while Lady Audley be employ in this manner ; five minute afterward she re - enter the room in which she have leave Phoebe Marks . 

 the innkeeper 's wife be sit before the low fender very much in the same attitude as that in which her late mistress have brood over that lonely hearth early in the evening . Phoebe have replenish the fire , and have reassume her bonnet and shawl . she be anxious to get home to that brutal husband , who be only too apt to fall into some mischief in her absence . she look up as Lady Audley enter the room , and utter an exclamation of surprise at see her late mistress in a walking - costume . 

 " my lady , " she cry , " you be not go out to - night ? " 

 " yes , I be , Phoebe , " Lady Audley answer , very quietly . " I be go to Mount Stanning with you to see this bailiff , and to pay and dismiss he myself . " 

 " but , my lady , you forget what the time be ; you can not   go out at such an hour . " 

 Lady Audley do not answer . she stand with her finger rest lightly upon the handle of the bell , meditate quietly . 

 " the stable be always lock , and the man in bed by ten o'clock , " she murmur , " when we be at home . it will make a terrible hubbub to get a carriage ready ; but yet I dare say one of the servant could manage the matter quietly for I . " 

 " but why should you go to - night , my lady ? " cry Phoebe Marks . " to - morrow will do quite as well . a week hence will do as well . our landlord would take the man away if he have your promise to settle the debt . " 

 Lady Audley take no notice of this interruption . she go hastily into the dressing - room , and fling off her bonnet and cloak , and then return to the boudoir , in her simple dinner - costume , with her curl brush carelessly away from her face . 

 " now , Phoebe Marks , listen to I , " she say , grasp her confidante 's wrist , and speak in a low , earnest voice , but with a certain imperious air that challenge contradiction and commanded obedience . " listen to I , Phoebe , " she repeat . " I be go to the Castle Inn to - night ; whether it be early or late be of very little consequence to I ; I have set my mind upon go , and I shall go . you have ask I why , and I have tell you . I be go in order that I may pay this debt myself ; and that I may see for myself that the money I give be apply to the purpose for which I give it . there be nothing out of the common course of life in my do this . I be go to do what other woman in my position very often do . I be go to assist a favorite servant . " 

 " but it be get on for twelve o'clock , my lady , " plead Phoebe . 

 Lady Audley frown impatiently at this interruption . 

 " if my go to your house to pay this man should be know , " she continue , still retain her hold of Phoebe 's wrist , " I be ready to answer for my conduct ; but I would rather that the business should be keep quiet . I think that I can leave this house without be see by any live creature , if you will do as I tell you . " 

 " I will do anything you wish , my lady , " answer Phoebe , submissively . 

 " then you will wish I good - night presently , when my maid come into the room , and you will suffer she to show you out of the house . you will cross the courtyard and wait for I in the avenue upon the other side of the archway . it may be half an hour before I be able to join you , for I must not leave my room till the servant have all go to bed , but you may wait for I patiently , for come what may I will join you . " 

 Lady Audley 's face be no long pale . an unnatural luster gleam in her great blue eye . she speak with an unnatural rapidity . she have altogether the appearance and manner of a person who have yield to the dominant influence of some overpowering excitement . Phoebe Marks star at her late mistress in mute bewilderment . she begin to fear that my lady be go mad . 

 the bell which Lady Audley rang be answer by the smart lady's - maid who wear rose - color ribbon , and black silk gown , and other adornment which be unknown to the humble people who sit below the salt in the good old day when servant wear linsey - woolsey . 

 " I do not know that it be so late , Martin , " say my lady , in that gentle tone which always win for her the willing service of her inferior . " I have be talk with Mrs. Marks and have let the time slip by I . I sha'n't   want anything to - night , so you may go to bed when you please . " 

 " thank you , my lady , " answer the girl , who look very sleepy , and have some difficulty in repress a yawn even in her mistress ' presence , for the Audley household usually keep very early hour . " I would well show Mrs. Marks out , my lady , have not   I ? " ask the maid , " before I go to bed ? " 

 " oh , yes , to be sure ; you can let phoebe out . all the other servant have go to bed , then , I suppose ? " 

 " yes , my lady . " 

 Lady Audley laugh as she glance at the timepiece . 

 " we have be terrible dissipate up here , Phoebe , " she say . " good - night . you may tell your husband that his rent shall be pay . " 

 " thank you very much , my lady , and good - night , " murmur Phoebe as she back out of the room , follow by the lady 's maid . 

 Lady Audley listen at the door , wait till the muffle sound of their footstep die away in the octagon chamber and on the carpet staircase . 

 " Martin sleep at the top of the house , " she say , " half a mile away from this room . in ten minute I may safely make my escape . " 

 she go back into her dressing - room , and put on her cloak and bonnet for the second time . the unnatural color still burn like a flame in her cheek ; the unnatural light still glitter in her eye . the excitement which she be under hold she in so strong a spell that neither her mind nor her body seem to have any consciousness of fatigue . however verbose I may be in my description of her feeling , I can never describe a tithe of her thought or her suffering . she suffer agony that would fill closely print volume , bulky with a thousand page , in that one horrible night . she undergo volume of anguish , and doubt , and perplexity ; sometimes repeat the same chapter of her torment over and over again ; sometimes hurry through a thousand page of her misery without one pause , without one moment of breathing time . she stand by the low fender in her boudoir , watch the minute - hand of the clock , and wait till it should be time for she to leave the house in safety . 

 " I will wait ten minute , " she say , " not a moment beyond , before I enter on my new peril . " 

 she listen to the wild roaring of the March wind , which seem to have rise with the stillness and darkness of the night . 

 the hand slowly make its inevitable way to the figure which tell that the ten minute be past . it be exactly a quarter to twelve when my lady take her lamp in her hand , and steal softly from the room . her footfall be as light as that of some graceful wild animal , and there be no fear of that airy step awakening any echo upon the carpet stone corridor and staircase . she do not pause until she reach the vestibule upon the ground floor . several door open out of the vestibule , which be octagon , like my lady 's ante - chamber . one of these door lead into the library , and it be this door which Lady Audley open softly and cautiously . 

 to have attempt to leave the house secretly by any of the principal outlet would have be simple madness , for the housekeeper herself superintend the barricading of the great door , back and front . the secret of the bolt , and bar , and chain , and bell which secure these door , and provide for the safety of Sir Michael Audley 's plate - room , the door of which be line with sheet - iron , be know only to the servant who have to deal with they . but although all these precaution be take with the principal entrance to the citadel , a wooden shutter and a slender iron bar , light enough to be lift by a child , be consider sufficient safeguard for the half - glass door which open out of the breakfast - room into the graveled pathway and smooth turf in the courtyard . 

 it be by this outlet that Lady Audley mean to make her escape . she could easily remove the bar and unfasten the shutter , and she might safely venture to leave the window ajar while she be absent . there be little fear of Sir Michael 's awake for some time , as he be a heavy sleeper in the early part of the night , and have sleep more heavily than usual since his illness . 

 Lady Audley cross the library , and open the door of the breakfast - room , which communicate with it . this latter apartment be one of the later addition to the Court . it be a simple , cheerful chamber , with brightly paper wall and pretty maple furniture , and be more occupy by Alicia than any one else . the paraphernalia of that young lady 's favorite pursuit be scatter about the room drawing - material , unfinished scrap of work , tangle skein of silk , and all the other token of a careless damsel 's presence ; while Miss Audley 's picture a pretty crayon sketch of a rosy - faced hoyden in a riding - habit and hat hang over the quaint Wedgewood ornament on the chimneypiece . my lady look upon these familiar object with scornful hatred flame in her blue eye . 

 " how glad she will be if any disgrace befall I , " she think ; " how she will rejoice if I be drive out of this house ! " 

 Lady Audley set the lamp upon a table near the fireplace , and go to the window . she remove the iron - bar and the light wooden shutter , and then open the glass - door . the March night be black and moonless , and a gust of wind blow in upon she as she open this door , and fill the room with its chilly breath , extinguish the lamp upon the table . 

 " no matter , " my lady mutter , " I could not have leave it burn . I shall know how to find my way through the house when I come back . I have leave all the door ajar . " 

 she step quickly out upon the smooth gravel , and close the glass - door behind she . she be afraid lest that treacherous wind should blow - to the door open into the library , and thus betray she . 

 she be in the quadrangle now , with that chill wind sweep against she , and swirl her silken garment round she with a shrill , rustle noise , like the whistling of a sharp breeze against the sail of a yacht . she cross the quadrangle and look back look back for a moment at the firelight gleam between the rosy - tinted curtain in her boudoir , and the dim gleam of the lamp through the mullioned window in the room where Sir Michael Audley lie asleep . 

 " I feel as if I be run away , " she think ; " I feel as if I be run away secretly in the dead of the night , to lose myself and be forget . perhaps it would be wise in I to run away , to take this man 's warning , and escape out of his power forever . if I be to run away and disappear as as George Talboys disappear . but where could I go ? what would become of I ? I have no money ; my jewel be not worth a couple of hundred pound , now that I have get rid of the good part of they . what could I do ? I must go back to the old life , the old , hard , cruel , wretched life the life of poverty , and humiliation , and vexation , and discontent . I should have to go back and wear myself out in that long struggle , and die as my mother die , perhaps ! " 

 my lady stand still for a moment on the smooth lawn between the quadrangle and the archway , with her head droop upon her breast and her hand lock together , debate this question in the unnatural activity of her mind . her attitude reflect the state of that mind it express irresolution and perplexity . but presently a sudden change come over she ; she lift her head lift it with an action of defiance and determination . 

 " no ! Mr. Robert Audley , " she say , aloud , in a low , clear voice ; " I will not go back I will not go back . if the struggle between we be to be a duel to the death , you shall not find I drop my weapon . " 

 she walk with a firm and rapid step under the archway . as she pass under that massive arch , it seem as if she disappear into some black gulf that have wait open to receive she . the stupid clock strike twelve , and the whole archway seem to vibrate under its heavy stroke , as Lady Audley emerge upon the other side and join Phoebe Marks , who have wait for her late mistress very near the gateway of the Court . 

 " now , Phoebe , " she say , " it be three mile from here to Mount Stanning , be not   it ? " 

 " yes , my lady . " 

 " then we can walk the distance in an hour and a half . " 

 Lady Audley have not stop to say this ; she be walk quickly along the avenue with her humble companion by her side . fragile and delicate as she be in appearance , she be a very good walker . she have be in the habit of take long country ramble with Mr. Dawson 's child in her old day of dependence , and she think very little of a distance of three mile . 

 " your beautiful husband will sit up for you , I suppose , Phoebe ? " she say , as they strike across an open field that be use as a short cut from Audley Court to the high - road . 

 " oh , yes , my lady ; he be sure to sit up . he will be drink with the man , I dare say . " 

 " the man ! what man ? " 

 " the man that be in possession , my lady . " 

 " ah , to be sure , " say Lady Audley , indifferently . 

 it be strange that Phoebe 's domestic trouble should seem so very far away from her thought at the time she be take such an extraordinary step toward set thing right at the Castle Inn . 

 the two woman cross the field and turn into the high road . the way to Mount Stanning be all up hill , and the long road look black and dreary in the dark night ; but my lady walk on with a desperate courage , which be no common constituent in her selfish sensuous nature , but a strange faculty bear out of her great despair . she do not speak again to her companion until they be close upon the glimmering light at the top of the hill . one of these village light , glare redly through a crimson curtain , mark out the particular window behind which it be likely that Luke Marks sit nod drowsily over his liquor , and wait for the coming of his wife . 

 " he have not go to bed , Phoebe , " say my lady , eagerly . " but there be no other light burn at the inn . I suppose Mr. Audley be in bed and asleep . " 

 " yes , my lady , I suppose so . " 

 " you be sure he be go to stay at the Castle to night ? " 

 " oh , yes , my lady . I help the girl to get his room ready before I come away . " 

 the wind , boisterous everywhere , be even shrill and more pitiless in the neighborhood of that bleak hill - top upon which the Castle Inn rear its rickety wall . the cruel blast rave wildly round that frail erection . they disport themselves with the shatter pigeon - house , the broken weathercock , the loose tile , and unshapely chimney ; they rattle at the window - pane , and whistle in the crevice ; they mock the feeble building from foundation to roof , and batter , and bang , and torment it in their fierce gambol , until it tremble and rock with the force of their rough play . 

 Mr. Luke Marks have not trouble himself to secure the door of his dwelling - house before sit down to booze with the man who hold provisional possession of his good and chattel . the landlord of the Castle Inn be a lazy , sensual brute , who have no thought high than a selfish concern for his own enjoyment , and a virulent hatred for anybody who stand in the way of his gratification . 

 Phoebe push open the door with her hand , and go into the house , follow by my lady . the gas be flare in the bar , and smoke the low plaster ceiling . the door of the bar - parlor be half open , and Lady Audley hear the brutal laughter of Mr. Marks as she cross the threshold of the inn . 

 " I will tell he you be here , my lady , " whisper Phoebe to her late mistress . " I know he will be tipsy . you you will not   be offend , my lady , if he should say anything rude ? you know it be not   my wish that you should come . " 

 " yes , yes , " answer Lady Audley , impatiently , " I know that . what should I care for his rudeness ! let he say what he like . " 

 Phoebe Marks push open the parlor door , leave my lady in the bar close behind she . 

 Luke sit with his clumsy leg stretch out upon the hearth . he hold a glass of gin - and - water in one hand and the poker in the other . he have just thrust the poker into a heap of black coal , and be scatter they to make a blaze , when his wife appear upon the threshold of the room . 

 he snatch the poker from between the bar , and make a half drunken , half threaten motion with it as he see she . 

 " so you have   condescend to come home at last , ma'am , " he say ; " I think you be never come no more . " 

 he speak in a thick and drunken voice , and be by no mean too intelligible . he be steep to the very lip in alcohol . his eye be dim and watery ; his hand be unsteady ; his voice be choke and muffle with drink . a brute , even when most sober ; a brute , even on his good behavior , he be ten time more brutal in his drunkenness , when the few restraint which hold his ignorant , every day brutality in check be fling aside in the indolent recklessness of intoxication . 

 " I I have   be long than I intend to be , Luke , " Phoebe answer , in her most conciliatory manner ; " but I have   see my lady , and she be be very kind , and and she will settle this business for we . " 

 " she be be very kind , have she ? " mutter Mr. Marks , with a drunken laugh ; " thank she for nothing . I know the vally of her kindness . she would be oncommon kind , I dessay , if she warn't   obligate to be it . " 

 the man in possession , who have fall into a maudlin and semi - unconscious state of intoxication upon about a third of the liquor that Mr. Marks have consume , only star in feeble wonderment at his host and hostess . he sit near the table . indeed , he have hook himself on to it with his elbow , as a safeguard against slide under it , and he be make imbecile attempt to light his pipe at the flame of a gutter tallow candle near he . 

 " my lady have promise to settle the business for we , Luke , " Phoebe repeat , without notice Luke 's remark . she know her husband 's dogged nature well enough by this time to know that it be bad than useless to try to stop he from do or say anything which his own stubborn will lead he to do or say . " my lady will settle it , " she say , " and she be come down here to see about it to - night , " she add . 

 the poker drop from the landlord 's hand , and fall clatter among the cinder on the hearth . 

 " my Lady Audley come here to - night ! " he say . 

 " yes , Luke . " 

 my lady appear upon the threshold of the door as Phoebe speak . 

 " yes , Luke Marks , " she say , " I have come to pay this man , and to send he about his business . " 

 Lady Audley say these word in a strange , semi - mechanical manner ; very much as if she have learn the sentence by rote , and be repeat it without know what she say . 

 Mr. Marks give a discontent growl , and set his empty glass down upon the table with an impatient gesture . 

 " you might have give the money to Phoebe , " he say , " as well as have bring it yourself . we do not   want no fine lady up here , pryin ' and pokin ' their precious nose into everythink . " 

 " Luke , Luke ! " remonstrate Phoebe , " when my lady have be so kind ! " 

 " oh , damn her kindness ! " cry Mr. Marks ; " it be not   her kindness as we want , gal , it be her money . she will not   get no snivelin ' gratitood from I . whatever she do for we she do because she be oblige ; and if she be not   oblige she would not   do it " 

 Heaven know how much more Luke mark might have say , have not my lady turn upon he suddenly and awe he into silence by the unearthly glitter of her beauty . her hair have be blow away from her face , and be of a light , feathery quality , have spread itself into a tangled mass that surround her forehead like a yellow flame . there be another flame in her eye a greenish light , such as might flash from the changing - hue orb of an angry mermaid . 

 " stop , " she cry . " I do not   come up here in the dead of night to listen to your insolence . how much be this debt ? " 

 " nine pound . " 

 Lady Audley produce her purse a toy of ivory , silver , and turquoise she take from it a note and four sovereign . she lay these upon the table . 

 " let that man give I a receipt for the money , " she say , " before I go . " 

 it be some time before the man could be rouse into sufficient consciousness for the performance of this simple duty , and it be only by dip a pen into the ink and push it between his clumsy finger , that he be at last make to comprehend that his autograph be want at the bottom of the receipt which have be make out by Phoebe Marks . Lady Audley take the document as soon as the ink be dry , and turn to leave the parlor . Phoebe follow she . 

 " you must not   go home alone , my lady , " she say . " you will let I go with you ? " 

 " yes , yes ; you shall go home with I . " 

 the two woman be stand near the door of the inn as my lady say this . Phoebe star wonderingly at her patroness . she have expect that Lady Audley would be in a hurry to return home after settle this business which she have capriciously take upon herself ; but it be not so ; my lady stand lean against the inn door and star into vacancy , and again Mrs. Marks begin to fear that trouble have drive her late mistress mad . 

 a little dutch clock in the bar strike two while Lady Audley linger in this irresolute , absent manner . she start at the sound and begin to tremble violently . 

 " I think I be go to faint , Phoebe , " she say ; " where can I get some cold water ? " 

 " the pump be in the wash - house , my lady ; I will run and get you a glass of cold water . " 

 " no , no , no , " cry my lady , clutch Phoebe 's arm as she be about to run away upon this errand ; " I will get it myself . I must dip my head in a basin of water if I want to save myself from faint . in which room do Mr. Audley sleep ? " 

 there be something so irrelevant in this question that Phoebe Marks star aghast at her mistress before she answer it . 

 " it be number three that I get ready , my lady the front room the room next to ours , " she reply , after that pause of astonishment . 

 " give I a candle , " say my lady . " I will go into your room , and get some water for my head ; stay where you be , and see that that brute of a husband of yours do not follow I ! " 

 she snatch the candle which Phoebe have light from the girl 's hand and run up the rickety , winding staircase which lead to the narrow corridor upon the upper floor . five bed - room open out of this low - ceilinge , close - smell corridor ; the number of these room be indicate by squat black figure paint upon the panel of the door . Lady Audley have drive up to Mount Stanning to inspect the house when she buy the business for her servant 's bridegroom , and she know her way about the dilapidated old place ; she know where to find Phoebe 's bedroom , but she stop before the door of that other chamber which have be prepare for Mr. Robert Audley . 

 she stop and look at the number on the door . the key be in the lock , and her hand drop upon it as if unconsciously . but presently she suddenly begin to tremble again , as she have tremble a few minute before at the striking of the clock . she stand for a few moment tremble thus , with her hand still upon the key ; then a horrible expression come over her face , and she turn the key in the lock . she turn it twice , double lock the door . 

 there be no sound from within ; the occupant of the chamber make no sign of have hear that ominous creaking of the rusty key in the rusty lock . 

 Lady Audley hurry into the next room . she set the candle on the dressing - table , fling off her bonnet and sling it loosely across her arm ; then she go to the wash - stand and fill the basin with water . she plunge her golden hair into this water , and then stand for a few moment in the center of the room look about she , with a white , earnest face , and an eager gaze that seem to take in every object in the poorly furnish chamber . Phoebe 's bedroom be certainly very shabbily furnish ; she have be compel to select all the most decent thing for those good bedroom which be set apart for any chance traveler who might stop for a night 's lodge at the Castle Inn ; but Phoebe Marks have do she good to atone for the lack of substantial furniture in her apartment by a superabundance of drapery . crisp curtain of cheap chintz hang from the tent - bedstead ; festoon drapery of the same material shroud the narrow window shut out the light of day , and afford a pleasant harbor for tribe of fly and predatory band of spider . even the look - glass , a miserably cheap construction which distort every face whose owner have the hardihood to look into it , stand upon a draperie altar of starched muslin and pink glaze calico , and be adorn with frill of lace and knit work . 

 my lady smile as she look at the festoon and furbelow which meet her eye upon every side . she have reason , perhaps , to smile , remember the costly elegance of her own apartment ; but there be something in that sardonic smile that seem to have a deep meaning than any natural contempt for Phoebe 's attempt at decoration . she go to the dressing - table and , smooth her wet hair before the look - glass , and then put on her bonnet . she be oblige to place the flame tallow candle very close to the lace furbelow about the glass ; so close that the starch muslin seem to draw the flame toward it by some power of attraction in its fragile tissue . 

 Phoebe wait anxiously by the inn door for my lady 's come she watch the minute hand of the little dutch clock , wonder at the slowness of its progress . it be only ten minute past two when Lady Audley come down - stair , with her bonnet on and her hair still wet , but without the candle . 

 Phoebe be immediately anxious about this missing candle . 

 " the light , my lady , " she say , " you have leave it up - stair ! " 

 " the wind blow it out as I be leave your room , " Lady Audley answer , quietly . " I leave it there . " 

 " in my room , my lady ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and it be quite out ? " 

 " yes , I tell you ; why do you worry I about your candle ? it be past two o'clock . come . " 

 she take the girl 's arm , and half lead , half drag she from the house . the convulsive pressure of her slight hand hold she firmly as an iron vise could have hold she . the fierce March wind bang to the door of the house , and leave the two woman stand outside it . the long , black road lie bleak and desolate before they , dimly visible between straight line of leafless hedge . 

 a walk of three mile ' length upon a lonely country road , between the hour of two and four on a cold winter 's morning , be scarcely a pleasant task for a delicate woman a woman whose inclination lean toward ease and luxury . but my lady hurry along the hard , dry highway , drag her companion with she as if she have be impel by some horrible demoniac force which know no abatement . with the black night above they with the fierce wind howl around they , sweep across a broad expanse of hidden country , blow as if it have arise simultaneously from every point of the compass , and make those wanderer the focus of its ferocity the two woman walk through the darkness down the hill upon which Mount Stanning stand , along a mile and a half of flat road , and then up another hill , on the western side of which Audley Court lie in that shelter valley , which seem to shut in the old house from all the clamor and hubbub of the everyday world . 

 my lady stop upon the summit of this hill to draw breath and to clasp her hand upon her heart , in the vain hope that she might still its cruel beating . they be now within three - quarter of a mile of the Court , and they have be walk for nearly an hour since they have leave the Castle Inn . 

 Lady Audley stop to rest , with her face still turn toward the place of her destination . Phoebe Marks , stop also , and very glad of a moment 's pause in that hurried journey , look back into the far darkness beneath which lie that dreary shelter that have give she so much uneasiness . and she do so , she utter a shrill cry of horror , and clutch wildly at her companion 's cloak . 

 the night sky be no long all dark . the thick blackness be break by one patch of lurid light . 

 " my lady , my lady ! " cry Phoebe , point to this lurid patch ; " do you see ? " 

 " yes , child , I see , " answer Lady Audley , try to shake the cling hand from her garment . " what be the matter ? " 

 " it be a fire a fire , my lady ! " 

 " yes , I be afraid it be a fire . at Brentwood , most likely . let I go , Phoebe ; it be nothing to we . " 

 " yes , yes , my lady ; it be near than Brentwood much nearer ; it be at Mount Stanning . " 

 Lady Audley do not answer . she be tremble again , with the cold perhaps , for the wind have tear her heavy cloak from her shoulder , and have leave her slender figure expose to the blast . 

 " it be at Mount Stanning , my lady ! " cry Phoebe Marks . " it be the Castle that be on fire I know it be , I know it be ! I think of fire to - night , and I be fidgety and uneasy , for I know this would happen some day . I would not   mind if it be only the wretched place , but there will be life lose , there will be life lose ! " sob the girl , distractedly . " there be Luke , too tipsy to help himself , unless other help he ; there be Mr. Audley asleep " 

 Phoebe Marks stop suddenly at the mention of Robert 's name , and fall upon her knee , clasp her uplifted hand , and appeal wildly to Lady Audley . 

 " oh , my God ! " she cry . " say it be not true , my lady , say it be not true ! it be too horrible , it be too horrible , it be too horrible ! " 

 " what be too horrible ? " 

 " the thought that be in my mind ; the terrible thought that be in my mind . " 

 " what do you mean , girl ? " cry my lady , fiercely . 

 " oh , God forgive I if I be wrong ! " the kneeling woman gasp in detach sentence , " and God grant I may be . why do you go up to the Castle , my lady ? why be you so set on go against all I could say you who be so bitter against Mr. Audley and against Luke , and who know they be both under that roof ? oh , tell I that I do you a cruel wrong , my lady ; tell I so tell I ! for as there be a Heaven above I I think that you go to that place to - night on purpose to set fire to it . tell I that I be wrong , my lady ; tell I that I be do you a wicked wrong . " 

 " I will tell you nothing , except that you be a mad woman , " answer Lady Audley ; in a cold , hard voice . " get up ; fool , idiot , coward ! be your husband such a precious bargain that you should be grovel there , lament and groan for he ? what be Robert Audley to you , that you behave like a maniac , because you think he be in danger ? how do you know the fire be at Mount Stanning ? you see a red patch in the sky , and you cry out directly that your own paltry hovel be in flame , as if there be no place in the world that could burn except that . the fire may be at Brentwood , or far away at Romford , or still far away , on the eastern side of London , perhaps . get up , mad woman , and go back and look after your good and chattel , and your husband and your lodger . get up and go : I do not   want you . " 

 " oh ! my lady , my lady , forgive I , " sob Phoebe ; " there be nothing you can say to I that be hard enough for have do you such a wrong , even in my thought . I do not   mind your cruel word I do not   mind anything if I be wrong . " 

 " go back and see for yourself , " answer Lady Audley , sternly . " I tell you again , I do not   want you . " 

 she walk away in the darkness , leave Phoebe Marks still kneel upon the hard road , where she have cast herself in that agony of supplication . Sir Michael 's wife walk toward the house in which her husband sleep with the red blaze light up the sky behind she , and with nothing but the blackness of the night before . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 the bearer of the tiding . 

 it be very late the next morning when Lady Audley emerge from her dressing - room , exquisitely dress in a morning costume of delicate muslin , delicate lace , and embroidery ; but with a very pale face , and with half - circle of purple shadow under her eye . she account for this pale face and these hollow eye by declare that she have sit up read until a very late hour on the previous night . 

 Sir Michael and his young wife breakfast in the library at a comfortable round table , wheel close to the blaze fire ; and Alicia be compel to share this meal with her step - mother , however she might avoid that lady in the long interval between breakfast and dinner . 

 the March morning be bleak and dull , and a drizzling rain fall incessantly , obscure the landscape and blot out the distance . there be very few letter by the morning post ; the daily newspaper do not arrive until noon ; and such aid to conversation be miss , there be very little talk at the breakfast table . 

 Alicia look out at the drizzle rain drift against the broad window - pane . 

 " no riding to - day , " she say ; " and no chance of any caller to enliven we , unless that ridiculous Bob come crawl through the wet from Mount Stanning . " 

 have you ever hear anybody , whom you know to be dead , allude to in a light , easy go manner by another person who do not know of his death allude to as do that or this , as perform some trivial everyday operation when you know that he have vanish away from the face of this earth , and separate himself forever from all live creature and their commonplace pursuit in the awful solemnity of death ? such a chance allusion , insignificant though it may be , be apt to send a strange thrill of pain through the mind . the ignorant remark jar discordantly upon the hyper - sensitive brain ; the King of Terrors be desecrate by that unwitte disrespect . Heaven know what hidden reason my lady may have have for experience some such revulsion of feeling on the sudden mention of Mr. Audley 's name , but her pale face blanch to a sickly white as Alicia Audley speak of her cousin . 

 " yes , he will come down here in the wet , perhaps , " the young lady continue , " with his hat sleek and shin as if it have be brush with a pat of fresh butter , and with white vapor steam out of his clothe , and make he look like an awkward genie just let out of his bottle . he will come down here and print impression of his muddy boot all over the carpet , and he will sit on your Gobelin tapestry , my lady , in his wet overcoat ; and he will abuse you if you remonstrate , and will ask why people have chair that be not to be sit upon , and why you do not   live in Figtree Court , and " 

 Sir Michael Audley watch his daughter with a thoughtful countenance as she talk of her cousin . she very often talk of he , ridicule he and inveigh against he in no very measured term . but perhaps the baronet thought of a certain Signora Beatrice who very cruelly entreat a gentleman call Benedick , but who be , it may be , heartily in love with he at the same time . 

 " what do you think Major Melville tell I when he call here yesterday , Alicia ? " Sir Michael ask , presently . 

 " I have not   the remotest idea , " reply Alicia , rather disdainfully . " perhaps he tell you that we should have another war before long , by Ged , sir ; or perhaps he tell you that we should have a new ministry , by Ged , sir , for that those fellow be get themselves into a mess , sir ; or that those other fellow be reform this , and cut down that , and alter the other in the army , until , by Ged , sir , we shall have no army at all , by - and - by nothing but a pack of boy , sir , cram up to the eye with a lot of senseless schoolmaster ' rubbish , and dress in shell - jacket and calico helmet . yes , sir , they be fight in Oudh in calico helmet at this very day , sir . " 

 " you be an impertinent minx , miss , " answer the baronet . " Major Melville tell I nothing of the kind ; but he tell I that a very devoted admirer of you , a certain Sir Harry Towers , have forsake his place in Hertfordshire , and his hunt stable , and have go on the continent for a twelvemonth ' tour . " 

 Miss Audley flush up suddenly at the mention of her old adorer , but recover herself very quickly . 

 " he have go on the continent , have he ? " she say indifferently . " he tell I that he mean to do so if if he do not   have everything his own way . poor fellow ! he be a dear , good - hearted , stupid creature , and twenty time well than that peripatetic , patent refrigerator , Mr. Robert Audley . " 

 " I wish , Alicia , you be not so fond of ridicule Bob , " Sir Michael say , gravely . " Bob be a good fellow , and I be as fond of he as if he have be my own son ; and and I have   be very uncomfortable about he lately . he have change very much within the last few day , and he have take all sort of absurd idea into his head , and my lady have alarm I about he . she think " 

 Lady Audley interrupt her husband with a grave shake of her head . 

 " it be well not to say too much about it as yet awhile , " she say ; " Alicia know what I think . " 

 " yes , " reply Miss Audley , " my lady think that Bob be go mad , but I know well than that . he be not at all the sort of person to go mad . how should such a sluggish ditch - pond of an intellect as his ever work itself into a tempest ? he may move about for the rest of his life , perhaps , in a tranquil state of semi - idiotcy , imperfectly comprehend who he be , and where he be go , and what he be do but he will never go mad . " 

 Sir Michael do not reply to this . he have be very much disturb by his conversation with my lady on the previous evening , and have silently debate the painful question , in his mind ever since . 

 his wife the woman he well love and most believe in have tell he , with all appearance of regret and agitation , her conviction of his nephew 's insanity . he try in vain to arrive at the conclusion he wish most ardently to attain ; he try in vain to think that my lady be mislead by her own fancy , and have no foundation for what she say . but then , again , it suddenly flash upon he , that to think this be to arrive at a bad conclusion ; it be to transfer the horrible suspicion from his nephew to his wife . she appear to be possess with an actual conviction of Robert 's insanity . to imagine her wrong be to imagine some weakness in her own mind . the long he think of the subject the more it harass and perplex he . it be most certain that the young man have always be eccentric . he be sensible , he be tolerably clever , he be honorable and gentlemanlike in feeling , though perhaps a little careless in the performance of certain minor social duty ; but there be some slight difference , not easily to be define , that separate he from other man of his age and position . then , again , it be equally true that he have very much change within the period that have succeed the disappearance of George Talboys . he have grow moody and thoughtful , melancholy and absent - minded . he have hold himself aloof from society , have sit for hour without speak ; have talk at other point by fit and start ; and have excite himself unusually in the discussion of subject which apparently lie far out of the region of his own life and interest . then there be even another region which seem to strengthen my lady 's case against this unhappy young man . he have be bring up in the frequent society of his cousin , Alicia his pretty , genial cousin to whom interest , and one would have think affection , naturally point as his most fitting bride . More than this , the girl have show he , in the innocent guilelessness of a transparent nature , that on her side at least , affection be not want ; and yet , in spite of all this , he have hold himself aloof , and have allow other to propose for her hand , and to be reject by she , and have still make no sign . 

 now love be so very subtle an essence , such an indefinable metaphysical marvel , that its due force , though very cruelly feel by the sufferer himself , be never clearly understand by those who look on at its torment and wonder why he take the common fever so badly . Sir Michael argue that because Alicia be a pretty girl and an amiable girl it be therefore extraordinary and unnatural in Robert Audley not to have duly fall in love with she . this baronet , who close upon his sixtieth birthday , have for the first time encounter that one woman who out of all the woman in the world have power to quicken the pulse of his heart , wonder why Robert fail to take the fever from the first breath of contagion that blow toward he . he forget that there be man who go their way unscathed amidst legion of lovely and generous woman , to succumb at last before some harsh - feature virago , who know the secret of that only philter which can intoxicate and bewitch he . he have forget that there be certain jack who go through life without meet the Jill appoint for they by Nemesis , and die old bachelor , perhaps , with poor Jill pin an old maid upon the other side of the party - wall . he forget that love , which be a madness , and a scourge , and a fever , and a delusion , and a snare , be also a mystery , and very imperfectly understand by everyone except the individual sufferer who writhe under its torture . Jones , who be wildly enamored of Miss Brown , and who lie awake at night until he loathe his comfortable pillow and tumble his sheet into two twisted rag of linen in his agony , as if he be a prisoner and want to wind they into impromptu rope ; this same Jones who think Russell Square a magic place because his divinity inhabit it , who think the tree in that inclosure and the sky above it greener and bluer than other tree or sky , and who feel a pang , yes , an actual pang , of mingled hope , and joy , and expectation , and terror , when he emerge from Guilford street , descend from the hight of Islington , into those sacred precinct ; this very Jones be hard and callous toward the torment of Smith , who adore Miss Robinson , and can not imagine what the infatuated fellow can see in the girl . so it be with Sir Michael Audley . he look at his nephew as a sample of a very large class of young man , and his daughter as a sample of an equally extensive class of feminine good , and could not see why the two sample should not make a very respectable match . he ignore all those infinitesimal difference in nature which make the wholesome food of one man the deadly poison of another . how difficult it be to believe sometimes that a man do not   like such and such a favorite dish . if at a dinner - party , a meek look guest refuse early salmon and cucumber , or green pea in February , we set he down as a poor relation whose instinct warn he off those expensive plate . if an alderman be to declare that he do not   like green fat , he would be look upon as a social martyr , a Marcus Curtius of the dinner - table , who immolate himself for the benefit of his kind . his fellow - aldermen would believe in anything rather than an heretical distaste for the city ambrosia of the soup tureen . but there be people who dislike salmon , and white - bait , and spring duckling , and all manner of old - establish delicacy , and there be other people who affect eccentric and despicable dish , generally stigmatize as nasty . 

 alas , my pretty Alicia , your cousin do not love you ! he admire your rosy english face , and have a tender affection for you which might perhaps have expand by - and - by into something warm enough for matrimony , that every - day jog - trot specie of union which demand no very passionate devotion , but for a sudden check which it have receive in Dorsetshire . yes , Robert Audley 's grow affection for his cousin , a plant of very slow growth , I be fain to confess , have be suddenly dwarf and stunt upon that bitter February day on which he have stand beneath the pine - tree talk to Clara Talboys . since that day the young man have experience an unpleasant sensation in thinking of poor Alicia . he look at she as be in some vague manner an incumbrance upon the freedom of his thought ; he have a haunt fear that he be in some tacit way pledge to she ; that she have a species of claim upon he , which forbid to he the right of thinking of another woman . I believe it be the image of Miss Audley present to he in this light that goad the young barrister into those outburst of splenetic rage against the female sex which he be liable to at certain time . he be strictly honorable , so honorable that he would rather have immolate himself upon the altar of truth and Alicia than have do she the remotest wrong , though by so do he might have secure his own comfort and happiness . 

 " if the poor little girl love I , " he think , " and if she think that I love she , and have be lead to think so by any word or act of mine , I be in duty bind to let she think so to the end of time , and to fulfill any tacit promise which I may have unconsciously make . I think once I mean once to to make she an offer by - and - by when this horrible mystery about George Talboys should have be clear up and everything peacefully settle but now " 

 his thought would ordinarily wander away at this point of his reflection , carry he where he never have intend to go ; carry he back under the pine - tree in dorsetshire , and set he once more face to face with the sister of his missing friend , and it be generally a very laborious journey by which he travel back to the point from which he stray . it be so difficult for he to tear himself away from the stunt turf and the pine - tree . 

 " poor little girl ! " he would think on come back to Alicia . " how good it be of she to love I , and how grateful ought I to be for her tenderness . how many fellow would think such a generous , love heart the high boon that earth could give they . there 's Sir Harry Towers stricken with despair at his rejection . he would give I half his estate , all his estate , twice his estate , if he have it , to be in the shoe which I be anxious to shake off my ungrateful foot . why do not   I love she ? why be it that although I know she to be pretty , and pure , and good , and truthful , I do not   love she ? her image never haunt I , except reproachfully . I never see she in my dream . I never wake up suddenly in the dead of the night with her eye shin upon I and her warm breath upon my cheek , or with the finger of her soft hand cling to mine . no , I be not in love with she , I can not   fall in love with she . " 

 he rag and rebel against his ingratitude . he try to argue himself into a passionate attachment for his cousin , but he fail ignominiously , and the more he try to think of Alicia the more he think of Clara Talboys . I be speak now of his feeling in the period that elapse between his return from Dorsetshire and his visit to Grange Heath . 

 Sir Michael sit by the library fire after breakfast upon this wretched rainy morning , write letter and read the newspaper . Alicia shut herself in her own apartment to read the third volume of a novel . Lady Audley lock the door of the octagon ante - chamber , and roam up and down the suite of room from the bedroom to the boudoir all through that weary morning . 

 she have lock the door to guard against the chance of any one come in suddenly and observe she before she be aware before she have have sufficient warning to enable she to face their scrutiny . her pale face seem to grow pale as the morning advance . a tiny medicine - chest be open upon the dressing - table , and little stopper bottle of red lavender , sal - volatile , chloroform , chlorodyne , and ether be scatter about . once my lady pause before this medicine - chest , and take out the remain bottle , half - absently , perhaps , until she come to one which be fill with a thick , dark liquid , and label " opium poison . " 

 she trifle a long time with this last bottle ; hold it up to the light , and even remove the stopper and smell the sickly liquid . but she put it from she suddenly with a shudder . " if I could ! " she mutter , " if I could only do it ! and yet why should I now ? " 

 she clinch her small hand as she utter the last word , and walk to the window of the dressing - room , which look straight toward that ivie archway under which any one must come who come from Mount Stanning to the Court . 

 there be small gate in the garden which lead into the meadow behind the Court , but there be no other way of come from Mount Stanning or Brentwood than by the principal entrance . 

 the solitary hand of the clock over the archway be midway between one and two when my lady look at it . 

 " how slow the time be , " she say , wearily ; " how slow , how slow ! shall I grow old like this , I wonder , with every minute of my life seem like an hour ? " 

 she stand for a few minute watch the archway , but no one pass under it while she look , and she turn impatiently away from the window to resume her weary wander about the room . 

 whatever fire that have be which have reflect itself vividly in the black sky , no tiding of it have as yet come to Audley Court . the day be miserably wet and windy , altogether the very last day upon which even the most confirm idler and gossip would care to venture out . it be not a market - day , and there be therefore very few passenger upon the road between Brentwood and Chelmsford , so that as yet no news of the fire , which have occur in the dead of the wintry night , have reach the village of Audley , or travel from the village to the Court . 

 the girl with the rose - color ribbon come to the door of the anteroom to summon her mistress to luncheon , but Lady Audley only open the door a little way , and intimate her intention of take no luncheon . 

 " my head ache terribly , Martin , " she say ; " I shall go and lie down till dinner - time . you may come at five to dress I . " 

 Lady Audley say this with the predetermination of dress at four , and thus dispense with the service of her attendant . among all privileged spy , a lady's - maid have the high privilege ; it be she who bath Lady Theresa 's eye with eau - de - cologne after her ladyship 's quarrel with the colonel ; it be she who administer sal - volatile to Miss Fanny when Count Beaudesert , of the Blues , have jilt she . she have a hundred method for the finding out of her mistress ' secret . she know by the manner in which her victim jerk her head from under the hair - brush , or chafe at the gentle administration of the comb , what hide torture be rack she breast what secret perplexity be bewilder her brain . that well - breed attendant know how to interpret the most obscure diagnosis of all mental disease that can afflict her mistress ; she know when the ivory complexion be buy and pay for when the pearly tooth be foreign substance fashion by the dentist when the glossy plait be the relic of the dead , rather than the property of the living ; and she know other and more sacred secret than these ; she know when the sweet smile be more false than Madame Levison 's enamel , and far less enduring when the word that issue from between gate of borrow pearl be more disguised and paint than the lip which help to shape they when the lovely fairy of the ball - room re - enter the dressing - room after the night 's long revelry , and throw aside her voluminous burnous and her faded bouquet , and drop her mask , and like another Cinderella lose the glass - slipper , by whose glitter she have be distinguish , and fall back into her rag and dirt , the lady 's maid be by to see the transformation . the valet who take wage from the prophet of Korazin must have see his master sometimes unveil , and must have laugh in his sleeve at the folly of the monster 's worshiper . 

 Lady Audley have make no confidante of her new maid , and on this day of all other she wish to be alone . 

 she do lie down ; she cast herself wearily upon the luxurious sofa in the dressing - room , and bury her face in the down pillow and try to sleep . Sleep ! she have almost forget what it be , that tender restorer of tired nature , it seem so long now since she have sleep . it be only about eight - and - forty hour perhaps , but it appear an intolerable time . her fatigue of the night before , and her unnatural excitement , have wear she out at last . she do fall asleep ; she fall into a heavy slumber that be almost like stupor . she have take a few drop out of the opium bottle in a glass of water before lie down . 

 the clock over the mantelpiece chime the quarter before four as she wake suddenly and start up , with the cold perspiration break out in icy drop upon her forehead . she have dream that every member of the household be clamor at the door , eager to tell she of a dreadful fire that have happen in the night . 

 there be no sound but the flapping of the ivy - leaf against the glass , the occasional fall of a cinder , and the steady ticking of the clock . 

 " perhaps I shall be always dream these sort of dream , " my lady think , " until the terror of they kill I ! " 

 the rain have cease , and the cold spring sunshine be glitter upon the window . Lady Audley dress herself rapidly but carefully . I do not say that even in her supreme hour of misery she still retain her pride in her beauty . it be not so ; she look upon that beauty as a weapon , and she feel that she have now double need to be well armed . she dress herself in her most gorgeous silk , a voluminous robe of silvery , shimmer blue , that make she look as if she have be array in moonbeam . she shake out her hair into feathery shower of glitter gold , and , with a cloak of white cashmere about her shoulder , go down - stair into the vestibule . 

 she open the door of the library and look in . Sir Michael Audley be asleep in his easy - chair . as my lady softly close this door Alicia descend the stair from her own room . the turret door be open , and the sun be shin upon the wet grass - plat in the quadrangle . the firm gravel - walk be already very nearly dry , for the rain have cease for upward of two hour . 

 " will you take a walk with I in the quadrangle ? " Lady Audley ask as her step - daughter approach . the armed neutrality between the two woman admit of any chance civility such as this . 

 " yes , if you please , my lady , " Alicia answer , rather listlessly . " I have be yawn over a stupid novel all the morning , and shall be very glad of a little fresh air . " 

 Heaven help the novelist whose fiction Miss Audley have be peruse , if he have no well critic than that young lady . she have read page after page without know what she have be read , and have fling aside the volume half a dozen time to go to the window and watch for that visitor whom she have so confidently expect . 

 Lady Audley lead the way through the low doorway and on to the smooth gravel drive , by which carriage approach the house . she be still very pale , but the brightness of her dress and of her feathery golden ringlet , distract an observer 's eye from her pallid face . all mental distress be , with some show of reason , associate in our mind with loose , disorder garment and dishabille hair , and an appearance in every way the reverse of my lady 's . why have she come out into the chill sunshine of that March afternoon to wander up and down that monotonous pathway with the step - daughter she hat ? she come because she be under the dominion of a horrible restlessness , which , would not suffer she to remain within the house wait for certain tiding which she know must too surely come . at first she have wish to ward they off at first she have wish that strange convulsion of nature might arise to hinder their come that abnormal winter lightning might wither and destroy the messenger who carry they that the ground might tremble and yawn beneath his hastening foot , and that impassable gulfs might separate the spot from which the tiding be to come and the place to which they be to be carry . she wish that the earth might stand still , and the paralyzed element cease from their natural function , that the progress of time might stop , that the Day of Judgment might come , and that she might thus be bring before an unearthly tribunal , and so escape the intervene shame and misery of any earthly judgment . in the wild chaos of her brain , every one of these thought have hold its place , and in her short slumber on the sofa in her dressing - room she have dream all these thing and a hundred other thing , all bear upon the same subject . she have dream that a brook , a tiny streamlet when she first see it , flow across the road between Mount Stanning and Audley , and gradually swell into a river , and from a river become an ocean , till the village on the hill recede far away out of sight and only a great waste of water roll where it once have be . she dream that she see the messenger , now one person , now another , but never any probable person , hinder by a hundred hinderance , now startling and terrible , now ridiculous and trivial , but never either natural or probable ; and go down into the quiet house with the memory of these dream strong upon she , she have be bewilder by the stillness which have betoken that the tiding have not yet come . 

 and now her mind undergo a complete change . she no long wish to delay the dreaded intelligence . she wish the agony , whatever it be to be , over and do with , the pain suffer , and the release attain . it seem to she as if the intolerable day would never come to an end , as if her mad wish have be grant , and the progress of time have actually stop . 

 " what a long day it have be ! " exclaim Alicia , as if take up the burden of my lady 's thought ; " nothing but drizzle and mist and wind ! and now that it be too late for anybody to go out , it must need be fine , " the young lady add , with an evident sense of injury . 

 Lady Audley do not answer . she be look at the stupid one - handed clock , and wait for the news which must come soon or later , which could not surely fail to come very speedily . 

 " they have be afraid to come and tell he , " she think ; " they have be afraid to break the news to Sir Michael . who will come to tell it , at last , I wonder ? the rector of Mount Stanning , perhaps , or the doctor ; some important person at least . " 

 if she could have go out into the leafless avenue , or onto the high road beyond they ; if she could have go so far as that hill upon which she have so lately part with Phoebe , she would have gladly do so . she would rather have suffer anything than that slow suspense , that corrode anxiety , that metaphysical dryrot in which heart and mind seem to decay under an insufferable torture . she try to talk , and by a painful effort contrive now and then to utter some commonplace remark . under any ordinary circumstance her companion would have notice her embarrassment , but Miss Audley , happen to be very much absorb by her own vexation , be quite as well inclined to be silent as my lady herself . the monotonous walk up and down the graveled pathway suit Alicia 's humor . I think that she even take a malicious pleasure in the idea that she be very likely catch cold , and that her Cousin Robert be answerable for her danger . if she could have bring upon herself inflammation of the lung , or rupture blood - vessel , by that exposure to the chill March atmosphere , I think she would have feel a gloomy satisfaction in her suffering . 

 " perhaps Robert might care for I , if I have inflammation of the lung , " she think . " he could not   insult I by call I a bouncer then . bouncer do not   have inflammation of the lung . " 

 I believe she draw a picture of herself in the last stage of consumption , prop up by pillow in a great easy - chair , look out of a window in the afternoon sunshine , with medicine bottle , a bunch of grape and a Bible upon a table by her side , and with Robert , all contrition and tenderness , summon to receive her farewell blessing . she preach a whole chapter to he in that parting benediction , talk a great deal long than be in keep with her prostrate state , and very much enjoy her dismal castle in the air . employ in this sentimental manner , Miss Audley take very little notice of her step - mother , and the one hand of the blunder clock have slip to six by the time Robert have be bless and dismiss . 

 " good gracious I ! " she cry , suddenly ' six o'clock , and I be not dress . " 

 the half - hour bell ring in a cupola upon the roof while Alicia be speak . 

 " I must go in , my lady , " she say . " will not   you come ? " 

 " presently , " answer Lady Audley . " I be dress , you see . " 

 Alicia run off , but Sir Michael 's wife still linger in the quadrangle , still wait for those tiding which be so long come . 

 it be nearly dark . the blue mist of evening have slowly rise from the ground . the flat meadow be fill with a gray vapor , and a stranger might have fancy Audley Court a castle on the margin of a sea . under the archway the shadow of fastcome night lurk darkly , like traitor wait for an opportunity to glide stealthily into the quadrangle . through the archway a patch of cold blue sky glimmer faintly , streak by one line of lurid crimson , and light by the dim glitter of one wintry - look star . not a creature be stir in the quadrangle but the restless woman who pace up and down the straight pathway , listen for a footstep whose come be to strike terror to her soul . she hear it at last ! a footstep in the avenue upon the other side of the archway . but be it the footstep ? her sense of hearing , make unnaturally acute by excitement , tell she that it be a man 's footstep tell even more , that it be the tread of a gentleman , no slouching , lumber pedestrian in hobnail boot , but a gentleman who walk firmly and well . 

 every sound fall like a lump of ice upon my lady 's heart . she could not wait , she could not contain herself , she lose all self - control , all power of endurance , all capability of self - restraint , and she rush toward the archway . 

 she pause beneath its shadow , for the stranger be close upon she . she see he , oh , God ! she see he in that dim evening light . her brain reel , her heart stop beat . she utter no cry of surprise , no exclamation of terror , but stagger backward and clung for support to the ivied buttress of the archway . with her slender figure crouch into the angle form by the buttress and the wall which it support , she stand star at the new - comer . 

 as he approach she more closely her knee sink under she , and she drop to the ground , not faint , or in any manner unconscious , but sink into a crouch attitude , and still crush into the angle of the wall , as if she would have make a tomb for herself in the shadow of that shelter brickwork . 

 " my lady ! " 

 the speaker be Robert Audley . he whose bedroom door she have double - locked seventeen hour before at the Castle Inn . 

 " what be the matter with you ? " he say , in a strange , constrain manner . " get up , and let I take you indoor . " 

 he assist she to rise , and she obey he very submissively . he take her arm in his strong hand and lead she across the quadrangle and into the lamp - light hall . she shiver more violently than he have ever see any woman shiver before , but she make no attempt at resistance to his will . 

 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

 my LADY tell the truth . 

 " be there any room in which I can talk to you alone ? " Robert Audley ask , as he look dubiously round the hall . 

 my lady only bow her head in answer . she push open the door of the library , which have be leave ajar . Sir Michael have go to his dressing - room to prepare for dinner after a day of lazy enjoyment , perfectly legitimate for an invalid . the apartment be quite empty , only light by the blaze of the fire , as it have be upon the previous evening . 

 Lady Audley enter the room , follow by Robert , who close the door behind he . the wretched , shiver woman go to the fireplace and kneel down before the blaze , as if any natural warmth , could have power to check that unnatural chill . the young man follow she , and stand beside she upon the hearth , with his arm rest upon the chimney - piece . 

 " Lady Audley , " he say , in a voice whose icy sternness hold out no hope of any tenderness or compassion , " I speak to you last - night very plainly , but you refuse to listen to I . to - night I must speak to you still more plainly , and you must no long refuse to listen to I . " 

 my lady , crouch before the fire with her face hide in her hand , utter a low , sob sound which be almost a moan , but make no other answer . 

 " there be a fire last night at Mount Stanning , Lady Audley , " the pitiless voice proceed ; " the Castle Inn , the house in which I sleep , be burn to the ground . do you know how I escape perish in that destruction ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I escape by a most providential circumstance which seem a very simple one . I do not sleep in the room which have be prepare for I . the place seem wretchedly damp and chilly , the chimney smoke abominably when an attempt be make at light a fire , and I persuade the servant to make I up a bed on the sofa in the small ground - floor sitting - room which I have occupy during the evening . " 

 he pause for a moment , watch the crouch figure . the only change in my lady 's attitude be that her head have fall a little low . 

 " shall I tell you by whose agency the destruction of the Castle Inn be bring about , my lady ? " 

 there be no answer . 

 " shall I tell you ? " 

 still the same obstinate silence . 

 " my Lady Audley , " cry Robert , suddenly , " you be the incendiary . it be you whose murderous hand kindle those flame . it be you who think by that thrice - horrible deed to rid yourself of I , your enemy and denouncer . what be it to you that other life might be sacrifice ? if by a second massacre of Saint Bartholomew you could have rid yourself of I you would have sacrifice an army of victim . the day be past for tenderness and mercy . for you I can no long know pity or compunction . so far as by spar your shame I can spare other who must suffer by your shame , I will be merciful , but no far . if there be any secret tribunal before which you might be make to answer for your crime , I would have little scruple in be your accuser , but I would spare that generous and high - bear gentleman upon whose noble name your infamy would be reflect . " 

 his voice soften as he make this allusion , and for a moment he break down , but he recover himself by an effort and continue : 

 " no life be lose in the fire of last night . I sleep lightly , my lady , for my mind be troubled , as it have be for a long time , by the misery which I know be lower upon this house . it be I who discover the breaking out of the fire in time to give the alarm and to save the servant girl and the poor drunken wretch , who be very much burn in spite of effort , and who now lie in a precarious state at his mother 's cottage . it be from he and from his wife that I learn who have visit the Castle Inn in the dead of the night . the woman be almost distracted when she see I , and from she I discover the particular of last night . Heaven know what other secret of yours she may hold , my lady , or how easily they might be extort from she if I want her aid , which I do not . my path lie very straight before I . I have swear to bring the murderer of George Talboys to justice , and I will keep my oath . I say that it be by your agency my friend meet with his death . if I have wonder sometimes , as it be only natural I should , whether I be not the victim of some horrible hallucination , whether such an alternative be not more probable than that a young and lovely woman should be capable of so foul and treacherous a murder , all wonder be past . after last night 's deed of horror , there be no crime you could commit , however vast and unnatural , which could make I wonder . henceforth you must seem to I no long a woman , a guilty woman with a heart which in its bad wickedness have yet some latent power to suffer and feel ; I look upon you henceforth as the demoniac incarnation of some evil principle . but you shall no long pollute this place by your presence . unless you will confess what you be and who you be in the presence of the man you have deceive so long , and accept from he and from I such mercy as we may be incline to extend to you , I will gather together the witness who shall swear to your identity , and at peril of any shame to myself and those I love , I will bring upon you the just and awful punishment of your crime . " 

 the woman rise suddenly and stand before he erect and resolute , with her hair dash away from her face and her eye glitter . 

 " bring Sir Michael ! " she cry ; " bring he here , and I will confess anything everything . what do I care ? God know I have struggle hard enough against you , and fight the battle patiently enough ; but you have conquer , Mr. Robert Audley . it be a great triumph , be it not a wonderful victory ? you have use your cool , calculate , frigid , luminous intellect to a noble purpose . you have conquer a MAD woman ! " 

 " a mad woman ! " cry Mr. Audley . 

 " yes , a mad woman . when you say that I kill George Talboys , you say the truth . when you say that I murder he treacherously and foully , you lie . I kill he because I be MAD ! because my intellect be a little way upon the wrong side of that narrow boundary - line between sanity and insanity ; because , when George Talboys goad I , as you have goad I , and reproach I , and threaten I , my mind , never properly balance , utterly lose its balance , and I be mad ! bring Sir Michael ; and bring he quickly . if he be to be tell one thing let he be tell everything ; let he hear the secret of my life ! " 

 Robert Audley leave the room to look for his uncle . he go in search of that honor kinsman with God know how heavy a weight of anguish at his heart , for he know he be about to shatter the day - dream of his uncle 's life ; and he know that our dream be none the less terrible to lose , because they have never be the reality for which we have mistake they . but even in the midst of his sorrow for Sir Michael , he could not help wonder at my lady 's last word " the secret of my life . " he remember those line in the letter write by Helen Talboys upon the eve of her flight from Wildernsea , which have so puzzle he . he remember those appeal sentence " you should forgive I , for you know why I have be so . you know the secret of my life . " 

 he meet Sir Michael in the hall . he make no attempt to prepare the way for the terrible revelation which the baronet be to hear . he only draw he into the fire - light library , and there for the first time address he quietly thus : " Lady Audley have a confession to make to you , sir a confession which I know will be a most cruel surprise , a most bitter grief . but it be necessary for your present honor , and for your future peace , that you should hear it . she have deceive you , I regret to say , most basely ; but it be only right that you should hear from her own lip any excuse which she may have to offer for her wickedness . may God soften this blow for you ! " sob the young man , suddenly break down ; " I can not ! " 

 Sir Michael lift his hand as if he would command his nephew to be silent , but that imperious hand drop feeble and impotent at his side . he stand in the center of the fire - light room rigid and immovable . 

 " Lucy ! " he cry , in a voice whose anguish strike like a blow upon the jarred nerve of those who hear it , as the cry of a wound animal pain the listener " Lucy , tell I that this man be a madman ! tell I so , my love , or I shall kill he ! " 

 there be a sudden fury in his voice as he turn upon Robert , as if he could indeed have fell his wife 's accuser to the earth with the strength of his uplifted arm . 

 but my lady fall upon her knee at his foot , interpose herself between the baronet and his nephew , who stand lean on the back of an easy - chair , with his face hide by his hand . 

 " he have tell you the truth , " say my lady , " and he be not mad ! I have send he for you that I may confess everything to you . I should be sorry for you if I could , for you have be very , very good to I , much well to I than I ever deserve ; but I can not , I can not   I can feel nothing but my own misery . I tell you long ago that I be selfish ; I be selfish still more selfish than ever in my misery . happy , prosperous people may feel for other . I laugh at other people 's suffering ; they seem so small compare to my own . " 

 when first my lady have fall on her knee , Sir Michael have attempt to raise she , and have remonstrate with she ; but as she speak he drop into a chair close to the spot upon which she knelt , and with his hand clasp together , and with his head bent to catch every syllable of those horrible word , he listen as if his whole being have be resolve into that one sense of hearing . 

 " I must tell you the story of my life , in order to tell you why I have become the miserable wretch who have no well hope than to be allow to run away and hide in some desolate corner of the earth . I must tell you the story of my life , " repeat my lady , " but you need not fear that I shall dwell long upon it . it have not be so pleasant to I that I should wish to remember it . when I be a very little child I remember ask a question which it be natural enough that I should ask , God help I ! I ask where my mother be . I have a faint remembrance of a face , like what my own be now , look at I when I be very little well than a baby ; but I have miss the face suddenly , and have never see it since . they tell I that mother be away . I be not happy , for the woman who have charge of I be a disagreeable woman and the place in which we live be a lonely place , a village upon the Hampshire coast , about seven mile from Portsmouth . my father , who be in the navy , only come now and then to see I ; and I be leave almost entirely to the charge of this woman , who be irregularly pay , and who vent her rage upon I when my father be behindhand in remit her money . so you see that at a very early age I find out what it be to be poor . 

 " perhaps it be more from be discontent with my dreary life than from any wonderful impulse of affection , that I ask very often the same question about my mother . I always receive the same answer she be away . when I ask where , I be tell that that be a secret . when I grow old enough to understand the meaning of the word death , I ask if my mother be dead , and I be tell ' no , she be not dead ; she be ill , and she be away . ' I ask how long she have be ill , and I be tell that she have be so some year , ever since I be a baby . 

 " at last the secret come out . I worry my foster - mother with the old question one day when the remittance have fall very much in arrear , and her temper have be unusually try . she fly into a passion , and tell I that my mother be a mad woman , and that she be in a madhouse forty mile away . she have scarcely say this when she repent , and tell I that it be not the truth , and that I be not to believe it , or to say that she have tell I such a thing . I discover afterward that my father have make her promise most solemnly never to tell I the secret of my mother 's fate . 

 " I brood horribly upon the thought of my mother 's madness . it haunt I by day and night . I be always picture to myself this mad woman pace up and down some prison cell , in a hideous garment that bind her torture limb . I have exaggerate idea of the horror of her situation . I have no knowledge of the different degree of madness , and the image that haunt I be that of a distraught and violent creature , who would fall upon I and kill I if I come within her reach . this idea grow upon I until I use to awake in the dead of night , scream aloud in an agony of terror , from a dream in which I have feel my mother 's icy grasp upon my throat , and hear her raving in my ear . 

 " when I be ten year old my father come to pay up the arrear due to my protectress , and to take I to school . he have leave I in Hampshire long than he have intend , from his inability to pay this money ; so there again I feel the bitterness of poverty , and run the risk of grow up an ignorant creature among coarse rustic child , because my father be poor . " 

 my lady pause for a moment , but only to take breath , for she have speak rapidly , as if eager to tell this hat story , and to have do with it . she be still on her knee , but Sir Michael make no effort to raise she . 

 he sit silent and immovable . what be this story that he be listen to ? whose be it , and to what be it to lead ? it could not be his wife 's ; he have hear her simple account of her youth , and have believe it as he have believe in the Gospel . she have tell he a very brief story of an early orphanage , and a long , quiet , colorless youth spend in the conventional seclusion of an english boarding - school . 

 " my father come at last , and I tell he what I have discover . he be very much affect when I speak of my mother . he be not what the world generally call a good man , but I learn afterward that he have love his wife very dearly , and that he would have willingly sacrifice his life to she , and constitute himself her guardian , have he not be compel to earn the daily bread of the mad woman and her child by the exercise of his profession . so here again I behold what a bitter thing it be to be poor . my mother , who might have be tend by a devoted husband , be give over to the care of hire nurse . 

 " before my father send I to school at Torquay , he take I to see my mother . this visit serve at least to dispel the idea which have so often terrify I . I see no raving , straight - waist - coat maniac , guard by zealous jailer , but a golden - haired , blue - eye , girlish creature , who seem as frivolous as a butterfly , and who skip toward we with her yellow curl decorate with natural flower , and salute we with radiant smile , and gay , ceaseless chatter . 

 " but she do not   know we . she would have speak in the same manner to any stranger who have enter the gate of the garden about her prison - house . her madness be an hereditary disease transmit to she from her mother , who have die mad . she , my mother , have be , or have appear sane up to the hour of my birth , but from that hour her intellect have decay , and she have become what I see she . 

 " I go away with the knowledge of this , and with the knowledge that the only inheritance I have to expect from my mother be insanity ! 

 " I go away with this knowledge in my mind , and with something more a secret to keep . I be a child of ten year only , but I feel all the weight of that burden . I be to keep the secret of my mother 's madness ; for it be a secret that might affect I injuriously in after - life . I be to remember this . 

 " I do remember this ; and it be , perhaps , this that make I selfish and heartless , for I suppose I be heartless . as I grow old I be tell that I be pretty beautiful lovely bewitching . I hear all these thing at first indifferently , but by - and - by I listen to they greedily , and begin to think that in spite of the secret of my life I might be more successful in the world 's great lottery than my companion . I have learn that which in some indefinite manner or other every school - girl learn soon or later I learn that my ultimate fate in life depend upon my marriage , and I conclude that if I be indeed pretty than my schoolfellow , I ought to marry well than any one of they . 

 " I leave school before I be seventeen year of age , with this thought in my mind , and I go to live at the other extremity of England with my father , who have retire upon his half - pay , and have establish himself at Wildernsea , with the idea that the place be cheap and select . 

 " the place be indeed select . I have not be there a month before I discover that even the prettiest girl might wait a long time for a rich husband . I wish to hurry over this part of my life . I dare say I be very despicable . you and your nephew , Sir Michael , have be rich all your life , and can very well afford to despise I ; but I know how far poverty can affect a life , and I look forward with a sicken dread to a life so affected . at last the rich suitor , the wandering prince come . " 

 she pause for a moment , and shudder convulsively . it be impossible to see any of the change in her countenance , for her face be obstinately bent toward the floor . throughout her long confession she never lift it ; throughout her long confession her voice be never break by a tear . what she have to tell she tell in a cold , hard tone , very much the tone in which some criminal , dogged and sullen to the last , might have confess to a jail chaplain . 

 " the wander prince come , " she repeat ; " he be call George Talboys . " 

 for the first time since his wife 's confession have begin , Sir Michael Audley start . he begin to understand it all now . a crowd of unheeded word and forget circumstance that have seem too insignificant for remark or recollection , flash back upon he as vividly as if they have be the lead incident of his past life . 

 " Mr. George Talboys be a cornet in a dragoon regiment . he be the only son of a rich country gentleman . he fall in love with I , and marry I three month after my seventeenth birthday . I think I love he as much as it be in my power to love anybody ; not more than I have love you , Sir Michael not so much , for when you marry I you elevate I to a position that he could never have give I . " 

 the dream be break . Sir Michael Audley remember that summer 's evening , nearly two year ago , when he have first declare his love for Mr. Dawson 's governess ; he remember the sick , half - shudder sensation of regret and disappointment that have come over he then , and he feel as if it have in some manner dimly foreshadow the agony of to - night . 

 but I do not believe that even in his misery he feel that entire and unmitigated surprise , that utter revulsion of feeling that be feel when a good woman wander away from herself and become the lost creature whom her husband be bind in honor to abjure . I do not believe that Sir Michael Audley have ever really believe in his wife . he have love she and admire she ; he have be bewitch by her beauty and bewilder by her charm ; but that sense of something want , that vague feeling of loss and disappointment which have come upon he on the summer 's night of his betrothal have be with he more or less distinctly ever since . I can not believe that an honest man , however pure and single may be his mind , however simply trustful his nature , be ever really deceive by falsehood . there be beneath the voluntary confidence an involuntary distrust , not to be conquer by any effort of the will . 

 " we be marry , " my lady continue , " and I love he very well , quite well enough to be happy with he as long as his money last , and while we be on the continent , travel in the good style and always stay at the good hotel . but when we come back to Wildernsea and live with papa , and all the money be go , and George grow gloomy and wretche , and be always think of his trouble , and appear to neglect I , I be very unhappy , and it seem as if this fine marriage have only give I a twelvemonth 's gayety and extravagance after all . I beg George to appeal to his father , but he refuse . I persuade he to try and get employment , and he fail . my baby be bear , and the crisis which have be fatal to my mother arise for I . I escape , but I be more irritable perhaps after my recovery , less inclined to fight the hard battle of the world , more disposed to complain of poverty and neglect . I do complain one day , loudly and bitterly ; I upbraid George Talboys for his cruelty in have ally a helpless girl to poverty and misery , and he fly into a passion with I and run out of the house . when I awake the next morning , I find a letter lie on the table by my bed , tell I that he be go to the antipode to seek his fortune , and that he would never see I again until he be a rich man . 

 " I look upon this as a desertion , and I resent it bitterly resent it by hat the man who have leave I with no protector but a weak , tipsy father , and with a child to support . I have to work hard for my living , and in every hour of labor and what labor be more wearisome than the dull slavery of a governess ? I recognize a separate wrong do I by George Talboys . his father be rich , his sister be live in luxury and respectability , and I , his wife , and the mother of his son , be a slave ally to beggary and obscurity . People pity I , and I hat they for their pity . I do not love the child , for he have be leave a burden upon my hand . the hereditary taint that be in my blood have never until this time show itself by any one sign or token ; but at this time I become subject to fit of violence and despair . at this time I think my mind first lose its balance , and for the first time I cross that invisible line which separate reason from madness . I have see my father 's eye fix upon I in horror and alarm . I have know he soothe I as only mad people and child be soothe , and I have chafe against his petty device , I have resent even his indulgence . 

 " at last these fit of desperation resolve themselves into a desperate purpose . I determine to run away from this wretched home which my slavery support . I determine to desert this father who have more fear of I than love for I . I determine to go to London and lose myself in that great chaos of humanity . 

 " I have see an advertisement in the Times while I be at Wildernsea , and I present myself to Mrs. Vincent , the advertiser , under a feigned name . she accept I , waive all question as to my antecedent . you know the rest . I come here , and you make I an offer , the acceptance of which would lift I at once into the sphere to which my ambition have point ever since I be a school - girl , and hear for the first time that I be pretty . 

 " three year have pass , and I have receive no token of my husband 's existence ; for , I argue , that if he have return to England , he would have succeed in find I under any name and in any place . I know the energy of his character well enough to know this . 

 " I say ' I have a right to think that he be dead , or that he wish I to believe he dead , and his shadow shall not stand between I and prosperity . ' I say this , and I become your wife , Sir Michael , with every resolution to be as good a wife as it be in my nature to be . the common temptation that assail and shipwreck some woman have no terror for I . I would have be your true and pure wife to the end of time , though I have be surround by a legion of tempter . the mad folly that the world call love have never have any part in my madness , and here at least extreme meet , and the vice of heartlessness become the virtue of constancy . 

 " I be very happy in the first triumph and grandeur of my new position , very grateful to the hand that have lift I to it . in the sunshine of my own happiness I feel , for the first time in my life , for the misery of other . I have be poor myself , and I be now rich , and could afford to pity and relieve the poverty of my neighbor . I take pleasure in act of kindness and benevolence . I find out my father 's address and send he large sum of money , anonymously , for I do not wish he to discover what have become of I . I avail myself to the full of the privilege your generosity afford I . I dispense happiness on every side . I see myself love as well as admire , and I think I might have be a good woman for the rest of my life , if fate would have allow I to be so . 

 " I believe that at this time my mind regain its just balance . I have watch myself very closely since leave Wildernsea ; I have hold a check upon myself . I have often wonder while sit in the surgeon 's quiet family circle whether any suspicion of that invisible , hereditary taint have ever occur to Mr. Dawson . 

 " Fate would not suffer I to be good . my destiny compel I to be a wretch . within a month of my marriage , I read in one of the Essex paper of the return of a certain Mr. Talboys , a fortunate gold - seeker , from Australia . the ship have sail at the time I read the paragraph . what be to be do ? 

 " I say just now that I know the energy of George 's character . I know that the man who have go to the antipode and win a fortune for his wife would leave no stone unturned in his effort to find she . it be hopeless to think of hide myself from he . 

 " unless he could be induce to believe that I be dead , he would never cease in his search for I . 

 " my brain be daze as I think of my peril . again the balance tremble , again the invisible boundary be pass , again I be mad . 

 " I go down to Southampton and find my father , who be live there with my child . you remember how Mrs. Vincent 's name be use as an excuse for this hurried journey , and how it be contrive I should go with no other escort than Phoebe Marks , whom I leave at the hotel while I go to my father 's house . 

 " I confide to my father the whole secret of my peril . he be not very much shocked at what I have do , for poverty have perhaps blunt his sense of honor and principle . he be not very much shocked , but he be frightened , and he promise to do all in his power to assist I in my horrible emergency . 

 " he have receive a letter address to I at Wildernsea , by George , and forward from there to my father . this letter have be write within a few day of the sailing of the Argus , and it announce the probable date of the ship 's arrival at Liverpool . this letter give we , therefore , datum upon which to act . 

 " we decide at once upon the first step . this be that on the date of the probable arrival of the Argus , or a few day later , an advertisement of my death should be insert in the Times . 

 " but almost immediately after decide upon this , we see that there be fearful difficulty in the carrying out of such a simple plan . the date of the death , and the place in which I die , must be announce , as well as the death itself . George would immediately hurry to that place , however distant it might be , however comparatively inaccessible , and the shallow falsehood would be discover . 

 " I know enough of his sanguine temperament , his courage and determination , his readiness to hope against hope , to know that unless he see the grave in which I be bury , and the register of my death , he would never believe that I be lose to he . 

 " my father be utterly dumfounde and helpless . he could only shed childish tear of despair and terror . he be of no use to I in this crisis . 

 " I be hopeless of any issue out of my difficulty . I begin to think that I must trust to the chapter of accident , and hope that among other obscure corner of the earth , Audley Court might be undreamt of by my husband . 

 " I sit with my father , drink tea with he in his miserable hovel , and play with the child , who be pleased with my dress and jewel , but quite unconscious that I be anything but a stranger to he . I have the boy in my arm , when a woman who attend he come to fetch he that she might make he more fit to be see by the lady , as she say . 

 " I be anxious to know how the boy be treat , and I detain this woman in conversation with I while my father doze over the tea - table . 

 " she be a pale - faced , sandy - haired woman of about five - and - forty and she seem very glad to get the chance of talk to I as long as I please to allow she . she soon leave off talk of the boy , however , to tell I of her own trouble . she be in very great trouble , she tell I . her eld daughter have be oblige to leave her situation from ill - health ; in fact , the doctor say the girl be in a decline ; and it be a hard thing for a poor widow who have see well day to have a sick daughter to support , as well as a family of young child . 

 " I let the woman run on for a long time in this manner , tell I the girl 's ailment , and the girl 's age , and the girl 's doctor 's stuff , and piety , and suffering , and a great deal more . but I neither listen to she nor heed she . I hear she , but only in a far - away manner , as I hear the traffic in the street , or the ripple of the stream at the bottom of it . what be this woman 's trouble to I ? I have misery of my own , and bad misery than her coarse nature could ever have to endure . these sort of people always have sick husband or sick child , and expect to be help in their illness by the rich . it be nothing out of the common . I be think this , and I be just go to dismiss the woman with a sovereign for her sick daughter , when an idea flash upon I with such painful suddenness that it send the blood surge up to my brain , and set my heart beat , as it only beat when I be mad . 

 " I ask the woman her name . she be a Mrs. Plowson , and she keep a small general shop , she say , and only run in now and then to look after Georgey , and to see that the little maid - of - all - work take care of he . her daughter 's name be Matilda . I ask she several question about this girl Matilda , and I ascertain that she be four - and - twenty , that she have always be consumptive , and that she be now , as the doctor say , go off in a rapid decline . he have declare that she could not last much more than a fortnight . 

 " it be in three week that the ship that carry George Talboys be expect to anchor in the Mersey . 

 " I need not dwell upon this business . I visit the sick girl . she be fair and slender . her description , carelessly give , might tally nearly enough with my own , though she bear no shadow of resemblance to I , except in these two particular . I be receive by the girl as a rich lady who wish to do she a service . I buy the mother , who be poor and greedy , and who for a gift of money , more money than she have ever before receive , consent to submit to anything I wish . upon the second day after my introduction to this Mrs. Plowson , my father go over to Ventnor , and hire lodging for his invalid daughter and her little boy . early the next morning he carry over the die girl and Georgey , who have be bribe to call she ' mamma . ' she enter the house as Mrs. Talboys ; she be attend by a Ventnor medical man as Mrs. Talboys ; she die , and her death and burial be register in that name . 

 " the advertisement be insert in the Times , and upon the second day after its insertion George Talboys visit Ventnor , and order the tombstone which at this hour record the death of his wife , Helen Talboys . " 

 Sir Michael Audley rise slowly , and with a stiff , constrained action , as if every physical sense have be benumb by that one sense of misery . 

 " I can not hear any more , " he say , in a hoarse whisper ; " if there be anything more to be tell I can not hear it . Robert , it be you who have bring about this discovery , as I understand . I want to know nothing more . will you take upon yourself the duty of provide for the safety and comfort of this lady whom I have think my wife ? I need not ask you to remember in all you do , that I have love she very dearly and truly . I can not say farewell to she . I will not say it until I can think of she without bitterness until I can pity she , as I now pray that God may pity she this night . " 

 Sir Michael walk slowly from the room . he do not trust himself to look at that crouch figure . he do not wish to see the creature whom he have cherish . he go straight to his dressing - room , rung for his valet , and order he to pack a portmanteau , and make all necessary arrangement for accompany his master by the last up - train . 

 CHAPTER XXXV . 

 the HUSH that succeed the TEMPEST . 

 Robert Audley follow his uncle into the vestibule after Sir Michael have speak those few quiet word which sound the death - knell of his hope and love . Heaven know how much the young man have fear the coming of this day . it have come ; and though there have be no great outburst of despair , no whirlwind of stormy grief , no loud tempest of anguish and tear , Robert take no comforting thought from the unnatural stillness . he know enough to know that Sir Michael Audley go away with the barbed arrow , which his nephew 's hand have send home to its aim , rankle in his tortured heart ; he know that this strange and icy calm be the first numbness of a heart stricken by grief so unexpected as for a time to be render almost incomprehensible by a blank stupor of astonishment ; he know that when this dull quiet have pass away , when little by little , and one by one , each horrible feature of the sufferer 's sorrow become first dimly apparent and then terribly familiar to he , the storm would burst in fatal fury , and tempest of tear and cruel thunder - clap of agony would rend that generous heart . 

 Robert have hear of case in which man of his uncle 's age have bear some great grief , as Sir Michael have bear this , with a strange quiet ; and have go away from those who would have comfort they , and whose anxiety have be relieve by this patient stillness , to fall down upon the ground and die under the blow which at first have only stun he . he remember case in which paralysis and apoplexy have stricken man as strong as his uncle in the first hour of the horrible affliction ; and he linger in the lamp - light vestibule , wonder whether it be not his duty to be with Sir Michael to be near he , in case of any emergency , and to accompany he wherever he go . 

 yet would it be wise to force himself upon that gray - head sufferer in this cruel hour , in which he have be awaken from the one delusion of a blameless life to discover that he have be the dupe of a false face , and the fool of a nature which be too coldly mercenary , too cruelly heartless , to be sensible of its own infamy ? 

 " no , " think Robert Audley , " I will not intrude upon the anguish of this wound heart . there be humiliation mingle with this bitter grief . it be well he should fight the battle alone . I have do what I believe to have be my solemn duty , yet I should scarcely wonder if I have render myself forever hateful to he . it be well he should fight the battle alone . I can do nothing to make the strife less terrible . well that it should be fight alone . " 

 while the young man stand with his hand upon the library door , still half - doubtful whether he should follow his uncle or re - enter the room in which he have leave that more wretched creature whom it have be his business to unmask , Alicia Audley open the dining - room door , and reveal to he the old - fashioned oak - panel apartment , the long table cover with showy damask , and bright with a cheerful glitter of glass and silver . 

 " be papa come to dinner ? " ask Miss Audley . " I be so hungry ; and poor Tomlins have send up three time to say the fish will be spoil . it must be reduce to a species of isinglass soup , by this time , I should think , " add the young lady , as she come out into the vestibule with the Times newspaper in her hand . 

 she have be sit by the fire read the paper , and wait for her senior to join she at the dinner table . 

 " oh , it be you , Mr. Robert Audley . " she remark , indifferently . " you dine with we of course . pray go and find papa . it must be nearly eight o'clock , and we be suppose to dine at six . " 

 Mr. Audley answer his cousin rather sternly . her frivolous manner jar upon he , and he forget in his irrational displeasure that Miss Audley have know nothing of the terrible drama which have be so long enact under her very nose . 

 " your papa have just endure a very great grief , Alicia , " the young man say , gravely . 

 the girl 's arch , laugh face change in a moment to a tenderly earnest look of sorrow and anxiety . Alicia Audley love her father very dearly . 

 " a grief ? " she exclaim ; " papa grieve ! oh ! Robert , what have happen ? " 

 " I can tell you nothing yet , Alicia , " Robert answer in a low voice . 

 he take his cousin by the wrist , and draw she into the dining - room as he speak . he close the door carefully behind he before he continue : 

 " Alicia , can I trust you ? " he ask , earnestly . 

 " trust I to do what ? " 

 " to be a comfort and a friend to your poor father under a very heavy affliction . " 

 " yes ! " cry Alicia , passionately . " how can you ask I such a question ? do you think there be anything I would not do to lighten any sorrow of my father 's ? do you think there be anything I would not suffer if my suffering could lighten his ? " 

 the rush tear rise to Miss Audley 's bright gray eye as she speak . 

 " oh , Robert ! Robert ! could you think so badly of I as to think I would not try to be a comfort to my father in his grief ? " she say , reproachfully . 

 " no , no , my dear , " answer the young man , quietly ; " I never doubt your affection , I only doubt your discretion . may I rely upon that ? " 

 " you may , Robert , " say Alicia , resolutely . 

 " very well , then , my dear girl , I will trust you . your father be go to leave the Court , for a time at least . the grief which he have just endure a sudden and unlooke - for sorrow , remember have no doubt make this place hateful to he . he be go away ; but he must not go alone , must he , Alicia ? " 

 " alone ? no ! no ! but I suppose my lady " 

 " Lady Audley will not go with he , " say Robert , gravely ; " he be about to separate himself from she . " 

 " for a time ? " 

 " no , forever . " 

 " separate himself from she forever ! " exclaim Alicia . " then this grief " 

 " be connect with Lady Audley . Lady Audley be the cause of your father 's sorrow . " 

 Alicia 's face , which have be pale before , flushed crimson . sorrow , of which my lady be the cause a sorrow which be to separate Sir Michael forever from his wife ! there have be no quarrel between they there have never be anything but harmony and sunshine between Lady Audley and her generous husband . this sorrow must surely then have arise from some sudden discovery ; it be , no doubt , a sorrow associate with disgrace . Robert Audley understand the meaning of that vivid blush . 

 " you will offer to accompany your father wherever he may choose to go , Alicia , " he say . " you be his natural comforter at such a time as this , but you will well befriend he in this hour of trial by avoid all intrusion upon his grief . your very ignorance of the particular of that grief will be a security for your discretion . say nothing to your father that you might not have say to he two year ago , before he marry a second wife . try and be to he what you be before the woman in yonder room come between you and your father 's love . " 

 " I will , " murmur Alicia , " I will . " 

 " you will naturally avoid all mention of Lady Audley 's name . if your father be often silent , be patient ; if it sometimes seem to you that the shadow of this great sorrow will never pass away from his life , be patient still ; and remember that there can be no well hope of a cure of his grief than the hope that his daughter 's devotion may lead he to remember there be one woman upon this earth who will love he truly and purely until the last . " 

 " yes yes , Robert , dear cousin , I will remember . " 

 Mr. Audley , for the first time since he have be a schoolboy , take his cousin in his arm and kiss her broad forehead . 

 " my dear alicia , " he say , " do this and you will make I happy . I have be in some measure the mean of bring this sorrow upon your father . let I hope that it be not an endure one . try and restore my uncle to happiness , Alicia , and I will love you more dearly than brother ever love a noble - hearted sister ; and a brotherly affection may be worth have , perhaps , after all , my dear , though it be very different to poor Sir Harry 's enthusiastic worship . " 

 Alicia 's head be bent and her face hide from her cousin while he speak , but she lift her head when he have finish , and look he full in the face with a smile that be only the bright for her eye be fill with tear . 

 " you be a good fellow , Bob , " she say ; " and I have   be very foolish and wicked to feel angry with you because " 

 the young lady stop suddenly . 

 " because what , my dear ? " ask Mr. Audley . 

 " because I be silly , Cousin Robert , " Alicia say , quickly ; " never mind that , Bob , I will do all you wish , and it shall not be my fault if my dear father do not   forget his trouble before long . I would go to the end of the world with he , poor darling , if I think there be any comfort to be find for he in the journey . I will go and get ready directly . do you think papa will go to - night ? " 

 " yes , my dear ; I do not   think Sir Michael will rest another night under this roof yet awhile . " 

 " the mail go at twenty minute past nine , " say Alicia ; " we must leave the house in an hour if we be to travel by it . I shall see you again before we go , Robert ? " 

 " yes , dear . " 

 Miss Audley run off to her room to summon she maid , and make all necessary preparation for the sudden journey , of whose ultimate destination she be as yet quite ignorant . 

 she go heart and soul into the carrying out of the duty which Robert have dictate to she . she assist in the packing of her portmanteau , and hopelessly bewilder she maid by stuff silk dress into her bonnet - box and satin shoe into her dressing - case . she roam about her room , gather together drawing - material , music - book , needle - work , hair - brush , jewelry , and perfume - bottle , very much as she might have do have she be about to sail for some savage country , devoid of all civilized resource . she be think all the time of her father 's unknown grief , and perhaps a little of the serious face and earnest voice which have that night reveal her Cousin Robert to she in a new character . 

 Mr. Audley go up - stair after his cousin , and find his way to Sir Michael 's dressing - room . he knock at the door and listen , Heaven know how anxiously , for the expect answer . there be a moment 's pause , during which the young man 's heart beat loud and fast , and then the door be open by the baronet himself . Robert see that his uncle 's valet be already hard at work prepare for his master 's hurried journey . 

 Sir Michael come out into the corridor . 

 " have you anything more to say to I , Robert ? " he ask , quietly . 

 " I only come to ascertain if I could assist in any of your arrangement . you go to London by the mail ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " have you any idea of where you will stay . " 

 " yes , I shall stop at the Clarendon ; I be know there . be that all you have to say ? " 

 " yes ; except that Alicia will accompany you ? " 

 " Alicia ! " 

 " she could not very well stay here , you know , just now . it would be good for she to leave the Court until " 

 " yes , yes , I understand , " interrupt the baronet ; " but be there nowhere else that she could go must she be with I ? " 

 " she could go nowhere else so immediately , and she would not be happy anywhere else . " 

 " let she come , then , " say Sir Michael , " let she come . " 

 he speak in a strange , subdued voice , and with an apparent effort , as if it be painful to he to have to speak at all ; as if all this ordinary business of life be a cruel torture to he , and jar so much upon his grief as to be almost bad to bear than that grief itself . 

 " very well , my dear uncle , then all be arrange ; Alicia will be ready to start at nine o'clock . " 

 " very good , very good , " mutter the baronet ; " let she come if she please , poor child , let she come . " 

 he sigh heavily as he speak in that half pity tone of his daughter . he be think how comparatively indifferent he have be toward that only child for the sake of the woman now shut in the fire - light room below . 

 " I shall see you again before you go , sir , " say Robert ; " I will leave you till then . " 

 " Stay ! " say Sir Michael , suddenly ; " have you tell Alicia ? " 

 " I have tell she nothing , except that you be about to leave the Court for some time . " 

 " you be very good , my boy , you be very good , " the baronet murmur in a broken voice . 

 he stretch out his hand . his nephew take it in both his own , and press it to his lip . 

 " oh , sir ! how can I ever forgive myself ? " he say ; " how can I ever cease to hate myself for have bring this grief upon you ? " 

 " no , no , Robert , you do right ; I wish that God have be so merciful to I as to take my miserable life before this night ; but you do right . " 

 Sir Michael re - enter his dressing - room , and Robert slowly return to the vestibule . he pause upon the threshold of that chamber in which he have leave Lucy Lady Audley , otherwise Helen Talboys , the wife of his lose friend . 

 she be lie upon the floor , upon the very spot in which she have crouch at her husband 's foot tell her guilty story . whether she be in a swoon , or whether she lie there in the utter helplessness of her misery , Robert scarcely care to know . he go out into the vestibule , and send one of the servant to look for her maid , the smart , be - ribbone damsel who be loud in wonder and consternation at the sight of her mistress . 

 " Lady Audley be very ill , " he say ; " take she to her room and see that she do not leave it to - night . you will be good enough to remain near she , but do not either talk to she or suffer she to excite herself by talk . " 

 my lady have not faint ; she allow the girl to assist she , and rise from the ground upon which she have grovel . her golden hair fall in loose , dishevel mass about her ivory throat and shoulder , her face and lip be colorless , her eye terrible in their unnatural light . 

 " take I away , " she say , " and let I sleep ! let I sleep , for my brain be on fire ! " 

 as she be leave the room with she maid , she turn and look at Robert . " be Sir Michael go ? " she ask . 

 " he will leave in half an hour . " 

 " there be no life lose in the fire at Mount Stanning ? " 

 " none . " 

 " I be glad of that . " 

 " the landlord of the house , Marks , be very terribly burn , and lie in a precarious state at his mother 's cottage ; but he may recover . " 

 " I be glad of that I be glad no life be lose . good - night , Mr. Audley . " 

 " I shall ask to see you for half an hour 's conversation in the course of to - morrow , my lady . " 

 " whenever you please . good night . " 

 " good night . " 

 she go away quietly lean upon her maid 's shoulder , and leave Robert with a sense of strange bewilderment that be very painful to he . 

 he sit down by the broad hearth upon which the red ember be fade , and wonder at the change in that old house which , until the day of his friend 's disappearance , have be so pleasant a home for all who shelter beneath its hospitable roof . he sit brood over the desolate hearth , and try to decide upon what must be do in this sudden crisis . he sit helpless and powerless to determine upon any course of action , lose in a dull revery , from which he be arouse by the sound of carriage - wheel drive up to the little turret entrance . 

 the clock in the vestibule strike nine as Robert open the library door . Alicia have just descend the stair with she maid ; a rosy - faced country girl . 

 " good - by , Robert , " say Miss Audley , hold out her hand to her cousin ; " good - by , and God bless you ! you may trust I to take care of papa . " 

 " I be sure I may . God bless you , my dear . " 

 for the second time that night Robert Audley press his lip to his cousin 's candid forehead , and for the second time the embrace be of a brotherly or paternal character , rather than the rapturous proceeding which it would have be have Sir Harry Towers be the privileged performer . 

 it be five minute past nine when Sir Michael come down - stair , follow by his valet , grave and gray - haired like himself . the baronet be pale , but calm and self - possess . the hand which he give to his nephew be as cold as ice , but it be with a steady voice that he bid the young man good - by . 

 " I leave all in your hand , Robert , " he say , as he turn to leave the house in which he have live so long . " I may not have hear the end , but I have hear enough . Heaven know I have no need to hear more . I leave all to you , but you will not be cruel you will remember how much I love " 

 his voice break huskily before he could finish the sentence . 

 " I will remember you in everything , sir , " the young man answer . " I will do everything for the good . " 

 a treacherous mist of tear blind he and shut out his uncle 's face , and in another minute the carriage have drive away , and Robert Audley sit alone in the dark library , where only one red spark glow among the pale gray ash . he sit alone , try to think what he ought to do , and with the awful responsibility of a wicked woman 's fate upon his shoulder . 

 " Good Heaven ! " he think ; ' surely this must be God 's judgment upon the purposeless , vacillate life I lead up to the seventh day of last September . surely this awful responsibility have be force upon I in order that I may humble myself to an offended providence , and confess that a man can not choose his own life . he can not say , ' I will take existence lightly , and keep out of the way of the wretched , mistaken , energetic creature , who fight so heartily in the great battle . ' he can not say , ' I will stop in the tent while the strife be fight , and laugh at the fool who be trample down in the useless struggle . ' he can not do this . he can only do , humbly and fearfully , that which the Maker who create he have appoint for he to do . if he have a battle to fight , let he fight it faithfully ; but woe betide he if he skulk when his name be call in the mighty muster - roll , woe betide he if he hide in the tent when the tocsin summon he to the scene of war ! " 

 one of the servant bring candle into the library and relighte the fire , but Robert Audley do not stir from his seat by the hearth . he sit as he have often sit in his chamber in Figtree Court , with his elbow rest upon the arm of his chair , and his chin upon his hand . 

 but he lift his head as the servant be about to leave the room . 

 " can I send a message from here to London ? " he ask . 

 " it can be send from Brentwood , sir not from here . " 

 Mr. Audley look at his watch thoughtfully . 

 " one of the man can ride over to Brentwood , sir , if you wish any message to be send . " 

 " I do wish to send a message ; will you manage it for I , Richards ? " 

 " certainly , sir . " 

 " you can wait , then , while I write the message . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 the man bring writing material from one of the side - table , and place they before Mr. Audley . 

 Robert dip a pen in the ink , and star thoughtfully at one of the candle for a few moment before he begin to write . 

 the message run thus : 

 " from Robert Audley , of Audley Court , Essex , to Francis Wilmington , of paper - building , Temple . 

 " DEAR WILMINGTON if you know any physician experience in case of mania , and to be trust with a secret , be so good as to send I his address by telegraph . " 

 Mr. Audley seal this document in a stout envelope , and hand it to the man , with a sovereign . 

 " you will see that this be give to a trustworthy person , Richards , " he say , " and let the man wait at the station for the return message . he ought to get it in an hour and a half . " 

 Mr. Richards , who have know Robert Audley in jacket and turn - down collar , depart to execute his commission . Heaven forbid that we should follow he into the comfortable servant ' hall at the Court , where the household sit round the blaze fire , discuss in utter bewilderment the event of the day . 

 nothing could be wide from the truth than the speculation of these worthy people . what clew have they to the mystery of that firelit room in which a guilty woman have kneel at their master 's foot to tell the story of her sinful life ? they only know that which Sir Michael 's valet have tell they of this sudden journey . how his master be as pale as a sheet , and speak in a strange voice that do not   sound like his own , somehow , and how you might have knock he Mr. Parsons , the valet down with a feather , if you have be minded to prostrate he by the aid of so feeble a weapon . 

 the wisehead of the servant ' hall decide that Sir Michael have receive sudden intelligence through Mr. Robert they be wise enough to connect the young man with the catastrophe either of the death of some near and dear relation the eld servant decimate the Audley family in their endeavor to find a likely relation or of some alarming fall in the fund , or of the failure of some speculation or bank in which the great part of the baronet 's money be invest . the general leaning be toward the failure of a bank , and every member of the assembly seem to take a dismal and raven - like delight in the fancy , though such a supposition involve their own ruin in the general destruction of that liberal household . 

 Robert sit by the dreary hearth , which seem dreary even now when the blaze of a great wood - fire roar in the wide chimney , and listen to the low wail of the March wind moan round the house and lift the shiver ivy from the wall it shelter . he be tired and wear out , for remember that he have be awaken from his sleep at two o'clock that morning by the hot breath of blaze timber and the sharp crackling of burn woodwork . but for his presence of mind and cool decision , Mr. Luke Marks would have die a dreadful death . he still bear the trace of the night 's peril , for the dark hair have be sing upon one side of his forehead , and his left hand be red and inflame , from the effect of the scorch atmosphere out of which he have drag the landlord of the Castle Inn . he be thoroughly exhausted with fatigue and excitement , and he fall into a heavy sleep in his easy - chair before the bright fire , from which he be only awaken by the entrance of Mr. Richards with the return message . 

 this return message be very brief . 

 " dear AUDLEY always glad to oblige . Alwyn Mosgrave , M.D. , 12 Saville row . safe . " 

 this with name and address , be all that it contain . 

 " I shall want another message take to Brentwood to - morrow morning , Richards , " say Mr. Audley , as he fold the telegram . " I should be glad if the man would ride over with it before breakfast . he shall have half a sovereign for his trouble . " 

 Mr. Richards bow . 

 " thank you , sir not necessary , sir ; but as you please , of course , sir , " he murmur . " at what hour might you wish the man to go ? " 

 Mr. Audley might wish the man to go as early as he could , so it be decide that he should go at six . 

 " my room be ready , I suppose , Richards ? " say Robert . 

 " yes , sir your old room . " 

 " very good . I shall go to bed at once . bring I a glass of brandy and water as hot as you can make it , and wait for the telegram . " 

 this second message be only a very earnest request to Doctor Mosgrave to pay an immediate visit to Audley Court on a matter of serious moment . 

 have write this message , Mr. Audley feel that he have do all that he could do . he drink his brandy and water . he have actual need of the diluted alcohol , for he have be chill to the bone by his adventure during the fire . he slowly sip the pale golden liquid and thought of Clara Talboys , of that earnest girl whose brother 's memory be now avenge , whose brother 's destroyer be humiliate in the dust . have she hear of the fire at the Castle Inn ? how could she have do otherwise than hear of it in such a place as Mount Stanning ? but have she hear that he have be in danger , and that he have distinguish himself by the rescue of a drunken boor ? I fear that , even sit by that desolate hearth , and beneath the roof whose noble be an exile from his own house , Robert Audley be weak enough to think of these thing weak enough to let his fancy wander away to the dismal fir - tree under the cold March sky , and the dark - brown eye that be so like the eye of his lose friend . 

 CHAPTER XXXVI . 

 DR . MOSGRAVE 's advice . 

 my lady sleep . through that long winter night she sleep soundly . criminal have often so sleep their last sleep upon earth ; and have be find in the gray morning slumber peacefully , by the jailer who come to wake they . 

 the game have be play and lose . I do not think that my lady have throw away a card , or miss the making of a trick which she might by any possibility have make ; but her opponent 's hand have be too powerful for she , and he have win . 

 she look upon herself as a species of state prisoner , who would have to be take good care of . a second Iron Mask , who must be provide for in some comfortable place of confinement . she abandon herself to a dull indifference . she have live a hundred life within the space of the last few day of her existence , and she have wear out her capacity for suffer for a time at least . 

 she eat her breakfast , and take her morning bath , and emerge , with perfumed hair and in the most exquisitely careless of morning toilet , from her luxurious dressing - room . she look at herself in the cheval - glass before she leave the room . a long night 's rest have bring back the delicate rose - tint of her complexion , and the natural luster of her blue eye . that unnatural light which have burn so fearfully the day before have go , and my lady smile triumphantly as she contemplate the reflection of her beauty . the day be go in which her enemy could have brand she with white - hot iron , and burn away the loveliness which have do such mischief . whatever they do to she they must leave she her beauty , she think . at the bad , they be powerless to rob she of that . 

 the March day be bright and sunny , with a cheerless sunshine certainly . my lady wrap herself in an indian shawl ; a shawl that have cost Sir Michael a hundred guineas . I think she have an idea that it would be well to wear this costly garment ; so that if hustle suddenly away , she might carry at least one of her possession with she . remember how much she have peril for a fine house and gorgeous furniture , for carriage and horse , jewel and lace ; and do not wonder if she cling with a desperate tenacity to gauds and gew - gaw , in the hour of her despair . if she have be Judas , she would have hold to she thirty piece of silver to the last moment of her shameful life . 

 Mr. Robert Audley breakfast in the library . he sit long over his solitary cup of tea , smoke his meerschaum pipe , and meditate darkly upon the task that lie before he . 

 " I will appeal to the experience of this Dr. Mosgrave , " he though ; " physician and lawyer be the confessor of this prosaic nineteenth century . surely , he will be able to help I . " 

 the first fast train from London arrive at Audley at half - past ten o'clock , and at five minute before eleven , Richards , the grave servant , announce Dr. Alwyn Mosgrave . 

 the physician from Saville Row be a tall man of about fifty year of age . he be thin and sallow , with lantern jaw , and eye of a pale , feeble gray , that seem as if they have once be blue , and have fade by the progress of time to their present neutral shade . however powerful the science of medicine as wield by Dr. Alwyn Mosgrave , it have not be strong enough to put flesh upon his bone , or brightness into his face . he have a strangely expressionless , and yet strangely attentive countenance . he have the face of a man who have spend the great part of his life in listen to other people , and who have part with his own individuality and his own passion at the very outset of his career . 

 he bow to Robert Audley , take the opposite seat indicate by he , and address his attentive face to the young barrister . Robert see that the physician 's glance for a moment lose its quiet look of attention , and become earnest and search . 

 " he be wonder whether I be the patient , " think Mr. Audley , " and be look for the diagnosis of madness in my face . " 

 Dr. Mosgrave speak as if in answer to this thought . 

 " be it not about your own health that you wish to consult I ? " he say , interrogatively . 

 " oh , no ! " 

 Dr. Mosgrave look at his watch , a fifty - guinea Benson - make chronometer , which he carry loose in his waistcoat pocket as carelessly as if it have be a potato . 

 " I need not remind you that my time be precious , " he say ; " your telegram inform I that my service be require in a case of danger as I apprehend , or I should not be here this morning . " 

 Robert Audley have sit look gloomily at the fire , wonder how he should begin the conversation , and have need this reminder of the physician 's presence . 

 " you be very good , Dr. Mosgrave , " he say , rouse himself by an effort , " and I thank you very much for have respond to my summon . I be about to appeal to you upon a subject which be more painful to I than word can describe . I be about to implore your advice in a most difficult case , and I trust almost blindly to your experience to rescue I , and other who be very dear to I , from a cruel and complicated position . " 

 the business - like attention in Dr. Mosgrave 's face grow into a look of interest as he listen to Robert Audley . 

 " the revelation make by the patient to the physician be , I believe , as sacred as the confession of a penitent to his priest ? " Robert ask , gravely . 

 " quite as sacred . " 

 " a solemn confidence , to be violate under no circumstance ? " 

 " most certainly . " 

 Robert Audley look at the fire again . how much should he tell , or how little , of the dark history of his uncle 's second wife ? 

 " I have be give to understand , Dr. Mosgrave , that you have devote much of your attention to the treatment of insanity . " 

 " yes , my practice be almost confine to the treatment of mental disease . " 

 " such be the case , I think I may venture to conclude that you sometimes receive strange , and even terrible , revelation . " 

 Dr. Mosgrave bow . 

 he look like a man who could have carry , safely lock in his passionless breast , the secret of a nation , and who would have suffer no inconvenience from the weight of such a burden . 

 " the story which I be about to tell you be not my own story , " say Robert , after a pause ; " you will forgive I , therefore , if I once more remind you that I can only reveal it upon the understanding that under no circumstance , or upon no apparent justification , be that confidence to be betray . " 

 Dr. Mosgrave bow again . a little sternly , perhaps , this time . 

 " I be all attention , Mr. Audley , " he say coldly . 

 Robert Audley draw his chair nearer to that of the physician , and in a low voice begin the story which my lady have tell upon her knee in that same chamber upon the previous night . Dr. Mosgrave 's listening face , turn always toward the speaker , betray no surprise at that strange revelation . he smile once , a grave , quiet smile , when Mr. Audley come to that part of the story which tell of the conspiracy at Ventnor ; but he be not surprised . Robert Audley end his story at the point at which Sir Michael Audley have interrupt my lady 's confession . he tell nothing of the disappearance of George Talboys , nor of the horrible suspicion that have grow out of that disappearance . he tell nothing of the fire at the Castle Inn . 

 Dr. Mosgrave shake his head , gravely , when Mr. Audley come to the end of his story . 

 " you have nothing further to tell I ? " he say . 

 " no . I do not think there be anything more that need be tell , " Robert answer , rather evasively . 

 " you would wish to prove that this lady be mad , and therefore irresponsible for her action , Mr. Audley ? " say the physician . 

 Robert Audley star , wonder at the mad doctor . by what process have he so rapidly arrive at the young man 's secret desire ? 

 " yes , I would rather , if possible , think her mad ; I should be glad to find that excuse for she . " 

 " and to save the esclandre of a Chancery suit , I suppose , Mr. Audley , " say Dr. Mosgrave . 

 Robert shudder as he bow an assent to this remark . it be something bad than a Chancery suit that he dread with a horrible fear . it be a trial for murder that have so long haunt his dream . how often he have awake , in an agony of shame , from a vision of a crowded court - house , and his uncle 's wife in a criminal dock , hem in on every side by a sea of eager face . 

 " I fear that I shall not be of any use to you , " the physician say , quietly ; " I will see the lady , if you please , but I do not believe that she be mad . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because there be no evidence of madness in anything she have do . she run away from her home , because her home be not a pleasant one , and she leave in the hope of find a well . there be no madness in that . she commit the crime of bigamy , because by that crime she obtain fortune and position . there be no madness there . when she find herself in a desperate position , she do not grow desperate . she employ intelligent mean , and she carry out a conspiracy which require coolness and deliberation in its execution . there be no madness in that . " 

 " but the trait of hereditary insanity " 

 " may descend to the third generation , and appear in the lady 's child , if she have any . madness be not necessarily transmit from mother to daughter . I should be glad to help you , if I could , Mr. Audley , but I do not think there be any proof of insanity in the story you have tell I . I do not think any jury in England would accept the plea of insanity in such a case as this . the good thing you can do with this lady be to send she back to her first husband ; if he will have she . " 

 Robert start at this sudden mention of his friend . 

 " her first husband be dead , " he answer , " at least , he have be miss for some time and I have reason to believe that he be dead . " 

 Dr. Mosgrave see the startled movement , and hear the embarrassment in Robert Audley 's voice as he speak of George Talboys . 

 " the lady 's first husband be miss , " he say , with a strange emphasis on the word " you think that he be dead ? " 

 he pause for a few moment and look at the fire , as Robert have look before . 

 " Mr. Audley , " he say , presently , " there must be no half - confidence between we . you have not tell I all . " 

 Robert , look up suddenly , plainly express in his face the surprise he feel at these word . 

 " I should be very poorly able to meet the contingency of my professional experience , " say Dr. Mosgrave , " if I could not perceive where confidence end and reservation begin . you have only tell I half this lady 's story , Mr. Audley . you must tell I more before I can offer you any advice . what have become of the first husband ? " 

 he ask this question in a decisive tone , as if he know it to be the key - stone of an arch . 

 " I have already tell you , Dr. Mosgrave , that I do not know . " 

 " yes , " answer the physician , " but your face have tell I what you have withhold from I ; it have tell I that you suspect . " 

 Robert Audley be silent . 

 " if I be to be of use to you , you must trust I , Mr. Audley , " say the physician . " the first husband disappear how and when ? I want to know the history of his disappearance . " 

 Robert pause for some time before he reply to this speech ; but , by and by , he lift his head , which have be bent in an attitude of earnest thought , and address the physician . 

 " I will trust you , Dr. Mosgrave , " he say . " I will confide entirely in your honor and goodness . I do not ask you to do any wrong to society ; but I ask you to save our stainless name from degradation and shame , if you can do so conscientiously . " 

 he tell the story of George 's disappearance , and of his own doubt and fear , Heaven know how reluctantly . 

 Dr. Mosgrave listen as quietly as he have listen before . Robert conclude with an earnest appeal to the physician 's good feeling . he implore he to spare the generous old man whose fatal confidence in a wicked woman have bring much misery upon his decline year . 

 it be impossible to draw any conclusion , either favorable or otherwise , from Dr. Mosgrave 's attentive face . he rise , when Robert have finish speak , and look at his watch once more . 

 " I can only spare you twenty minute , " he say . " I will see the lady , if you please . you say her mother die in a madhouse ? " 

 " she do . will you see Lady Audley alone ? " 

 " yes , alone , if you please . " 

 Robert rung for my lady 's maid , and under convoy of that smart young damsel the physician find his way to the octagon antechamber , and the fairy boudoir with which it communicate . 

 ten minute afterward , he return to the library , in which Robert sit wait for he . 

 " I have talk to the lady , " he say , quietly , " and we understand each other very well . there be latent insanity ! insanity which might never appear ; or which might appear only once or twice in a lifetime . it would be a dementia in its bad phase , perhaps ; acute mania ; but its duration would be very brief , and it would only arise under extreme mental pressure . the lady be not mad ; but she have the hereditary taint in her blood . she have the cunning of madness , with the prudence of intelligence . I will tell you what she be , Mr. Audley . she be dangerous ! " 

 Dr. Mosgrave walk up and down the room once or twice before he speak again . 

 " I will not discuss the probability of the suspicion which distress you , Mr. Audley , " he say , presently , " but I will tell you this much , I do not advise any esclandre . this Mr. George Talboys have disappear , but you have no evidence of his death . if you could produce evidence of his death , you could produce no evidence against this lady , beyond the one fact that she have a powerful motive for get rid of he . no jury in the United Kingdom would condemn she upon such evidence as that . " 

 Robert Audley interrupt Dr. Mosgrave , hastily . 

 " I assure you , my dear sir , " he say , " that my great fear be the necessity of any exposure any disgrace . " 

 " certainly , Mr. Audley , " answer the physician , coolly , " but you can not expect I to assist you to condone one of the bad offense against society . if I see adequate reason for believe that a murder have be commit by this woman , I should refuse to assist you in smuggle she away out of the reach of justice , although the honor of a hundred noble family might be save by my do so . but I do not see adequate reason for your suspicion ; and I will do my good to help you . " 

 Robert Audley grasp the physician 's hand in both his own . 

 " I will thank you when I be well able to do so , " he say , with emotion ; " I will thank you in my uncle 's name as well as in my own . " 

 " I have only five minute more , and I have a letter to write , " say Dr. Mosgrave , smile at the young man 's energy . 

 he seat himself at a writing - table in the window , dip his pen in the ink , and write rapidly for about seven minute . he have fill three side of a sheet of note - paper , when he throw down his pen and fold his letter . 

 he put this letter into an envelope , and deliver it , unseal , to Robert Audley . 

 the address which it bear be : 

 " Monsieur Val , 

 " villebrumeuse , 

 " Belgium . " 

 Mr. Audley look rather doubtfully from this address to the doctor , who be put on his glove as deliberately as if his life have never know a more solemn purpose than the proper adjustment of they . 

 " that letter , " he say , in answer to Robert Audley 's inquire look , " be write to my friend Monsieur Val , the proprietor and medical superintendent of a very excellent maison de santť in the town of Villebrumeuse . we have know each other for many year , and he will no doubt willingly receive Lady Audley into his establishment , and charge himself with the full responsibility of her future life ; it will not be a very eventful one ! " 

 Robert Audley would have speak , he would have once more express his gratitude for the help which have be give to he , but Dr. Mosgrave check he with an authoritative gesture . 

 " from the moment in which Lady Audley enter that house , " he say , " her life , so far as life be make up of action and variety , will be finish . whatever secret she may have will be secret forever ! whatever crime she may have commit she will be able to commit no more . if you be to dig a grave for she in the near churchyard and bury she alive in it , you could not more safely shut she from the world and all worldly association . but as a physiologist and as an honest man , I believe you could do no well service to society than by do this ; for physiology be a lie if the woman I see ten minute ago be a woman to be trust at large . if she could have spring at my throat and strangle I with her little hand , as I sit talk to she just now , she would have do it . " 

 " she suspect your purpose , then ! " 

 " she know it . ' you think I be mad like my mother , and you have come to question I , ' she say . ' you be watch for some sign of the dreadful taint in my blood . ' good - day to you , Mr. Audley , " the physician add hurriedly , " my time be up ten minute ago ; it be as much as I shall do to catch the train . " 

 CHAPTER XXXVII . 

 bury ALIVE . 

 Robert Audley sit alone in the library with the physician 's letter upon the table before he , think of the work which be still to be do . 

 the young barrister have constitute himself the denouncer of this wretched woman . he have be her judge ; and he be now her jailer . not until he have deliver the letter which lie before he to its proper address , not until he have give up his charge into the safe - keeping of the foreign mad - house doctor , not until then would the dreadful burden be remove from he and his duty do . 

 he write a few line to my lady , tell she that he be go to carry she away from Audley Court to a place from which she be not likely to return , and request she to lose no time in prepare for the journey . he wish to start that evening , if possible , he tell she . 

 Miss Susan Martin , the lady 's maid , think it a very hard thing to have to pack her mistress ' trunk in such a hurry , but my lady assist in the task . she toil resolutely in direct and assist her servant , who scent bankruptcy and ruin in all this pack up and hurry away , and be therefore rather languid and indifferent in the discharge of her duty ; and at six o'clock in the evening she send her attendant to tell Mr. Audley that she be ready to depart as soon as he please . 

 Robert have consult a volume of Bradshaw , and have discover that Villebrumeuse lie out of the track of all railway traffic , and be only approachable by diligence from Brussels . the mail for Dover leave London Bridge at nine o'clock , and could be easily catch by Robert and his charge , as the seven o'clock up - train from Audley reach Shoreditch at a quarter past eight . travel by the Dover and Calais route , they would reach villebrumeuse by the follow afternoon or evening . 

 it be late in the afternoon of the next day when the diligence bump and rattle over the uneven paving of the principal street in Villebrumeuse . 

 Robert Audley and my lady have have the coupť of the diligence to themselves for the whole of the journey , for there be not many traveler between Brussels and Villebrumeuse , and the public conveyance be support by the force of tradition rather than any great profit attach to it as a speculation . 

 my lady have not speak during the journey , except to decline some refreshment which Robert have offer she at a halting place upon the road . her heart sink when they leave Brussels behind , for she have hop that city might have be the end of her journey , and she have turn with a feeling of sickness and despair from the dull belgian landscape . 

 she look up at last as the vehicle jolt into a great stony quadrangle , which have be the approach to a monastery once , but which be now the court yard of a dismal hotel , in whose cellar legion of rat skirmish and squeak even while the broad sunshine be bright in the chamber above . 

 Lady Audley shudder as she alight from the diligence , and find herself in that dreary court yard . Robert be surround by chatter porter , who clamor for his " baggage , " and dispute among themselves as to the hotel at which he be to rest . one of these man run away to fetch a hackney - coach at Mr. Audley 's behest , and reappear presently , urge on a pair of horse which be so small as to suggest the idea that they have be make out of one ordinary - sized animal with wild shriek and whoop that have a demoniac sound in the darkness . 

 Mr. Audley leave my lady in a dreary coffee - room in the care of a drowsy attendant while he drive away to some distant part of the quiet city . there be official business to be go through before Sir Michael 's wife could be quietly put away in the place suggest by Dr. Mosgrave . Robert have to see all manner of important personage ; and to take numerous oath ; and to exhibit the English physician 's letter ; and to go through much ceremony of signing and countersign before he could take his lose friend 's cruel wife to the home which be to be she last upon earth . upward of two hour elapse before all this be arrange , and the young man be free to return to the hotel , where he find his charge star absently at a pair of wax - candle , with a cup of untasted coffee stand cold and stagnant before she . 

 Robert hand my lady into the hire vehicle , and take his seat opposite to she once more . 

 " where be you go to take I ? " she ask , at last . " I be tired of be treat like some naughty child , who be put into a dark cellar as a punishment for its offense . where be you take I ? " 

 " to a place in which you will have ample leisure to repent the past , Mrs. Talboys , " Robert answer , gravely . 

 they have leave the paved street behind they , and have emerge out of a great gaunt square , in which there appear to be about half a dozen cathedral , into a small boulevard , a broad lamp - light road , on which the shadow of the leafless branch go and come tremblingly , like the shadow of a paralytic skeleton . there be house here and there upon this boulevard ; stately house , entre cour et jardin , and with plaster vas of geranium on the stone pillar of the ponderous gateway . the rumble hackney - carriage drive upward of three - quarter of a mile along this smooth roadway before it draw up against a gateway , old and more ponderous than any of those they have pass . 

 my lady give a little scream as she look out of the coach - window . the gaunt gateway be light by an enormous lamp ; a great structure of iron and glass , in which one poor little shiver flame struggle with the March wind . 

 the coachman ring the bell , and a little wooden door at the side of the gate be open by a gray - haired man , who look out at the carriage , and then retire . he reappear three minute afterward behind the folding iron gate , which he unlock and throw back to their full extent , reveal a dreary desert of stone - pave courtyard . 

 the coachman lead his wretched horse into the courtyard , and pilot the vehicle to the principal doorway of the house , a great mansion of gray stone , with several long range of window , many of which be dimly light , and look out like the pale eye of weary watcher upon the darkness of the night . 

 my lady , watchful and quiet as the cold star in the wintry sky , look up at these casement with an earnest and scrutinize gaze . one of the window be shroud by a scanty curtain of fade red ; and upon this curtain there go and come a dark shadow , the shadow of a woman with a fantastic head dress , the shadow of a restless creature , who pace perpetually backward and forward before the window . 

 Sir Michael Audley 's wicked wife lay her hand suddenly upon Robert 's arm , and point with the other hand to this curtain window . 

 " I know where you have bring I , " she say . " this be a MAD - HOUSE . " 

 Mr. Audley do not answer she . he have be stand at the door of the coach when she address he , and he quietly assist she to alight , and lead she up a couple of shallow stone step , and into the entrance - hall of the mansion . he hand Dr. Mosgrave 's letter to a neatly - dress , cheerful - look , middle - aged woman , who come trip out of a little chamber which open out of the hall , and be very much like the bureau of an hotel . this person smilingly welcome Robert and his charge : and after dispatch a servant with the letter , invite they into her pleasant little apartment , which be gayly furnish with bright amber curtain and heat by a tiny stove . 

 " Madam find herself very much fatigue ? " the Frenchwoman say , interrogatively , with a look of intense sympathy , as she place an arm - chair for my lady . 

 " Madam " shrug her shoulder wearily , and look round the little chamber with a sharp glance of scrutiny that betoken no very great favor . 

 " what be this place , Robert Audley ? " she cry fiercely . " do you think I be a baby , that you may juggle with and deceive I what be it ? it be what I say just now , be it not ? " 

 " it be a maison de santť , my lady , " the young man answer , gravely . " I have no wish to juggle with or to deceive you . " 

 my lady pause for a few moment , look reflectively at Robert . 

 " a maison de santť , " she repeat . " yes , they manage these thing well in France . in England we should call it a madhouse . this a house for mad people , this , be it not , madam ? " she say in French , turn upon the woman , and tap the polished floor with her foot . 

 " ah , but no , madam , " the woman answer with a shrill scream of protest . " it be an establishment of the most agreeable , where one amuse one 's self " 

 she be interrupt by the entrance of the principal of this agreeable establishment , who come beam into the room with a radiant smile illuminate his countenance , and with Dr. Mosgrave 's letter open in his hand . 

 it be impossible to say how enchanted he be to make the acquaintance of M'sieu . there be nothing upon earth which he be not ready to do for m'sieu in his own person , and nothing under heaven which he would not strive to accomplish for he , as the friend of his acquaintance , so very much distinguish , the english doctor . Dr. Mosgrave 's letter have give he a brief synopsis of the case , he inform Robert , in an undertone , and he be quite prepared to undertake the care of the charming and very interesting " Madam Madam " 

 he rub his hand politely , and look at Robert . Mr. Audley remember , for the first time , that he have be recommend to introduce his wretched charge under a feigned name . 

 he affect not to hear the proprietor 's question . it might seem a very easy matter to have hit upon a heap of name , any one of which would have answer his purpose ; but Mr. Audley appear suddenly to have forget that he have ever hear any mortal appellation except that of himself and of his lose friend . 

 perhaps the proprietor perceive and understand his embarrassment . he at any rate relieve it by turn to the woman who have receive they , and mutter something about No . 14 , Bis . the woman take a key from a long range of other , that hang over the mantel - piece , and a wax candle from a bracket in a corner of the room , and have light the candle , lead the way across the stone - pave hall , and up a broad , slippery staircase of polished wood . 

 the english physician have inform his belgian colleague that money would be of minor consequence in any arrangement make for the comfort of the english lady who be to be commit to his care . act upon this hint , Monsieur Val open the outer door of a stately suite of apartment , which include a lobby , pave with alternate diamond of black and white marble , but of a dismal and cellar - like darkness ; a saloon furnish with gloomy velvet drapery , and with a certain funereal splendor which be not peculiarly conducive to the elevation of the spirit ; and a bed - chamber , contain a bed so wondrously make , as to appear to have no opening whatever in its covering , unless the counterpane have be split asunder with a pen - knife . 

 my lady star dismally round at the range of room , which look dreary enough in the wan light of a single wax - candle . this solitary flame , pale and ghost - like in itself , be multiply by paler phantom of its ghostliness , which glimmer everywhere about the room ; in the shadowy depth of the polished floor and wainscot , or the window - pane , in the look - glass , or in those great expanse of glimmer something which adorn the room , and which my lady mistook for costly mirror , but which be in reality wretched mockery of burnish tin . 

 amid all the fade splendor of shabby velvet , and tarnished gilding , and polished wood , the woman drop into an arm - chair , and cover her face with her hand . the whiteness of they , and the starry light of diamond tremble about they , glitter in the dimly - light chamber . she sit silent , motionless , despairing , sullen , and angry , while Robert and the french doctor retire to an outer chamber , and talk together in undertone . Mr. Audley have very little to say that have not be already say for he , with a far well grace than he himself could have express it , by the english physician . he have , after great trouble of mind , hit upon the name of Taylor , as a safe and simple substitute for that other name , to which alone my lady have a right . he tell the Frenchman that this Mrs. Taylor be distantly related to he that she have inherit the seed of madness from her mother , as indeed Dr. Mosgrave have inform Monsieur Val ; and that she have show some fearful token of the lurking taint that be latent in her mind ; but that she be not to be call " mad . " he beg that she might be treat with all tenderness and compassion ; that she might receive all reasonable indulgence ; but he impress upon Monsieur Val , that under no circumstance be she to be permit to leave the house and ground without the protection of some reliable person , who should be answerable for her safe - keeping . he have only one other point to urge , and that be , that Monsieur Val , who , as he have understand , be himself a Protestant the doctor bow would make arrangement with some kind and benevolent protestant clergyman , through whom spiritual advice and consolation might be secure for the invalid lady ; who have especial need , Robert add , gravely , of such advantage . 

 this with all necessary arrangement as to pecuniary matter , which be to be settle from time to time between Mr. Audley and the doctor , unassiste by any agent whatever be the extent of the conversation between the two man , and occupy about a quarter of an hour . 

 my lady sit in the same attitude when they re - enter the bedchamber in which they have leave she , with her ring hand still clasped over her face . 

 Robert bend over to whisper in her ear . 

 " your name be Madam Taylor here , " he say . " I do not think you would wish to be know by your real name . " 

 she only shake her head in answer to he , and do not even remove her hand from over her face . 

 " Madam will have an attendant entirely devoted to her service . " say Monsieur Val . " Madam will have all her wish obey ; her reasonable wish , but that go without say , " monsieur add , with a quaint shrug . " every effort will be make to render madam 's sojourn at Villebrumeuse agreeable . the inmate dine together when it be wish . I dine with the inmate sometimes ; my subordinate , a clever and a worthy man always . I reside with my wife and child in a little pavilion in the ground ; my subordinate reside in the establishment . Madam may rely upon our utmost effort be exert to insure her comfort . " 

 Monsieur be say a great deal more to the same effect , rub his hand and beam radiantly upon Robert and his charge , when madam rise suddenly , erect and furious , and drop her jeweled finger from before her face , tell he to hold his tongue . 

 " leave I alone with the man who have bring I here . " she cry , between her set tooth . " leave I ! " 

 she point to the door with a sharp , imperious gesture ; so rapid that the silken drapery about her arm make a swoop sound as she lift her hand . the sibilant french syllable hiss through her tooth as she utter they , and seem well fit to her mood and to herself than the familiar English she have speak hitherto . 

 the french doctor shrug his shoulder as he go out into the lobby , and mutter something about a " beautiful devil , " and a gesture worthy of " the Mars . " my lady walk with a rapid footstep to the door between the bed - chamber and the saloon ; close it , and with the handle of the door still in her hand , turn and look at Robert Audley . 

 " you have bring I to my grave , Mr. Audley , " she cry ; " you have use your power basely and cruelly , and have bring I to a live grave . " 

 " I have do that which I think just to other and merciful to you , " Robert answer , quietly . " I should have be a traitor to society have I suffer you to remain at liberty after the disappearance of George Talboys and the fire at Castle Inn . I have bring you to a place in which you will be kindly treat by people who have no knowledge of your story no power to taunt or to reproach you . you will lead a quiet and peaceful life , my lady ; such a life as many a good and holy woman in this catholic country freely take upon herself , and happily endure until the end . the solitude of your existence in this place will be no great than that of a king 's daughter , who , fly from the evil of the time , be glad to take shelter in a house as tranquil as this . surely , it be a small atonement which I ask you to render for your sin , a light penance which I call upon you to perform . live here and repent ; nobody will assail you , nobody will torment you . I only say to you , repent ! " 

 " I can not ! " cry my lady , push her hair fiercely from her white forehead , and fix her dilate eye upon Robert Audley , " I can not ! have my beauty bring I to this ? have I plot and scheme to shield myself and lay awake in the long deadly night , tremble to think of my danger , for this ? I have well have give up at once , since this be to be the end . I have well have yield to the curse that be upon I , and give up when George Talboys first come back to England . " 

 she pluck at the feathery golden curl as if she would have tear they from her head . it have serve she so little after all , that gloriously glitter hair , that beautiful nimbus of yellow light that have contrast so exquisitely with the melting azure of her eye . she hat herself and her beauty . 

 " I would laugh at you and defy you , if I dare , " she cry ; " I would kill myself and defy you , if I dare . but I be a poor , pitiful coward , and have be so from the first . Afraid of my mother 's horrible inheritance ; afraid of poverty ; afraid of George Talboys ; afraid of you . " 

 she be silent for a little while , but she hold her place by the door , as if determine to detain Robert as long as it be her pleasure to do so . 

 " do you know what I be think of ? " she say , presently . " do you know what I be think of , as I look at you in the dim light of this room ? I be think of the day upon which George Talboys disappear . " 

 Robert start as she mention the name of his lose friend ; his face turn pale in the dusky light , and his breathing grow quick and louder . 

 " he be stand opposite I , as you be stand now , " continue my lady . " you say that you would raze the old house to the ground ; that you would root up every tree in the garden to find your dead friend . you would have have no need to do so much : the body of George Talboys lie at the bottom of the old well , in the shrubbery beyond the lime - walk . " 

 Robert Audley fling his hand and clasp they above his head , with one loud cry of horror . 

 " oh , my God ! " he say , after a dreadful pause ; " have all the ghastly thing that I have think prepare I so little for the ghastly truth , that it should come upon I like this at last ? " 

 " he come to I in the lime - walk , " resume my lady , in the same hard , dog tone as that in which she have confess the wicked story of her life . " I know that he would come , and I have prepare myself , as well as I could , to meet he . I be determined to bribe he , to cajole he , to defy he ; to do anything soon than abandon the wealth and the position I have win , and go back to my old life . he come , and he reproach I for the conspiracy at Ventnor . he declare that so long as he live he would never forgive I for the lie that have break his heart . he tell I that I have pluck his heart out of his breast and trample upon it ; and that he have now no heart in which to feel one sentiment of mercy for I . that he would have forgive I any wrong upon earth , but that one deliberate and passionless wrong that I have do he . he say this and a great deal more , and he tell I that no power on earth should turn he from his purpose , which be to take I to the man I have deceive , and make I tell my wicked story . he do not know the hide taint that I have suck in with my mother 's milk . he do not know that it be possible to drive I mad . he goad I as you have goad I ; he be as merciless as you have be merciless . we be in the shrubbery at the end of the lime - walk . I be seat upon the broken masonry at the mouth of the well . George Talboys be lean upon the disuse windlass , in which the rusty iron spindle rattle loosely whenever he shift his position . I rise at last , and turn upon he to defy he , as I have determine to defy he at the bad . I tell he that if he denounce I to Sir Michael , I would declare he to be a madman or a liar , and I defy he to convince the man who love I blindly , as I tell he that he have any claim to I . I be go to leave he after have tell he this , when he catch I by the wrist and detain I by force . you see the bruise that his finger make upon my wrist , and notice they , and do not believe the account I give of they . I could see that , Mr. Robert Audley , and I see that you be a person I should have to fear . " 

 she pause , as if she have expect Robert to speak ; but he stand silent and motionless , wait for the end . 

 " George Talboys treat I as you treat I , " she say , petulantly . " he swear that if there be but one witness of my identity , and that witness be remove from Audley Court by the width of the whole earth , he would bring he there to swear to my identity , and to denounce I . it be then that I be mad , it be then that I draw the loose iron spindle from the shrunken wood , and see my first husband sink with one horrible cry into the black mouth of the well . there be a legend of its enormous depth . I do not know how deep it be . it be dry , I suppose , for I hear no splash , only a dull thud . I look down and I see nothing but black emptiness . I kneel down and listen , but the cry be not repeat , though I wait for nearly a quarter of an hour God know how long it seem to I ! by the mouth of the well . " 

 Robert Audley utter a word of horror when the story be finish . he move a little near toward the door against which Helen Talboys stand . have there be any other mean of exit from the room , he would gladly have avail himself of it . he shrink from even a momentary contact with this creature . 

 " let I pass you , if you please , " he say , in an icy voice . 

 " you see I do not fear to make my confession to you , " say Helen Talboys ; " for two reason . the first be , that you dare not use it against I , because you know it would kill your uncle to see I in a criminal dock ; the second be , that the law could pronounce no bad sentence than this a life - long imprisonment in a mad - house . you see I do not thank you for your mercy , Mr. Robert Audley , for I know exactly what it be worth . " 

 she move away from the door , and Robert pass she without a word , without a look . 

 half an hour afterward he be in one of the principal hotel at Villebrumeuse , sit at a neatly - order supper - table , with no power to eat ; with no power to distract his mind , even for a moment , from the image of that lose friend who have be treacherously murder in the thicket at Audley Court . 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII . 

 GHOST - HAUNTED . 

 no feverish sleeper travel in a strange dream ever look out more wonderingly upon a world that seem unreal than Robert Audley , as he star absently at the flat swamp and dismal poplar between Villebrumeuse and Brussels . could it be that he be return to his uncle 's house without the woman who have reign in it for nearly two year as queen and mistress ? he feel as if he have carry off my lady , and have make away with she secretly and darkly , and must now render up an account to Sir Michael of the fate of that woman , whom the baronet have so dearly love . 

 " what shall I tell he ? " he think . " shall I tell the truth the horrible , ghastly truth ? no ; that would be too cruel . his generous spirit would sink under the hideous revelation . yet , in his ignorance of the extent of this wretched woman 's wickedness , he may think , perhaps , that I have be hard with she . " 

 brood thus , Mr. Robert Audley absently watch the cheerless landscape from the seat in the shabby coupť of the diligence , and think how great a leaf have be tear out of his life , now that the dark story of George Talboys be finish . 

 what have he to do next ? a crowd of horrible thought rush into his mind as he remember the story that he have hear from the white lip of Helen Talboys . his friend his murder friend lie hide among the moldering ruin of the old well at Audley Court . he have lain there for six long month , unburied , unknown ; hide in the darkness of the old convent well . what be to be do ? 

 to institute a search for the remain of the murder man be to inevitably bring about a coroner 's inquest . should such an inquest be hold , it be next to impossible that the history of my lady 's crime could fail to be bring to light . to prove that George Talboys meet with his death at Audley Court , be to prove almost as surely that my lady have be the instrument of that mysterious death ; for the young man have be know to follow she into the lime - walk upon the day of his disappearance . 

 " my God ! " Robert exclaim , as the full horror of his position become evident to he ; " be my friend to rest in this unhallowed burial - place because I have condone the offense of the woman who murder he ? " 

 he feel that there be no way out of this difficulty . sometimes he think that it little matter to his dead friend whether he lie entomb beneath a marble monument , whose workmanship should be the wonder of the universe , or in that obscure hiding - place in the thicket at Audley Court . at another time he would be seize with a sudden horror at the wrong that have be do to the murder man , and would fain have travel even more rapidly than the express between Brussels and Paris could carry he in his eagerness to reach the end of his journey , that he might set right this cruel wrong . 

 he be in London at dusk on the second day after that on which he have leave Audley Court , and he drive straight to the Clarendon , to inquire after his uncle . he have no intention of see Sir Michael , as he have not yet determine how much or how little he should tell he , but he be very anxious to ascertain how the old man have sustain the cruel shock he have so lately endure . 

 " I will see Alicia , " he think , ' she will tell I all about her father . it be only two day since he leave Audley . I can scarcely expect to hear of any favorable change . " 

 but Mr. Audley be not destine to see his cousin that evening , for the servant at the Clarendon tell he that Sir Michael and his daughter have leave by the morning mail for Paris , on their way to Vienna . 

 Robert be very well pleased to receive this intelligence ; it afford he a welcome respite , for it would be decidedly well to tell the baronet nothing of his guilty wife until he return to England , with health unimpaired and spirit re - establish , it be to be hop . 

 Mr. Audley drive to the Temple . the chamber which have seem dreary to he ever since the disappearance of George Talboys , be doubly so to - night . for that which have be only a dark suspicion have now become a horrible certainty . there be no long room for the pale ray , the most transitory glimmer of hope . his bad terror have be too well found . 

 George Talboys have be cruelly and treacherously murder by the wife he have love and mourn . 

 there be three letter wait for Mr. Audley at his chamber . one be from Sir Michael , and another from Alicia . the third be address in a hand the young barrister know only too well , though he have see it but once before . his face flush redly at the sight of the superscription , and he take the letter in his hand , carefully and tenderly , as if it have be a living thing , and sentient to his touch . he turn it over and over in his hand , look at the crest upon the envelope , at the post - mark , at the color of the paper , and then put it into the bosom of his waistcoat with a strange smile upon his face . 

 " what a wretched and unconscionable fool I be ! " he think . " have I laugh at the folly of weak man all my life , and be I to be more foolish than the weak of they at last ? the beautiful brown - eyed creature ! why do I ever see she ? why do my relentless Nemesis ever point the way to that dreary house in Dorsetshire ? " 

 he open the first two letter . he be foolish enough to keep the last for a delicious morsel a fairy - like dessert after the commonplace substantiality of a dinner . 

 Alicia 's letter tell he that Sir Michael have bear his agony with such a persevering tranquility that she have become at last far more alarmed by his patient calmness than by any stormy manifestation of despair . in this difficulty she have secretly call upon the physician who attend the Audley household in any case of serious illness , and have request this gentleman to pay Sir Michael an apparently accidental visit . he have do so , and after stop half an hour with the baronet , have tell Alicia that there be no present danger of any serious consequence from this great grief , but that it be necessary that every effort should be make to arouse Sir Michael , and to force he , however unwillingly , into action . 

 Alicia have immediately act upon this advice , have resume her old empire as a spoiled child , and remind her father of a promise he have make of take she through Germany . with considerable difficulty she have induce he to consent to fulfil this old promise , and have once gain her point , she have contrive that they should leave England as soon as it be possible to do so , and she tell Robert , in conclusion , that she would not bring her father back to his old house until she have teach he to forget the sorrow associate with it . 

 the baronet 's letter be very brief . it contain half a dozen blank check on Sir Michael Audley 's London banker . 

 " you will require money , my dear Robert , " he write , " for such arrangement as you may think fit to make for the future comfort of the person I commit to your care . I need scarcely tell you that those arrangement can not be too liberal . but perhaps it be as well that I should tell you now , for the first and only time , that it be my earnest wish never again to hear that person 's name . I have no wish to be tell the nature of the arrangement you may make for she . I be sure that you will act conscientiously and mercifully . I seek to know no more . whenever you want money , you will draw upon I for any sum that you may require ; but you will have no occasion to tell I for whose use you want that money . " 

 Robert Audley breathe a long sigh of relief as he fold this letter . it release he from a duty which it would have be most painful for he to perform , and it forever decide his course of action with regard to the murder man . 

 George Talboys must lie at peace in his unknown grave , and Sir Michael Audley must never learn that the woman he have love bear the red brand of murder on her soul . 

 Robert have only the third letter to open the letter which he have place in his bosom while he read the other ; he tear open the envelope , handle it carefully and tenderly as he have do before . 

 the letter be as brief as Sir Michael 's . it contain only these few line : 

 " DEAR MR . AUDLEY the rector of this place have be twice to see Marks , the man you save in the fire at the Castle Inn . he lie in a very precarious state at his mother 's cottage , near Audley Court , and be not expect to live many day . his wife be attend he , and both he and she have express a most earnest desire that you should see he before he die . pray come without delay . 

 " yours very sincerely , 

 " CLARA TALBOYS . 

 " Mount Stanning Rectory , March 6 . " 

 Robert Audley fold this letter very reverently , and place it underneath that part of his waistcoat which might be suppose to cover the region of his heart . have do this , he seat himself in his favorite arm - chair , fill and light a pipe and smoke it out , star reflectingly at the fire as long as his tobacco last . " what can that man mark want with I , " think the barrister . " he be afraid to die until he have make confession , perhaps . he wish to tell I that which I know already the story of my lady 's crime . I know that he be in the secret . I be sure of it even upon the night on which I first see he . he know the secret , and he trade on it . " 

 Robert Audley shrink strangely from return to Essex . how should he meet Clara Talboys now that he know the secret of her brother 's fate ? how many lie he should have to tell , or how much equivocation he must use in order to keep the truth from she ? yet would there be any mercy in tell that horrible story , the knowledge of which must cast a blight upon her youth , and blot out every hope she have even secretly cherish ? he know by his own experience how possible it be to hope against hope , and to hope unconsciously ; and he could not bear that her heart should be crush as his have be by the knowledge of the truth . " well that she should hope vainly to the last , " he think ; " well that she should go through life seek the clew to her lose brother 's fate , than that I should give that clew into her hand , and say , ' our bad fear be realize . the brother you love have be foully murder in the early promise of his youth . ' " 

 but Clara Talboys have write to he , implore he to return to Essex without delay . could he refuse to do her bidding , however painful its accomplishment might be ? and again , the man be die , perhaps , and have implore to see he . would it not be cruel to refuse to go to delay an hour unnecessarily ? he look at his watch . it want only five minute to nine . there be no train to Audley after the Ipswich mail , which leave London at half - past eight ; but there be a train that leave Shoreditch at eleven , and stop at Brentwood between twelve and one . Robert decide upon go by this train , and walk the distance between Brentwood and Audley , which be upwards of six mile . 

 Fleet street be quiet and lonely at this late hour , and Robert Audley be in a ghost - see mood , would have be scarcely astonished have he see Johnson 's set come roystere westward in the lamp - light , or blind John Milton grope his way down the step before Saint Bride 's Church . 

 Mr. Audley hail a hansom at the corner of Farrington street , and be rattle rapidly away across tenantless Smithfield market , and into a labyrinth of dingy street that bring he out upon the broad grandeur of Finsbury Pavement . 

 the hansom rattle up the steep and stony approach to Shoreditch Station , and deposit Robert at the door of that unlovely temple . there be very few people go to travel by this midnight train , and Robert walk up and down the long wooden platform , read the huge advertisement whose gaunt lettering look wan and ghastly in the dim lamplight . 

 he have the carriage in which he sit all to himself . all to himself do I say ? have he not lately summon to his side that ghostly company which of all companionship be the most tenacious ? the shadow of George Talboys pursue he , even in the comfortable first - class carriage , and be behind he when he look out of the window , and be yet far ahead of he and the rush engine , in that thicket toward which the train be speed , by the side of the unhallowed hiding - place in which the mortal remain of the dead man lie , neglect and uncare for . 

 " I must give my lose friend decent burial , " Robert think , as the chill wind sweep across the flat landscape , and strike he with such frozen breath as might have emanate from the lip of the dead . " I must do it ; or I shall die of some panic like this which have seize upon I to - night . I must do it ; at any peril ; at any cost . even at the price of that revelation which will bring the mad woman back from her safe hiding - place , and place she in a criminal dock . " he be glad when the train stop at Brentwood at a few minute after twelve . 

 it be half - past one o'clock when the night wanderer enter the village of Audley , and it be only there that he remember that Clara Talboys have omit to give he any direction by which he might find the cottage in which Luke Marks lay . 

 " it be Dawson who recommend that the poor creature should be take to his mother 's cottage , " Robert think , by - and - by , " and , I dare say . Dawson have attend he ever since the fire . he will be able to tell I the way to the cottage . " 

 act upon this idea , Mr. Audley stop at the house in which Helen Talboys have live before her second marriage . the door of the little surgery be ajar , and there be a light burn within . Robert push the door open and peep in . the surgeon be stand at the mahogany counter , mix a draught in a glass measure , with his hat close beside he . late as it be , he have evidently only just come in . the harmonious snoring of his assistant sound from a little room within the surgery . 

 " I be sorry to disturb you , Mr. Dawson , " Robert say , apologetically , as the surgeon look up and recognize he , " but I have come down to see Marks , who , I hear , be in a very bad way , and I want you to tell I the way to his mother 's cottage . " 

 " I will show you the way , Mr. Audley , " answer the surgeon , " I be go there this minute . " 

 " the man be very bad , then ? " 

 " so bad that he can be no bad . the change that can happen be that change which will take he beyond the reach of any earthly suffering . " 

 " strange ! " exclaim Robert . " he do not appear to be much burn . " 

 " he be not much burn . have he be , I should never have recommend his being remove from Mount Stanning . it be the shock that have do the business . he have be in a rag fever for the last two day ; but to - night he be much calm , and I be afraid , before to - morrow night , we shall have see the last of he . " 

 " he have ask to see I , I be tell , " say Mr. Audley . 

 " yes , " answer the surgeon , carelessly . " a sick man 's fancy , no doubt . you drag he out of the house , and do your good to save his life . I dare say , rough and boorish as the poor fellow be , he think a good deal of that . " 

 they have leave the surgery , the door of which Mr. Dawson have lock behind he . there be money in the till , perhaps , for surely the village apothecary could not have fear that the most daring housebreaker would imperil his liberty in the pursuit of blue pill and colocynth , of salt and senna . 

 the surgeon lead the way along the silent street , and presently turn into a lane at the end of which Robert Audley see the wan glimmer of a light ; a light which tell of the watch that be keep by the sick and die ; a pale , melancholy light , which always have a dismal aspect when look upon in this silent hour betwixt night and morning . it shine from the window of the cottage in which Luke Marks lay , watch by his wife and mother . 

 Mr. Dawson lift the latch , and walk into the common room of the little tenement , follow by Robert Audley . it be empty , but a feeble tallow candle , with a broken back , and a long , cauliflower - head wick , sputter upon the table . the sick man lie in the room above . 

 " shall I tell he you be here ? " ask Mr. Dawson . 

 " yes , yes , if you please . but be cautious how you tell he , if you think the news likely to agitate he . I be in no hurry . I can wait . you can call I when you think I can safely come up - stair . " 

 the surgeon nod , and softly ascend the narrow wooden stair lead to the upper chamber . 

 Robert Audley seat himself in a Windsor chair by the cold hearth - stone , and star disconsolately about he . but he be relieve at last by the low voice of the surgeon , who look down from the top of the little staircase to tell he that Luke Marks be awake , and would be glad to see he . 

 Robert immediately obey this summon . he creep softly up the stair , and take off his hat before he bend his head to enter at the low doorway of the humble rustic chamber . he take off his hat in the presence of this common peasant man , because he know that there be another and a more awful presence hover about the room , and eager to be admit . 

 Phoebe Marks be sit at the foot of the bed , with her eye fix upon her husband 's face not with any very tender expression in the pale light , but with a sharp , terrified anxiety , which show that it be the come of death itself that she dread , rather than the loss of her husband . the old woman be busy at the fire - place , air linen , and prepare some mess of broth which it be not likely the patient would ever eat . the sick man lie with his head prop up by pillow , his coarse face deadly pale , and his great hand wander uneasily about the coverlet . Phoebe have be read to he , for an open testament lie among the medicine and lotion bottle upon the table near the bed . every object in the room be neat and orderly , and bear witness of that delicate precision which have always be a distinguish characteristic of Phoebe . 

 the young woman rise as Robert Audley cross the threshold , and hurry toward he . 

 " let I speak to you for a moment , sir , before you talk to Luke , " she say , in an eager whisper . " pray let I speak to you first . " 

 " what be the gal a - sayin ' , there ? " ask the invalid in a subdue roar , which die away hoarsely on his lip . he be feebly savage , even in his weakness . the dull glaze of death be gather over his eye , but they still watch Phoebe with a sharp glance of dissatisfaction . " what be she up to there ? " he say . " I will not   have no plottin ' and no hatchin ' agen I . I want to speak to Mr. Audley my own self ; and whatever I do I be go to answer for . if I do any mischief , I be a - go to try and undo it . what be she a - sayin ' ? " 

 " she be not   a - sayin ' nothing , lovey , " answer the old woman , go to the bedside of her son , who even when make more interesting than usual by illness , do not seem a very fit subject for this tender appellation . 

 " she be only a - tellin ' the gentleman how bad you have   be , my pretty . " 

 " what I be a - go to tell I be only a - go to tell to he , remember , " growl Mr. Mark ; " and ketch I a - tellin ' of it to he if it warn't   for what he do for I the other night . " 

 " to be sure not , lovey , " answer the old woman soothingly . 

 Phoebe Marks have draw Mr. Audley out of the room and onto the narrow landing at the top of the little staircase . this landing be a platform of about three foot square , and it be as much as the two could manage to stand upon it without push each other against the whitewashed wall , or backward down the stair . 

 " oh , sir , I want to speak to you so badly , " Phoebe answer , eagerly ; " you know what I tell you when I find you safe and well upon the night of the fire ? " 

 " yes , yes . " 

 " I tell you what I suspect ; what I think still . " 

 " yes , I remember . " 

 " but I never breathe a word of it to anybody but you , sir , and I think that Luke have forget all about that night ; I think that what go before the fire have go clean out of his head altogether . he be tipsy , you know , when my la when she come to the Castle ; and I think he be so dazed and scar like by the fire that it all go out of his memory . he do not   suspect what I suspect , at any rate , or he would have speak of it to anybody or everybody ; but he be dreadful spiteful against my lady , for he say if she would have let he have a place at Brentwood or Chelmsford , this would not   have happen . so what I want to beg of you , sir , be not to let a word drop before Luke . " 

 " yes , yes , I understand ; I will be careful . " 

 " my lady have leave the Court , I hear , sir ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " never to come back , sir ? " 

 " never to come back . " 

 " but she have not go where she will be cruelly treat ; where she will be ill - used ? " 

 " no : she will be very kindly treat . " 

 " I be glad of that , sir ; I beg your pardon for trouble you with the question , sir , but my lady be a kind mistress to I . " 

 Luke 's voice , husky and feeble , be hear within the little chamber at this period of the conversation , demand angrily when " that gal would have do jawing ; " upon which Phoebe put her finger to her lip , and lead Mr. Audley back into the sick - room . 

 " I do not   want you " say Mr. Marks , decisively , as his wife re - enter the chamber " I do not   want you ; you have   no call to hear what I have   get to say I only want Mr. Audley , and I want to speak to he all alone , with none o ' your sneakin ' listenin ' at door , d'ye hear ? so you may go down - stair and keep there till you be want ; and you may take mother no , mother may stay , I shall want she presently . " 

 the sick man 's feeble hand point to the door , through which his wife depart very submissively . 

 " I have   no wish to hear anything , Luke , " she say , " but I hope you will not   say anything against those that have be good and generous to you . " 

 " I shall say what I like , " answer Mr. Marks , fiercely , " and I be not a - go to be order by you . you be not   the parson , as I have   ever heerd of ; nor the lawyer neither . " 

 the landlord of the Castle Inn have undergo no moral transformation by his death - bed suffering , fierce and rapid as they have be . perhaps some faint glimmer of a light that have be far off from his life now struggle feebly through the black obscurity of ignorance that darken his soul . perhaps a half angry , half sullen penitence urge he to make some rugged effort to atone for a life that have be selfish and drunken and wicked . be it how it might he wipe his white lip , and turn his haggard eye earnestly upon Robert Audley , point to a chair by the bedside . 

 " you make game of I in a general way , Mr. Audley , " he say , presently , " and you have   draw I out , and you have   tumble and toss I about like in a gentlemanly way , till I be nothink or anythink in your hand ; and you have   look I through and through , and turn I inside out till you think you know as much as I know . I have no particular call to be grateful to you , not before the fire at the Castle t'other night . but I be grateful to you for that . I be not grateful to folk in a general way , p'r'aps , because the thing as gentlefolk have give have a'most allus be the very thing I do not   want . they have   give I soup , and track , and flannel , and coal ; but , Lord , they have   make such a precious noise about it that I would have be to send them all back to them . but when a gentleman go and put his own life in danger to save a drunken brute like I , the drunken brute as ever be feel grateful like to that gentleman , and wish to say before he die which he see in the doctor 's face as he be not   get long to live ' thank ye , sir , I be oblige to you . " 

 Luke Marks stretch out his left hand the right hand have be injure by the fire , and be wrap in linen and grope feebly for that of Mr. Robert Audley . 

 the young man take the coarse but shrunken hand in both his own , and press it cordially . 

 " I need no thank , Luke Marks , " he say ; " I be very glad to be of service to you . " 

 Mr. Marks do not speak immediately . he be lie quietly upon his side , star reflectingly at Robert Audley . 

 " you be oncommon fond of that gent as disappear at the Court , warn't   you , sir ? " he say at last . 

 Robert start at the mention of his dead friend . 

 " you be oncommon fond of that Mr. Talboys , I have   hear say , sir , " repeat Luke . 

 " yes , yes , " answer Robert , rather impatiently , " he be my very dear friend . " 

 " I have   hear the servant at the Court say how you take on when you could not   find he . I have   heere the landlord of the Sun Inn say how cut up you be when you first miss he . ' if the two gent have be brother , ' the landlord say , ' our gent , ' meanin ' you , sir , ' could not   have be more cut up when he miss the other . ' " 

 " yes , yes , I know , I know , " say Robert ; " pray do not speak any more of this subject . I can not tell you how much it distress I . " 

 be he to be haunt forever by the ghost of his unburied friend ? he come here to comfort the sick man , and even here he be pursue by this relentless shadow ; even here he be remind of the secret crime which have darken his life . 

 " listen to I , Marks , " he say , earnestly ; " believe I that I appreciate your grateful word , and that I be very glad to have be of service to you . but before you say anything more , let I make one most solemn request . if you have send for I that you may tell I anything of the fate of my lose friend , I entreat you to spare yourself and to spare I that horrible story . you can tell I nothing which I do not already know . the bad you can tell I of the woman who be once in your power , have already be reveal to I by her own lip . pray , then , be silent upon this subject ; I say again , you can tell I nothing which I do not know . " 

 Luke Marks look musingly at the earnest face of his visitor , and some shadowy expression , which be almost like a smile , flit feebly across the sick man 's haggard feature . 

 " I can not   tell you nothing you do not   know ? " he ask . 

 " nothing . " 

 " then it be not   no good for I to try , " say the invalid , thoughtfully . " do she tell you ? " he ask , after a pause . 

 " I must beg , Marks , that you will drop the subject , " Robert answer , almost sternly . " I have already tell you that I do not wish to hear it speak of . whatever discovery you make , you make your market out of they . whatever guilty secret you get possession of , you be pay for keep silence . you have well keep silence to the end . " 

 " have I ? " cry Luke Marks , in an eager whisper . " have I really now well hold my tongue to the last ? " 

 " I think so , most decidedly . you trade on your secret , and you be pay to keep it . it would be more honest to hold to your bargain , and keep it still . " 

 " but , suppose I want to tell something , " cry Luke , with feverish energy , ' suppose I feel I can not   die with a secret on my mind , and have ask to see you on purpose that I might tell you ; suppose that , and you will suppose nothing but the truth . I would have be burn alive before I would have tell she . " he speak these word between his set tooth , and scowl savagely as he utter they . " I would have be burn alive first . I make her pay for her pretty insolent way ; I make her pay for her air and grace ; I would never have tell she never , never ! I have my power over she , and I keep it ; I have my secret and be pay for it ; and there be not   a petty slight as she ever put upon I or mine that I do not   pay she out for twenty time over ! " 

 " Marks , Marks , for Heaven 's sake be calm , " say Robert , earnestly . " what be you talk of ? what be it that you could have tell ? " 

 " I be a - goin to tell you , " answer Luke , wipe his lip . " give we a drink , mother . " 

 the old woman pour out some cool drink into a mug , and carry it to her son . 

 he drink it in an eager hurry , as if he feel that the brief remainder of his life must be a race with the pitiless pedestrian , Time . 

 " stop where you be , " he say to his mother , point to a chair at the foot of the bed . 

 the old woman obey , and seat herself meekly opposite to Mr. Audley . 

 " I will ask you another question , mother , " say Luke , " and I think it will be strange if you can not   answer it . do you remember when I be at work upon Atkinson 's farm ; before I be married you know , and when I be livin ' down here along of you ? " 

 " yes , yes , " Mrs. Marks answer , nod triumphantly , " I remember that , my dear . it be last fall , just about as the apple be bein ' gather in the orchard across our lane , and about the time as you have your new sprig wesket . I remember , Luke , I remember . " 

 Mr. Audley wonder where all this be to lead to , and how long he would have to sit by the sick man 's bed , hear a conversation that have no meaning to he . 

 " if you remember that much , maybe you will remember more , mother , " say Luke . " can you call to mind my bring some one home here one night , while Atkinsons be stackin ' the last o ' their corn ? " 

 once more Mr. Audley start violently , and this time he look up earnestly at the face of the speaker , and listen , with a strange , breathless interest , that he scarcely understand himself , to what Luke Marks be say . 

 " I rek'lect your bring home Phoebe , " the old woman answer , with great animation . " I rek'lect your bringin ' Phoebe home to take a cup o ' tea , or a little snack o ' supper , a mort o ' time . " 

 " Bother Phoebe , " cry Mr. Marks , " who be a talkin ' of Phoebe ? what be Phoebe , that anybody should go to put theirselve out about she ? do you remember my bringin ' home a gentleman after ten o'clock , one September night ; a gentleman as be wet through to the skin , and be cover with mud and slush , and green slime and black muck , from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot , and have his arm break , and his shoulder swell up awful ; and be such a objeck that nobody would ha ' know he ; a gentleman as have to have his clothe cut off he in some place , and as sit by the kitchen fire , starin ' at the coal as if he have go mad or stupid - like , and do not   know where he be , or who he be ; and as have to be care for like a baby , and dress , and dry , and wash , and feed with spoonful of brandy , that have to be force between his locked tooth , before any life could be get into he ? do you remember that , mother ? " 

 the old woman nod , and mutter something to the effect that she remember all these circumstance most vividly , now that Luke happen to mention they . 

 Robert Audley utter a wild cry , and fall down upon his knee by the side of the sick man 's bed . 

 " my God ! " he ejaculate , " I think Thee for Thy wondrous mercy . George Talboys be alive ! " 

 " wait a bit , " say Mr. Marks , " do not   you be too fast . mother , give we down that tin box on the shelf over against the chest of drawer , will you ? " 

 the old woman obey , and after fumble among broken teacup and milk - jug , lidless wooden cotton - box , and a miscellaneous litter of rag and crockery , produce a tin snuff - box with a slide lid ; a shabby , dirty - look box enough . 

 Robert Audley still kneel by the bedside with his face hide by his clasp hand . Luke Marks open the tin box . 

 " there be not   no money in it , more be the pity , " he say , " or if there have be it would not   have be let stop very long . but there be summat in it that perhaps you will think quite as valliable as money , and that be what I be go to give you as a proof that a drunken brute can feel thankful to they as be kind to he . " 

 he take out two fold paper , which he give into Robert Audley 's hand . 

 they be two leaf tear out of a pocket - book , and they be write upon in pencil , and in a handwriting that be quite strange to Mr. Audley a cramp , stiff , and yet scrawling hand , such as some plowman might have write . 

 " I do not   know this writing , " Robert say , as he eagerly unfold the first of the two paper . " what have this to do with my friend ? why do you show I these ? " 

 " suppose you read them first , " say Mr. Marks , " and ask I question about they afterwards . " 

 the first paper which Robert Audley have unfold contain the follow line , write in that cramp , yet scrawl hand which be so strange to he : 

 " MY DEAR FRIEND I write to you in such utter confusion of mind as perhaps no man ever before suffer . I can not tell you what have happen to I , I can only tell you that something have happen which will drive I from England a break - hearted man , to seek some corner of the earth in which I may live and die unknown and forgotten . I can only ask you to forget I . if your friendship could have do I any good , I would have appeal to it . if your counsel could have be any help to I , I would have confide in you . but neither friendship nor counsel can help I ; and all I can say to you be this , God bless you for the past , and teach you to forget I in the future . G.T. " 

 the second paper be address to another person , and its content be brief than those of the first . 

 " HELEN may God pity and forgive you for that which you have do to - day , as truly as I do . rest in peace . you shall never hear of I again ; to you and to the world I shall henceforth be that which you wish I to be to - day . you need fear no molestation from I . I leave England never to return . 

 " G.T. " 

 Robert Audley sit star at these line in hopeless bewilderment . they be not in his friend 's familiar hand , and yet they purport to be write by he and be sign with his initial . 

 he look scrutinizingly at the face of Luke Marks , think that perhaps some trick be be play upon he . 

 " this be not write by George Talboys , " he say . 

 " it be , " answer Luke Marks , " it be write by Mr. Talboys , every line of it . he write it with his own hand ; but it be his left hand , for he could not   use his right because of his broken arm . " 

 Robert Audley look up suddenly , and the shadow of suspicion pass away from his face . 

 " I understand , " he say , " I understand . tell I all ; tell I how it be that my poor friend be save . " 

 " I be at work up at Atkinson 's farm , last September , " say Luke Marks , " help to stack the last of the corn , and as the nighest way from the farm to mother 's cottage be through the meadow at the back of the Court , I use to come that way , and Phoebe use to stand in the garden wall beyond the lime - walk sometimes , to have a chat with I , knowin ' my time o ' comin ' home . 

 " I do not   know what Phoebe be a - do upon the evenin ' of the seventh o ' September I rek'lect the date because Farmer Atkinson pay I my wage all of a lump on that day , and I would have to sign a bit of a receipt for the money he give I I do not   know what she be a - do , but she warn't   at the gate agen the lime - walk , so I go round to the other side o ' the garden and jump across the dry ditch , for I want partic'ler to see she that night , as I be go away to work upon a farm beyond Chelmsford the next day . Audley church clock strike nine as I be crossin ' the meadow between Atkinson 's and the Court , and it must have be about a quarter past nine when I get into the kitchen garden . 

 " I cross the garden , and go into the lime - walk ; the nigh way to the servant ' hall take I through the shrubbery and past the dry well . it be a dark night , but I know my way well enough about the old place , and the light in the window of the servant ' hall look red and comfortable through the darkness . I be close against the mouth of the dry well when I hear a sound that make my blood creep . it be a groan a groan of a man in pain , as be lyin ' somewhere hide among the bush . I warn't   afraid of ghost and I warn't   afraid of anythink in a general way , but there be somethin in hearin ' this groan as chill I to the very heart , and for a minute I be strike all of a heap , and do not   know what to do . but I hear the groan again , and then I begin to search among the bush . I find a man lyin ' hide under a lot o ' laurel , and I think at first he be up to no good , and I be a - go to collar he to take he to the house , when he catch I by the wrist without gettin ' up from the ground , but lookin ' at I very earnest , as I could see by the way his face be turn toward I in the darkness , and ask I who I be , and what I be , and what I have to do with the folk at the Court . 

 " there be something in the way he speak that tell I he be a gentleman , though I do not   know he from Adam , and could not   see his face ; and I answer his question civil . 

 " ' I want to get away from this place , ' he say , ' without bein ' see by any livin ' creetur , remember that . I have   be lyin ' here ever since four o'clock to - day , and I be half dead , but I want to get away without bein ' see , mind that . ' 

 " I tell he that be easy enough , but I begin to think my first thought of he might have be right enough , after all , and that he could not   have be up to no good to want to sneak away so precious quiet . 

 " ' can you take I to any place where I can get a change of dry clothe , ' he say , ' without half a dozen people knowin ' it ? ' 

 " he would get up into a sittin ' attitude by this time , and I could see that his right arm hang close by his side , and that he be in pain . 

 " I point to his arm , and ask he what be the matter with it ; but he only answer , very quiet like : ' break , my lad , break . not that that be much , ' he say in another tone , speak to himself like , more than to I . ' there be broken heart as well as break limb , and they be not so easy mend . ' 

 " I tell he I could take he to mother 's cottage , and that he could dry his clothe there and welcome . 

 " ' can your mother keep a secret ? ' he ask . 

 " ' well , she could keep one well enough if she could remember it , ' I tell he ; ' but you might tell she all the secret of the Freemasons , and Foresters , and Buffalers and Oddfellers as ever be , to - night : and she would have forget all about them to - morrow mornin ' . ' 

 " he seem satisfied with this , and he get himself up by holdin ' on to I , for it seem as if his limb be cramp , the use of them be almost go . I feel as he come agen I , that his clothe be wet and mucky . 

 " ' you have not   be and fall into the fish - pond , have you , sir ? ' I ask . 

 " he make no answer to my question ; he do not   seem even to have hear it . I could see now he be standin ' upon his foot that he be a tall , fine - make man , a head and shoulder high than I . 

 " ' take I to your mother 's cottage , ' he say , ' and get I some dry clothe if you can ; I will pay you well for your trouble . ' 

 " I know that the key be mostly leave in the wooden gate in the garden wall , so I lead he that way . he could scarcely walk at first , and it be only by leanin ' heavily upon my shoulder that he manage to get along . I get he through the gate , leavin ' it unlock behind I , and trustin ' to the chance of that not bein ' notice by the under - gardener , who have the care of the key , and be a careless chap enough . I take he across the meadow , and bring he up here , still keepin ' away from the village , and in the field , where there be not   a creature to see we at that time o ' night ; and so I get he into the room down - stair , where mother be a - sittin ' over the fire gettin ' my bit o ' supper ready for I . 

 " I put the strange chap in a chair agen the fire , and then for the first time I have a good look at he . I never see anybody in such a state before . he be all over green damp and muck , and his hand be scratch and cut to piece . I get his clothe off he how I could , for he be like a child in my hand , and sit starin ' at the fire as helpless as any baby ; only givin ' a long heavy sigh now and then , as if his heart be a - go to bust . at last he drop into a kind of a doze , a stupid sort of sleep , and begin to nod over the fire , so I run and get a blanket and wrap he in it , and get he to lie down on the press bedstead in the room under this . I send mother to bed , and I sit by the fire and watch he , and kep ' the fire up till it be just upon daybreak , when he ' wake up all of a sudden with a start , and say he must go , directly this minute . 

 " I beg he not to think of such a thing and tell he he warn't   fit to move for ever so long ; but he say he must go , and he get up , and though he stagger like , and at first could hardly stand steady two minute together , he would not   be beat , and he get I to dress he in his clothe as I have dry and clean as well as I could while he lay asleep . I do manage it at last , but the clothe be awful spoiled , and he look a dreadful objeck , with his pale face and a great cut on his forehead that I would wash and tie up with a handkercher . he could only get his coat on by button it on round his neck , for he could not   put a sleeve upon his broken arm . but he hold out agen everything , though he groan every now and then ; and what with the scratch and bruise on his hand , and the cut upon his forehead , and his stiff limb and broken arm , he would plenty of call to groan ; and by the time it be broad daylight he be dressed and ready to go . 

 " ' what be the near town to this upon the London road ? ' he ask I . 

 " I tell he as the nighest town be Brentwood . 

 " ' very well , then , ' he say , ' if you will go with I to Brentwood , and take I to some surgeon as'll set my arm , I will give you a five pound note for that and all your other trouble . ' 

 " I tell he that I be ready and willin ' to do anything as he want do ; and ask he if I should not   go and see if I could borrow a cart from some of the neighbor to drive he over in , for I tell he it be a good six mile ' walk . 

 " he shake his head . no , no , no , he say , he do not   want anybody to know anything about he ; he would rather walk it . 

 " he do walk it ; and he walk like a good ' un , too ; though I know as every step he take o ' they six mile he take in pain ; but he hold out as he have hold out before ; I never see such a chap to hold out in all my blessed life . he have to stop sometimes and lean agen a gateway to get his breath ; but he hold out still , till at last we get into Brentwood , and then he say , ' take I to the nighest surgeon 's , ' and I wait while he have his arm set in splint , which take a precious long time . the surgeon want he to stay in Brentwood till he be well , but he say it warn't   to be hear on , he must get up to London without a minute 's loss of time ; so the surgeon make he as comfortable as he could , consider and tie up his arm in a sling . " 

 Robert Audley start . a circumstance connect with his visit to Liverpool dash suddenly back upon his memory . he remember the clerk who have call he back to say there be a passenger who take his berth on board the Victoria Regia within an hour or so of the vessel 's sailing ; a young man with his arm in a sling , who have call himself by some common name , which Robert have forget . 

 " when his arm be dress , " continue Luke , " he say to the surgeon , ' can you give I a pencil to write something before I go away ? ' the surgeon smile and shake his head : ' you will never be able to write with that there hand to - day , ' he say , pointin ' to the arm as have just be dress . ' p'rap not , ' the young chap answer , quiet enough , ' but I can write with the other , ' ' can not   I write it for you ? ' say the surgeon . ' no , thank you , ' answer the other ; ' what I have   get to write be private . if you can give I a couple of envelope , I will be oblige to you . ' 

 " with that the surgeon go to fetch the envelope , and the young chap take a pocket - book out of his coat pocket with his left hand ; the cover be wet and dirty , but the inside be clean enough , and he tear out a couple of leaf and begin to write upon them as you see ; and he write dreadful awk'ard with his left hand , and he write slow , but he contrive to finish what you see , and then he put the two bit o ' writin ' into the envelope as the surgeon bring he , and he seal them up , and he put a pencil cross upon one of them , and nothing on the other : and then he pay the surgeon for his trouble , and the surgeon say , be not   there nothing more he can do for he , and can not   he persuade he to stay in Brentwood till his arm 's well ; but he say no , no , it be not   possible ; and then he say to I , ' come along o ' I to the railway station , and I will give you what I have   promise . ' 

 " so I go to the station with he . we be in time to catch the train as stop at Brentwood at half after eight , and we have five minute to spare . so he take I into a corner of the platform , and he say , ' I want you to deliver these here letter for I , ' which I tell he I be willin ' . ' very well , then , ' he say ; ' look here ; you know Audley Court ? ' ' yes , ' I say , ' I ought to , for my sweetheart live lady 's maid there . ' ' whose lady 's maid ? ' he say . so I tell he , ' my lady 's , the new lady what be governess at Mr. Dawson 's . ' ' very well , then , ' he say ; ' this here letter with the cross upon the envelope be for Lady Audley , but you be to be sure to give it into her own hand ; and remember to take care as nobody see you give it . ' I promise to do this , and he hand I the first letter . and then he say , ' do you know Mr. Audley , as be nevy to Sir Michael ? ' and I say , ' yes , I have   heerd tell on he , and I have   heerd as he be a reg'lar swell , but affable and free - spoken '   for I heerd them tell on you , you know , " Luke add , parenthetically . " ' now look here , ' the young chap say , ' you be to give this other letter to Mr. Robert Audley , whose a - stayin ' at the Sun Inn , in the village ; ' and I tell he it be all right , as I have   know'd the Sun ever since I be a baby . so then he give I the second letter , what be get nothing write upon the envelope , and he give I a five - pound note , accordin ' to promise ; and then he say , ' good - day , and thank you for all your trouble,'and he get into a second - class carriage ; and the last I see of he be a face as white as a sheet of writin ' paper , and a great patch of stickin'-plaster criss - cross upon his forehead . " 

 " Poor George ! poor George ! " 

 " I go back to Audley , and I go straight to the Sun Inn , and ask for you , meanin ' to deliver both letter faithful , so help I God ! then ; but the landlord tell I as you have start off that mornin ' for London , and he do not   know when you would come back , and he do not   know the name o ' the place where you live in London , though he say he think it be in one o ' they law court , such as Westminster Hall or Doctors ' Commons , or something like that . so what be I to do ? I could not   send a letter by post , not knowin ' where to direct to , and I could not   give it into your own hand , and I have be tell partickler not to let anybody else know of it ; so I have nothing to do but to wait and see if you come back , and bide my time for givin ' of it to you . 

 " I think I would go over to the Court in the evenin ' and see Phoebe , and find out from she when there would be a chance of seein ' her lady , for I know'd she could manage it if she like . so I do not   go to work that day , though I ought to ha ' do , and I lounge and idle about until it be nigh upon dusk , and then I go down to the meadow behind the Court , and there I find Phoebe sure enough , waitin ' agen the wooden door in the wall , on the lookout for I . 

 " I have not   be talkin ' to she long before I see there be somethink wrong with she and I tell she as much . 

 " well , ' she say , ' I be not   quite myself this evenin ' , for I have a upset yesterday , and I be not   get over it yet . ' 

 " ' a upset , ' I say . ' you have a quarrel with your missus , I suppose . ' 

 " she do not   answer I directly , but she smile the queer smile as ever I see , and presently she say : 

 " no , Luke , it be not   nothing o ' that kind ; and what be more , nobody could be friendly toward I than my lady . I think she would do any think for I a'most ; and I think , whether it be a bit o ' farming stock and furniture or such like , or whether it be the good - will of a public - house , she would not   refuse I anythink as I ask she . ' 

 " I could not   make out this , for it be only a few day before as she have tell I her missus be selfish and extravagant , and we might wait a long time before we could get what we want from she . 

 " so I say to she , ' why , this be rather sudden like , Phoebe ; ' and she say , ' yes , it be sudden ; ' and she smile again , just the same sort of smile as before . upon that I turn round upon her sharp , and say : 

 " I will tell you what it be , my gal , you be a - keepin ' somethink from I ; somethink you have   be tell , or somethink you have   find out ; and if you think you be a - go to try that game on with I , you will find you be very much mistaken ; and so I give you warnin ' . " 

 " but she laugh it off like , and say , ' Lor ' Luke , what could have put such fancy into your head ? ' 

 " ' perhaps other people can keep secret as well as you , ' I say , ' and perhaps other people can make friend as well as you . there be a gentleman come here to see your missus yesterday , warn't   there a tall young gentleman with a brown beard ? ' 

 " instead of answering of I like a Christian , my Cousin Phoebe burst out a - cryin ' , and wring her hand , and go on awful , until I be dash if I can make out what she be up to . 

 " but little by little I get it out of she , for I would not   stand no nonsense ; find she tell I how she have be sittin ' at work at the window of her little room , which be at the top of the house , right up in one of the gable , and overlook the lime - walk , and the shrubbery and the well , when she see my lady walk with a strange gentleman , and they walk together for a long time , until by - and - by they " 

 " stop ! " cry Robert , " I know the rest . " 

 " well , Phoebe tell I all about what she see , and she tell I she have meet her lady almost directly afterward , and something have pass between them , not much , but enough to let she missus know that the servant what she look down upon have find out that as would put she in that servant 's power to the last day of her life . 

 " ' and she be in my power , Luke , ' say Phoebe ; ' and she will do anythin ' in the world for we if we keep her secret . ' 

 " so you see both my Lady Audley and her maid think as the gentleman as I have see safe off by the London train be lie dead at the bottom of the well . if I be to give the letter they would find out the contrary of this ; and if I be to give the letter , Phoebe and I would lose the chance of gettin ' start in life by her missus . 

 " so I kep ' the letter and kep ' my secret , and my lady kep ' hern . but I think if she act liberal by I , and give I the money I want , free like , I would tell her everythink , and make her mind easy . 

 " but she do not . whatever she give I she throw I as if I have be a dog . whenever she speak to I , she speak as she might have speak to a dog ; and a dog she could not   abide the sight of . there be no word in her mouth that be too bad for I ; there be no toss as she could give her head that be too proud and scornful for I ; and my blood b'ile agen she , and I kep ' my secret , and let she keep hern . I open the two letter , and I read them , but I could not   make much sense out of them , and I hide them away ; and not a creature but I have see them until this night . " 

 Luke Marks have finish his story , and lie quietly enough , exhaust by have talk so long . he watch Robert Audley 's face , fully expect some reproof , some grave lecture ; for he have a vague consciousness that he have do wrong . 

 but Robert do not lecture he ; he have no fancy for an office which he do not think himself fit to perform . 

 Robert Audley sit until long after daybreak with the sick man , who fall into a heavy slumber a short time after he have finish his story . the old woman have doze comfortably throughout her son 's confession . Phoebe be asleep upon the press bedstead in the room below ; so the young barrister be the only watcher . 

 he could not sleep ; he could only think of the story he have hear . he could only thank God for his friend 's preservation , and pray that he might be able to go to Clara Talboys , and say , " your brother still live , and have be find . " 

 Phoebe come up - stair at eight o'clock , ready to take her place at the sick - bed , and Robert Audley go away , to get a bed at the Sun Inn . it be nearly dusk when he awake out of a long dreamless slumber , and dress himself before din in the little sitting - room , in which he and George have sit together a few month before . 

 the landlord wait upon he at dinner , and tell he that Luke Marks have die at five o'clock that afternoon . " he go off rather sudden like , " the man say , " but very quiet . " 

 Robert Audley write a long letter that evening , address to Madame Taylor , care of Monsieur Val , Villebrumeuse ; a long letter in which he tell the wretched woman who have bear so many name , and be to bear a false one for the rest of her life , the story that the die man have tell he . 

 " it may be some comfort to she to hear that her husband do not perish in his youth by her wicked hand , " he think , " if her selfish soul can hold any sentiment of pity or sorrow for other . " 

 CHAPTER XL . 

 RESTORED . 

 Clara Talboys return to dorsetshire , to tell her father that his only son have sail for Australia upon the 9th of September , and that it be most probable he yet live , and would return to claim the forgiveness of the father he have never very particularly injure ; except in the matter of have make that terrible matrimonial mistake which have exercise so fatal an influence upon his youth . 

 Mr. Harcourt - Talboys be fairly nonplus . Junius Brutus have never be place in such a position as this , and see no way of get out of this dilemma by act after his favorite model , Mr. Talboys be fain to be natural for once in his life , and to confess that he have suffer much uneasiness and pain of mind about his only son since his conversation with Robert Audley , and that he would be heartily glad to take his poor boy to his arm , whenever he should return to England . but when be he likely to return ? and how be he to be communicate with ? that be the question . Robert Audley remember the advertisement which he have cause to be insert in the Melbourne and Sydney paper . if George have re - enter either city alive , how be it that no notice have ever be take of that advertisement ? be it likely that his friend would be indifferent to his uneasiness ? but then , again , it be just possible that George Talboys have not happen to see this advertisement ; and , as he have travel under a feigned name , neither his fellow passenger nor the captain of the vessel would have be able to identify he with the person advertise for . what be to be do ? must they wait patiently till George grow weary of his exile , and return to his friend who love he ? or be there any mean to be take by which his return might be hasten ? Robert Audley be at fault ! perhaps , in the unspeakable relief of mind which he have experience upon the discovery of his friend 's escape , he be unable to look beyond the one fact of that providential preservation . 

 in this state of mind he go down to dorsetshire to pay a visit to Mr. Talboys , who have give way to a perfect torrent of generous impulse , and have go so far as to invite his son 's friend to share the prim hospitality of the square , red brick mansion . 

 Mr. Talboys have only two sentiment upon the subject of George 's story ; one be a natural relief and happiness in the thought that his son have be save , the other be an earnest wish that my lady have be his wife , and that he might thus have have the pleasure of make a signal example of she . 

 " it be not for I to blame you , Mr. Audley , " he say , " for have smuggle this guilty woman out of the reach of justice , and thus , as I may say , palter with the law of your country . I can only remark that , have the lady fall into my hand , she would have be very differently treat . " 

 it be in the middle of April when Robert Audley find himself once more under those black fir - tree beneath which his wander thought have so often stay since his first meeting with Clara Talboys . there be primrose and early violet in the hedge now , and the stream , which , upon his first visit , have be hard and frost - bind as the heart of Harcourt Talboys , have thaw , like that gentleman , and run merrily under the blackthorn bush in the capricious April sunshine . 

 Robert have a prim bedroom , and an uncompromise dressing - room allot he in the square house , and he wake every morning upon a metallic spring mattress , which always give he the idea of sleep upon some musical instrument , to see the sun glare in upon he through the square , white blind and light up the two lackered urn which adorn the foot of the blue iron bedstead , until they blaze like two tiny brazen lamp of the roman period . he emulate Mr. Harcourt Talboys in the matter of shower - bath and cold water , and emerge prim and blue as that gentleman himself , as the clock in the hall strike seven , to join the master of the house in his ante - breakfast constitutional under the fir - tree in the stiff plantation . 

 but there be generally a third person who assist in the constitutional promenade , and that third person be Clara Talboys , who use to walk by her father 's side , more beautiful than the morning for that be sometimes dull and cloudy , while she be always fresh and bright in a broad - leave straw - hat and flap blue ribbon , one quarter of an inch of which Mr. Audley would have esteem a prouder decoration than ever adorn a favor creature 's button - hole . 

 at first they be very ceremonious toward each other , and be only familiar and friendly upon the one subject of George 's adventure ; but little by little a pleasant intimacy arise between they , and before the first three week of Robert 's visit have elapse , Miss Talboys make he happy , by take he seriously in hand and lecture he on the purposeless life he have lead so long , and the little use he have make of the talent and opportunity that have be give to he . 

 how pleasant it be to be lecture by the woman he love ! how pleasant it be to humiliate himself and depreciate himself before she ! how delightful it be to get such splendid opportunity of hint that if his life have be sanctify by an object he might indeed have strive to be something well than an idle flaneur upon the smooth pathway that have no particular goal ; that , bless by the tie which would have give a solemn purpose to every hour of his existence , he might indeed have fight the battle earnestly and unflinchingly . he generally wound up with a gloomy insinuation to the effect that it be only likely he would drop quietly over the edge of the Temple Gardens some afternoon when the river be bright and placid in the low sunlight , and the little child have go home to their tea . 

 " do you think I can read french novel and smoke mild turkish until I be three - score - and - ten , Miss Talboys ? " he ask . " do you think there will not come a day in which my meerschaum will be foul , and the french novel more than usually stupid , and life altogether such a dismal monotony that I shall want to get rid of it somehow or other ? " 

 I be sorry to say that while this hypocritical young barrister be hold forth in this despondent way , he have mentally sell up his bachelor possession , include all Michel Levy 's publication , and half a dozen solid silver - mount meerschaum ; pension off Mrs. Maloney , and lay out two or three thousand pound in the purchase of a few acre of verdant shrubbery and sloping lawn , embosome amid which there should be a fairy cottage ornťe , whose rustic casement should glimmer out of bower of myrtle and clematis to see themselves reflect in the purple bosom of the lake . 

 of course , Clara Talboys be far from discover the drift of these melancholy lamentation . she recommend Mr. Audley to read hard and think seriously of his profession , and begin life in real earnest . it be a hard , dry sort of existence , perhaps , which she recommend ; a life of serious work and application , in which he should strive to be useful to his fellow - creature , and win a reputation for himself . 

 " I would do all that , " he think , " and do it earnestly , if I could be sure of a reward for my labor . if she would accept my reputation when it be win , and support I in the struggle by her beloved companionship . but what if she send I away to fight the battle , and marry some hulking country squire while my back be turn ? " 

 be naturally of a vacillating and dilatory disposition , there be no saying how long Mr. Audley might have keep his secret , fearful to speak and break the charm of that uncertainty which , though not always hopeful , be very seldom quite despairing , have not he be hurry by the impulse of an unguarded moment into a full confession of the truth . 

 he have stay five week at Grange Heath , and feel that he could not , in common decency , stay any long ; so he have pack his portmanteau one pleasant May morning , and have announce his departure . 

 Mr. Talboys be not the sort of man to utter any passionate lamentation at the prospect of lose his guest , but he express himself with a cool cordiality which serve with he as the strong demonstration of friendship . 

 " we have get on very well together , Mr. Audley , " he say , " and you have be pleased to appear sufficiently happy in the quiet routine of our orderly household ; nay , more , you have conform to our little domestic regulation in a manner which I can not refrain from say I take as an especial compliment to myself . " 

 Robert bow . how thankful he be to the good fortune which have never suffer he to oversleep the signal of the clang bell , or lead he away beyond the ken of clock at Mr. Talboys ' luncheon hour . 

 " I trust as we have get on so remarkably well together , " Mr. Talboys resume , " you will do I the honor of repeat your visit to dorsetshire whenever you feel inclined . you will find plenty of sport among my farm , and you will meet with every politeness and attention from my tenant , if you like to bring your gun with you . " 

 Robert respond most heartily to these friendly overture . he declare that there be no earthly occupation that be more agreeable to he than partridge - shooting , and that he should be only too delighted to avail himself of the privilege so kindly offer to he . he could not help glance toward Clara as he say this . the perfect lid droop a little over the brown eye , and the faint shadow of a blush illuminate the beautiful face . 

 but this be the young barrister 's last day in Elysium , and there must be a dreary interval of day and night and week and month before the first of September would give he an excuse for return to dorsetshire ; a dreary interval which fresh colored young squire or fat widower of eight - and - forty , might use to his disadvantage . it be no wonder , therefore , that he contemplate this dismal prospect with moody despair , and be bad company for Miss Talboys that morning . 

 but in the evening after dinner , when the sun be low in the west , and Harcourt Talboys closet in his library upon some judicial business with his lawyer and a tenant farmer , Mr. Audley grow a little more agreeable . he stand by Clara 's side in one of the long window of the drawing - room , watch the shadow deepen in the sky and the rosy light grow every moment rosier as the sun die out . he could not help enjoy that quiet tete - a - tete , though the shadow of the next morning 's express which be to carry he away to London loom darkly across the pathway of his joy . he could not help be happy in her presence ; forgetful of the past , reckless of the future . 

 they talk of the one subject which be always a bond of union between they . they talk of her lose brother George . she speak of he in a very melancholy tone this evening . how could she be otherwise than sad , remember that if he live and she be not even sure of that he be a lonely wanderer far away from all who love he , and carry the memory of a blighted life wherever he go . 

 " I can not think how papa can be so resign to my poor brother 's absence , " she say , " for he do love he , Mr. Audley ; even you must have see lately that he do love he . but I can not think how he can so quietly submit to his absence . if I be a man , I would go to Australia , and find he , and bring he back ; if he be still to be find among the living , " she add , in a low voice . 

 she turn her face away from Robert , and look out at the darken sky . he lay his hand upon her arm . it tremble in spite of he , and his voice tremble , too , as he speak to she . 

 " shall I go to look for your brother ? " he say . 

 " you ! " she turn her head , and look at he earnestly through her tear . " you , Mr. Audley ! do you think that I could ask you to make such a sacrifice for I , or for those I love ? " 

 " and do you think , Clara , that I should think any sacrifice too great a one if it be make for you ? do you think there be any voyage I would refuse to take , if I know that you would welcome I when I come home , and thank I for have serve you faithfully ? I will go from one end of the continent of Australia to the other to look for your brother , if you please , Clara ; and will never return alive unless I bring he with I , and will take my chance of what reward you shall give I for my labor . " 

 her head be bent , and it be some moment before she answer he . 

 " you be very good and generous , Mr. Audley , " she say , at last , " and I feel this offer too much to be able to thank you for it . but what you speak of could never be . by what right could I accept such a sacrifice ? " 

 " by the right which make I your bounden slave forever and ever , whether you will or no . by right of the love I bear you , Clara , " cry Mr. Audley , drop on his knee rather awkwardly , it must be confess and cover a soft little hand , that he have find half hide among the fold of a silken dress , with passionate kiss . 

 " I love you , Clara , " he say , " I love you . you may call for your father , and have I turn out of the house this moment , if you like ; but I shall go on love you all the same ; and I shall love you forever and ever , whether you will or no . " 

 the little hand be draw away from his , but not with a sudden or angry gesture , and it rest for one moment lightly and tremulously upon his dark hair . 

 " Clara , Clara ! " he murmur , in a low , plead voice , ' shall I go to Australia to look for your brother ? " 

 there be no answer . I do not   know how it be , but there be scarcely anything more delicious than silence in such case . every moment of hesitation be a tacit avowal ; every pause be a tender confession . 

 " shall we both go , dearest ? shall we go as man and wife ? shall we go together , my dear love , and bring our brother back between we ? " 

 Mr. Harcourt Talboys , come into the lamplit room a quarter of an hour afterward , find Robert Audley alone , and have to listen to a revelation which very much surprise he . like all self - sufficient people , he be tolerably blind to everything that happen under his nose , and he have fully believe that his own society , and the spartan regularity of his household , have be the attraction which have make dorsetshire delightful to his guest . 

 he be rather disappointed , therefore ; but he bear his disappointment pretty well , and express a placid and rather stoical satisfaction at the turn which affair have take . 

 so Robert Audley go back to London , to surrender his chamber in Figtree Court , and to make all due inquiry about such ship as sail from Liverpool for Sydney in the month of June . 

 he have linger until after luncheon at Grange Heath , and it be in the dusky twilight that he enter the shady Temple court and find his way to his chamber . he find Mrs. Maloney scrub the stair , as be she will not upon a Saturday evening , and he have to make his way upward amidst an atmosphere of soapy steam , that make the baluster greasy under his touch . 

 " there be lot of letter , yer honor , " the laundress say , as she rise from her knee and flatten herself against the wall to enable Robert to pass she , " and there be some parcel , and there be a gentleman which have call ever so many time , and be waitin ' to - night , for I towld he you would write to I to say your room be to be air . " 

 he open the door of his sitting - room , and walk in . the canary be sing their farewell to the set sun , and the faint , yellow light be flicker upon the geranium leave . the visitor , whoever he be , sit with his back to the window and his head bend upon his breast . but he start up as Robert Audley enter the room , and the young man utter a great cry of delight and surprise , and open his arm to his lose friend , George Talboys . 

 we know how much Robert have to tell . he touch lightly and tenderly upon that subject which he know be cruelly painful to his friend ; he say very little of the wretched woman who be wear out the remnant of her wicked life in the quiet suburb of the forgotten belgian city . 

 George Talboys speak very briefly of that sunny seventh of September , upon which he have leave his friend sleep by the trout stream while he go to accuse his false wife of that conspiracy which have well nigh break his heart . 

 " God know that from the moment in which I sink into the black pit , know the treacherous hand that have send I to what might have be my death , my chief thought be of the safety of the woman who have betray I . I fall upon my foot upon a mass of slush and mire , but my shoulder be bruise , and my arm break against the side of the well . I be stun and daze for a few minute , but I rouse myself by an effort , for I feel that the atmosphere I breathe be deadly . I have my australian experience to help I in my peril ; I could climb like a cat . the stone of which the well be build be rugged and irregular , and I be able to work my way upward by plant my foot in the interstice of the stone , and rest my back at time against the opposite side of the well , help myself as well as I could with my hand , though one arm be crippled . it be hard work , Bob , and it seem strange that a man who have long profess himself weary of his life , should take so much trouble to preserve it . I think I must have be work upward of half an hour before I get to the top ; I know the time seem an eternity of pain and peril . it be impossible for I to leave the place until after dark without be observe , so I hide myself behind a clump of laurel - bush , and lie down on the grass faint and exhausted to wait for nightfall . the man who find I there tell you the rest . Robert . " 

 " yes , my poor old friend . yes , he tell I all . " 

 George have never return to Australia after all . he have go on board the Victoria Regia , but have afterward change his berth for one in another vessel belong to the same owner , and have go to New York , where he have stay as long as he could endure the loneliness of an existence which separate he from every friend he have ever know . 

 " Jonathan be very kind to I , Bob , " he say ; " I have enough money to enable I to get on pretty well in my own quiet way and I mean to have start for the California gold field to get more when that be go . I might have make plenty of friend have I please , but I carry the old bullet in my breast ; and what sympathy could I have with man who know nothing of my grief ? I yearn for the strong grasp of your hand , Bob ; the friendly touch of the hand which have guide I through the dark passage of my life . " 

 CHAPTER XLI . 

 AT PEACE . 

 two year have pass since the May twilight in which Robert find his old friend ; and Mr. Audley 's dream of a fairy cottage have be realize between Teddington Locks and Hampton Bridge , where , amid a little forest of foliage , there be a fantastical dwelling place of rustic woodwork , whose latticed window look out upon the river . here , among the lily and the rush on the slop bank , a brave boy of eight year old play with a toddle baby , who peer wonderingly from his nurse 's arm at that other baby in the purple depth of the quiet water . 

 Mr. Audley be a rise man upon the home circuit by this time , and have distinguish himself in the great breach of promise case of Hobbs v. Nobbs , and have convulse the court by his deliciously comic rendering of the faithless Nobb 's amatory correspondence . the handsome dark - eyed boy be Master George Talboys , who decline musa at Eton , and fish for tadpole in the clear water under the spread umbrage beyond the ivied wall of the academy . but he come very often to the fairy cottage to see his father , who live there with his sister and his sister 's husband ; and he be very happy with his Uncle Robert , his Aunt Clara , and the pretty baby who have just begin to toddle on the smooth lawn that slop down to the water 's brink , upon which there be a little swiss boat - house and landing - stage where Robert and George moor their slender wherry . 

 other people come to the cottage near Teddington . a bright , merry - hearted girl , and a gray - bearded gentleman , who have survive the trouble of his life , and battle with it as a Christian should . 

 it be more than a year since a black - edged letter , write upon foreign paper , come to Robert Audley , to announce the death of a certain Madame Taylor , who have expire peacefully at villebrumeuse , die after a long illness , which Monsieur Val describe as a maladie de langueur . 

 another visitor come to the cottage in this bright summer of 1861 a frank , generous hearted young man , who toss the baby and play with Georgey , and be especially great in the management of the boat , which be never idle when Sir Harry Towers be at Teddington . 

 there be a pretty rustic smoking - room over the Swiss boat - house , in which the gentleman sit and smoke in the summer evening , and whence they be summon by Clara and Alicia to drink tea , and eat strawberry and cream upon the lawn . 

 Audley Court be shut up , and a grim old housekeeper reign paramount in the mansion which my lady 's ring laughter once make musical . a curtain hang before the pre - raphaelite portrait ; and the blue mold which artist dread gather upon the Wouvermans and Poussins , the Cuyps and Tintorettis . the house be often show to inquisitive visitor , though the baronet be not inform of that fact , and people admire my lady 's room , and ask many question about the pretty , fair - haired woman who die abroad . 

 Sir Michael have no fancy to return to the familiar dwelling - place in which he once dream a brief dream of impossible happiness . he remain in London until Alicia shall be Lady Towers , when he be to remove to a house he have lately buy in Hertfordshire , on the border of his son - in - law 's estate . George Talboys be very happy with his sister and his old friend . he be a young man yet , remember , and it be not quite impossible that he may , by - and - by , find some one who will console he for the past . that dark story of the past fade little by little every day , and there may come a time in which the shadow my lady 's wickedness have cast upon the young man 's life will utterly vanish away . 

 the meerschaum and the french novel have be present to a young Templar with whom Robert Audley have be friendly in his bachelor day ; and Mrs. Maloney have a little pension , pay she quarterly , for her care of the canary and geranium . 

 I hope no one will take objection to my story because the end of it leave the good people all happy and at peace . if my experience of life have not be very long , it have at least be manifold ; and I can safely subscribe to that which a mighty king and a great philosopher declare , when he say , that neither the experience of his youth nor of his age have ever show he " the righteous forsaken , nor his seed beg their bread . " 

 the END .