FENTON 'S QUEST 


 by M. E. BRADDON 


 THE AUTHOR of 

 " LADY AUDLEY 's SECRET , " " AURORA FLOYD " 

 ETC . ETC . ETC . 

 cheap UNIFORM EDITION of MISS BRADDON 's novel . 

 price 2s . picture board ; 2s . 6d . cloth gilt ; 3s . 6d . half parchment or half morocco ; postage 4d . 

 MISS BRADDON 's novel 

 include 

 " LADY AUDLEY 's SECRET , " " VIXEN , " " ISHMAEL " ETC . 

 " no one can be dull who have a novel by Miss Braddon in hand . the most tiresome journey be beguile , and the most wearisome illness be brighten , by any one of her book . " 

 " Miss Braddon be the Queen of the circulate library . " the World . 

 N.B. there be now 45 novel always in print ; for full list see book of cover , or apply for a Catalogue , to be send   post free , 

 LONDON : J. and B. MAXWELL , 

 Milton House , 14 and 15 Shoe Lane , Fleet Street ; 

 and 

 35 St. Bride Street , Ludgate Circus , E.O. 

 and at all Railway Bookstalls , Booksellers ' and Libraries . 

 content 
 CHAPTER I. the common FEVER 
 CHAPTER II . MARIAN 'S STORY 
 CHAPTER III . ACCEPTED 
 CHAPTER IV . JOHN SALTRAM 
 CHAPTER V. HALCYON DAYS 
 CHAPTER VI . SENTENCE of EXILE 
 CHAPTER VII . " GOOD - BYE " 
 CHAPTER VIII . miss 
 CHAPTER IX . JOHN SALTRAM 'S advice 
 CHAPTER X. JACOB NOWELL 
 CHAPTER XI . the marriage at WYGROVE 
 CHAPTER XII . a FRIENDLY COUNSELLOR 
 CHAPTER xiii . MRS . PALLINSON have view 
 CHAPTER XIV . FATHER and SON 
 CHAPTER XV . on the TRACK 
 CHAPTER XVI . face to FACE 
 CHAPTER XVII . MISS CARLEY 's admirer 
 CHAPTER XVIII . JACOB NOWELL 's WILL 
 CHAPTER XIX . gilbert ASKS a question 
 CHAPTER XX . drift AWAY 
 CHAPTER XXI . FATHER and DAUGHTER 
 CHAPTER XXII . AT LIDFORD AGAIN 
 CHAPTER XXIII . call to ACCOUNT 
 CHAPTER XXIV . TORMENTED by DOUBT 
 CHAPTER XXV . miss again 
 CHAPTER XXVI . in BONDAGE 
 CHAPTER XXVII . only a woman 
 CHAPTER XXVIII . AT FAULT 
 CHAPTER XXIX . BAFFLED , not BEATEN 
 CHAPTER XXX . STRICKEN DOWN 
 CHAPTER XXXI . ELLEN CARLEY 's TRIALS 
 CHAPTER XXXII . the padlocked door AT WYNCOMB 
 CHAPTER XXXIII . " what must be shall be " 
 CHAPTER XXXIV . DOUBTFUL INFORMATION 
 CHAPTER XXXV . BOUGHT with a price 
 chapter xxxvi . come ROUND 
 CHAPTER XXXVII . a full CONFESSION 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII . an ILL - OMENED wedding 
 CHAPTER xxxix . a DOMESTIC MYSTERY 
 CHAPTER XL . in PURSUIT 
 CHAPTER XLI . OUTWARD BOUND 
 CHAPTER XLII . the PLEASURES of WYNCOMB 
 CHAPTER XLIII . MR . WHITELAW make an END of the MYSTERY 
 CHAPTER XLIV . after the FIRE 
 CHAPTER XLV . MR . WHITELAW make his WILL 
 CHAPTER XLVI . ellen regains her liberty 
 CHAPTER XLVII . CLOSING SCENES 
 CHAPTER I 

 the common FEVER 


 a warm summer evening , with a sultry haze brood over the level landscape , and a Sabbath stillness upon all thing in the village of Lidford , Midlandshire . in the remoter corner of the old gothic church the shadow be begin to gather , as the sermon draw near its close ; but in the centre aisle and about the pulpit there be broad daylight still shin - in from the wide western window , across the low half of which there be tall figure of the evangelist in old stain glass . 

 there be no chorister at Lidford , and the evening service be conduct in rather a drowsy way ; but there be a solemn air of repose about the gray old church that should be conducive to tranquil thought and pious meditation . simple and earnest have be the word of the sermon , simple and earnest seem the countenance of the congregation , look reverently upwards at the face of their pastor ; and one might fancy , contemplate that grand old church , so much too spacious for the need of the little flock gather there to - night , that Lidford be a forgotten , half - desert corner of this earth , in which a man , tired of the press and turmoil of the world , might find an almost monastic solitude and calm . 

 so think a gentleman in the Squire 's pew a good - look man of about thirty , who be finish his first Sunday at Lidford by devout attendance at evening service . he have be think a good deal about this quiet country life during the service , wonder whether it be not the good life a man could live , after all , and think it all the sweet because of his own experience , which have lie chiefly in city . 

 he be a certain Mr. Gilbert Fenton , an australian merchant , and be on a visit to his sister , who have marry the principal landowner in Lidford , Martin Lister a man whose father have be call " the squire . " the lady sit opposite her brother in the wide old family pew to - night a handsome - look matron , with a little rosy - cheeked damsel sit by her side a damsel with flow auburn hair , tiny hat and feather , and bright scarlet stocking , look very much as if she have walk out of a picture by Mr. Millais . 

 the congregation stand up to sing a hymn when the sermon be end , and Gilbert Fenton turn his face towards the opposite line of pew , in one of which , very near he , there be a girl , at whom Mrs. Lister have catch her brother look very often , during the service just conclude . 

 it be a face that a man could scarcely look upon once without find his glance wander back to it afterwards ; not quite a perfect face , but a very bright and win one . large gray eye , with a wonderful light in they , under dark lash and dark brow ; a complexion that have a dusky pallor , a delicate semi - transparent olive - tint that one seldom see out of a spanish picture ; a sweet rosy mouth , and a piquant little nose of no particular order , make up the catalogue of this young lady 's charm . but in a face worth look at there be always a something that can not be put into word ; and the bright and good attribute of this face be quite beyond translation . it be a face one might almost call ' splendid " there be such a light and glory about it at some moment . Gilbert Fenton think so to - night , as he see it in the full radiance of the western sunlight , the lip part as the girl sing , the clear gray eye look upward . 

 she be not alone : a portly genial - look old man stand by her side , and accompany she to the church - porch when the hymn be over . here they both linger a moment to shake hand with Mrs. Lister , very much to Gilbert Fenton 's satisfaction . they walk along the churchyard - path together , and Gilbert give his sister 's arm a little tug , which mean , " introduce I . " 

 " my brother Mr. Fenton , Captain Sedgewick , Miss Nowell . " 

 the Captain shake hand with Gilbert . " delighted to know you , Mr. Fenton ; delight to know any one belong to Mrs. Lister . you be go to stop down here for some time , I hope . " 

 " I fear not for very long , Captain Sedgewick . I be a business man , you see , and can not   afford to take a long holiday from the City . " 

 Mrs. Lister laugh . " my brother be utterly devoted to commercial pursuit , " she say ; " I think he believe every hour waste that he spend out of his counting - house . " 

 " and yet I be think in church this evening , that a man 's life might be happy in such a place as this , drift away in a kind of dreamy idleness , than the great success possible to commerce could ever make it . " 

 " you would very soon be tired of your dreamy idleness , " answer his sister , " and sigh for your office and your club . " 

 " the country suit old people , who have play their part in life , and make an end of it , " say the Captain . " it suit my little girl here very well , too , " he add , with a fond glance at his companion ; ' she have her bird and her flower , and her book and music ; and I do not   think she ever sigh for anything gayer than Lidford . " 

 " never , uncle George , " say the girl , slip her hand through his arm . and Gilbert Fenton see that those two be very fond of each other . 

 they come to the end of a shady wind lane at this moment , and Captain Sedgewick and Miss Nowell wish Mrs. Lister and her brother good - evening , and go away down the lane arm - in - arm . 

 " what a lovely girl she be ! " say Gilbert , when they be go . 

 " Lovely be rather a strong word , Gilbert , " Mrs. Lister answer coldly ; ' she be certainly pretty , but I hope you be not go to lose your heart in that direction . " 

 " there be no fear of that . a man may admire a girl 's face without be in any danger of lose his heart . but why not in that direction , Belle ? be there any special objection to the lady ? " 

 " only that she be a nobody , without either money or position and I think you ought to have both when you marry . " 

 " thank for the imply compliment ; but I do not fancy that an australian merchant can expect to secure a wife of very exalt position ; and I be the last man in the world to marry for money . " 

 " I do not   for a moment suppose you would marry any one you do not   like , from mercenary consideration ; but there be no reason you should make a foolish match . " 

 " of course not . I think it very doubtful whether I shall ever marry at all . I be just the kind of man to go down to my grave a bachelor . " 

 " why so , Gilbert ? " 

 " well , I can hardly tell you , my dear . perhaps I be rather difficult to please just a little stony - hearted and invulnerable . I know that since I be a boy , and get over my schoolboy love affair , I have never see the woman who could touch my heart . I have meet plenty of pretty woman , and plenty of brilliant woman , of course , in society ; and have admire they , and there an end . I have never see a woman whose face impress I so much at first sight as the face of your friend , Miss Nowell . " 

 " I be very sorry for that . " 

 " but why , Belle ? " 

 " because the girl be a nobody less than nobody . there be an unpleasant kind of mystery about her birth . " 

 " how be that ? her uncle , Captain Sedgewick , seem to be a gentleman . " 

 " Captain Sedgewick be very well , but he be not her uncle ; he adopt she when she be a very little girl . " 

 " but who be her people , and how do she fall into his hand ? " 

 " I have never hear that . he be not very fond of talk about the subject . when we first come to know they , he tell we that Marian be only his adopt niece ; and he have never tell we any more than that . " 

 " she be the daughter of some friend , I suppose . they seem very much attach to each other . " 

 " yes , she be very fond of he , and he of she . she be an amiable girl ; I have nothing to say against she but " 

 " but what , Belle ? " 

 " I should not   like you to fall in love with she . " 

 " but I should , mamma ! " cry the damsel in scarlet stocking , who have absorb every word of the foregoing conversation . " I should like uncle Gil to love Marian just as I love she . she be the dear girl in the world . when we have a juvenile party last winter , it be Marian who dress the Christmas - tree every bit ; and she play the piano for we all the evening , do not   she , mamma ? " 

 " she be very good - natured , Lucy ; but you must not   talk nonsense ; and you ought not to listen when your uncle and I be talk . it be very rude . " 

 " but I can not   help hear you , mamma . " 

 they be at home by this time , within the ground of a handsome red - brick house of the early georgian era , which have be the property of the Listers ever since it be build . without , the garden be a picture of neatness and order ; within , everything be solid and comfortable : the furniture of a somewhat ponderous and explode fashion , but handsome withal , and brighten here and there by some concession to modern notion of elegance or ease a dainty little table for book , a luxurious arm - chair , and so on . 

 Martin Lister be a gentleman chiefly distinguish by good - nature , hospitable instinct , and an enthusiastic devotion to agriculture . there be very few thing in common between he and his brother - in - law the australian merchant , but they get on very well together for a short time . Gilbert Fenton pretend to be profoundly interested in the thrilling question of drainage , deep or superficial , and seem to enter unreservedly into every discussion of the late invention or improvement in agricultural machinery ; and in the mean time he really like the repose of the country , and appreciate the vary charm of landscape and atmosphere with a fervour unfelt by the man who have be bear and rear amidst those pastoral scene . 

 the two man smoke their cigar together in a quietly companionable spirit , stroll about the garden and farm , drop out a sentence now and then , and anon fall into a lazy reverie , each ponder upon his own affair Gilbert meditating transaction with foreign house , risky bargain with trader of doubtful solvency , or hazardous investment in stock , as the case might be ; the gentleman farmer ruminate upon the chance of a good harvest , or the probable value of his Scotch short - horn . 

 Mr. Lister have prefer lounging about the farm with a cigar in his mouth to attendance at church upon this particular Sunday evening . he have finish his customary round of inspection by this time , and be sit by one of the open window of the drawing - room , with his body in one luxurious chair , and his leg extend upon another , deep in the study of the Gardener 's Chronicle , which he fling aside upon the appearance of his family . 

 " well , Toddlekins , " he cry to the little girl , " I hope you be very attentive to the sermon ; listen for two , and make up for your lazy dad . that be a vicarious kind of devotion that ought to be permit occasionally to a hard - work fellow like I . I be glad you have   come back to give we some tea , Belle . do not   go upstairs ; let Susan carry up your bonnet and shawl . it be nearly nine o'clock . toddlekin want her tea before she go to bed . " 

 " Lucy have have her tea in the nursery , " say Mrs. Lister , as she take her seat before the cup and saucer . 

 " but she will have some more with papa , " reply Martin , who have an amiable knack of spoil his child . there be only two this bright fair - haired Lucy , aged nine , and a sturdy boy of seven . 

 they sip their tea , and talk a little about who have be at church and who have not be , and the room be fill with that atmosphere of dulness which seem to prevail in such household upon a summer Sunday evening ; a kind of palpable emptiness which set a man speculate how many year he may have to live , and how many such sunday he may have to spend . he be apt to end by wonder a little whether life be really worth the trouble it cost , when almost the good thing that can come of it be a condition of comfortable torpor like this . 

 Gilbert Fenton put down his cup and go over to one of the open window . it be nearly as dark as it be likely to be that midsummer night . a new moon be shin faintly in the clear evening sky ; and here and there a solitary star shine with a tremulous brightness . the shadow of the tree make spot of solemn darkness on the wide lawn before the window , and a warm faint sweetness come from the crowded flower - bed , where all the flower in this light be of one grayish silvery hue . 

 " it be almost too warm an evening for the house , " say Gilbert ; " I think I will take a stroll . " 

 " I would come with you , old fellow , but I have   be all round the farm , and I be dead beat , " say good - natured Martin Lister . 

 " thank , Martin ; I would not   think of disturb you . you look the picture of comfort in that easy - chair . I shall only stay long enough to finish a cigar . " 

 he walk slowly across the lawn a noble stretch of level greensward with dark spread cedar and fine old beech scatter about it ; he walk slowly towards the gate , light his cigar as he go , and think . he be think of his past life , and of his future . what be it to be ? a dull hackneyed course of money - making , chequer only by the dreary vicissitude of trade , and brighten only by such selfish pleasure as constitute the recreation of a business man an occasional dinner at Blackwall or Richmond , a week 's shooting in the autumn , a little easy - go hunting in the winter , a hurried scamper over some of the beat continental road , or a fortnight at a german spa ? these have be his pleasure hitherto , and he have find life pleasant enough . perhaps he have be too busy to question the pleasantness of these thing . it be only now that he find himself away from the familiar arena of his daily life , with neither employment nor distraction , that he be able to look back upon his career deliberately , and ask himself whether it be one that he could go on live without weariness for the remainder of his day . 

 he have be at this time a little more than seven year in business . he have be breed - up with no expectation of ever have to take his place in the counting - house , have be educate at Eton and Oxford , and have be teach to anticipate a handsome fortune from his father . all these expectation have be disappoint by Mr. Fenton 's sudden death at a period of great commercial disturbance . the business be find in a state of entanglement that be very near insolvency ; and wise friend tell Gilbert Fenton that the only hope of come well out of these perplexity lay with himself . the business be too good to be sacrifice , and the business be all his father have leave behind he , with the exception of a houseful of handsome furniture , two or three carriage , and a couple of pair of horse , which be sell by auction within a few week of the funeral . 

 Gilbert Fenton take upon himself the management of the business . he have a clear comprehensive intellect , which adapt itself very easily to commerce . he put his shoulder to the wheel with a will , and work for the first three year of his business career as it be not give to many man to work in the course of their life . by that time the ship have be steer clear of all rock and quicksand , and ride the commercial water gallantly . Gilbert be not a rich man , but be in a fair way to become a rich man ; and the name of Fenton stand as high as in the palmy day of his father 's career . 

 his sister have fortunately marry Martin Lister some year before her father 's death , and have receive she dowry at the time of her marriage . Gilbert have only himself to work for . at first he have work for the sake of his dead father 's honour and repute ; later he fall into a groove , like other man , and work for the love of money - make not with any sordid love of money , but with that natural desire to accumulate which grow out of a business career . 

 to - night he be in an unusually thoughtful humour , and incline to weigh thing in the balance with a doubtfulness as to their value which be new to he . the complete idleness and emptiness of his life in the country have make he meditative . be it worth live , that monotonous business life of his ? would not the time soon come in which its dreariness would oppress he as the dulness of Lidford House have oppress he to - night ? his youth be fast go nay , have it not indeed go from he for ever ? have not youth leave he all at once when he begin his commercial career ? and the pleasure that have be fresh enough within the last few year be rapidly grow stale . he know the german spa , the pine - grove where the band play , the gambling - saloon and their company , by heart , though he have never stay more than a fortnight at any one of they . he have exhaust Brittany and the South of France in these rapid scamper ; skim the cream of their novelty , at any rate . he do not care very much for field - sport , and hunt and shoot in a jog - trot safe kind of way , with a view to the benefit of his health , which savour of old bachelorhood . and as for the rest of his pleasure the social rubber at his club , the Blackwall or Richmond dinner it seem only custom that make they agreeable . 

 " if I have go to the Bar , as I intend to do before my father 's death , I should have have an object in life , " he think , as he puff slowly at his cigar ; " but a commercial man have nothing to hope for in the way of fame nothing to work for except money . I have a good mind to sell the business , now that it be worth sell , and go in for the Bar after all , late as it be . " 

 he have think of this more than once ; but he know the fancy be a foolish one , and that his friend would laugh at he for his folly . 

 he be beyond the ground of Lidford House by this time , saunter onward in the fair summer night ; not indifferent to the calm loveliness of the scene around he , only conscious that there be some void within himself which these thing could not fill . he walk along the road by which he and his sister have come back from church , and turn into the lane at the end of which Captain Sedgewick have bid they good night . he have be down this lane before to - night , and know that it be one of the prettiest walk about Lidford ; so there be scarcely anything strange in the fact that he should choose this promenade for his evening saunter . 

 the rustic way , wide enough for a wagon , and with slop grassy bank , and tall straggle hedge , full of dog - rose and honeysuckle , lead towards a river a fair winding stream , which be one of the glory of Lidford . a little before one come to the river , the lane open upon a green , where there be a mill , and a miller 's cottage , a rustic inn , and two or three other house of more genteel pretension . 

 Gilbert Fenton wonder which of these be the habitation of Captain Sedgewick , conclude that the half - pay officer and his niece must need live in one of they . he reconnoitre they as he go by the low garden - fence , over which he could see the pretty lawn and flower - bed , with cluster of evergreen here and there , and a wealth of rose and seringa . one of they , the prettiest and most seclude , be also the small ; a low white - walled cottage , with casement window above , and old - fashioned bow - window below , and a porch overgrow with rose . the house lie back a little way from the green ; and there be a tiny brook run beside the holly hedge that bound the garden , span by a little rustic bridge before the gate . 

 pause just beside this bridge , Mr. Fenton hear the joyous barking of a dog , and catch a brief glimpse of a light muslin dress flit across the little lawn at one side of the cottage while he be wonder about the owner of this dress , the noisy dog come rush towards the gate , and in the next moment a girlish figure appear in the wind path that go in and out among the flower - bed . 

 Gilbert Fenton know that tall slim figure very well . he have guess rightly , and this low white - walled cottage be really Captain Sedgewick 's . it seem to he as if a kind of instinct bring he to that precise spot . 

 Miss Nowell come to the gate , and stand there look out , with a skye terrier in her arm . Gilbert draw back a little , and fling his cigar into the brook . she have not see he yet . her look be wander far away across the green , as if in search of some one . 

 Gilbert Fenton stand quite still watch she . she look even pretty without her bonnet than she have look in the church , he think : the rich dark - brown hair gather in a great knot at the back of the graceful head ; the perfect throat circle by a broad black ribbon , from which there hang an old - fashioned gold cross ; the youthful figure set - off by the girlish muslin dress , so become in its utter simplicity . 

 he could not stand there for ever look at she , pleasant as it might be to he to contemplate the lovely face ; so he make a little movement at last , and come a few step near to the gate . 

 " good - evening once more , Miss Nowell , " he say . 

 she look up at he , surprise by his sudden appearance , but in no manner embarrassed . 

 " good - evening , Mr. Fenton . I do not see you till this moment . I be look for my uncle . he have go out for a little stroll while he smoke his cigar , and I expect he home every minute . " 

 " I have be indulge in a solitary cigar myself , " answer Gilbert . " one be apt to be inspire with an antipathy to the house on this kind of evening . I leave the Listers yawn over their tea - cup , and come out for a ramble . the aspect of the lane at which we part company this evening tempt I down this way . what a pretty house you have ! do you know I guess that it be yours before I see you . " 

 " indeed ! you must have quite a talent for guess . " 

 " not in a general way ; but there be a fitness in thing . yes , I feel sure that this be your house . " 

 " I be glad you like it , " she answer simply . " Uncle George and I be very fond of it . but it must seem a poor little place to you after Lidford House . " 

 " Lidford House be spacious , and comfortable , and commonplace . one could hardly associate the faint touch of romance with such a place . but about this one might fancy anything . ah , here be your uncle , I see . " 

 Captain Sedgewick come towards they , surprised at see Mr. Fenton , with whom he shake hand again very cordially , and who repeat his story about the impossibility of endure to stop in the house on such a night . 

 the Captain insist on his go in - door with they , however ; and he exhibit no disinclination to linger in the cottage drawing - room , though it be only about a fourth of the size of that at Lidford House . it look a very pretty room in the lamplight , with quaint old - fashioned furniture , the fresh and most delicate chintz hanging and covering of chair and sofa , and some valuable old china here and there . 

 Captain Sedgewick have plenty to say for himself , and be pleased to find an intelligent stranger to converse with . his health have fail he long ago , and he have turn his back upon the world of action for ever ; but he be as cheerful and hopeful as if his existence have be the gay possible to man . 

 of course they talk a little of military matter , the change that have come about in the service none of they change for the well , accord to the Captain , who be a little behind the time in his way of look at these thing . 

 he order in a bottle of claret for his guest , and Gilbert Fenton find himself seat by the open bow - window look out at the dusky lawn and drink his wine , as much at home as if he have be a visitor at the Captain 's for the last ten year . Marian Nowell sit on the other side of the room , with the lamplight shin on her dark - brown hair , and with that much - to - be - envy skye terrier on her lap . Gilbert glance across at she every now and then while he be talk with her uncle ; and by and by she come over to the window and stand behind the Captain 's chair , with her clasp hand rest upon his shoulder . 

 Gilbert contrive to engage she in the conversation presently . he find she quite able to discuss the airy topic which he start the last new volume of poem , the picture of the year , and so on . there be nothing awkward or provincial in her manner ; and if she do not say anything particularly brilliant , there be good sense in all her remark , and she have a bright animate way of speak that be very charming . 

 she have live a life of peculiar seclusion , rarely go beyond the village of Lidford , and have contrive to find perfect happiness in that simple existence . the Captain tell Mr. Fenton this in the course of their talk . 

 " I have not be able to afford so much as a visit to London for my darling , " he say ; " but I do not know that she be any the bad for her ignorance of the great world . the grand point be that she should be happy , and I thank God that she have be happy hitherto . " 

 " I should be very ungrateful if I be not , uncle George , " the girl say in a half whisper . 

 Captain Sedgewick give a thoughtful sigh , and be silent for a little while after this ; and then the talk go on again until the clock upon the chimney - piece strike the half - hour after ten , and Gilbert Fenton rise to say good - night . " I have stay a most unconscionable time , I fear , " he say ; " but I have really no idea it be so late . " 

 " pray , do not   hurry away , " reply the Captain . " you ought to help I to finish that bottle . marian and I be not the early people in Lidford . " 

 Gilbert would have have no objection to loiter away another half - hour in the bow - window , talk politic with the Captain , or light literature with Miss Nowell , but he know that his prolonged absence must have already cause some amount of wonder at Lidford House ; so he hold firmly to his good - night , shake hand with his new friend , hold Marian Nowell 's soft slender hand in his for the first time , and wonder at the strange magic of her touch , and then go out into the dreamy atmosphere of the summer night a change creature . 

 " be this love at first sight ? " he ask himself , as he walk homeward along the rustic lane , where dog - rose and the starry flower of the wild convolvulus gleam whitely in the uncertain light . " be it ? I should have be the last of man to believe such a thing possible yesterday ; and yet to - night I feel as if that girl be destine to be the rule influence of my future life . why be it ? because she be lovely ? surely not . surely I be not so weak a fool as to be catch by a beautiful face ! and yet what else do I know of she ? absolutely nothing . she may be the shallow of living creature the most selfish , the false , the basest . no ; I do not believe she could ever be false or unworthy . there be something noble in her face something more than mere beauty . Heaven know , I have see enough of that in my time . I could scarcely be so childish as to be bewitch by a pair of gray eye and a rosy mouth ; there must be something more . and , after all , this be most likely a pass fancy , bear out of the utter idleness and dulness of this place . I shall go back to London in a week or two , and forget Marian Nowell . Marian Nowell ! " 

 he repeat the name with unspeakable tenderness in his tone a deep feeling than would have seem natural to a pass fancy . it be more like a symptom of sicken for life 's great fever . 

 it be close upon eleven when he make his appearance in his sister 's drawing - room , where Martin Lister be enjoy a comfortable nap , while his wife stifle her yawn over a mild theological treatise . 

 he have to listen to a good deal of wonderment about the length of his absence , and be fain to confess to an accidental encounter with Captain Sedgewick , which have necessitate his go into the cottage . 

 " why , what could have take you that way , Gilbert ? " 

 " a truant fancy , I suppose , my dear . it be as good a way as any other . " 

 Mrs. Lister sigh , and shake her head doubtfully . " what fool you man be , " she say , " about a pretty face ! " " include Martin , Belle , when he fall in love with your fair self ? " 

 " Martin do not stare I out of countenance in church , sir . but you have almost keep we wait for prayer . " 

 the servant come file in . Martin Lister wake with a start , and Gilbert Fenton kneel down among his sister 's household to make his evening orison . but his thought be not easily to be fix that night . they wander very wide of that simple family prayer , and make themselves into a vision of the future , in which he see his life change and brighten by the companionship of a fair young wife . 

 CHAPTER II 

 MARIAN 'S STORY 


 the day pass , and there be no more dulness or emptiness for Gilbert Fenton in his life at Lidford . he go every day to the white - walled cottage on the green . it be easy enough to find some fresh excuse for each visit a book or a piece of music which he have recommend to Miss Nowell , and have procure from London for she , or something of an equally frivolous character . the Captain be always cordial , always pleased to see he . his visit be generally make in the evening ; and it be his delight to linger over the pretty little round table by the bow - window , drink tea dispense by Marian . the bright home - like room , the lovely face turn so trustingly to his ; these be the thing which make that fair vision of the future that haunt he so often now . he fancy himself the master of some pretty villa in the suburb at Kingston or Twickenham , perhaps with a garden slop down to the water 's edge , a lawn on which he and his wife and some choose friend might sit after dinner in the long summer evening , sip their claret or their tea , as the case might be , and watch the last rosy glow of the sunset fade and die upon the river . he fancy himself with this girl for his wife , and the delight of go back from the dull dryasdust labour of his city life to a home in which she would bid he welcome . he behave with a due amount of caution , and do not give the young lady any reason to suspect the state of the case yet awhile . Marian be perfectly devoid of coquetry , and have no idea that this gentleman 's constant presence at the cottage could have any reference to herself . he like her uncle ; what more natural than that he should like that gallant soldier , whom Marian adore as the first of mankind ? and it be out of his liking for the Captain that he come so often . 

 the Captain , however , have not be slow to discover the real state of affair , and the discovery have give he unqualified satisfaction . for a long time his quiet contentment in this pleasant , simple , easy - go life have be cloud by anxious thought about Marian 's future . his death should that event happen before she marry must need leave her utterly destitute . the little property from which his income be derive be not within his power to bequeath . it would pass , upon his death , to one of his nephew . the furniture of the cottage might realize a few hundred , which would most likely be , for the great part , absorb by the debt of the year and the expense of his funeral . altogether , the outlook be a dreary one , and the Captain have suffer many a sharp pang in brood over it . lovely and attractive as Marian be , the chance of an advantageous marriage be not many for she in such a place as Lidford . it be natural , therefore , that Captain Sedgewick should welcome the advent of such a man as Gilbert Fenton a man of good position and ample mean ; a thoroughly unaffected and agreeable fellow into the bargain , and quite handsome enough to win any woman 's heart , the Captain think . he watch the two young people together , after the notion of this thing come into his mind , and about the sentiment of one of they he feel no shadow of doubt . he be not quite so clear about the feeling of the other . there be a perfect frankness and ease about Marian that seem scarcely compatible with the growth of that tender passion which generally reveal itself by a certain amount of reserve , and be more eloquent in silence than in speech . Marian seem always pleased to see Gilbert , always interested in his society ; but she do not seem more than this , and the Captain be sorely perplexed . 

 there be a dinner - party at Lidford House during the second week of Gilbert 's acquaintance with these new friend , and Captain Sedgewick and his adopt niece be invite . 

 " they be pleasant people to have at a dinner - party , " Mrs. Lister say , when she discuss the invitation with her husband and brother ; ' so I suppose they may as well come , though I do not   want to encourage your folly , Gilbert . " 

 " my folly , as you be kind enough to call it , be not dependent on your encouragement , Belle . " 

 " then it be really a serious case , I suppose , " say Martin . 

 " I really admire Miss Nowell more than I ever admire any one before , if that be what you call a serious case , Martin . " 

 " rather like it , I think , " the other answer with a laugh . 

 the dinner be a very quiet business a couple of steady - go country gentleman , with their wife and daughter , a son or two more or less dashing and sportsmanlike in style , the rector and his wife , Captain Sedgewick and Miss Nowell . Gilbert have to take one of the portly matron in to dinner , and find himself place at some distance from Miss Nowell during the repast ; but he be able to make up for this afterwards , when he slip out of the dining - room some time before the rest of the gentleman , and find marian seat at the piano , play a dreamy reverie of Goria 's , while the other lady be gather in a little knot , discuss the last village scandal . 

 he go over to the piano and stand by she while she play , look fondly down at the graceful head , and the white hand glide gently over the key . he do not disturb she by much talk : it be quite enough happiness for he to stand there watch she as she play . later , when a couple of whist - table have be establish , and the brilliantly - light room have grow hot , these two sit together at one of the open window , look out at the moonlit lawn ; one of they supremely happy , and yet with a kind of undefined sense that this supreme happiness be a dangerous thing a thing that it would be wise to pluck out of his heart , and have do with . 

 " my holiday be very nearly over , Miss Nowell , " Gilbert Fenton say by and by . " I shall have to go back to London and the old commercial life , the letter - writing and interview - giving , and all that kind of thing . " 

 " your sister say you be very fond of the counting - house , Mr. Fenton , " she answer lightly . " I daresay , if you would only confess the truth , you be heartily tired of the country , and will be delighted to resume your business life . " 

 " I should never be tired of Lidford . " 

 " indeed ! and yet it be generally consider such a dull place . " 

 " it have not be so to I . it will always be a shin spot in my memory , different and distinct from all other place . " 

 she look up at he , wonder a little at his earnest tone , and their eye meet his full of tenderness , her only shy and surprised . it be not then that the word he have to speak could be speak , and he let the conversation drift into a general discussion of the merit of town or country life . but he be determined that the word should be speak very soon . 

 he go to the cottage next day , between three and four upon a drowsy summer afternoon , and be so fortunate as to find marian sit under one of the walnut - tree at the end of the garden read a novel , with her faithful skye terrier in attendance . he seat himself on a low garden - chair by her side , and take the book gently from her hand . 

 " I have come to spoil your afternoon 's amusement , " he say . " I have not many day more to spend in Lidford , you know , and I want to make the most of a short time . " 

 " the book be not particularly interesting , " Miss Nowell answer , laugh . " I will go and tell my uncle you be here . he be take an afternoon nap ; but I know he will be pleased to see you . " 

 " do not   tell he just yet , " say Mr. Fenton , detain she . " I have something to say to you this afternoon , something that it be wise to say at once , perhaps , though I have be willing enough to put off the hour of say it , as a man may well be when all his future life depend upon the issue of a few word . I think you must know what I mean , Miss Nowell . Marian , I think you can guess what be come . I tell you last night how sweet Lidford have be to I . " 

 " yes , " she say , with a bright inquire look in her eye . " but what have I to do with that ? " 

 " everything . it be you who have make the little country village my paradise . o Marian , tell I that it have not be a fool 's paradise ! my darling , I love you with all my heart and soul , with an honest man 's first and only love . promise that you will be my wife . " 

 he take the hand that lie loosely on her lap , and press it in both his own . she withdraw it gently , and sit look at he with a face that have grow suddenly pale . 

 " you do not know what you be ask , " she say ; " you can not know . Captain Sedgewick be not my uncle . he do not even know who my parent be . I be the most obscure creature in the world . " 

 " not one degree less dear to I because of that , Marian ; only the dearer . tell I , my darling , be there any hope for I ? " 

 " I never think " she falter ; " I have no idea " 

 " that to know you be to love you . my life and soul , I have love you from the hour I first see you in Lidford church . I be a doomed man from that moment , Marian . o my dearest , trust I , and it shall go hard if I do not make your future life a happy one . grant that I be ten year more than ten year your senior , that be a difference on the right side . I have fight the battle of life , and have conquer , and be strong enough to protect and shelter the woman I love . come , Marian , I be wait for a word of hope . " 

 " and do you really love I ? " she ask wonderingly . " it seem so strange after so short a time . " 

 " I love you from that first evening in the church , my dear . " 

 " I be very grateful to you , " she say slowly , " and I be proud I have reason to be proud of your preference . but I have know you such a short time . I be afraid to give you any promise . " 

 " Afraid of I , or of yourself , Marian ? " 

 " of myself . " 

 " in what way ? " 

 " I be only a foolish frivolous girl . you offer I so much more than I deserve in offer I your love like this . I scarcely know if I have a heart to give to any one . I know that I have never love anybody except my one friend and protector , my dear adopt uncle . " 

 " but you do not say that you can not love I , Marian . perhaps I have speak too soon , after all . it seem to I that I have know you for a lifetime ; but that be only a lover 's fancy . I seem almost a stranger to you , perhaps ? " 

 " almost , " she answer , look at he with clear truthful eye . 

 " that be rather hard upon I , my dear . but I can wait . you do not know how patient I can be . " 

 he begin to talk of indifferent subject after this , a little depressed and dishearten by the course the interview have take . he feel that he have be too precipitate . what be there in a fortnight 's intimacy to justify such a step , except to himself , with whom time have be measure by a different standard since he have know Marian Nowell ? he be angry with his own eagerness , which have bring upon he this semi - defeat . 

 happily Miss Nowell have not tell he that his case be hopeless , have not forbid he to approach the subject again ; nor have she exhibit any involuntary sign of aversion to he . surprise have appear the chief sentiment cause by his revelation . surprise be natural to such girlish inexperience ; and after surprise have pass away , more tender feeling might arise , a latent tenderness unsuspected hitherto . 

 " I think a woman can scarcely help return a man 's love , if he be only as thoroughly in earnest as I be , " Gilbert Fenton say to himself , as he sit under the walnut - tree try to talk pleasantly , and to ignore the serious conversation which have precede that careless talk . 

 he see the Captain alone next day , and tell he what have happen . George Sedgewick listen to he with profound attention and a grave anxious face . 

 " she do not   reject you ? " he say , when Gilbert have finish his story . 

 " not in plain word . but there be not much to indicate hope . and yet I cling to the fancy that she will come to love I in the end . to think otherwise would be utter misery to I . I can not tell you how dearly I love she , and how weak I be about this business . it seem contemptible for a man to talk about a broken heart ; but I shall carry an empty one to my grave unless I win Marian Nowell for my wife . " 

 " you shall win she ! " cry the Captain energetically . " you be a noble fellow , sir , and will make she an excellent husband . she will not be so foolish as to reject such a disinterested affection . besides , " he add , hesitate a little , " I have a very shrewd notion that all this apparent indifference be only shyness on my little girl 's part , and that she love you . " 

 " you believe that ! " cry Gilbert eagerly . 

 " it be only guesswork on my part , of course . I be an old bachelor , you see , and have have very little experience as to the sign and token of the tender passion . but I will sound my little girl by and by . she will be more ready to confess the truth to her old uncle than she would to you , perhaps . I think you have be a trifle hasty about this affair . there be so much in time and custom . " 

 " it be only a cold kind of love that grow out of custom , " Gilbert answer gloomily . " but I daresay you be right , and that it would have be well for I to have wait . " 

 " you may hope everything , if you can only be patient , " say the Captain . " I tell you frankly , that nothing would make I happy than to see my dear child marry to a good man . I have have many dreary thought about her future of late . I think you know that I have nothing to leave she . " 

 " I have never think of that . if she be destine to inherit all the wealth of the Rothschilds , she could be no dearer to I than she be . " 

 " ah , what a noble thing true love be ! and do you know that she be not really my niece only a poor waif that I adopt fourteen year ago ? " 

 " I have hear as much from her own lip . there be nothing , except some unworthiness in herself , that could make any change in my estimation of she . " 

 " unworthiness in herself ! you need never fear that . but I must tell you Marian 's story before this business go any far . will you come and smoke your cigar with I to - night ? she be go to drink tea at a neighbour 's , and we shall be alone . they be all fond of she , poor child . " 

 " I shall be very happy to come . and in the meantime , you will try and ascertain the real state of her feeling without distress she in any way ; and you will tell I the truth with all frankness , even if it be to be a deathblow to all my hope ? " 

 " even if it should be that . but I do not fear such a melancholy result . I think Marian be sensible enough to know the value of an honest man 's heart . " 

 Gilbert quit the Captain in a more hopeful spirit than that in which he have go to the cottage that day . it be only reasonable that this man should be the good judge of his niece 's feeling . 

 leave alone , George Sedgewick pace the room in a meditative mood , with his hand thrust deep into his trouser - pocket , and his gray head bend thoughtfully . 

 " she must like he , " he mutter to himself . " why should not she like he ? good - look , generous , clever , prosperous , well - connect , and over head and ear in love with she . such a marriage be the very thing I have be pray for . and without such a marriage , what would be her fate when I be go ? a drudge and dependent in some middle - class family perhaps tyrannise over and torment by a brood of vulgar child . " 

 Marian come in at the open window while he be still pace to and fro with a disturbed countenance . 

 " my dear uncle , what be the matter ? " she ask , go up to he and lay a caress hand upon his shoulder . " I know you never walk about like that unless you be worry by something . " 

 " I be not worried to - day , my love ; only a little perplexed , " answer the Captain , detain the caressing little hand , and plant himself face to face with his niece , in the full sunlight of the broad bow - window . " Marian , I think you and I have no secret from each other ? " 

 " secret , uncle George ! " 

 " yes , my dear . have not   you something pleasant to tell your old uncle something that a girl generally like tell ? you have a visitor yesterday afternoon while I be asleep . " 

 " Mr. Fenton . " 

 " Mr. Fenton . he have be here with I just now ; and I know that he ask you to be his wife . " 

 " he do , uncle George . " 

 " and you do not   refuse he , Marian ? " 

 " not positively , uncle George . he take I so much by surprise , you see ; and I really do not   know how to refuse any one ; but I think I ought to have make he understand more clearly that I mean no . " 

 " but why , my dear ? " 

 " because I be sure I do not   care about he as much as I ought to care . I like he very well , you know , and think he clever and agreeable , and all that kind of thing . " 

 " that will soon grow into a warm feeling , Marian ; at least I trust in God that it will do so . " 

 " why , dear uncle ? " 

 " because I have set my heart upon this marriage . o Marian , my love , I have never venture to speak to you about your future the day that must come when I be dead and go ; and you can never know how many anxious hour I have spend thinking of it . such a marriage as this would secure you happiness and prosperity in the year to come . " 

 she clung about he fondly , tell he she care little what might become of her life when he should be lose to she . that grief must need be the crown sorrow of her existence ; and it would matter nothing to she what might come afterwards . 

 " but my dear love , ' afterwards ' will make the great part of your life . we must consider these thing seriously , Marian . a good man 's affection be not to be throw away rashly . you have know Mr. Fenton a very short time ; and perhaps it be only natural you should think of he with comparative indifference . " 

 " I do not say I be indifferent to he , uncle George ; only that I do not love he as he seem to love I . it would be a kind of sin to accept so much and to give so little . " 

 " the love will come , marian ; I be sure that it will come . " 

 she shake her head playfully . 

 " what a darling match - make uncle it be ! " she say , and then kiss he and run away . 

 she think of Gilbert Fenton a good deal during the rest of that day ; think that it be a pleasant thing to be love so truly , and hop that she might always have he for her friend . when she go out to drink tea in the evening his image go with she ; and she find herself make involuntary comparison between a speciman of provincial youth whom she encounter at her friend 's house and Mr. Fenton , very much to the advantage of the australian merchant . 

 while Marian Nowell be away at this little social gathering , Captain Sedgewick and Gilbert Fenton sit under the walnut - tree smoke their cigar , with a bottle of claret on a little iron table before they . 

 " when I come back from India fourteen year ago on the sick - list , " begin the Captain , " I go down to Brighton , a place I have be fond of in my young day , to recruit . it be in the early spring , quite out of the fashionable season , and the town be very empty . my lodging be in a dull street at the extreme east , lead away from the sea , but within sight and sound of it . the solitude and quiet of the place suit I ; and I use to walk up and down the cliff in the dusk of evening enjoy the perfect loneliness of the scene . the house I live in be a comfortable one , keep by an elderly widow who be a pattern of neatness and propriety . there be no child ; for some time no other lodger ; and the place be as quiet as the grave . all this suit I very well . I want rest , and I be get it . 

 " I have be at Brighton about a month , when the drawing - room floor over my head be take by a lady , and her little girl of about five year old . I use to hear the child 's foot pattering about the room ; but she be not a noisy child by any mean ; and when I do happen to hear her voice , it have a very pleasant sound to I . the lady be an invalid , and be a good deal of trouble , my landlady take occasion to tell I , as she have no maid of her own . her name be Nowell . 

 " soon after this I encounter she on the cliff one afternoon with her little girl . the child and I have meet once or twice before in the hall ; and her recognition of I lead to a little friendly talk between I and the mother . she be a fragile delicate - look woman , who have once be very pretty , but whose beauty have for the most part be wear away , either by ill - health or trouble . she be very young , five - and - twenty at the utmost . she tell I that the little girl be her only child , and that her husband be away from England , but that she expect his return before long . 

 " after this we meet almost every afternoon ; and I begin to look out for these meeting , and our quiet talk upon the solitary cliff , as the pleasantest part of my day . there be a win grace about this Mrs. Nowell 's manner that I have never see in any other woman ; and I grow to be more interested in she than I care to confess to myself . it matter little now ; and I may freely own how weak I be in those day . 

 " I could see that she be very ill , and I do not need the ominous hint of the landlady , who have contrive to question Mrs. Nowell 's doctor , to inspire I with the dread that she might never recover . I think of she a great deal , and watch the fade light in her eye , and listen to the weaken tone of her voice , with a sense of trouble that seem utterly disproportionate to the occasion . I will not say that I love she ; neither the fact that she be another man 's wife , nor the fact that she be soon to die , be ever absent from my mind when I think of she . I will only say that she be more to I than any woman have ever be before , or have ever be since . it be the one sentimental episode of my life , and a very brief one . 

 " the week go by , and her husband do not come . I think the trouble and anxiety cause by his delay do a good deal towards hasten the inevitable end ; but she bear her grief very quietly , and never utter a complaint of he in my hearing . she pay her way regularly enough for a considerable time , and then all at once break down , and confess to the landlady that she have not a shilling more in the world . the woman be a hard creature , and tell she that if that be the case , she must find some other lodging , and immediately . I hear this , not from Mrs. Nowell , but from the landlady , who seem to consider her conduct thoroughly justify by the high code of moral . she be a lone unprotected woman , and how be she to pay her rent and taxis if her good floor be occupy by a non - pay tenant ? 

 " I be by no mean a rich man ; but I could not endure to think of that helpless die creature thrust out into the street ; and I tell my landlady that I would be answerable for Mrs. Nowell 's rent , and for the daily expense incur on her behalf . Mr. Nowell would in all probability appear in good time to relieve I from the responsibility , but in the mean while that poor soul upstairs be not to be distressed . I beg that she might know nothing of this undertaking on my part . 

 " it be not long after this when our daily meeting on the cliff come to an end . mild as the weather be by this time , Mrs. Nowell 's doctor have forbid she go out any long . I know that she have no maid to send out with the child , so I send the servant up to ask she if she would trust the little one for a daily walk with I . this she be very pleased to do , and Marian become my dear little companion every afternoon . she have take to I , as the phrase go , from the very first . she be the gentle , most engaging child I have ever meet with a little grave for her year , and tenderly thoughtful of other . 

 " one evening Mrs. Nowell send for I . I go up to the drawing - room immediately , and find she sit in an easy - chair prop up by pillow , and very much change for the bad since I have see she last . she tell I that she have discover the secret of my goodness to she , as she call it , from the landlady , and that she have send for I to thank I . 

 " ' I can give you nothing but thank and blessing , ' she say , ' for I be the most helpless creature in this world . I suppose my husband will come here before I die , and will relieve you from the risk you have take for I ; but he can never repay you for your goodness . ' 

 " I tell she to give herself no trouble on my account ; but I could not help say , that I think her husband have behave shamefully in not come to England to her long ere this . 

 " ' he know that you be ill , I suppose ? ' I say . 

 " ' o yes , he know that . I be ill when he send I home . we have be travel about the continent almost ever since our marriage . he marry I against his father 's will , and lose all chance of a great fortune by do so . I do not know how much he sacrifice at the time , or I should never have consent to his lose so much for my sake . I think the knowledge of what he have lose come between we very soon . I know that his love for I have grow weak as the year go by , and that I have be little well than a burden to he . I could never tell you how lonely my life have be in those great foreign city , where there seem such perpetual gaiety and pleasure . I think I must have die of the solitude and dulness the long dreary summer evening , the dismal winter day if it have not be for my darling child . she have be all the world to I . and , o God ! ' she cry , with a look of anguish that go to my heart , ' what will become of she when I be dead , and she be leave to the care of a selfish dissipate man ? ' 

 " ' you need never fear that she will be without one friend while I live , ' I say . ' little Marian be very dear to I , and I shall make it my business to watch over her career as well as I can . ' 

 " the poor soul clasp my hand , and press her feverish lip to it in a transport of gratitude . what a brute a man must have be who could neglect such a woman ! 

 " after this I go up to her room every evening , and read to she a little , and cheer she as well as I could ; but I believe her heart be break . the end come very suddenly at last . I have intend to question she about her husband 's family ; but the subject be a difficult one to approach , and I have put it off from day to day , hop that she might rally a little , and would be in a well condition to discuss business matter . 

 " she never do rally . I be with she when she die , and her last act be to draw her child towards she with her feeble arm and lie my hand upon the little one 's head , look up at I with sorrowful plead eye . she be quite speechless then , but I know what the look mean , and answer it . 

 " ' to the end of my life , my dear , ' I say , ' I shall love and cherish she to the end of my life . ' 

 " after this the child fall asleep in my arm as I sit by the bedside sharing the long melancholy watch with the landlady , who behave very well at this sorrowful time . we sit in the quiet room all night , the little one wrap in a shawl and nestle upon my breast . in the early summer morning Lucy Nowell die , very peacefully ; and I carry Marian down to the sofa in the parlour , and lay she there still asleep . she cry piteously for her mother when she awake , and I have to tell she that which it be so hard to tell a child . 

 " I write to Mr. Nowell at an address in Brussels which I find at the top of his last letter to his wife . no answer come . I write again , after a little while , with the same result ; and , in the mean time , the child have grow fonder of I and dearer to I every day . I have hire a nursemaid for she , and have take an upper room for her nursery ; but she spend the great part of her life with I , and I begin to fancy that Providence intend I should keep she with I for the rest of her day . she tell I , in her innocent childish way , that papa have never love she as her mamma do . he have be always out of door till very , very late at night . she have creep from her little bed sometimes when it be morning , quite light , and have find mamma in the sitting - room , with no fire , and the candle all burn out , wait for papa to come home . 

 " I put an advertisement , address to Mr. Percival Nowell , in the Times and in Galignani , for I feel that the child 's future might depend upon her father 's acknowledgment of she in the present ; but no reply come to these advertisement , and I settle in my own mind that this Nowell be a scoundrel , who have deliberately desert his wife and child . 

 " the possession of the poor creature who be go be of no great value . there be some rather handsome clothe and a small collection of jewelry some of it modern , the rest curious and old - fashioned . these latter article I keep religiously , believe they to be family relic . the clothe and the modern trinket I cause to be sell , and the small sum realise for they barely pay the expense of the funeral and grave . the arrear of rent and all other arrear fall upon I . I pay they , and then leave Brighton with the child and nurse . I be bear not twenty mile from this place , and I have a fancy for end my day in my native county ; so I come down to this part of the world , and look about I a little , live in farm - house lodging here and there , until I find this cottage to let one day , and decide upon settle at Lidford . and now you know the whole story of Marian 's adoption , Mr. Fenton . how happy we have be together , or what she have be to I since that time , I could never tell you . " 

 " the story do you credit , sir ; and I honour you for your goodness , " say Gilbert Fenton . 

 " Goodness , pshaw ! " cry the Captain , impetuously ; " it have be a mere matter of self - indulgence on my part . the child make herself necessary to I from the very first . I be a solitary man , a confirm bachelor , with every prospect of become a hard , selfish old fogey . Marian Nowell have be the sunshine of my life ! " 

 " you never make any farth discovery about Mr. Nowell ? " 

 " never . I have sometimes think , that I ought to have make some strong effort to place myself in communication with he . I have think this , especially when brood upon the uncertainty of my darling 's future . from the little Mrs. Nowell tell I about her marriage , I have reason to believe her husband 's father must have be a rich man . he might have soften towards his grandchild , in spite of his disapproval of the marriage . I sometimes think I ought to have seek out the grandfather . but , you see , it would have be uncommonly difficult to set about this , in my complete ignorance as to who or what he be . " 

 " very difficult . and if you have find he , the chance be that he would have set his face against the child . Marian Nowell will have no need to supplicate for protection from an indifferent father or a hard - hearted grandfather , if she will be my wife . 

 " Heaven grant that she may love you as you deserve to be love by she ! " Captain Sedgewick answer heartily . 

 he think it would be the good thing that could happen to his darling to become this young man 's wife , and he have a notion that a simple , inexperienced girl could scarcely help respond to the hope of such a lover . to his mind Gilbert Fenton seem eminently adapt to win a woman 's heart . he forget the fatality that belong to these thing , and that a man may have every good gift , and yet just miss the magic power to touch one woman 's heart . 

 CHAPTER III 

 ACCEPTED 


 Mr. Fenton linger another week at Lidford , with imminent peril to the safe conduct of affair at his office in Great St. Helens . he could not tear himself away just yet . he feel that he must have some more definite understanding of his position before he go back to London ; and in the meantime he ponder with a dangerous delight upon that sunny vision of a suburban villa to which Marian should welcome he when his day 's work be do . 

 he go every day to the cottage , and he bear himself in no manner like a reject lover . he be indeed very hopeful as to the issue of his wooing . he know that Marian Nowell 's heart be free , that there be no rival image to be displace before his own could reign there , and he think that it must go hard with he if he do not win her love . 

 so Marian see he every day , and have to listen to the Captain 's praise of he pretty frequently during his absence . and Captain Sedgewick 's talk about Gilbert Fenton generally close with a regretful sigh , the meaning of which have grow very clear to Marian . 

 she think about her uncle 's word and look and sigh a good deal in the quiet of her own room . what be there she would not do for the love of that dearest and noblest of man ? marry a man she dislike ? no , that be a sin from which the girl 's pure mind would have recoil instinctively . but she do like Gilbert Fenton love he perhaps though she have never confess as much to herself . 

 this calm friendship might really be love after all ; not quite such love as she have read of in novel and poem , where the passion be always render desperate by the oppose influence of adverse circumstance and unkind kindre ; but a tranquil sentiment , a dull , slow , smoulder fire , that need only some sudden wind of jealousy or misfortune to fan it into a flame . 

 she know that his society be pleasant to she , that she would miss he very much when he leave Lidford ; and when she try to fancy he reconcile to her rejection of he , and return to London to transfer his affection to some other woman , the thought be very obnoxious to she . he have not flatter she , he have be in no way slavish in his attention to she ; but he have surround she with a kind of atmosphere of love and admiration , the charm of which no girl thus belove for the first time in her life could be quite proof against . 

 thus the story end , as romance so begin generally do end . there come a summer twilight , when Gilbert Fenton find himself once more upon the dewy lawn under the walnut - tree alone with Marian Nowell . he repeat his appeal in warmer , fonder tone than before , and with a kind of imply certainty that the answer must be a favourable one . it be something like take the fortress by storm . he have his arm round her slim waist , his lip upon her brow , before she have time to consider what her answer ought to be . 

 " my darling , I can not live without you ! " he say , in a low passionate voice . " tell I that you love I . " 

 she disengage herself gently from his embrace , and stand a little way from he , with shy , downcast eyelid . 

 " I think I do , " she say slowly . 

 " that be quite enough , marian ! " cry Gilbert , joyously . " I know you be destine to be my wife . " 

 he draw her hand through his arm and take she back to the house , where the Captain be sit in his favourite arm - chair by the window , with a reading lamp on the little table by his side , and the Times newspaper in his hand . 

 " your niece have bring you a nephew , sir , " say Gilbert . 

 the Captain throw aside his paper , and stretch out both his hand to the young man . 

 " my dear boy , I can not tell you how happy this make I ! " he cry . " do not   I promise you that all would go well if you be patient ? my little girl be wise enough to know the value of a good man 's love . " 

 " I be very grateful , uncle George , " falter Marian , take shelter behind the Captain 's chair ; " only I do not   feel that I be worthy of so much thought . " 

 " nonsense , child ; not worthy ! you be the good girl in Christendom , and will make the bright and true wife that ever make a man 's home dear to he . " 

 the evening go on very happily after that : Marian at the piano , play plaintive dreamy melody with a tender expressive touch ; Gilbert sit close at hand , watch the face he love so dearly an evening in Paradise , as it seem to Mr. Fenton . he go homeward in the moonlight a little before eleven o'clock , think of his new happiness such perfect happiness , without a cloud . the bright suburban villa be no long an airy castle , perhaps never to be realize ; it be a delightful certainty . he begin to speculate as to the number of month that must need pass before he could make Marian his wife . there be no reason for delay . he be well - off , his own master , and it be only her will that could hinder the speedy realization of that sweet domestic dream which have haunt he lately . 

 he tell his sister what have happen next morning , when Martin Lister have leave the breakfast table to hold audience with his farm bailiff , and those two be together alone . he be a little tired of have his visit to the cottage criticise in Mrs. Lister 's somewhat supercilious manner , and be very glad to be able to announce that Marian Nowell be to be his wife . 

 " well , Gilbert , " exclaim the matron , after receive his tiding with tightly - close lip and a generally antagonistic demeanour , " I can only say , that if you must marry at all and I be sure I think you have quite settle down as a bachelor , with your excellent lodging in Wigmore Street , and every possible comfort in life I think you might have choose much well than this . of course , I do not   want to be rude or unpleasant ; but I can not help say , that I consider any man a fool who allow himself to be captivate by a pretty face . " 

 " I have find a great deal more than a pretty face to admire in Marian Nowell . " 

 " indeed ! can you name any other advantage which she possess ? " 

 " Amiability , good sense , and a pure and refined nature . " 

 " what warrant have you for all those thing ? mind , Gilbert , I like the girl well enough ; I have nothing to say against she ; but I can not help think it a most unfortunate match for you . " 

 " how unfortunate ? " 

 " the girl 's position be so very doubtful . " 

 " position ! " echo Gilbert impatiently . " that sort of talk be one of the consequence of live in such a place as Lidford . you talk about position , as if I be a prince of the blood - royal , whose marriage would be register in every almanac in the kingdom . " 

 " if she be really the Captain 's niece , it would be a different thing , " harp Mrs. Lister , without notice this contemptuous interruption ; " but to marry a girl about whose relation nobody know anything ! I suppose even you have not be tell who her father and mother be . " 

 " I know quite enough about they . Captain Sedgewick have be candour itself upon the subject . " 

 " and be the father and mother both dead ? " 

 " Miss Nowell 's mother have be dead many year . " 

 " and her father ? " 

 " Captain Sedgewick do not know whether he be dead or live . " 

 " ah ! " exclaim Mrs. Lister with a profound sigh ; " I should have think as much . and you be really go to marry a girl with this disreputable mystery about her belonging ? " 

 " there be nothing either disreputable or mysterious . People be sometimes lose sight of in this world . Mr. Nowell be a bad husband and an indifferent father , and Captain Sedgewick adopt his daughter ; that be all . " 

 " and no doubt , after you be marry , this Mr. Nowell will make his appearance some day , and be a burden upon you . " 

 " I be not afraid of that . and now , Belle , as this be a subject upon which we do not   seem very likely to agree , I think we have well drop it . I consider it only right to tell you of my engagement . " 

 on this his sister soften a little , and promise Gilbert that she would do she good to be kind to Miss Nowell . 

 " you will not   be marry for some time to come , of course , " she say . 

 " I do not   know about that , Belle . there be nothing to prevent a speedy marriage . " 

 " o , surely you will wait a twelvemonth , at least . you have know Marian Nowell such a short time . you ought to put she to the test in some manner before you make she your wife . " 

 " I have no occasion to put she to any kind of test . I have a most profound and perfect belief in her goodness . " 

 " why , Gilbert , this be utter infatuation about a girl whom you have only know a little more than three week ! " 

 it do seem difficult for a matter - of - fact , reasonable matron , whose romantic experience be thing of the remote past , to understand this sudden trust in , and all - absorb love for , an acquaintance of a brief summer holiday . but Gilbert Fenton believe implicitly in his own instinct , and be not to be shake . 

 he go back to town by the afternoon express that day , for he dare not delay his return any long . he go back regretfully enough to the dryasdust business life , after spend the great part of the morning under the walnut - tree in Captain Sedgewick 's garden , play with Fritz the skye terrier , and talk airy nonsense to Marian , while she sit in a garden - chair hemming silk handkerchief for her uncle , and look distractingly pretty in a print morning dress with tiny pink rosebud on a white ground , and a knot of pink ribbon fasten the dainty collar . he venture to talk a little about the future too ; paint , with all the enthusiasm of Claude Melnotte , and a great deal more sincerity , the home which he mean to create for she . 

 " you will have to come to town to choose our house , you know , Marian , " he say , after a glowing description of such a villa as never yet exist , except in the florid imagination of an auctioneer ; " I could never venture upon such an important step without you : apart from all sentimental consideration , a woman 's judgment be indispensable in these matter . the house might be perfection in every other point , and there might be no boiler , or no butler 's pantry , or no cupboard for broom on the landing , or some irremediable omission of that kind . yes , Marian , your uncle must bring you to town for a week or so of house - hunting , and soon . " 

 she look at he with a startled expression . 

 " soon ! " she repeat . 

 " yes , dear , very soon . there be nothing in the world to hinder our marriage . why should we delay long than to make all necessary arrangement ? I long so for my new home , Marian , I have never have a home in my life since I be a boy . " 

 " o Mr. Fenton Gilbert , " she pronounce his christian name shyly , and in obedience to his reproachful look , " remember how short a time we have know each other . it be much too soon to talk or think of marriage yet . I want you to have plenty of leisure to consider whether you really care for I , whether it be not   only a fancy that will die out when you go back to London . and we ought to have time to know each other very well , Gilbert , to be quite sure we be suit to one another . " 

 this seem an echo of his sister 's reasoning , and vex he a little . 

 " have you any fear that we shall not suit each other , Marian ? " he ask anxiously . 

 " I know that you be only too good for I , " she answer . upon which Gilbert hinder the hemming of the Captain 's handkerchief by stoop down to kiss the little hand at work upon they . and then the talk drift back to easy subject , and he do not again press that question as to the date of the marriage . 

 at last the time come for go to the station . he have arrange for Mr. Lister 's gig to call for he at the cottage , so that he might spend every possible moment with Marian . and at three o'clock the gig appear , drive by Martin Lister himself , and Gilbert be fain to say good - bye . his last linger backward glance show he the white figure under the walnut - trees , and a little hand wave farewell . 

 how empty and dreary his comfortable bachelor lodging seem to he that night when he have din , and sit by the open window smoke his solitary cigar , listen to the dismal street - noise , and the monotonous roll of ceaseless wheel yonder in Oxford - street ; not care to go out to his club , care still less for opera or theatre , or any of the old way whereby he have be will not to dispose of his evening ! 

 his mind be full of Marian Nowell . all that be grave and earnest in his nature give force to this his first love . he have have flirtation in the past , of course ; but they have be no more than flirtation , and at thirty his heart be as fresh and inexperienced as a boy 's . it please he to think of Marian 's lonely position . Better , a hundred time well , that she should be thus , than fetter by tie which might come between they and perfect union . the faithful and generous protector of her childhood would of necessity always claim her love ; but beyond this one affection , she would be Gilbert 's , and Gilbert 's only . there would be no mother , no sister , to absorb her time and distract her thought from her husband , perhaps prejudice she against he . domestic life for those two must need be free from all the petty jar , the overshadow cloud no big than a man 's hand , forerunner of temp , which Mr. Fenton have hear of in many household . 

 he be never weary of think about that life which be to be . everything else he think of be now consider only in relation to that one subject . he apply himself to business with a new ardour ; never before have he be so anxious to grow rich . 

 CHAPTER IV 

 JOHN SALTRAM 


 the office of Fenton and Co. in Great St. Helens be handsome , prosperous - looking premise , consist of two large outer room , where half - a - dozen indefatigable clerk sit upon high stool before ponderous mahogany desk , and write industriously all day long ; and an inner and small apartment , where there be a faded Turkey - carpet instead of the kamptulicon that cover the floor of the outer office , a couple of capacious , red - morocco - cover arm - chair , and a desk of substantial and somewhat legal design , on which Gilbert Fenton be will not to write the more important letter of the house . in all the office there be iron safe , which give one a notion of limitless wealth store away in the shape of bond and bill , if not actual gold and bank - note ; and upon all the wall there be colour and uncoloure engraving of ship frame and glaze , and catalogue of merchandise that have be sell , or be to be sell , hang loosely one on the other . besides these , there be a great many of those flimsy paper that record the state of thing on ' Change , hang here and there on the brass rail of the desk , from little hook in the wall , and in any other available spot . and in all the premise there be an air of business and prosperity , which seem to denote that Fenton and Co. be travel at a rapid pace on the high - road to fortune . 

 Gilbert Fenton sit in the inner office at noon one day about a week after his return from Lidford . he have come to business early that morning , have initial a good many account , and write half - a - dozen letter already , and have throw himself back in his easy - chair for a few minute ' idle musing musing upon that one sweet dream of his new existence , of course . from whatever point his thought start , they always drift into that channel . 

 while he be sit like this , with his hand in his pocket and his chair tilt upon its hind leg , the half - glass door open , and a gentleman come into the office a man a little over middle height , broad - shoulder , and powerfully build , with a naturally dark complexion , which have be tan still darker by sun and wind , black eye and heavy black eyebrow , a head a little bald at the top , and a face that might have be call almost ugly but for the look of intellectual power in the broad open forehead and the perfect modelling of the flexible sensitive mouth ; a remarkable face altogether , not easily to be forget by those who have once look upon it . 

 this man be John Saltram , the one intimate and choose friend of Gilbert Fenton 's youth and manhood . they have meet first at Oxford , and have seldom lose sight of each other since the old university day . they have travel a good deal together during the one idle year that have precede Gilbert 's sudden plunge into commerce . they have be up the Nile together in the course of these wandering ; and here , remote from all civilized aid , Gilbert have fall ill of a fever a long tedious business which bring he to the very point of death , and throughout which John Saltram have nurse he with a womanly tenderness and devotion that know no abatement . if this have be want to strengthen the tie between they which it be not it would have bring they close together . as it be , that dreary time of sickness and peril be only a memory which Gilbert Fenton keep in his heart of heart , never to grow less sacred to he until the end of life . 

 Mr. Saltram be a barrister , almost a briefless one at present , for his habit be desultory , not to say idle , and he have not take very kindly to the slow drudgery of the Bar . he have some money of his own , and add to his income by write for the press in a powerful trenchant manner , with a style that be like the stroke of a sledge - hammer . in spite of this literary work , for which he get very well pay , Mr. Saltram generally contrive to be in debt ; and there be few period of his life in which he be not engage more or less in the delicate operation of raise money by bill of accommodation . Habit have give he quite an artistic touch for this kind of thing , and he do his work fondly , like some enthusiastic horticulturist who give his anxious day to the bud forth of some new orchid or the production of a hitherto unobtainable tulip . it be doubtful whether money procure from any other source be ever half so sweet to this gentleman as the cash for which he pay sixty per cent to the Jews . with these proclivity he manage to rub on from year to year somehow , get about five hundred per annum in solid value out of an income of seven , and add a little annually to the rolling mass of debt which he have begin to accumulate while he be at Balliol . 

 " why , Jack , " cry Gilbert , start up from his reverie at the entrance of his friend , and greet he with a hearty handshaking , " this be an agreeable surprise ! I be ask for you at the Pnyx last night , and Joe Hawdon tell I you be away up the Danube he think , on a canoe expedition . " 

 " it be only under some utterly impossible dispensation that Joseph Hawdon will ever be right about anything . I have be on a walk expedition in Brittany , dear boy , alone , and have find myself very bad company . I start soon after you go to your sister 's , and only come back last night . that scoundrel Levison promise I seventy - five this afternoon ; but whether I shall get it out of he be a fact only know to himself and the power with which he hold communion . and be the rustic business pleasant , Gil ? do you take kindly to the syllabub and new milk , the summer sunrise over dewy field , the pretty dairy - maid , and prize pig , and daily inspection of the home - farm ? or do you find life rather dull down at Lidford ? I know the place well enough , and all the country round about there . I have stay at Heatherly with Sir David Forster more than once for the shooting season . a pleasant fellow Forster , in a dissipate good - for - nothing kind of way , always up to his eye in debt . do you happen to meet he while you be down there ? " 

 " no , I do not   think the lister know he . " 

 " so much the well for they ! it be a vice to know he . and you be not dull at Lidford ? " 

 " very far from it , Jack . I be happy there than I have ever be in my life before . " 

 " eh , Gil ! " cry John Saltram ; " that mean something more than a quiet fortnight with a married sister . come , old fellow , I have a vested right to a share in all your secret . " 

 " there be no secret , Jack . yes , I have fall in love , if that be what you mean , and be engage . " 

 " so soon ! that be rather quick work , be not   it , dear boy ? " 

 " I do not   think so . what be that the poet say ? ' if not an Adam at his birth , he be no love at all . ' my passion spring into life full - grown after an hour 's contemplation of a beautiful face in Lidford church . " 

 " who be the lady ? " 

 " o , her position be not worth speak of . she be the adopt niece of a half - pay captain an orphan , without money or connection . " 

 " Humph ! " mutter John Saltram with the privileged candour of friendship ; " not a very advantageous match for you , Gilbert , from a worldly point of view . " 

 " I have not consider the matter from that point of view . " 

 " and the lady be all that be charming , of course ? " 

 " to my mind , yes . " 

 " very young ? " 

 " Nineteen . " 

 " well , dear old follow , I wish you joy with all heartiness . you can afford to marry whom you please , and be very right to let inclination and not interest govern your choice . whenever I tie myself in the bondage of matrimony , it will be to a lady who can pay my debt and set I on my leg for life . whether such a one will ever consider my ugly face a fair equivalent for her specie , be an open question . you must introduce I to your future wife , Gilbert , on the first opportunity . I shall be very anxious to discover whether your marriage will be likely to put an end to our friendship . " 

 " there be no fear of that , Jack . that be a contingency never to arise . I have tell Marian a great deal about you already . she know that I owe my life to you , and she be prepared to value you as much as I do . " 

 " she be very good ; but all wife promise that kind of thing before marriage . and there be apt to come a day when the familiar bachelor friend fall under the domestic taboo , together with smoking in the drawing - room , brandy - and - soda , and other luxury of the old , easy - go , single life . " 

 " Marian be not very likely to prove a domestic tyrant . she be the gentle dear girl , and be very well use to bachelor habit in the person of her uncle . I do not   believe she will ever extinguish our cigar , Jack , even in the drawing - room . I look forward to the happy home that ever a man possess ; and it would be no home of mine if you be not welcome and honour in it . I hope we shall spend many a summer evening on the lawn , Jack , with a bottle of Pomard or St. Julien between we , watch the drowsy old angler in their punt , and the swift outrigger flash past in the twilight . I mean to find some snug little place by the river , you know , Saltram somewhere about Teddington , where the gardens slope down to the water 's edge . " 

 " very pleasant ! and you will make an admirable family man , Gil . you have none of the fault that render I ineligible for the married state . I think your Marian be a very fortunate girl . what be her surname , by the way ? " 

 " Nowell . " 

 " Marian Nowell a very pretty name ! when do you think of go back to Lidford ? " 

 " in about a month . my brother - in - law want I to go back to they for the 1st of September . " 

 " then I think I shall run down to Forster 's , and have a pop at the pheasant . it will give I an opportunity of be present to Miss Nowell . " 

 " I shall be very pleased to introduce you , old fellow . I know that you will admire she . " 

 " well , I be not a very warm admirer of the sex in general ; but I be sure to like your future wife , Gil , if it be only because you have choose she . " 

 " and your own affair , Jack how have they be go on ? " 

 " not very brightly . I be not a lucky individual , you know . destiny and I have be at odd ever since I be a schoolboy . " 

 " not in love yet , John ? " 

 " no , " the other answer , with rather a gloomy look . 

 he be sit on a corner of the ponderous desk in a lounging attitude , gaze meditatively at his boot , and hit one of they now and then with a cane he carry , in a restless kind of way . 

 " you see , the fact of the matter be , Gil , " he begin at last , " as I tell you just now , if ever I do marry , mercenary consideration be likely to be at the bottom of the business . I do not   mean to say that I would marry a woman I dislike , and take it out of she in ill - usage or neglect . I be not quite such a scoundrel as that . but if I have the luck to meet with a woman I could like , tolerably pretty and agreeable , and all that kind of thing , and weak enough to care for I a woman with a handsome fortune I should be a fool not to snap at such a chance . " 

 " I see , " exclaim Gilbert , " you have meet with such a woman . " 

 " I have . " 

 again the gloomy look come over the dark strongly - mark face , the thick black eyebrow contract in a frown , and the cane be strike impatiently against John Saltram 's boot . 

 " but you be not in love with she ; I see that in your face , Jack . you will think I a sentimental fool , I daresay , and fancy I look at thing in a new light now that I be down a pit myself ; but , for God 's sake , do not   marry a woman you can not   love . tolerably pretty and agreeable will not   do , Jack , that mean indifference on your part ; and , depend upon it , when a man and woman be tie together for life , there be only a short step from indifference to dislike . " 

 " no , Gilbert , it be not that , " answer the other , still moodily contemplative of his boot . " I really like the lady well enough love she , I daresay . I have not have much experience of the tender passion since I be jilt by an Oxford barmaid whom I would have marry , by Jove . but the truth be , the lady in question be not   free to marry just yet . there be a husband in the case a feeble old Anglo - Indian , who can not   live very long . do not   look so glum , old fellow ; there have be nothing wrong , not a word that all the world might not hear ; but there be sign and token by which a man , without any vanity and heaven know I have no justification for that may be sure a woman like he . in short , I believe that if Adela Branston be a widow , the course would lie clear before I , and I should have nothing to do but go in and win . and the stake will be worth win , I assure you . " 

 " but this Mr. Branston may live for an indefinite number of year , during which you will be waste your life on a shadow . " 

 " not very likely . poor old Branston come home from Calcutta a confirmed invalid , and I believe his sentence have be pronounce by all the doctor . in the mean time he make the good of life , have his good day and bad day , and entertain a great deal of company at a delightful place near Maidenhead with a garden slop to the river like that you be talk of just now , only on a very extensive scale . you know how often I have want you to run down there with I , and how there have be always something to prevent your going . " 

 " yes , I remember . rely upon it , I shall contrive to accept the next invitation , come what may . but I can not   say I like the idea of this prospective kind of courtship , or that I consider it quite worthy of you , Saltram . " 

 " my dear Gilbert , when a fellow be burden with debt and of a naturally idle disposition , he be apt to take rather a liberal view of such mean of advancement in life as may present themselves to he . but there be no prospective courtship nothing at all resemble a courtship in this case , believe I . Mrs. Branston know that I like and admire she . she know as much of almost every man who go to Rivercombe ; for there be plenty who will be dispose to go in against I for the prize by - and - by . but I think that she like I well than any one else , and that the chance will be all in my favour . from first to last there have not be a word speak between we which old Branston himself might not hear . as to Adela 's marrying again when he be go , he could scarcely be so fatuous as not to foresee the probability of that . " 

 " be she pretty ? " 

 " very pretty , in rather a childish way , with blue eye and fair hair . she be not my ideal among woman , but no man ever marry his ideal . the man who have swear by eye as black as a stormy midnight and raven hair generally unite himself to the most insipid thing in blonde , and the idolater of golden lock take to wife some frizzy - haired West Indian with an unmistakable dip of the tar - brush . when will you go down to Rivercombe ? " 

 " whenever you like . " 

 " the nabob be hospitality itself , and will be delighted to see you if he be to the fore when you go . I fancy there be some kind of regatta a race or two , at any rate on Saturday afternoon . will that suit you ? " 

 " very well indeed . " 

 " then we can meet at the station . there be a train down at 2.15 . but we be go to see something of each other in the meantime , I hope . I know that I be a sore hindrance to business at such an hour as this . will you dine with I at the Pnyx at seven to - night ? I shall be able to tell you how I get on with Levison . " 

 " with pleasure . " 

 and so they part Gilbert Fenton to return to his letter - writing , and to the reception of caller of a more commercial and profitable character ; John Saltram to loiter slowly through the street on his way to the money - lender 's office . 

 they din together very pleasantly that evening . Mr. Levison have prove accommodate for the nonce ; and John Saltram be in high spirit , almost boisterously gay , with the gaiety of a man for whom life be make up of swift transition from brightness to gloom , long interval of despondency , and brief glimpse of pleasure ; the reckless humour of a man with whom think always mean care , and whose soul have no high aspiration than to beguile the march of time by such evening as these . 

 they meet on the following Saturday at the great western terminus , John Saltram still in high spirit , and Gilbert Fenton quietly happy . that morning 's post have bring he his first letter from Marian an innocent girlish epistle , which be as delicious to Gilbert as if it have be the chef - d'oeuvre of a Sevignť . what could she say to he ? very little . the letter be full of gratitude for his thoughtfulness about she , for the pretty tribute of his love which he have send she , the book and music and ribbon and glove , in the purchase whereof he have find such a novel pleasure . it have be a common thing for he to execute such commission for his sister ; but it be quite a new sensation to he to discuss the colour of glove and ribbon , now that the trifle he choose be to give pleasure to Marian Nowell . he know every tint that harmonise or contrast well with that clear olive complexion the brilliant blue that give new brightness to the sparkle grey eye , the pink that cast warm light upon the firmly - mould throat and chin and he find a childish delight in these triviality . there be one ribbon he select for she at this time which he have strange reason to remember in the day to come a narrow blue ribbon , with tiny pink rosebud upon it , a daring mixture of the two colour . 

 he have the letter in the breast - pocket of his coat when he meet John Saltram at the station , and entertain that gentleman with certain passage from it as they speed down to Maidenhead . to which passage Mr. Saltram listen kindly , with a very vague notion of the writer . 

 " I be afraid she be rather a namby - pamby person , " he think , " with nothing but her beauty to recommend she . that wonderful gift of beauty have such power to bewitch the most sensible man upon occasion . " 

 they charter a fly at Maidenhead , and drive about a mile and a half along a pleasant road before they come to the gate of Rivercombe a low straggling house with verandah , over which trail a wealth of flower creeper , and innumerable window opening to the ground . the garden be perfection , not garden of yesterday , with only the prim splendour of modern horticulture to recommend they , but spread lawn , on which the deep springy turf have be grow a hundred year lawn make delicious in summer time by the cool umbrage of old forest - tree ; fertile rose - garden screen from the biting of adverse wind by tall hedge of holly and yew , the angle whereof be embellish by vas and peacock quaintly cut in the style of a bygone age ; and for chief glory of all , the bright blue river , which make the principal boundary of the place , wash the edge of the wide slop lawn , and make perpetual music on a summer day with its joyous ripple . 

 there be a good deal of company already scatter about the lawn when John Saltram and his friend be usher into the pretty drawing - room . the cheerful sound of croquet - ball come from a level stretch of grass visible from the window , and quite a little fleet of boat be jostle one another at the landing by the swiss boat - house . 

 Mrs. Branston come in from the garden to welcome they , look very pretty in a coquettish little white - chip hat with a scarlet feather , and a pale - gray silk dress loop up over an elaborately - flounce muslin petticoat . she be a slender little woman , with a brilliant complexion , sunny wave hair , and innocent blue eye ; the sort of woman whom a man would wish to shelter from all the storm of life , but whom he might scarcely care to choose for the companion of a perilous voyage . 

 she profess herself very much pleased to see Gilbert Fenton . 

 " I have hear so much of you from Mr. Saltram , " she say . " he be always praise you . I believe he care more for you than anyone else in the world . " 

 " I have not many people to care for , " answer John Saltram , " and Gilbert be a friend of long standing . " 

 a sentimental expression come over Mrs. Branston 's girlish face , and she give a little regretful sigh . 

 " I be sorry you will not see my husband to - day , " she say , after a brief pause . " it be one of his bad day . " 

 the two gentleman both express their regret upon this subject ; and then they go out to the lawn with Mrs. Branston , and join the group by the river - brink , who be wait for the race . here Gilbert find some pleasant people to talk to ; while Adela Branston and John Saltram stroll , as if by accident , to a seat a little way apart from the rest , and sit there talk in a confidential manner , which might not really constitute a flirtation , but which have rather that appearance to the eye of the ignorant observer . 

 the boat come flash by at last , and there be the usual excitement amongst the spectator ; but it seem to Gilbert that Mrs. Branston find more interest in John Saltram 's conversation than in the race . it be possible she have see too many such contest to care much for the result of this one . she scarcely look up as the boat shoot by , but sit with her little gloved hand clasp upon her knee , and her bright face turn towards John Saltram . 

 they all go into the house at about seven o'clock , after a good deal of croquet and flirtation , and find a free - and - easy kind of banquet , half tea , half luncheon , but very substantial after its kind , wait for they in the long low dining - room . Mrs. Branston be very popular as a hostess , and have a knack of bring pleasant people round her journalist and musical man , clever young painter who be begin to make their mark in the art - world , pretty girl who could sing or play well , or talk more or less brilliantly . against nonentity of all kind Adela Branston set her face , and have a polite way of drop people from whom she derive no amusement , plead in her pretty childish way that it be so much more pleasant for all party . that this mundane existence of our be not intend to be all pleasure , be an idea that never yet trouble Adela Branston 's mind . she have be pet and spoil by everyone about she from the beginning of her brief life , and have pass from the frivolous career of a school - girl to a position of wealth and independence as Michael Branston 's wife ; fully believe that , in make the sacrifice involve in marry a man forty year her senior , she earn the right to take her own pleasure , and to gratify every caprice of her infantile mind , for the remainder of her day . she be supremely selfish in an agreeable unconscious fashion , and consider herself a domestic martyr whenever she spend an hour in her husband 's sick - room , listen to his peevish account of his malady , or read a Times leader on the threatening aspect of thing in the City for the solace of his loneliness and pain . 

 the popping of cork sound merrily amidst the buzz of conversation , and great antique silver tankard of Badminton and Moselle cup be empty as by magic , none know how except the grave judicial - look butler , whose omniscient eye reign above the pleasant confusion of the scene . and after about an hour and a half waste in this agreeable indoor picnic , Mrs. Branston and her friend adjourn to the drawing - room , where the grand piano have be push into a conspicuous position , and where the musical business of the evening speedily begin . 

 it be very pleasant sit by the open window in the summer twilight , with no artificial light in the room , except the wax candle on the piano , listen to good music , and talk a little now and then in that subdued confidential tone to which music make such an agreeable accompaniment . 

 Adela Branston sit in the midst of a group in a wide bay window , and although John Saltram be stand near her chair , he do not this time engage the whole of her attention . Gilbert find himself seat next a very animate young lady , who rather bore he with her rapture about the music , and who seem to have assist at every morning and evening concert that have be give within the last two year . to any remoter period her memory do not extend , and she imply that she have be before that time in a chrysalis or non - existent condition . she tell Mr. Fenton , with an air of innocent wonder , that she have hear there be people live who remember the first appearance of Jenny Lind . 

 a little before ten o'clock there be a general movement for the rail , the great number of Mrs. Branston 's guest have come from town . there be a scarcity of fly at this juncture , so John Saltram and Gilbert Fenton walk back to the station in the moonlight . 

 " well , Gilbert , old fellow , what do you think of the lady ? " Mr. Saltram ask , when they be a little way beyond the gate of Rivercombe . 

 " I think she very pretty , Jack , and well yes upon the whole fascinating . but I do not   like the look of the thing altogether , and I fancy there be considerable bad taste in give party with an invalid husband upstairs . I be wonder how Mr. Branston like the noise of all that talk and laughter in the dining - room , or the music that come afterwards . " 

 " my dear fellow , old Branston delight in society . he be generally well enough to sit in the drawing - room and look on at his wife 's party . he do not   talk much on those occasion . indeed , I believe he be quite incapable of converse about anything except the rise and fall of indian stock , or the fluctuation in the value of indigo . and , you see , Adela marry he with the intention of enjoy her life . she confess as much sometimes with perfect candour . " 

 " I daresay she be very candid , and just as shallow , " say Gilbert Fenton , who be inclined to set his face against this entanglement of his friend 's . 

 " well yes , I suppose she be rather shallow . those pretty pleasant little woman generally be , I think . depth of feeling and force of mind be so apt to go along with blue spectacle and a rugged aspect . a woman 's prettiness must stand for something . there be so much real pleasure in the contemplation of a charming face , that a man have nee rescind a little in the way of mental qualification . and I do not think Adela Branston be without a heart . " 

 " you praise she very warmly . be you really in love with she , John ? " his friend ask seriously . 

 " no , Gilbert , upon my honour . I heartily wish I be . I wish I could give she more by - and - by , when death bring about her release from Michael Branston , than the kind of liking I feel for she . no , I be not in love with she ; but I think she like I ; and a man must be something bad than a brute if he be not grateful for a pretty woman 's regard . " 

 they say no more about Mrs. Branston . Gilbert have a strong distaste for the business ; but he do not care to take upon himself the office of mentor to a friend whose will he know to be much strong than his own , and to whose domination he have be apt to submit in most thing , as to the influence of a superior mind . it disappoint he a little to find that John Saltram be capable of make a mercenary marriage , capable even of the great baseness involve in the anticipation of a dead man 's shoe ; but his heart be not easily to be turn against the choose friend of his youth , and he be prompt in make excuse for the line of conduct he disapprove . 

 CHAPTER V 

 HALCYON day 


 it be still quite early in September when Gilbert Fenton go back to Lidford and take up his quarter once more in the airy chintz - curtain bedchamber set apart for he in his sister 's house . he have devote himself very resolutely to business during the interval that have go by since his last visit to that quiet country house ; but the time have seem very long to he , and he fancy himself a kind of martyr to the necessity of commerce . the aspect of his affair of late have not be quite free from unpleasantness . there be difficulty in the conduct of business in the Melbourne branch of the house , that branch which be under the charge of a cousin of Gilbert 's , about whose business capacitie the late Mr. Fenton have entertain the most exalted opinion . 

 the Melbourne trading have not of late do much credit to this gentleman 's commercial genius . he have put his trust in firm that have crumble to piece before the bill draw upon they come due , involve his cousin in considerable loss . Gilbert be rich enough to stand these loss , however ; and he reconcile himself to they as well he might , take care to send his australian partner imperative instruction for a more prudent system of trading in the future . 

 the uneasiness and vexation produce by this business be still upon he when he go down to Lidford ; but he rely upon Marian Nowell 's presence to dissipate all his care . 

 he do find himself perfectly happy in her society . he be trouble by no doubt as to her affection for he , no uncertainty as to the brightness of the day that be to come . her manner seem to he all that a man could wish in the future partner of his life . an innocent trustfulness in his superior judgment , a childlike submission to his will which Marian display upon all occasion , be alike flattering and delightful . nor do she ever appear to grow tired of that talk of their future which be so pleasant to her lover . there be no shadow of doubt upon her face when he speak of the serene happiness which they two be to find in an existence spend together . he be the first who have ever speak to she of these thing , and she listen to he with an utter simplicity and freshness of mind . 

 Time have reconcile Isabella Lister to her brother 's choice , and she now deign to smile upon the lover , very much to Gilbert 's satisfaction . he have be too proud to supplicate her good grace ; but he be pleased that his only sister should show herself gracious and affectionate to the girl he love so fondly . during this second visit of his , therefore , Marian come very often to Lidford House ; sometimes accompany by her uncle , sometimes alone ; and there be perfect harmony between the eld and young lady . 

 the partridge upon Martin Lister 's estate do not suffer much damage from his brother - in - law 's gun that autumn . Gilbert find it a great deal pleasanter to spend his morning dawdle in the little cottage drawing - room or under the walnut - tree with Marian , than to waste his noontide hour in the endeavour to fill a creditable game - bag . there be not very much to tell of the hour which those two spend together so happily . it be an innocent , frivolous , useless employment of time , and leave little trace behind it , except in the heart of one of those two . Gilbert wonder at himself when , in some sober interval of reflection , he happen to consider those idle morning , those tranquil uneventful afternoon and evening , remember what a devoted man of business he have once be , and how a few month ago he would have denounce such a life in another . 

 " well , " he say to himself , with a happy laugh , " a man can take this fever but once in his life , and it be only wise in he to surrender himself utterly to the divine delirium . I shall have no excuse for neglect business by - and - by , when my little wife and I be settle down together for the rest of our day . let I be her lover while I may . can I ever be less than her lover , I wonder ? will marriage , or custom , or the assurance that we belong to each other for the rest of our day , take the poetry out of our life ? I think not ; I think Marian must always be to I what she have seem to I from the very first something well and bright than the common thing of this life . " 

 Custom , which make marian Nowell dearer to Gilbert Fenton every day , have by this time familiarise she with his position as her future husband . she be no long surprised or distressed when he plead for a short engagement , and a speedy realization of that utopian home which they be to inhabit together . the knowledge of her uncle 's delight in this engagement of hers might have reconcile she to it , even if she have not love Gilbert Fenton . and she tell herself that she do love he ; or , more often put the matter in the form of a question , ask herself whether she could be so basely ungrateful as not to love one who regard she with such disinterested affection ? 

 it be settle finally , after a good deal of pleasant discussion , that the wedding should take place early in the come spring at late in April . even this seem a long delay to Gilbert ; but he submit to it as an inevitable concession to the superior instinct of his betrothed , which harmonise so well with Mrs. Lister 's idea of wisdom and propriety . there be the house to be secure , too , so that he might have a fitting home to which to take his darling when their honeymoon be over ; and as he have no female relation in London who could take the care of furnish this earthly paradise off his hand , he feel that the whole business must devolve upon himself , and could not be do without time . 

 Captain Sedgewick promise to bring Marian to town for a fortnight in October , in order that she might assist her lover in that delightful duty of house - hunting . she look forward to this visit with quite a childlike pleasure . her life at Lidford have be completely happy ; but it be a monotonous kind of happiness ; and the notion of go about London , even at the dull time of the year , be very delightful to she . 

 the weather happen to be especially fine that September . it be the bright month of the year , and the lover take long ramble together in the woodland road and lane about Lidford , sometimes alone , more often with the Captain , who be a very fair pedestrian , in spite of have have a bullet or two through his leg in the day go by . when the weather be too warm for walk , Gilbert borrow Martin Lister 's dog - cart , and drive they on long journey of exploration to remote village , or to the cheery little market - town ten mile away . 

 they all three set out for a walk one afternoon , when Gilbert have be about a fortnight at Lidford , with no particular destination , only bent on enjoy the lovely weather and the rustic beauty of woodland and meadow . the Captain choose their route , as he always do on these occasion , and under his guidance they follow the river - bank for some distance , and then turn aside into a wood in which Gilbert Fenton have never be before . he say so , with an expression of surprise at the beauty of the place , where the fern grow deep under giant oak and beech , and where the mossy ground dip suddenly down to a deep still pool which reflect the sunlit sky through a break in the dark foliage that shelter it . 

 " what , have you never be here ? " exclaim the Captain ; " then you have never see Heatherly , I suppose ? " 

 " never . by the way , be not that Sir David Forster 's place ? " ask Gilbert , remember John Saltram 's promise . 

 he have see very little more of his friend after that visit to Rivercombe , and have half forget Mr. Saltram 's talk of come down to this neighbourhood on purpose to be present to Marian . 

 " yes . it be something of a show - place , too ; and we think a good deal of it in these part . there be some fine Sir Joshuas among the family portrait , paint in the day when the Forsters be well off and of more importance in the county than they be now . and there be a few other good picture dutch interior , and some seascape by Bakhuysen . decidedly you ought to see Heatherly . shall we push on there this afternoon ? " 

 " be it far from here ? " 

 " not much more than a mile . this wood join the park , and there be a public right of way across the park to the Lidford road , so the gate be always open . we can not   waste our walk , and I know Sir David quite well enough to ask he to let you see the picture , if he should happen to be at home . " 

 " I should like it of all thing , " say Gilbert eagerly . " my friend John Saltram know this Sir David Forster , and he talk of be down here at this time : I forget all about it till you speak of Heatherly just now . I have a knack of forget thing now - a - day . " 

 " I wonder that you should forget anything connect with Mr. Saltram , Gilbert , " say Marian ; " that Mr. Saltram of whom you think so much . I can not tell you how anxious I be to see what kind of person he be ; not handsome you have confess as much as that . " 

 " yes , Marian , I admit the painful fact . there be people who call John Saltram ugly . but his face be not a common one ; it be a very picturesque kind of ugliness a face that Velasquez would have love to paint , I think . it be a rugged , strongly - mark countenance with a villanously dark complexion ; but the eye be very fine , the mouth perfection ; and there be a look of power in the face that , to my mind , be well than beauty . " 

 " and I think you own that Mr. Saltram be hardly the most agreeable person in the world . " 

 " well , no , he be not what one could well call an eminently agreeable person . and yet he exercise a good deal of influence over the man he know , without admit many of they to his friendship . he be very clever ; not a brilliant talker by any mean , except on rare occasion , when he choose to give full swing to his power ; he do not lay himself out for social success ; but he be a man who seem to know more of every subject than the man about he . I doubt if he will ever succeed at the Bar . he have so little perseverance or steadiness , and indulge in such an erratic , desultory mode of life ; but he have make his mark in literature already , and I think he might become a great man if he choose . whether he ever will choose be a doubtful question . " 

 " I be afraid he must be rather a dissipate , dangerous kind of person , " say Marian . 

 " well , yes , he be subject to occasional outbreak of dissipation . they do not   last long , and they seem to leave not the faint impression upon his herculean constitution ; but of course that sort of thing do more or less injury to a man 's mind , however comparatively harmless the form of his dissipation may be . there be very few man whom John Saltram can not drink under the table , and rise with a steady brain himself when the wassail be end ; yet I believe , in a general way , few man drink less than he do . at card he be equally strong ; a past - master in all game of skill ; and the play be apt to be rather high at one or two of the club he belong to . he have a wonderful power of self - restraint when he care to exert it ; will play six or seven hour every night for three week at a stretch , and then not touch a card for six month . poor old John , " say Gilbert Fenton , with a half - regretful sigh ; " under happy circumstance , he might be such a good man . " 

 " but I fear he be a dangerous friend for you , Gilbert , " exclaim Marian , horrify by this glimpse of bachelor life . 

 " no , darling , I have never share his wilder pleasure . there be a few choose spirit with whom he consort at such time . I believe this Sir David Forster be one of they . " 

 " Sir David have the reputation of lead rather a wild life in London , " say the Captain , " and of bring a dissipated set down here every autumn . thing have not go well with he . his wife , who be a very beautiful girl , and whom he passionately love , be kill by a fall from her horse a few month after the birth of her first child . the child die too , and the double loss ruin Sir David . he use to spend the great part of his life at Heatherly , and be a general favourite among the county people ; but since that time he have avoid the place , except during the shooting season . he have a hunting - box in the shire , and be a regular daredevil over a big country they tell I . " 

 they have reach the little gate opening from the wood into the park by this time . there be not much difference in the aspect of the sylvan scene upon the other side of the fence . Sir David 's domain have be a good deal neglect of late year , and the brushwood and bramble grow thick under the noble old tree . the timber have not yet suffer by its owner 's improvidence . the end of all thing must have come for Sir David before he would have consent to the spoliation of a place he fondly love , little as he have care to inhabit it since the day that shatter all that be bright and good in his life . 

 for some time Captain Sedgewick and his companion go along a footpath under the shelter of the tree , and then emerge upon a wide stretch of smooth turf , across which they command a perfect view of the principal front of the old house . it be a quadrangular building of the Elizabethan period , very plainly build , and with no special beauty to recommend it to the lover of the picturesque . whatever charm of form it may have possess in the past have be ruthlessly extirpate by the modernisation of the window , which be now all of one size and form a long gaunt range of unsheltered casement star blankly out upon the spectator . there be no flower - bed , no terrace walk , or graceful flight of step before the house ; only a bare grassplot , with a stiff line of tall elm on each side , and a wide dry moat divide it from the turf in the park . two lodge ponderous square brick building with very small window , each the exact counterpart of the other , and a marvel of substantial ugliness keep guard over a pair of tall iron gate , about six hundred yard apart , approach by stone bridge that span the moat . 

 Captain Sedgewick ring a bell hang by the side of one of these gate , whereat there arise a shrill peal that set the rook scream in the tall elm overhead . an elderly female appear in answer to this summon , and open the gate in a slow mechanical way , without the faint show of interest in the people about to enter , and look as if she would have admit a gang of obvious burglar with equal indifference . 

 " rather a hideous style of place , " say Gilbert , as they walk towards the house ; " but I think show - place , as a general rule , excel in ugliness . I daresay the owner of they find a dismal kind of satisfaction in consider the depressing influence their dreary pile of brick - and - mortar must exercise on the mind of stranger ; may be a sort of compensation for be oblige to live in such a gaol of a place . " 

 there be a clumsy low stone portico over the door , wide enough to admit a carriage ; and lounge upon a bench under this stony shelter they find a sleepy - look man - servant , who inform Captain Sedgewick that Sir David be at Heatherly , but that he be out shoot with his friend at this present moment . in his absence the man would be very happy to show the house to Captain Sedgewick and his party . 

 Gilbert Fenton ask about John Saltram . 

 yes , Mr. Saltram have arrive at Heatherly on Tuesday evening , two night ago . 

 they go over the state - room , and look at the picture , which be really as good as the Captain have represent they . the inspection occupy a little more than an hour , and they be ready to take their departure , when the sound of masculine voice resound loudly in the hall , and their conductor announce that Sir David and his friend have come in . 

 there be only two gentleman in the hall when they go into that spacious marble - paved chamber , where there be great log burn on the wide open hearth , in spite of the warmth of the September day . one of these two be Sir David Forster , a big man , with a light - brown beard and a florid complexion . the other be John Saltram , who sit in a lounging attitude on one of the deep window - seat examine his breech - loader . his back be turn towards the window , and the glare of the blaze log shine full upon his dark face with a strange rembrandt - like effect . 

 one glance tell Marian Nowell who this man be . that powerful face , with its unfathomable eye and thoughtful mouth , be not the countenance she have conjure up from the depth of her imagination when Gilbert Fenton have describe his friend ; yet she feel that this stranger lounge in the window be John Saltram , and no other . he rise , and set down his gun very quietly , and stand by the window wait while Captain Sedgewick introduce Gilbert to Sir David . then he come forward , shake hand with his friend , and be thereupon present to Marian and her uncle by Gilbert , who make these introduction with a kind of happy eagerness . 

 Sir David be full of friendliness and hospitality , and insist on keep they to show Gilbert and Miss Nowell some picture in the billiard - room and in his own private snuggery , apartment which be not show to ordinary visitor . 

 they stroll through these room in a leisurely way , Sir David make considerable pain to show Gilbert Fenton the gem of his collection , John Saltram act as cicerone to Marian . he be curious to discover what this girl be like , whether she have indeed only her beauty to recommend she , or whether she be in sober reality the perfect be Gilbert Fenton believe she to be . 

 she be very beautiful . the first brief look convince Mr. Saltram that upon this point at least her lover have indulge in no loverlike exaggeration . there be a singular charm in the face ; a high , more penetrate loveliness than mere perfection of feature ; a kind of beauty that would have be at once the delight and desperation of a painter so fit a subject for his brush , so utterly beyond the power of perfect reproduction , unless by one of those happy , almost accidental success which make the triumph of genius . 

 John Saltram watch Marian Nowell 's face thoughtfully as he talk to she , for the most part , about the picture which they be look at together . before their inspection of these art - treasure be end , he be fain to confess to himself that she be intelligent as well as beautiful . it be not that she have say anything particularly brilliant , or have show herself learn in the quality of the old dutch master ; but she possess that charming childlike capacity for receive information from a superior mind , and that perfect and rapid power of appreciate a clever man 's conversation , which be apt to seem so delightful to the sterner sex when exhibit by a pretty woman . at first she have be just a little shy and constrain in her talk with John Saltram . her lover 's account of this man have not inspire she with any exalt opinion of his character . she be rather inclined to look upon he as a person to be dread , a friend whose influence be dangerous at good , and who might prove the evil genius of Gilbert Fenton 's life . but whatever her opinion on this point might remain , her reserve soon melt before John Saltram 's clever talk and kindly conciliate manner . he lay himself out to please on this occasion , and it be very rarely he do that without succeed . 

 " I want you to think of I as a kind of brother , Miss Nowell , " he say in the course of their talk . " Gilbert and I have be something like brother for the last twelve year of our life , and it would be a hard thing , for one of we at least , if our friendship should ever be lessen . you shall find I discretion itself by - and - by , and you shall see that I can respect Gilbert 's altered position ; but I should not   like to lose he , and I do not   think you look capable of set your face against your husband 's old friend . " 

 Marian blush a little at this , remember that only an hour or two ago she have be think that this friendship be a perilous one for Gilbert , and that it would be well if John Saltram 's influence over he could be lessen somehow in the future . 

 " I do not   believe I should ever have the power to diminish Gilbert 's regard for you , Mr. Saltram , even be I inclined to do so , " she say . 

 " o yes , you would ; your power over he will be illimitable , depend upon it . but now I have see you , I think you will only use it wisely . " 

 Marian shake her head , laugh gaily . 

 " I be much more fitted to be rule than to rule , Mr. Saltram , " she say . " I be utterly inexperienced in the world , you know , and Mr. Fenton be my superior in every way . " 

 " your superior in year , I know , but in what else ? " 

 " in everything else . in intellect and judgment , as well as in knowledge of the world . you could never imagine what a quiet changeless life I have lead . " 

 " your intellect be so much the clear for that , I think . it have not be disturb by all the narrow petty influence of a life spend in what be call ' society . ' " 

 before they leave the house , Gilbert and the Captain be oblige to promise to dine at Heatherly next day , very much to the secret distaste of the former , who must thus lose an evening with Marian , but who be ashamed to reveal his hopeless condition by a persistent refusal . Captain Sedgewick beg John Saltram to choose an early day for dining at the cottage , and Gilbert give he a general invitation to Lidford House . 

 these matter be settle , they depart , accompany by Mr. Saltram , who propose to walk as far as the wood with they , and who extend his walk still far , only leave they at the gate of the Captain 's modest domain . the conversation be general throughout the way back ; and they all find plenty to talk about , as they loiter slowly on among the wave shadow of the tree flicker darkly on the wind path by which they go . Gilbert linger outside the gate after Marian and her uncle have go into the cottage he be so eager to hear his friend praise the girl he love . 

 " well , John ? " he ask . 

 " well , dear old boy , she be all that be beautiful and charming , and I can only congratulate you upon your choice . Miss Nowell 's perfection be a subject about which there can not be two opinion . " 

 " and you think she love I , Jack ? " 

 " do I think she love you ? why , surely , Gil , that be not a question upon which you want another man 's judgment ? " 

 " no , of course not , but one be never tired of receive the assurance of that fact . and you could see by her way of speak about I " 

 " she speak of you in the prettiest manner possible . she seem to consider you quite a superior being . " 

 " dear girl , she be so good and simple - hearted . do you know , Jack , I feel as if I could never be sufficiently grateful to Providence for my happiness in have win such an angel . " 

 " well , you certainly have reason to consider yourself a very lucky fellow ; but I doubt if any man ever deserve good fortune well than you do , Gilbert . and now , good - bye . it be get unconscionably late , and I shall scarcely get back in time to change my clothe for dinner . we spend all our evening in pious devotion to billiard , with a rubber or two , or a little lansquenet towards the small hour . do not   forget your engagement to - morrow ; good - bye . " 

 they have a very pleasant evening at Heatherly . Sir David 's guest at this time consist of a Major Foljambe , an elderly man who have see a good deal of service in India ; a Mr. Harker , who have be in the church , and have leave it in disgust as alike unsuited to his taste and capacity ; Mr. Windus Carr , a prosperous west - end solicitor , who have inherit a first - rate practice from his father , and who devote his talent to the enjoyment of life , leave his client to the care of his partner , a steady - go stout gentleman , with a bald head , and an inexhaustible capacity for business ; and last , but by no mean least , John Saltram , who possess more influence over David Forster than any one else in the world . 

 CHAPTER VI 

 SENTENCE of EXILE 


 after the dinner at Heatherly , John Saltram come very often to the cottage . he do not care much for the fellow who be stay with Sir David this year , he tell Gilbert . he know all Major Foljambe 's tiger story by heart , and have convict he of glare discrepancy in his description of the havoc he and his brother officer have make among the big game . Windus Carr be a conceited presume cad , who be always bore they with impossible account of his conquest among the fair sex ; and that poor Harker be an unmitigated fool , whose brain have run into his billiard - cue . this be the report which John Saltram give of his fellow - guest ; and he leave the shooting - party morning after morning to go out boat with Gilbert and Marian , or to idle away the sunny hour on the lawn listen to the talk of the two other , and drop in a word now and then in a sleepy way as he lie stretch on the grass near they , look up to the sky , with his arm cross above his head . 

 he call at Lidford House one day when Gilbert have tell he he should stay at home to write letter , and be duly present to the Listers , who make a little dinner - party in his honour a few day afterwards , to which Captain Sedgewick and Marian be invite a party which go off with more brightness and gaiety than be will not to distinguish the Lidford House entertainment . after this there be more boat long afternoon spend on the wind river , with occasional landing upon picturesque little island or woode bank , where there be the wild - flower Marian Nowell love and understand so well ; more idle morning in the cottage garden a happy innocent break in the common course of life , which seem almost as pleasant to John Saltram as to his friend . he have contrive to make himself popular with every one at Lidford , and be an especial favourite with Captain Sedgewick . 

 he seem so thoroughly happy amongst they , and display such a perfect sympathy with they in all thing , that Gilbert Fenton be take utterly by surprise by his abrupt departure , which happen one day without a word of warning . he have din at the cottage on the previous evening , and have be in his wildest , most reckless spirit that mood to which he be subject at rare interval , and in which he exercise a potent fascination over his companion . he have beguile the little party at the cottage into complete forgetfulness of the hour by his unwonted eloquence upon subject of a deep , high kind than it be his habit to speak about ; and then at the last moment , when the clock on the mantelpiece have strike twelve , he have suddenly seat himself at the piano , and sing they Moore 's " Farewell , but whenever you welcome the hour , " in tone that go straight to the heart of the listener . he have one of those rare sympathetic voice which move people to tear unawares , and before the song be end Marian be fairly overcome , and have make a hasty escape from the room ashamed of her emotion . 

 late as it be , Gilbert accompany his friend for a mile of his homeward route . he have secure a latch - key during his last visit to Lidford House , and could let himself in quietly of a night without entrench upon the regular habit of Mrs. Lister 's household . 

 once clear of the cottage , John Saltram 's gaiety vanish all in a moment , and give place to a moody silence which Gilbert be powerless to dissipate . 

 " be there anything amiss , Jack ? " he ask . " I know high spirit be not always a sign of inward contentment with you . be there anything wrong to - night ? " 

 " no . " 

 " be you sure of that ? " 

 " quite sure . I may be a little knock up perhaps ; that be all . " 

 no hint of his intend departure fall from he when they shake hand and wish each other good - night ; but early next morning a brief note be deliver to Mr. Fenton at his sister 's house to the follow effect : 

 " MY DEAR gilbert , I find myself oblige to leave this place for London at once , and have not time to thank anyone for the kindness I have receive during my stay . will you do the good to repair this omission on my part , and offer my warm expression of gratitude to Captain Sedgewick and Miss Nowell for their goodness to I ? pray apologise for I also to Mr. and Mrs. Lister for my inability to make my adieux in a more formal manner than this , a shortcoming which I hope to atone for on some future visit . tell Lister I shall be very pleased to see he if he will look I up at the Pnyx when he be next in town . 

 " ever your , JOHN SALTRAM . " 

 this be all . there be no explanation of the reason for this hurried journey , a strange omission between man who be on term of such perfect confidence as obtain with these two . Gilbert Fenton be not a little disturb by this unlooke - for event , fear that some kind of evil have befall his friend . 

 " his money matter may have fall into a desperate condition , " he think ; " or perhaps that woman that Mrs. Branston , be at the bottom of the business . " 

 he go to the cottage that morning as usual , but not with his accustomed feeling of unalloyed happiness . the serene heaven of his tranquil life be cloud a little by this strange conduct of John Saltram 's . it wound he to think that his old companion be keep a secret from he . 

 " I suppose it be because I lecture he a little about Mrs. Branston the other day , " he say to himself . " the business be connect with she in some way , I daresay , and poor Jack do not care to arouse my virtuous indignation . that come of take a high moral tone with one 's friend . he swallow the pill with a decent grace at the time , and shut one out of his confidence ever afterwards . " 

 Captain Sedgewick express himself much surprised and disappoint by Mr. Saltram 's departure . Marian say very little upon the subject . there seem nothing extraordinary to she in the fact that a gentleman should be summon to London by the claim of business . 

 Gilbert might have brood long upon the mystery involve in his friend 's conduct , but that evening 's post bring he trouble in the shape of bad news from Melbourne . his confidential clerk an old man who have be with his father for many year , and who know every intricacy of the business write he a very long letter , dwell upon the evil fortune which attend all their australian transaction of late , and hint at dishonesty and double - dealing on the part of Gilbert 's cousin , Astley Fenton , the local manager . 

 the letter be a very sensible one , calculate to arouse a careless man from a false sense of security . Gilbert be so much disturb by it , that he determine upon go back to London by the early fast train next morning . it be cut short his holiday only by a few day . he have mean to return at the beginning of the follow week , and he feel that he have already some reason to reproach himself for his neglect of business . 

 he leave Lidford happy in the thought that Captain Sedgewick and Marian be to come to London in October . the period of separation would be something less than a month . and after that ? well , he would of course spend Christmas at Lidford ; and he fancy how the holly and mistletoe , the church - decoration and carol - singing , and all the stereotype geniality of the season , thing that have seem trite and dreary to he since the day of his boyhood , would have a new significance and beauty for he when he and Marian keep the sacred festival together . and then how quickly would begin the new year , the year whose spring - tide would see they man and wife ! perhaps there be no period of this mortal life so truly happy as that in which all our thought be occupy in look forward to some great joy to come . whether the joy , when it do come , be ever so unqualified a delight as it seem in the distance , or whether it ever come at all , be question which we have all solve for ourselves somehow or other . to Gilbert Fenton these day - dream be bright and new , and he be trouble by no fear of their not be realize . 

 he go at his business with considerable ardour , and make a careful and detailed investigation of all affair connect with their Melbourne trading , assist throughout by Samuel Dwyer , the old clerk . the result of his examination convince he that his cousin have be play he false ; that the man with whom his pretend loss have be make be man of straw , and the transaction be shadow invent to cover his own embezzlement . it be a complicated business altogether ; and it be not until Gilbert Fenton have be engage upon it for more than a week , and have make search inquiry as to the status of the firm with which the suppose dealing have take place , that he be able to arrive at this conclusion . have at last make himself master of the real state of thing , as far as it be in any way possible to do so at that distance from the scene of action , Gilbert see that there be only one line of conduct open to he as a man of business . that be to go at once to Melbourne , investigate his cousin 's transaction on the spot , and take the management of the colonial house into his own hand . to do this would be a sore trial to he , for it would involve the postponement of his marriage . he could scarcely hope to do what he have to do in Melbourne and to get back to England before a later date than that which he have hop would be his wedding - day . yet to do anything less than this would be futile and foolish ; and it be possible that the future stability of his position be dependent upon his arrangement of these Melbourne difficulty . it be his home , the prosperity of his come life that he have to fight for ; and he tell himself that he must put aside all weakness , as he have do once before , when he turn away from the easy - go study and pleasure of young Oxford life to undertake a hand - to - hand fight with evil fortune . 

 he have conquer then , as he hop to conquer now , have an energetic nature , and a strong faith in man 's power to master fortune by honest work and patience . 

 there be no time lose after once his decision be arrive at . he begin to put his affair in order for departure immediately , and write to Marian within a few hour of make up his mind as to the necessity of this voyage . he tell she frankly all that have happen , that their fortune be at stake , and that it be his bounden duty to take this step , hard as it might seem to he . he could not leave England without see she once more , he say , recently as they have part , and brief as his leisure must need be . there be so many thing he would have to say to she on the eve of this cruel separation . 

 he go down to Lidford one evening when all the arrangement for his voyage be complete , and he have two clear day at his disposal before the vessel he be to go in left Liverpool . the Listers be very much surprised and shock when he tell they what he be go to do ; Mrs. Lister bitterly bewail the insecurity of all commercial position , and appear to consider her brother on the verge of bankruptcy . 

 he find a warm welcome at the cottage from the Captain , who heartily approve of the course he be take , and be full of hopefulness about the future . 

 " a few month more or less can make little difference , " he say , when Gilbert be lament the postponement of his wedding . " Marian will be quite safe in her old uncle 's care ; and I do not suppose either of you will love each other any the less for the delay . I have such perfect confidence in you , Gilbert , you see ; and it be such a happiness to I to know that my darling 's future be in the hand of a man I can so thoroughly trust . be you reduce to absolute poverty , with the battle of life to fight all over again , I would give you my dear girl without fear of the issue . I know you be of the stuff that be not to be beat ; and I believe that neither time nor circumstance could ever change your love for she . " 

 " you may believe that . every day make her dearer to I . I should be ashamed to tell you how bitterly I feel this parting , and what a desperate mental struggle I go through before I could make up my mind to go . " 

 Marian come into the room in the midst of this conversation . she be very pale , and her eye have a dull , heavy look . the bad news in Gilbert 's letter have distress she even more than he have anticipate . 

 " my darling , " he say tenderly , look down at the changed face , with her cold hand clasp in his own , " how ill you be look ! I fear I make my letter too dismal , and that it frighten you . " 

 " oh no , no . I be very sorry you should have this bad fortune , Gilbert , that be all . " 

 " there be nothing which I do not hope to repair , dear . the loss be not more than I can stand . all that I take to heart be the separation from you , Marian . " 

 " I be not worth so much regret , " she say , with her eye fix upon the ground , and her hand clasp and unclasp each other nervously . 

 " not worth so much regret , Marian ! " he exclaim . " you be all the world to I ; the beginning and end of my universe . " 

 she look a little bright by - and - by , when her lover have do his good to cheer she with hopeful talk , which cost he no small effort in the depressed state of his mind . the day go by very slowly , although it be the last which those two be to spend together until Gilbert Fenton 's return . it be a hopelessly wet day , with a perpetual drizzle rain and a leaden - gray sky ; weather which seem to harmonise well enough with the pervade gloom of Gilbert 's thought as he stand by the fire , lean against an angle of the mantelpiece , and watch Marian 's needle move monotonously in and out of the canvas . 

 the Captain , who lead an easy comfortable kind of life at all time , be apt to dispose of a good deal of his leisure in slumber upon such a day as this . he sit down in his own particular easy - chair , doze behind the shelter of a newspaper , and lull agreeably by the low sound of Gilbert and Marian 's conversation . 

 so the quiet hour go by , overshadow by the gloom of that approach separation . after dinner , when they have return to the drawing - room , and Captain Sedgewick have refresh his intellectual power with copious draught of strong tea , he begin to talk of Marian 's childhood , and the circumstance which have throw she into his hand . 

 " I do not   suppose my little girl ever show you her mother 's jewel - case , do she , Gilbert ? " he ask . 

 " never . " 

 " I think as much . it contain that old - fashioned jewelry I speak of family relic , which I have sometimes fancy might be of use to she , if ever her birthright be worth claim . but I doubt if that will ever happen now that so many year have go by , and there have be no endeavour to trace she . run and fetch the case , Marian . there be some of its content which Gilbert ought to see before he leave England paper which I intend to show he when I first tell he your mother 's story . " 

 Marian leave they , and come back in a few minute carry an old - fashioned ebony jewel - case , inlay with brass . she unlock it with a little key hanging to her watch - chain , and exhibit its content to Gilbert Fenton . there be some curious old ring , of no great value ; a seal - ring with a crest cut on a bloodstone a crest of that common kind of device which do not imply noble or ancient lineage on the part of the bearer thereof ; a necklace and earring of amethyst ; a gold bracelet with a miniature of a young man , whose handsome face have a hard disagreeable expression ; a locket contain grey hair , and have a date and the initial " M.G. " engrave on the massive plain gold case . 

 these be all the trinket . in a secret drawer there be a certificate of marriage between Percival Nowell , bachelor , gentleman , and Lucy Geoffry , spinster , at St. Pancras Church , London . the most interesting content of the jewel - case consist of a small packet of letter write by Percival Nowell to Lucy Geoffry before their marriage . 

 " I have read they carefully ever so many time , with the notion that they might throw some light upon Mr. and Mrs. Nowell 's antecedent , " say the Captain , as Gilbert hold these in his hand , disinclined to look at document of so private and sacred a character ; " but they tell very little . I fancy that Miss Geoffry be a governess in some family in London the envelope be miss , you see , so there be no evidence as to where she be live , except that it be in London and that she leave her employment to marry this Percival Nowell . you would like to read the letter yourself , I daresay , Gilbert . put they in your pocket , and look they over at your leisure when you get home . you can bring they back before you leave Lidford . " 

 Mr. Fenton glance at Marian to see if she have any objection to his read the letter . she be quite silent , look absently at the trinket lie in the tray before she . 

 " you do not   mind my read your father 's letter , Marian ? " he ask . 

 " not at all . only I think you will find they very uninteresting . " 

 " I be interested in everything that concern you . " 

 he put the paper in his pocket , and sit up for an hour in his room that night read Percival Nowell 's love letter . they reveal very little to he , except the unmitigated selfishness of the writer . that quality exhibit itself in every page . the lover have meet for the first time at the house of some Mr. Crosby , in whose family Miss Geoffry seem to be live ; and there be clandestine meeting speak of in the Regent 's Park , for which reason Gilbert suppose Mr. Crosby 's house must have be in that locality . there be break appointment , for which Miss Geoffry be bitterly reproach by her lover , who abuse the whole crosby household in a venomous manner for have keep she at home at these time . 

 " if you love I , as you pretend , Lucy , " Mr. Nowell write on one occasion , " you would speedily exchange this degrading slavery for liberty and happiness with I , and would be content to leave the future utterly in my hand , without question or fear . a really generous woman would do this . " 

 there be a good deal more to the same effect , and it seem as if the proposal of marriage come at last rather reluctantly ; but it do come , and be repeat , and urge in a very pressing manner ; while Lucy Geoffry to the last appear to have hang back , as if dread the result of that union . 

 the letter tell little of the writer 's circumstance or social status . whenever he allude to his father , it be with anger and contempt , and in a manner that imply some quarrel between they ; but there be nothing to indicate what kind of man the father be . 

 Gilbert Fenton take the packet back to the cottage next morning . he be to return to London that afternoon , and have only a few hour to spend with Marian . the day be dull and cold , but there be no rain ; and they walk together in the garden , where the leaf be begin to fall , and whence every appearance of summer seem to have vanish since Gilbert 's last visit . 

 for some time they be both rather silent , pace thoughtfully up and down the sheltered walk that bound the lawn . Gilbert find it impossible to put on an appearance of hopefulness on this last day . it be well wholly to give up the attempt , and resign himself to the gloom that brood over he , shut out the future . that airy castle of his the villa on the bank of the Thames seem to have fade and vanish altogether . he could not look beyond the australian journey to the happy time of his return . the hazard of time and distance bewilder he . he feel an unspeakable dread of the distance that be to divide he from Marian Nowell a dread that grow strong with every hour . he be destine to suffer a fresh pang before the moment of parting come . Marian turn to he by - and - by with an earnest anxious face , and say , 

 " Gilbert , there be something which I think I ought to say to you before you go away . " 

 " what be that , my darling ? " 

 " it be rather hard to say . I fear it will give you pain . I have be think about it for a long time . the thought have be a constant reproach to I . Gilbert , it would be well if we be both free ; well if you could leave England without any tie to weigh you down with anxiety when you be out yonder , and will have so much occasion for perfect freedom of mind . " 

 " Marian ! " 

 " o , pray , pray do not   think I ungrateful or unmindful of your goodness to I . I be only anxious for your happiness . I be not steady enough , or fix enough , in my mind . I be not worthy of all the thought and care you have give I . " 

 " Marian , have I do anything to forfeit your love ? " 

 " o no , no . " 

 " then why do you say these thing to I ? do you want to break my heart ? " 

 " would it break your heart if I be to recall my promise , Gilbert ? " 

 " yes , Marian , " he answer gravely , draw she suddenly to he , and look into her face with earnest scrutinise eye ; " but if you do not love I , if you can not love I and God know how happy I have be in the belief that I have win your love long ago let the word be speak . I will bear it , my dear , I will bear it . " 

 " o no , no , " she cry , shock by the dead whiteness of his face , and burst into tear . " I will try to be worthy of you . I will try to love you as you deserve to be love . it be only a fancy of mine that it would be well for you to be free from all thought of I . I think it would seem very hard to I to lose your love . I do not   think I could bear that , Gilbert . " 

 she look up at he with an appealing expression through her tear an innocent , half - childish look that go to his heart and he clasp she to his breast , believe that this proposal to set he free have be indeed nothing more than a girlish caprice . 

 " my dearest , my life be bind up with your love , " he say . " nothing can part we except your ceasing to love I . " 

 CHAPTER VII 

 " GOOD - BYE " 


 the hour for the final parting come at last , and Gilbert Fenton turn his back upon the little gate by which he have watch Marian Nowell stand upon that first summer Sunday evening which seal his destiny . 

 he leave Lidford weary at heart , weigh down by a depression he have vainly struggle against , and he brood over his trouble all the way back to town . it seem as if all the hope that have make life so sweet to he only a week ago have be sweep away . he could not look beyond that dreary australian exile ; he could not bring his thought to bear upon the time that be to come afterwards , and which need be no less bright because of this delay . 

 " she may die while I be away , " he think . " o God , if that be to happen ! if I be to come back and find she dead ! such thing have be ; and man and woman have bear they , and go on living . " 

 he have one more duty to perform before he leave England . he have to say good - bye to John Saltram , whom he have not see since they part that night at Lidford . he could not leave England without some kind of farewell to his old friend , and he have reserve this last evening for the duty . 

 he go to the Pnyx on the chance of find Saltram there , and fail in that , eat his solitary dinner in the coffee - room . the waiter tell he that Mr. Saltram have not be at the club for some week . Gilbert do not waste much time over his dinner , and go straight from the Pnyx to the Temple , where John Saltram have a second - floor in figtree - court . 

 Mr. Saltram be at home . it be his own sonorous voice which answer Gilbert 's knock , bid he enter with a muttered curse upon the interruption by way of addendum . the room into which Mr. Fenton go upon receive this unpromising invitation be in a state of chaotic confusion . an open portmanteau sprawl upon the floor , and a whole wardrobe of masculine garment seem to have be shoot at random on to the chair near it ; a dozen soda - water bottle , full and empty , be huddle in one corner ; a tea - tray totter on the extreme edge of a table heap with dusty book and paper ; and at a desk in the centre of the room , with a great paraffin lamp flare upon his face as he write , sit John Saltram , surround by fallen slip of copy , write as if to win a wager . 

 " who be it ? and what do you want ? " he ask in a husky voice , without look up from his paper or suspend the rapid progress of his pen . 

 " why , Jack , I do not   think I ever catch you so hard at work before . " 

 John Saltram drop his pen at the sound of his friend 's voice and get up . he give Gilbert his hand in a mechanical kind of way . 

 " no , I do not   generally go at it quite so hard ; but you know I have a knack of do thing against time . I have be give myself a spell of hard work in order to pick up a little cash for the child of Israel . " 

 he drop back into his chair , and Gilbert take one opposite he . the lamp shine full upon John Saltram 's face as he sit at his desk ; and after look at he for a moment by that vivid light , Gilbert Fenton give a cry of surprise . 

 " what be the matter , Gil ? " 

 " you be the matter . you be look as wear and haggard as if you have have a long illness since I see you last . I never remember you look so ill . this kind of thing will not   do , John . you would soon kill yourself at this rate . " 

 " not to be do , my dear fellow . I be the tough thing in creation . I have be sit up all night for the last week or so , and that do rather impair the freshness of one 's complexion ; but I assure you there be nothing so good for a man as a week or two of unbroken work . I have be do an exhaustive review of roman literature for one of the quarterly , and the subject involve a little more reading than I be quite prepared for . " 

 " and you have really not be ill ? " 

 " not in the least . I be never ill . " 

 he push aside his paper , and sit with his elbow on the desk and his head lean on his hand , wait for Gilbert to talk . he be evidently in one of those silent mood which be common to he at time . 

 Gilbert tell he of his Melbourne trouble , and of his immediate departure . the announcement rouse he from his absent humour . he drop his arm from the table suddenly , and sit look full at Gilbert with a very intent expression . 

 " this be strange news , " he say , " and it will cause the postponement of your marriage , I suppose ? " 

 " unhappily , yes ; that be unavoidable . hard line , be not   it , Jack ? " 

 " well , yes ; I daresay the separation seem rather a hardship ; but you be young enough to stand a few month ' delay . when do you sail ? " 

 " to - morrow . " 

 " so soon ? " 

 " yes . it be a case in which everything depend upon rapidity of action . I leave Liverpool to - morrow afternoon . I come up from Lidford to - day on purpose to spend a few farewell hour with you . and I have be think , Jack , that you might run down to Liverpool with I to - morrow , and see the last of I , eh , old fellow ? " 

 John Saltram hesitate , look doubtfully at his paper . 

 " it would be only a kind thing to do , Jack , and a wholesome change for yourself into the bargain . anything would be well for you than be shut up in these chamber another day . " 

 " well , Gilbert , I will go with you , " say Mr. Saltram presently with a kind of recklessness . " it be a small thing to do for friendship . yes , I will see you off , dear boy . egad , I wish I could go to Australia with you . I would , if it be not for my engagement with the child and sundry other creditor . I think a new country might do I good . but there be no use in talk about that . I be bind hand and foot to the old one . " 

 " that remind I of something I have to say to you , John . there must have be some reason for your leave Lidford in that sudden way the other day , and your note explain nothing . I think you and I have no secret from each other , it be scarcely fair to treat I like that . " 

 " the business be hardly worth explain , " answer the other moodily . " a bill that I have forget for the time fall due just then , and I hurry off to set thing straight . " 

 " let I help you somehow or other , Jack . " 

 " no , Gilbert ; I will never suffer you to become entangled in the labyrinth of my affair . you do not   know what a hopeless wilderness you would enter if you be desperate enough to attempt my rescue . I have be past redemption for the last ten year , ever since I leave Oxford . nothing but a rich marriage will ever set I straight ; and I sometimes doubt if that game be worth the candle , and whether it would not be well to make a clean sweep of my engagement , offer up my name to the execration of mankind and the fiery indignation of solvent journalist , who would find subject for sensation leader in my iniquity , emigrate , and turn bushranger . a wild free life in the wilderness must be a happy exchange for all the petty worry and perplexity of this cursed existence . " 

 " and how about Mrs. Branston , John ? by the way , I think that she might have have something to do with your sudden journey to London . " 

 " no ; she have nothing to do with it . I have not see she since I come back from Lidford . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " no . your lecture have a potent effect , you see , " say Mr. Saltram , with something of a sneer . " you have almost cure I of that passion . " 

 " my opinion would have very little influence if you be far go , John . the fact be , Mrs. Branston , pretty and agreeable as she may be , be not the sort of woman to acquire any strong hold upon you . " 

 " you think not ? " 

 " I be sure of it . " 

 after this John Saltram become more expansive . they sit together until late in the night , talk chiefly of the past , old friend , and half - forget day ; recall the scene through which they have travel together with a pensive tenderness , and dwell regretfully upon that careless bygone time when life be fresh for both of they , and the future seem to lie across the straight , easy high - road to reputation and happiness . 

 Gilbert speak of that perilous illness of his in Egypt , the fever in which he have be give over by every one , and only save at last by the exemplary care and devotion of his friend . John Saltram have a profound objection to this thing be talk about , and try immediately to change the drift of the conversation ; but to - night Gilbert be not to be stop . 

 " you refuse the help of my purse , Jack , " he say , " and forget that I owe you my life . I should never have be to the fore to navigate the good ship Fenton and Co. , if it have not   be for your care . the doctor fellow at Cairo tell I as much in very plain term . yes , John , I consider myself your debtor to the amount of a life . " 

 " save a man 's life be sometimes rather a doubtful boon . I think if I have a fever , and some officious fool drag I through it when I be in a fair way to make a decent end , I should be very savagely disposed towards he . " 

 " why , John Saltram , you be the last man in the world from whom I should expect that dreary kind of talk . yet I suppose it be only a natural consequence of shut yourself up in these room for ten day at a stretch . " 

 " what good use have I make of my life in the past , Gilbert ? " demand the other bitterly ; " and what have I to look forward to in the future ? to marry , and redeem my position by the aid of a woman 's money . that be hardly the noble destiny that can befall a man . and yet I think if Adela Branston be free , and willing to marry I , I might make something of my life . I might go into Parliament , and make something of a name for myself . I could write book instead of anonymous article . I should scarcely sink down into an idle mindless existence of dinner - giving and dinner - eating . yes , I think the good thing that could happen to I would be to marry Adela Branston . " 

 they part at last , John Saltram have faithfully promise his friend to work no more that night , and they meet at Euston Square early the next morning for the journey to Liverpool . Gilbert have never find his friend 's company more delightful than on this last day . it seem as if John Saltram put away every thought of self in his perfect sympathy with the thought and feeling of the traveller . they din together , and it be dusk when they wish each other good - bye on the deck of the vessel . 

 " good - bye , Gilbert , and God bless you ! if if anything should happen to I if I should have go to the bad utterly before you come back , you must try to remember our friendship of the past . think that I have love you very dearly as well as one man ever love another , perhaps . " 

 " my dear John , you have no need to tell I to think that . nothing can ever weaken the love between we . and you be not likely to go to the bad . good bye , dear old friend . I shall remember you every day of my life . you be second only to Marian in my heart . I shall write you an account of my proceeding , and shall expect to hear from you . once more , good bye . " 

 the bell ring . Gilbert Fenton and his friend shake hand in silence for the last time , and in the next moment John Saltram run down the step to the little steamer which have bring they out to the large vessel . the sail spread wide in the cool evening wind , and the mighty ship glide away into the dusk . John Saltram 's last look show he his friend 's face gaze down upon he over the bulwark full of trust and affection . 

 he go back to London by the evening express , and reach his chamber at a late hour that night . there have be some attempt at tidy the room in his absence ; but his book and paper have be undisturbe . some letter be lie on the desk , amongst they one in a big scrawl hand that be very familiar to Mr. Saltram , the envelope stamp " Lidford . " he tear this open eagerly . it be from Sir David Forster . 

 " DEAR SALTRAM "   write the Baronet , " what do you mean by this iniquitous conduct ? you only obtain my consent to your hurried departure the other day on condition you should come back in a week , yet there be no sign of you . foljambe and the lawyer be go , and I be alone with Harker , whose stupidity be something marvellous . I be die by inch of this dismal state of thing . I can not   tell the man to go , you see , for he be really a most worthy creature , although such a consummate fool . for pity 's sake come to I . you can do your literary work down here as well as in London , and I promise to respect your laborious hour . ever your , 

 " DAVID FORSTER . " 

 John Saltram stand with this letter open in his hand , star blankly at it , like a man lose in a dream . 

 " go back ! " he mutter at last " go back , when I think I do such a great thing in come away ! no , I be not weak enough for that folly . " 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 miss 


 on the 5th of July in the following year , Gilbert Fenton land in England , after nearly ten month of exile . he have find hard work to do in the colonial city , and have do it ; surmount every difficulty by a steady resolute course of action . 

 Astley Fenton have try to shelter his fraud , heap falsehood upon falsehood ; and have end by make a full confession , after receive his cousin 's promise not to prosecute . the sum make away with by he amount to some thousand . Gilbert find that he have be lead a life of reckless extravagance , and be a notorious gambler . so there come an evening when after a prolonged investigation of affair , Astley Fenton put on his hat , and leave his cousin 's office for ever . when Gilbert hear of he next , he be clerk to a bookseller in Sydney . 

 the disentanglement of the Melbourne trading have occupy long than Gilbert expect ; and his exile have be especially dreary to he during the last two month he spend in Australia , from the failure of his english letter . the first two mail after his arrival have bring he letter from Marian and her uncle , and one short note from John Saltram . the mail that follow bring he nothing , and he be inexpressibly alarmed and distress by this fact . if he could by any possibility have return to England immediately after the arrival of the first mail which bring he no letter , he would have do so . but his journey would have be waste have he not remain to complete the work of reorganization he have commence ; so he stay , sorely against the grain , hop to get a letter by the next mail . 

 that come , and with the same dispiriting result to Gilbert Fenton . there be a letter from his sister , it be true ; but that be write from Switzerland , where she be travel with her husband , and bring he no tiding of Marian . he try to convince himself that if there have be bad news , it must need have come to he ; that the delay be only the result of accident , some mistake of Marian 's as to the date of the mail . what more natural than that she should make such a mistake , at a place with such deficient postal arrangement as those which obtain at Lidford ? but , argue with himself as he might , this silence of his betrothed be none the less perplexing to he , and he be a prey to perpetual anxiety during the time that elapse before the sailing of the vessel that be to convey he back to England . 

 then come the long monotonous voyage , afford ample leisure for gloomy thought , for shapeless fear in the dead watch of the night , when the sea wash drearily against his cabin window , and he lie broad awake counting the hour that must wear themselves out before he could set foot on english ground . as the time of his arrival draw nearer , his mind grow restless and fitful , now full of hope and happy vision of his meeting with Marian , now weigh down by the burden of some unspeakable terror . 

 the day dawn at last , that sultry summer day , and Gilbert be amongst those eager passenger who quit the vessel at daybreak . 

 he go straight from the quay to the railway - station , and the delay of an hour which he have to endure here seem almost interminable to he . as he pace to and fro the long platform wait for the London express , he wonder how he have bear all the previous delay , how he have be able to live through that dismal agonizing time . his own patience be a mystery to he now that the ordeal be over . 

 the express start at last , and he sit quietly in his corner try to read a newspaper ; while his fellow - traveller discuss the state of trade in Liverpool , which seem from their account to be as desperate and hopeless as the condition of all commerce appear invariably to be whenever commercial matter come under discussion . Gilbert Fenton be not interested in the Liverpool trade at this particular crisis . he know that he have weather the storm which have assail his own fortune , and that the future lie clear and bright before he . 

 he do not waste an hour in London , but go straight from one station to another , and be in time to catch a train for Fairleigh , the station near to Lidford . it be five o'clock in the afternoon when he arrive at this place , and charter a fly to take he over to Lidford a lovely summer afternoon . the sight of the familiar english scenery , look so exquisite in its summer glory , fill he with a pleasure that be almost akin to pain . he have often walk this road with Marian ; and as he drive along he look eagerly at every distant figure , half hop to see his darling approach he in the summer sunlight . 

 Mr. Fenton deposit his carpet - bag at the cosy village inn , where snow - white curtain flutter gaily at every window in the warm western breeze , and innumerable geranium make a gaudy blaze of scarlet against the wooden wall . he do not stop here to make any inquiry about those he have come to see . his heart be beat tumultuously in expectation of the meeting that seem so near . he alight from the fly , dismiss the driver , and walk rapidly across a field lead by a short cut to the green on which Captain Sedgewick 's house stand . this field bring he to the side of the green opposite the Captain 's cottage . he stop for a moment as he come through the little wooden gate , and look across the grass , where a regiment of geese be march towards the still pool of willow - shadow water . 

 the shutter of the upper room be closed , and there be a board above the garden - gate . the cottage be to be let . 

 Gilbert Fenton 's heart give one great throb , and then seem to cease beat altogether . he walk across the green slowly , stun by this unlooked - for blow . yes , the house be empty . the garden , which he remember in such exquisite order , have a weedy dilapidated look that seem like the decay of some considerable time . he ring the bell several time , but there be no answer ; and he be turn away from the gate with the stunned confused feeling still upon he , unable to consider what he ought to do next , when he hear himself call by his name , and see a woman look at he across the hedge of the neighbouring garden . 

 " be you wish to make any inquiry about the last occupant of Hazel Cottage , sir ? " she ask . 

 " yes , " Gilbert answer huskily , look at she in an absent unseeing way . 

 he have see she often during his visit to the cottage , busy at work in her garden , which be much small than the Captain 's , but he have never speak to she before to - day . 

 she be a maiden lady , who eke out her slender income by let a part of her miniature abode whenever an opportunity for so doing occur . the care of this cottage occupy all her day , and form the delight and glory of her life . it be a little large than a good - sized doll 's house , and furnish with spindle - legge chair and table that have be polish to the last extremity of brightness . 

 " perhaps you would be so good as to walk into my sitting - room for a few moment , sir , " say this lady , open her garden - gate . " I shall be most happy to afford you any information about your friend . " 

 " you be very good , " say Gilbert , follow she into the prim little parlour . 

 he have recover his self - possession in some degree by this time , tell himself that this desertion of Hazel Cottage involve no more than a change of residence . 

 " my name be Dodd , " say the lady , motion Mr. Fenton to a chair , " Miss Letitia Dodd . I have the pleasure of see you very often during your visit next door . I be not on visit term with Captain Sedgewick and Miss Nowell , although we bow to each other out of door . I be only a tradesman 's daughter indeed my brother be now carry on business as a butcher in Fairleigh and of course I be quite aware of the difference in our position . I be the last person to intrude myself upon my superior . " 

 " if you will be so kind as to tell I where they have go ? " Gilbert ask , eager to stop this formal statement of Miss Dodd 's social standing . 

 " where they have go ! " she repeat . " dear , dear ! then you do not know " 

 " I do not know what ? " 

 " of Captain Sedgewick 's death . " 

 " good God ! my dear old friend ! when do he die ? " 

 " at the beginning of the year . it be very sudden a fit of apoplexy . he be seize in the night , poor dear gentleman , and it be only discover when the servant go to call he in the morning . he only live two day after the seizure ; and never speak again . " 

 " and Miss Nowell what make she leave the cottage ? she be still at Lidford , I suppose ? " 

 " o dear no , Mr. Fenton . she go away altogether about a month after the Captain 's death . " 

 " where do she go ? " 

 " I can not tell you that , I do not even know that she intend leave Hazel Cottage until the day after she leave . when I see the shutter close and the board up , you might have knock I down with a feather . Miss Nowell be so much like in Lidford , and she have more than one invitation from friend to stay with they for the sake of a change after her uncle 's death ; but she would not visit anywhere . she stay quite alone in the cottage , with only the old servant . " 

 " but there must surely be some one in the place who know where she have go ! " exclaim Gilbert . 

 " I think not . the landlord of Hazel Cottage do not know . he be my landlord also , and I be ask he about Miss Nowell when I pay my rent the other day . he say he suppose she have go away to be marry . that have be the general impression , in fact , at Lidford . People make sure that Miss Nowell have leave to be married to you . " 

 " I have only just return from Australia . I have come back to fulfil my engagement to Miss Nowell . can you suggest no one from whom I be likely to obtain information ? " 

 " there be the family at the Rectory ; they know she very well , and be extremely kind to she after her uncle 's death . it might be worth your while to call upon Mr. Marchant . " 

 " yes , I will call , " Gilbert answer ; " thank for the suggestion . " 

 he wish Miss Dodd good - afternoon , and leave she stand at the gate of her little garden , watch he with profound interest as he walk away towards the village . there be a pleasing mystery in the affair , to the mind of Miss Dodd . 

 Gilbert Fenton go at once to the Rectory , although it be now past seven o'clock . he have meet Mr. and Mrs. Marchant several time , and have visit they with the Listers . 

 the Rector be at home , sit over his solitary glass of port by the open window of his snug dining - room , look lazily out at a group of son and daughter play croquet on the lawn . he be surprised to see Mr. Fenton , but welcome he with much cordiality . 

 " I have come to you full of care , Mr. Marchant , " Gilbert begin ; " and the press nature of my business must excuse the lateness of my visit . " 

 " there be no occasion for any excuse . I be very glad to see you at this time . pray help yourself to some wine , there be clean glass near you ; and take some of those strawberry , on which my wife pride herself amazingly . People who live in the country all their day be oblige to give their mind to horticulture . and now , what be this care of your , Mr. Fenton ? nothing very serious , I hope . " 

 " it be very serious to I at present . I think you know that I be engaged to Miss Nowell . " 

 " perfectly . I have imagine until this moment that you and she be marry . when she leave Lidford , I conclude that she have go to stay with friend of your , and that the marriage would , in all probability , take place at an early period , without any strict observance of etiquette as to her mourning for her uncle . it be natural that we should think this , know her solitary position . " 

 " then you do not know where she go on leave this place ? " 

 " not in the faint degree . her departure be altogether unexpected by we . my wife and daughter call upon her two or three time after the Captain 's death , and be even anxious that she should come here to stay for a short time ; but she would not do that . she seem grateful , and touch by their anxiety about she , but they could not bring she to talk of her future . " 

 " and she tell they nothing of her intention to leave Lidford ? " 

 " not a word . " 

 this be all that Gilbert Fenton could learn . his interview with the Rector last some time long ; but it tell he nothing . whom next could he question ? he know all Marian 's friend , and he spend the next day in call upon they , but with the same result ; no one could tell he her reason for leave Hazel Cottage , or where she have go . 

 there remain only one person whom he could question , and that be the old servant who have live with Captain Sedgewick nearly all the time of his residence at Lidford , and whom Gilbert have conciliate by numerous gift during his visit to Hazel Cottage . she be a good - humour honest creature , of about fifty , and have be devote to the Captain and Marian . 

 after a good deal of trouble , Gilbert ascertain that this woman have not accompany her young mistress when she leave Lidford , but have take service in a grocer 's family at Fairleigh . have discover this , Mr. Fenton set off immediately for the little market - town , on foot this time , and with his mind full of the day when he and Marian have walk this way together . 

 he find the shop to which he have be direct a roomy old - fashioned emporium in the high - street , sink three or four foot below the level of the pavement , and approach by a couple of step ; a shop with a low ceiling , that be make low by bunch of candle , ham , bacon , and other merchandise hang from the massive beam that span it . Mr. Fenton , have duly state his business , be show into the grocer 's good parlour a resplendent apartment , where there be more ornament in the way of shell - and - feather flower under glass shade , and bohemian glass scent - bottle , than be consistent with luxurious occupation , and where every chair and sofa be make a perfect veil prophet by enshroud antimacassor . here Sarah Down , the late Captain 's servant , come to Mr. Fenton , wipe her hand and arm upon a spotless canvas apron , and generally apologetic as to her appearance . to this woman Gilbert repeat the question he have ask of other , with the same disheartening result . 

 " the poor dear young lady feel the Captain 's loss dreadfully ; as well she might , when they have be so fond of each other , " Sarah Down say , in answer to one of Gilbert 's inquiry . " I never know any one grieve so deeply . she would not   go anywhere , and she could not   bear to see any one who come to see she . she use to shut herself up in the Captain 's room day after day , kneel by his bedside , and cry as if her heart would break . I have look through the keyhole sometimes , and see she there on her knee , with her face bury in the bedclothe . she do not   care to talk about he even to I , and I have hard work to persuade she to eat or drink enough to keep life in she at this time . when the day be fine , I use to try and get she to walk out a little , for she look as white as a ghost for want of air ; and after a good deal of persuasion , she do go out sometimes of an afternoon , but she would not   ask any one to walk with she , though there be plenty she might have ask the young lady from the Rectory and other . she prefer be alone , she tell I , and I be glad that she should get the air and the change anyhow . she brighten a little after this , but very little . it be all of a sudden one day that she tell I she be go away . I want to go with she , but she say that could not   be . I ask she where she be go , and she tell I , after hesitate a little , that she be go to friend in London . I know she have be very fond of two young lady that she go to school with at Lidford , whose father live in London ; and I think it be to their house she be go . I ask she if it be , and she say yes . she make arrangement with the landlord about sell the furniture . he be an auctioneer himself , and there be no difficulty about that . the money be to be send to she at a post - office in London . I wonder at that , but she say it be well so . she pay every sixpence that be owing , and give I a handsome present over and above my wage ; though I do not   want to take anything from she , poor dear young lady , know that there be very little leave after the Captain 's death , except the furniture , which be not   likely to bring much . and so she go away about two day after she first mention that she be go to leave Lidford . it be all very sudden , and I do not   think she bid good - bye to any one in the place . she seem quite break down with grief in those two last day . I shall never forget her poor pale face when she get into the fly . " 

 " how do she go ? from the station here ? " 

 " I do not   know anything about that , except that the fly come to the cottage for she and her luggage . I want to go to the station with she , to see she off , but she would not   let I . " 

 " do she mention I during the time that follow Captain Sedgewick 's death ? " 

 " only when I speak about you , sir . I use to try to comfort she , tell she she have you still leave to care for she , and to make up for he she would lose . but she use to look at I in a strange pitiful sort of way , and shake her head . ' I be very miserable , Sarah , ' she would say to I ; ' I be quite alone in the world now my dear uncle be go , and I do not   know what to do . ' I tell she she ought to look forward to the time when she would be marry , and would have a happy home of her own ; but I could never get she to talk of that . " 

 " can you tell I the name and address of her friend in London the young lady with whom she go to school ? " 

 " the name be Bruce , sir ; and they live , or they use to live at that time , in St. John's - wood . I have hear Miss Nowell say that , but I do not   know the name of the street or number of the house . " 

 " I daresay I shall be able to find they . it be a strange business , Sarah . it be most unaccountable that my dear girl should have leave Lidford without write I word of her removal and her intention with regard to the future that she should have send I no announcement of her uncle 's death , although she must have know how well I love he . I be go to ask you a question that be very painful to I , but which must be ask soon or later . do you know of any one else whom she may have like well than I any one whose influence may have govern she at the time she leave Lidford ? " 

 " no , indeed , sir , " reply the woman , promptly . " who else be there ? Miss Nowell know so few gentleman , and see no one except the Rector 's family and two or three lady after the uncle 's death . " 

 " not at the cottage , perhaps . but she may have see some one out - of - door . you say she always go out alone at that time , and prefer to do so . " 

 " yes , sir , that be true . but it seem natural enough that she should like to be alone on account of her grief . " 

 " there must have be some reason for her silence towards I , Sarah . she could not have act so cruelly without some powerful motive . Heaven only know what it may have be . the business of my life will be to find she to see her face to face once more , and hear the explanation of her conduct from her own lip . " 

 he thank the woman for her information , slip a sovereign into her hand , and depart . he call upon the proprietor of Hazel Cottage , an auctioneer , surveyor , and house - agent in the high - street of Fairleigh , but could obtain no fresh tiding from this gentleman , except the fact that the money realise by the Captain 's furniture have be send to Miss Nowell at a post - office in the City , and have be duly acknowledge by she , after a delay of about a week . the auctioneer show Gilbert the letter of receipt , which be word in a very formal business - like manner , and bear no address but " London . " the sight of the familiar hand give he a sharp pang . o God , how he have languish for a letter in that handwriting ! 

 he have nothing more to do after this in the neighbourhood of Lidford , except to pay a pious visit to the Captain 's grave , where a handsome slab of granite record the virtue of the dead . it lie in the prettiest , most retired part of the churchyard , half - hide under a wide - spread yew . Gilbert Fenton sit down upon a low wall near at hand for a long time , brood over his broken life , and wish himself at rest beneath that solemn shelter . 

 " she never love I , " he say to himself bitterly . " I shut my eye obstinately to the truth , or I might have discover the secret of her indifference by a hundred sign and token . I fancy that a man who love a woman as I love she must succeed in win her heart at last . and I accept her girlish trust in I , her innocent gratitude for my attention , as the evidence of her love . even at the last , when she want to release I , I would not understand . I do not expect to be love as I love she . I would have give so much , and be content to take so little . what be there I would not have do what sacrifice of my own pride that I would not have happily make to win she ! o my darling , even in your desertion of I you might have trust I well than this ! you would have find I fond and faithful through every trial , your friend in spite of every wrong . " 

 he kneel down by the grave , and press his lip to the granite on which George Sedgewick 's name be chisel . 

 " I owe it to the dead to discover her fate , " he say to himself , as he rise from that reverent attitude . " I owe it to the dead to penetrate the secret of her new life , to assure myself that she be happy , and have fall under no fatal influence . " 

 the Listers be still abroad , and Gilbert be very glad that it be so . it would have excruciate he to hear his sister 's comment on Marian 's conduct , and to perceive the suppress exultation with which she would most likely have discuss this unhappy termination to an engagement which have be enter on in utter disregard of her counsel . 

 CHAPTER IX 

 JOHN SALTRAM 'S advice 


 Mr. Fenton discover the Bruce family in Boundary - road , St. John's - wood , after a good deal of trouble . but they could tell he nothing of their dear friend Miss Nowell , of whom they speak with the warm regard . they have never see she since they have leave the school at Lidford , where they have be boarder , and she a daily pupil . they have not even hear of Captain Sedgewick 's death . 

 Gilbert ask these young lady if they know of any other acquaintance of Marian 's living in or near London . they both answer promptly in the negative . the school be a small one , and they have be the only pupil who come from town ; nor have they ever hear marian speak of any London friend . 

 thus end Mr. Fenton 's inquiry in this direction , leave he no wise than when he leave Lidford . he have now exhaust every possible channel by which he might obtain information . the ground lie open before he , and there be nothing leave for he but publicity . he take an advertisement to the Times office that afternoon , and pay for six insertion in the second column : 

 " Miss MARIAN NOWELL , late of Lidford , Midlandshire , be request to communicate immediately with G.F. , Post - office , Wigmore - street , to whom her silence have cause extreme anxiety . she may rely upon the advertiser 's friendship and fidelity under all possible circumstance . " 

 Gilbert feel a little more hopeful after have do this . he fancy this advertisement must need bring he some tiding of his lost love . the mystery might be happily solve after all , and Marian prove true to he . he try to persuade himself that this be possible ; but it be very difficult to reconcile her line of conduct with the fact of her regard for he . 

 in the evening he go to the Temple , eager to see John Saltram , from whom he have no intention to keep the secret of his trouble . he find his friend at home , writing , with his desk push against the open window , and the dust and shabbiness of his room dismally obvious in the hot July sunshine . he start up as Gilbert enter , and the dark face grow suddenly pale . 

 " you take I by surprise , " he say . " I do not   know you be in England . " 

 " I only land two day ago , " answer Gilbert , as they shake hand . " I daresay I startle you a little , dear old fellow , come in upon you without a moment 's notice , when you fancy I be at the Antipodes . but , you see , I hunt you up directly I be free . " 

 " you have do well out yonder , I hope , Gilbert ? " 

 " yes ; everything have go well enough with I in business . but my come home have be a dreary one . " 

 " how be that ? " 

 " Captain Sedgewick be dead , and Marian Nowell be lose . " 

 " Lost ! what do you mean by that ? " 

 Mr. Fenton tell his friend all that have befall he since his arrival in England . 

 " I come to you for counsel and help , John , " he say , when he have finish his story . 

 " I will give you my help , so far as it be possible for one man to help another in such a business , and my counsel in all honesty , " answer John Saltram ; " but I doubt if you will be incline to receive it . " 

 " why should you doubt that ? " 

 " because it be not likely to agree with your own idea . " 

 " speak out , John . " 

 " I think that if Miss Nowell have really love you , she would never have take this step . I think that she must have leave Lidford in order to escape from her engagement , perhaps expect your early return . I believe your pursuit of she can only end in failure and disappointment ; and although I be ready to assist you in any manner you wish , I warn you against sacrifice your life to a delusion . " 

 " it be not under the delusion that Marian Nowell love I that I be go to search for she , " Gilbert Fenton say slowly , after an interval of silence . " I be not so weak as to believe that after what have happen , though I have try to argue with myself , only this afternoon , that she may still be true to I and that there may have be some hide reason for her conduct . grant that she wish to escape from her engagement , she might have trust to my honour to give she a prompt release the moment I become acquainted with the real state of her feeling . there must have be some strong influence than this at work when she leave Lidford . I want to know the true cause of that hurried departure , John . I want to be sure that Marian Nowell be happy , and in safe hand . " 

 " by what mean do you hope to discover this ? " 

 " I rely a good deal upon repeat advertisement in the Times . they may bring I tiding of Marian if not directly , from some person who have see she since she leave Lidford . " 

 " if she really wish to hide herself from you , she would most likely change her name . " 

 " why should she wish to hide herself from I ? she must know that she might trust I . of her own free will she would never do this cruel thing . there must have be some secret influence at work upon my darling 's mind . it shall be my business to discover what that influence be ; or , in plainer word still , to discover the man who have rob I of Marian Nowell 's heart . " 

 " it come to that , then , " say John Saltram . " you suspect some unknown rival ? " 

 " yes ; that be the most natural conclusion to arrive at . and yet heaven know how unwillingly I take that into consideration . " 

 " there be no particular person whom you suspect ? " 

 " no one . " 

 " if there should be no result from your advertisement , what will you do ? " 

 " I can not tell you just yet . unless I get some kind of clue , the business will seem a hopeless one . but I can not imagine that the advertisement will fail completely . if she leave Lidford to be marry , there must be some record of her marriage . should my first advertisement fail , my next shall be insert with a view to discover such a record . " 

 " and if , after infinite trouble , you should find she the wife of another man , what reward would you have for your waste time and lose labour ? " 

 " the happiness of know she to be in a safe and honourable position . I love she too dearly to remain in ignorance of her fate . " 

 " well , Gilbert , I know that good advice be generally throw away in such a case as this ; but I have a fix opinion on the subject . to my mind , there be only one wise course open to you , and that be , to let this thing alone , and resign yourself to the inevitable . I acknowledge that Miss Nowell be eminently worthy of your affection ; but you know the old song ' if she be not fair to I , what care I how fair she be . ' there be plenty of woman in the world . the choice be wide enough . " 

 " not for I , John . Marian Nowell be the only woman I have ever love , the only woman I ever can love . " 

 " my dear boy , it be so natural for you to believe that just now ; and a year hence you will think so differently ! " 

 " no , John . but I be not go to make any protestation of my constancy . let the matter rest . I know that my life be break that this blow have leave I nothing to hope for or to live for , except the hope of find the girl who have wrong I . I will not   weary you with lamentation . my talk have be entirely of self since I come into this room . tell I your own affair , Jack , old friend . how have the world go with you since we part at Liverpool last year ? " 

 " not too smoothly . my financial position become a little more obscure and difficult of comprehension every year , as you know ; but I rub on somehow . I have be work at literature like a galley - slave ; have contribute no end of stuff to the Quarterlies ; and be engage upon a book , yes Gil , positively a book , which I hope may do great thing for I if ever I can finish it . " 

 " be it a novel ? " 

 " a novel ! no ! " cry John Saltram , with a wry face ; " it be the romance of reality I deal with . my book be a Life of Jonathan Swift . he be always a favourite study of mine , you know , that brilliant , unprincipled , intolerant , cynical , irresistible , miserable man . Scott 's biography seem to I to give but a tame picture , and other be only sketch . mine will be a pre - raphaelite study faithful as a photograph , careful as a miniature on ivory , and life - size . " 

 " I trust it will bring you fame and money when the time come , " answer Gilbert . " and how about Mrs. Branston ? be she as charming as ever ? " 

 " a little more so , if possible . poor old Michael Branston be dead go off the hook rather suddenly about a month ago . the widow look amazingly pretty in her weed . " 

 " and you will marry she , I suppose , Jack , as soon as her mourning be over ? " 

 " well , yes ; it be on the card , " John Saltram say , in an indifferent tone . 

 " why , how you say that ! be there any doubt as to the lady 's fortune ? " 

 " o no ; that be all square enough . Michael Branston 's will be in the Illustrated London News ; the personalty swear under a hundred and twenty thousand , all leave to the widow , besides real property a house in Cavendish Square , the villa at Maidenhead , and a place near Leamington . " 

 " it would be a splendid match for you , Jack . " 

 " Splendid , of course . an unprecedented stroke of luck for such a fellow as i. yet I doubt very much if I be quite the man for that sort of life . I should be apt to fancy it a kind of gild slavery , I think , Gil , and there would be some danger of my kicking off the chain . " 

 " but you like Mrs. Branston , do not   you , Jack ? " 

 " like she ? yes , I like she too well to deceive she . and she would expect devoted affection from a second husband . she be full of romantic idea , school - girl theory of life which she be oblige to nip in the bud when she go to the altar with old Branston , but which have burst into flower now that she be free . " 

 " have you see she often since her husband 's death ? " 

 " only twice ; once immediately after the funeral , and again yesterday . she be live in Cavendish Square just now . " 

 " I hope you will marry she . I should like to see you safe in smooth water , and with some purpose in life . I should like to see you turn your back upon the loneliness of these dreary chamber . " 

 " they be not very brilliant , be they ? I do not   know how many generation of briefless barrister these chair and table have serve . the room have an atmosphere of failure ; but they suit I very well . I be not always here , you know . I spend a good deal of my time in the country . " 

 " Whereabouts ? " 

 " sometimes in one direction , sometimes in another ; wherever my truant fancy lead I . I prefer such spot as be most remote from the haunt of man , unknown to cockney ; and so long as there be a river within reach of my lodging , I can make myself tolerably happy with a punt and a fishing - rod , and contrive to forget my care . " 

 " you have not be to Lidford since I leave England , I suppose ? " 

 " yes ; I be at Heatherly a week or two in the winter . poor old David Forster would not let I alone until I go down to he . he be ill , and in a very dismal condition altogether , abandon by the rest of his crony , and a close prisoner in the house which have so many painful association for he . it be a work of charity to bear he company . " 

 " do you see Captain Sedgewick , or Marian , while you be down there ? " 

 " no . I should have like to have call upon the kind old Captain ; but Forster be unconscionably exact , there be no get away from he . " 

 Gilbert stop with his friend until late that night , smoking and drink a mild mixture of brandy and soda - water , and talk of the thing that have be do on this side of the globe while he have be on the other . no more be say about Marian , or Gilbert 's plan for the future . in his own mind that one subject reign supreme , shut out every other thought ; but he do not want to make himself a nuisance to John Saltram , and he know that there be bound to the endurance of which friendship be capable . 

 the two friend seem cheerful enough as they smoke their cigar in the summer dusk , the quiet of the flagged court below rarely break by a pass footfall . it be the pleasantest evening which Gilbert Fenton have spend for a long time , in spite of the heavy burden on his mind , in spite of the depressing view which Mr. Saltram take of his position . 

 " dear old John , " he say , as they shake hand at parting , " I can not tell you what a happiness it have be to I to see you again . we be never separate so long before since the day when I eat my first dinner at Balliol . " 

 the other seem touch by this expression of regard , but disinclined to betray his emotion , after the manner of Englishmen on such occasion . 

 " my dear Gilbert , it ought to be very pleasant to I to hear that . but I doubt if I be worthy of so much . as far as my own liking for you go , there be no inequality between we ; but you be a well fellow than I be by a long way , and be not likely to profit much in the long - run by your friendship for a reprobate like I . " 

 " that be all nonsense , John . that kind of vague self - accusation mean nothing . I have no doubt I shall live to see you a great man , and to be proud enough of be able to claim you as the choose friend of my youth . Mr. Branston 's death have clear the way for you . the chance of a distinguished future be within your grasp . " 

 " the chance within my grasp ! yes . my dear Gilbert , I tell you there be some man for whom everything in this world come too late . " 

 " what do you mean by that ? " 

 " only that I doubt if you will ever see I Adela Branston 's husband . " 

 " I can not   understand you , John . " 

 " my dear fellow , there be nothing strange in that . there be time when I can not understand myself . " 

 CHAPTER x 

 JACOB NOWELL 


 the day go by , and bring Gilbert Fenton no reply to his advertisement . he call at the post - office morning and evening , only to find the same result ; and a dull blank feeling , a kind of deadness of heart and mind , begin to steal over he with the progress of the day . he go through the routine of his business - life steadily enough , work as hard as he have ever work ; but it be only by a supreme effort that he could bring his mind to bear upon the detail of business all interest in his office - work be go . 

 the advertisement have appear for the sixth time , and Gilbert have frame a second , offer a reward of twenty pound for any direct evidence of the marriage of Marian Nowell ; when a letter be hand to he one evening at the post - office a letter in a common blue envelope , direct in a curious crab hand , and bear the London post - mark . 

 his heart beat loud and fast as he tear open this envelope . it contain only a half - sheet of paper , with these word write upon it in the cramped half - illegible hand which figure on the outside : 

 " the person advertise for Marian Nowell be request to call at no . 5 , Queen Anne 's Court , Wardour Street , any evening after seven . " 

 this be all . little as this brief note imply , however , Gilbert make sure that the writer must be in a position to give he some kind of information about the object of his search . it be six o'clock when he receive the communication . he go from the post - office to his lodging with his mind in a tumult of excitement , make a mere pretence of take a hasty dinner , and set off immediately afterwards for Wardour Street . 

 there be more than time for he to walk , and he hop that the walk might have some effect in reduce the fever of his mind . he do not want to present himself before stranger who , no doubt , only want to make a barter of any knowledge they possess as to Marian 's whereabouts in a state of mental excitement . the address to which he be go mystify he beyond measure . what could people live in such a place as this know of she whom he seek ? 

 he be in Wardour Street at a quarter before seven , but he have considerable trouble in find Queen Anne 's Court , and the clock of the neighbourhood be strike the hour as he turn into a narrow alley with dingy - look shop on one side and a high dead wall on the other . the gas be glimmer faintly in the window of No . 5 , and a good deal of old silver , tarnish and blacken , huddle together behind the wire - guard glass , be dimly visible in the uncertain light . there be some old jewellery too , and a little wooden bowl of sovereign or gold coin of some kind or other . 

 on a brass plate upon the door of this establishment there appear the name of Jacob Nowell , silversmith and money - changer . 

 Gilbert Fenton star in amazement at this inscription . it must need be some relative of Marian 's he be about to see . 

 he open the door , bewilder a little by this discovery , and a shrill bell give notice of his entrance to those within . a tall lanky young man , with a sallow face and sleek black hair , emerge quickly from some door in the obscure background , and ask in a sharp voice what the visitor please to want . 

 " I wish to see Mr. Nowell , the writer of a letter address to the post - office in Wigmore Street . " 

 the sallow - faced young man disappear without a word , leave Gilbert stand in the dimly light shop , where he see more old silver crowd upon shelf behind glass door , carve ebony cabinet loom out of the dusk , and here and there an old picture in a tarnish frame . on the counter there be a glass case contain foreign bank - note and gold , some curious old watch , and other trinket , a baby 's coral , a battered silver cup , and a gold snuff - box . 

 while Gilbert wait thus he hear voice in a room at the back the shrill tone of the sallow young man and a feeble old voice raise querulously and then , after a delay which seem long to his impatience , the young man reappear and tell he Mr. Nowell be ready to see he . 

 Gilbert go into the room at the end of the shop a small dark parlour , more crowded with a heterogeneous collection of plate , picture , and bric - a - brac of all kind than the shop itself . Sultry as the July evening be , there be a fire burn in the pinch rusty grate , and over this fire the owner of the room bend affectionately , with his slippere foot on the fender , and his bony hand clasp his bony knee . 

 he be an old man , with long yellowish - white hair stream from beneath a velvet skull - cap , and bright black eye deep set in a pale thin face . his nose be a sharp aquiline , and give something of a bird - like aspect to a countenance that must once have be very handsome . he be wrap in a long dressing - gown of some thick grey woollen stuff . 

 the sallow - faced young man linger by the half - glass door between the parlour and the shop , as if he would fain have remain a witness to the interview about to take place between his master and the strange ; but the old man look round at he sharply , and say , 

 " that will do , Tulliver ; you can go back to the shop . if Abrahams bring that little lot again to - night , tell he I will give five - and - nine an ounce , not a fraction more . " 

 Mr. Tulliver retire , leave the door ajar ever so little ; but the penetrate black eye of the master be quick to perceive this manoeuvre . 

 " will you be so good as to shut that door , sir , quite securely ? " he say to Gilbert . " that young man be very inquisitive ; I be afraid I have   keep he too long . People talk of old servant ; but half the robbery in the world be commit by old servant . be seat , if you please , sir . you find this room rather close , perhaps . some people do ; but I be old and chilly , and I can not   live without a fire . " 

 " I have come to you in great anxiety of mind , " say Gilbert , as he seat himself upon the only disengage chair in the room , " and with some hope that you may be able to set my mind at ease by afford I information about Miss Marian Nowell . " 

 " I can give you no information about she . " 

 " indeed ! " cry Gilbert , with a bitter pang of disappointment ; " and yet you answer my advertisement . " 

 " I do , because I have some reason to suppose this Marian Nowell may be my granddaughter . " 

 " that be quite possible . " 

 " can you tell I her father 's name ? " 

 " Percival Nowell . her mother be a Miss Lucy Geoffry . " 

 " right , " say the old man . " Percival Nowell be my only son my only child of late year . there be a girl , but she die early . he be my only son , and his mother and I be foolish enough to be proud of his good look and his clever way ; and we bring he up a gentleman , send he to an expensive school , and after that to the University , and pinch ourselves in every way for his sake . my father be a gentleman ; and it be only after I have fail as a professional man , through circumstance which I need not explain to you now , that I take to this business . I would have make any sacrifice in reason for that boy of mine . I want he to be a gentleman , and to make his way in one of the learn profession . after a great deal of chop and change , he fix upon the Bar , take chamber in the Temple , make I pay all the fee , and pretend to study . but I soon find that he be lead a wild dissipate life , and be never likely to be good for anything . he get into debt , draw bill upon I , and behave altogether in a most shameful manner . when I send for he , and remonstrate with he upon his disgraceful conduct , he tell I that I be a miser , that I spend my life in a dog - kennel for the sake of hoard money , and that I deserve nothing well than his treatment of I . I may have be well off at this time than I have care to let he know , for I have soon find out what a reckless scoundrel I have to deal with ; but if he have behave decently , he would have find I generous and indulgent enough . as it be , I tell he to go about his business , and never to expect another sixpence from I as long as he live . how he manage to exist after this , I hardly know . he be very much mix up with a disreputable lot of turf - man , and I believe he make money by bet . his mother rob I for he , I find out afterwards , and contrive to send he a good deal of money at odd time . my business as a dealer in second - hand silver be well then than it be now , and I have have so much money pass through my hand that it be pretty easy for my wife to cheat I . poor soul ! she have be dead and go these fifteen year , and I have freely forgive she . she love that young man to distraction . if he have want a step to reach the object of his wish , she would have lay herself down in the dust and let he walk over her body . I suppose it be in the nature of mother to love their son like that . well , sir , I never see my gentleman after that day . I have plenty of letter from he , all ask for money ; threaten letter , pitiful letter , letter in which he swear he would destroy himself if he do not   receive a remittance by return of post ; but I never send he a shilling . about a year after our last meeting , I receive the announcement of his marriage with Miss Geoffry . he write to tell I that , if I would allow he a decent income , he would reform and lead a steady life . that letter I do answer : to the effect that , if he choose to come here and act as my shopman , I would give he board and lodge for himself and his wife , and such wage as he should deserve . I tell he that I have give he his chance as a gentleman , and he have throw it away . I would give he the opportunity now of succeed in a humbler career by sheer industry and perseverance as I have succeed myself . if he think that I have make a fortune , there be so much the more reason for he to try his luck . this be the last letter I ever write to he . it be unanswered ; but about a year and a half afterwards there come a few line to his mother , tell she of the birth of a daughter , which be to be call Marian , after she . this last letter come from Brussels . " 

 " and do you hear no more of your son after this ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " nothing . I think his mother use to get letter from he in secret for some time ; that these fail suddenly at last ; and that anxiety about her worthless son anxiety which she try to hide from I shorten her life . she never complain , poor soul ! never mention Percy 's name until the last , when she beg I to be kind to he if he should ever come to throw himself upon my kindness . I give she my promise that , if that come to pass , he should find I a well friend to he than he deserve . it be hard to refuse the last prayer of a faithful wife who have do her duty patiently for nearly thirty year . " 

 " have you any reason to suppose your son still live ? " 

 " I have no evidence of his death . often and often , after my poor wife be go , I have sit alone here of a night thinking of he ; think that he might come in upon I at any moment ; almost listen for his footstep in the quiet of the place . but he never come . he would have find I very soft - hearted at such time . my mind change to he a good deal after his mother 's death . I use to think of he as he be in his boyhood , when Marian and I have such great hope of he , and would sit and talk of he for hour together by this fireside . an old man leave quite alone as I be have plenty of time for such thought . night after night I have fancy I hear his step , and have look up at that door expect to see he open it and come in ; but he never come . he may be dead . I suppose he be dead ; or he would have come to make another attempt at get money out of I . " 

 " you have never take any measure for find he ? " inquire Gilbert . 

 " no . if he want I , he know where I be to be find . I be a fixture . it be his business to come to I . when I see the name of Marian Nowell in your advertisement a week ago , I feel curious to know whether it could be my grandchild you be look for . I hold off till this morning , think it be not   worth my while to make any inquiry about the matter ; but I could not   get it out of my head somehow ; and it end by my answer your advertisement . I be an old man , you see , without a creature belong to I ; and it might be a comfort to I to meet with some one of my own flesh and blood . the bit of money I may leave behind I when I die will not   be much ; but it might as well go to my son 's child as to a stranger . " 

 " if your son 's child can be find , you will discover she to be well worthy of your love . yes , though she have do I a cruel wrong , I believe she to be all that be good and pure and true . " 

 " what be the wrong that she have do you ? " 

 Gilbert tell Jacob Nowell the story of his engagement , and the bitter disappointment which have befall he on his return from Australia . the old man listen with every appearance of interest . he approve of Gilbert 's notion of advertising for the particular of a possible marriage , and offer to bear his part in the expense of the search for his granddaughter . 

 Gilbert smile at this offer . 

 " you do not know what a worthless thing money be to I now , " he say , " or now lightly I hold my own trouble or loss in this matter . " 

 he leave Queen Anne 's Court soon after this , after have promise Jacob Nowell to return and report progress so soon as there should be anything worth tell . he go back to Wigmore Street heavy - hearted , depressed by the reaction that follow the vain hope which the silversmith 's letter have inspire . it matter little to he to know the antecedent of Marian 's father , while Marian 's destiny remain still hide from he . 

 CHAPTER XI 

 the marriage at wygrove 


 on the following day Gilbert Fenton take his second advertisement to the office in Printing House Square ; an advertisement offer a reward of twenty pound for any reliable information as to the marriage of Marian Nowell . a week go by , during which the advertisement appear on alternate day ; and at the end of that time there come a letter from the parish - clerk of Wygrove , a small town about forty mile far from London than Lidford , state that , on the 14th of March , John Holbrook and Marian Nowell have be marry at the church in that place . Gilbert Fenton leave London by an early train upon the morning after his receipt of this letter ; and at about three o'clock in the afternoon find himself on the outskirt of Wygrove , rather a difficult place to reach , involve a good deal of delay at out - of - the - way junction , and a six - mile journey by stage - coach from the near station . 

 it be about the dull dreariest little town to which his destiny have ever bring Gilbert Fenton , consist of a melancholy high - street , with a blank market - place , and a town hall that look as if it have not be open within the memory of man ; a grand old gothic church , much too large for the requirement of the place ; a grim square brick box inscribe " Ebenezer ; " and a few prim villa straggle off into the country . 

 on one side of the church there be a curious little old - fashioned court , wonderfully neat and clean , with house the parlour whereof be sink below the level of the pavement , after the manner of these old place . there be a great show of geranium in the casement , and a general aspect of brightness and order distinguish all these modest dwelling . it be to this court that Mr. Fenton have be direct on inquire for Thomas Stoneham , the parish - clerk , at the inn where the coach deposit he . he be fortunate enough to find Mr. Stoneham sun himself on the threshold of his domicile , smoke an after - dinner pipe . a pleasant clattering of tea - thing sound from the neat little parlour within , show that , early as it be , there be already preparation for the cup which cheer without inebriate in the Stoneham household . 

 Thomas Stoneham , support by a freshly - paint door of a vivid green and an extensive brass plate engrave with his name and function , be a personage of some dignity . he be a middle - aged man , ponderous and slow of motion , with a latent pomposity , which he render as agreeable as possible by the urbanity of his manner . he be a man of a lofty spirit , who believe in his office as something exalt above all other dignity of this earth less lucrative , of course , than a bishopric or the woolsack , and of a narrow range , but quite as important on a small scale . " the world might get on pretty well without bishop , " think Mr. Stoneham , when he ponder upon these thing as he smoke his churchwarden pipe ; " but what would become of a parish in which there be no clerk ? " 

 this gentleman , see Gilbert Fenton approach , be quick to surmise that the stranger come in answer to the letter he have write the day before . the advent of a stranger in Wygrove be so rare an occurrence , that it be natural enough for he to jump at this conclusion . 

 " I believe you be Mr. Stoneham , " say Gilbert , " and the writer of a letter in answer to an advertisement in the Times . " 

 " my name be Stoneham , sir ; I be the clerk of this parish , and have be for twenty year and more , as I think I may have state in the letter to which you refer . will you be so kind as to step inside ? " 

 Mr. Stoneham wave his hand towards the parlour , to which apartment Gilbert descend . here he find Mrs. Stoneham , a meek little sandy - haired woman , who seem to be bear down by the weight of her lord 's dignity ; and Miss Stoneham , also meek and sandy , with a great many stiff little corkscrew ringlet bud out all over her head and a sharp little inquire nose . 

 these lady would have retire on Gilbert 's entrance , but he beg they to remain ; and after a good deal of polite hesitation they consent to do so , Mrs. Stoneham resume her seat before the tea - tray , and Miss Stoneham retire to a little table by the window , where she be engage in trim a bonnet . 

 " I want to know all about this marriage , Mr. Stoneham , " Gilbert begin , when he have seat himself in a shin mahogany arm - chair by the empty fire - place . " first and foremost , I want you to tell I where Mr. and Mrs. Holbrook be now live . " 

 the parish - clerk shake his head with a stately slowness . 

 " not to be do , sir , " he say : " when Mr. and Mrs. Holbrook leave here they go the Lord know where . they go away the very day they be marry . there be a fly wait for they at the church - door , with their luggage upon it , when the ceremony be over , ready to drive they to Grangewick station . I see they get into it and drive away ; and that be every mortal thing that I know as to what become of they after they be marry in yonder church . " 

 " you do not   know who this Mr. Holbrook be ? " 

 " no more than the babe unborn , sir . he be a stranger in this place , be only here long enough to get the license for his marriage . I should take he to be a gentleman ; but he be not   a pleasant person to speak to rather stand - off - ish in his manner . he be not   the sort of man I should have choose if I have be a pretty young woman like Miss Nowell ; but there be no accounting for taste , and she seem uncommonly fond of he . I never see any one more agitated than she be when they be marry . she be cry in a quiet way all through the service , and when it be over she faint dead - off . I daresay it do seem hard to she to be marry like that , without so much as a friend to give she away . she be in mourning , too , deep mourning . " 

 " can you give I any description of this man this Mr. Holbrook ? " 

 " well , no , sir : he be an ordinary kind of person to look at ; might be any age between thirty and forty ; not a gentleman that I should have take a fancy to myself , as I say before ; but young woman be that wayward and uncertain like , there be no knowing where to have they . " 

 " be Miss Nowell long at Wygrove before her marriage ? " 

 " about three week . she lodge with Miss Long , up the town , a friend of my daughter 's . if you would like to ask any question of Miss Long , our Jemima might step round there with you presently . " 

 " I should be very glad to do so , " Gilbert answer quickly . he ask several more question ; but Mr. Stoneham could give he no information , except as to the bare fact of the marriage . Gilbert know now that the girl he have so fondly love and so entirely trust be utterly lose to he ; that he have be jilt cruelly and heartlessly , as he could but own to himself . yes , she have jilt he have in all probability never love he . he blame himself for have urge his suit too ardently , with little reference to Marian 's own feeling , with a root obstinate conviction that he need only to win she in order to insure the happiness of both . 

 have fully prove Mr. Stoneham 's inability to afford he any further help in this business , Gilbert avail himself of the fair Jemima 's willingness to ' step round " to Miss Long 's domicile with he , in the hope of obtain full information from that lady . while Miss Stoneham be engage in put on her bonnet for this expedition , the clerk propose to take Gilbert across to the church and show he the entry of the marriage in the register . " with a view to the satisfactory settlement of the reward , " Mr. Stoneham add in a fat voice , and with the air of a man to whom twenty pound more or less be an affair of very little moment . 

 Gilbert assent to this , and accompany Mr. Stoneham to a little side - door which admit they into the old church , where the light shine dimly through paint window , in which there seem more leaden framework than glass . the atmosphere of the place be cold even on this sultry July afternoon , and the vestry to which Mr. Stoneham conduct his companion have a damp mouldy smell . 

 he open a cupboard , with a good deal of jingling of a great bunch of key , and produce the register ; a grim - look volume bind in dingy leather , and calculate to inspire gloomy feeling in the mind of the bridegroom and bride who have occasion to inscribe their name therein ; a volume upon which the love and the grace who hover around the entrance to the matrimonial state have shed no ray of glamour . 

 Thomas Stoneham lay this book before Gilbert , open at the page on which Marian 's marriage be record . yes , there be the familiar signature in the fair flow hand he have love so well . it be his Marian , and no other , whom John Holbrook have marry in that gloomy old church . 

 the signature of the bridegroom be in a stiff straight hand , all the letter form with unusual precision , as if the name have be write in a slow laboured way . 

 who could this John Holbrook be ? Gilbert be quite certain that he have never hear the name at Lidford , nor could he believe that if any attachment between this man and Marian Nowell have exist before his own acquaintance with she , Captain Sedgewick would have be so dishonourable as to keep the fact a secret from he . this John Holbrook must need , therefore , be some one who have come to Lidford during Gilbert 's absence from England ; yet Sarah Down have be able to tell he of no new visitor at Hazel Cottage . 

 he copy the record of the marriage on a leaf in his pocket - book , pay Mr. Stoneham a couple of ten - pound note , and leave the church . the clerk 's daughter be wait for he in the little court outside , and they go at once to the house where Miss Nowell have lodge during her residence at Wygrove . 

 it be a house in a neat little terrace on the outskirt of the town ; a house approach by a flight of steep stone step of spotless purity , and a half - glass door , which open at once into a bright airy - look parlour , faintly perfume with rose - leaf and lavender mouldering in the china vase on the mantelpiece . here Gilbert be introduce to Miss Long , a maiden lady of uncertain age , who wear stiff band of suspiciously black hair under an imposing structure of lace and artificial flower , and a rusty black - silk dress , the body of which fit so tightly as to seem like a kind of armour . this lady receive Mr. Fenton very graciously , and declare herself quite ready to give he any information in her power about Miss Nowell . 

 it happen unfortunately , however , that her power be of a most limited extent . 

 " a sweet young lady never live than Miss Nowell , " she say . " I have   have a great many people occupy these apartment since my father 's death leave I throw upon my own resource . I have   have lodger that I might call permanent , in a manner of speak ; but I never have any one that I take to as I take to Miss Nowell , though she be hardly with I three week from first to last . " 

 " do she seem happy in her mind during that time ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " well , no ; I can not say that she do . I should have expect to see a young lady that be go to be married to the man she love much more cheerful and hopeful about the future than Miss Nowell be . she tell I that her uncle have not be dead many week , and I think at first that this be the only grief she have on her mind ; but after some time , when I find she very low and downhearted , and have win upon she to trust I almost as if I have be an old friend , she own to I that she have behave very badly to a gentleman she have be engage to , and that the thought of her wickedness to he prey upon her mind . ' I do not   think any good can ever come of my marriage , Miss Long , ' she say to I ; ' I think I must surely be punish for my falsehood to the good man who love I so truly . but there be some thing in life that seem like fate . they come upon we in a moment , and we have no strength to fight against they . I believe it be my fate to love John Holbrook . there be nothing in this world I could refuse to do for his sake . if he have ask I for my life , I must have give it to he as freely as I give he my love . from the first hour in which I see he he be my master . ' " 

 " this Mr. Holbrook be very fond of she , I suppose ? " 

 " I daresay he be , sir ; but he be not a man that show his feeling very much . they use to go for long walk together , though it be March and cold windy weather , and she always seem happy when he bring her home . he come every evening to drink tea with she , and I use to hear they talk as I sit at work in the next room . she be happy enough when he be with she . it be only when she be alone that she would give way to low spirit and gloomy thought about the future . " 

 " do she ever tell you anything about Mr. Holbrook his position or profession ? how long she have know he ? how and where they have first meet ? " 

 " no , sir . she tell I once that he be not rich ; I think that be about all she ever say of he , except when she speak of his influence over she , and her trust in he . " 

 " have you any idea where they be go to live after their marriage ? " 

 " I can not tell you the name of the place . Miss Nowell say that a friend of Mr. Holbrook 's be go to lend he an old farm - house in a very pretty part of the country . it would be very lonely , she say , and her husband would have sometimes to leave she to attend to his business in London ; but she would not mind that . ' some day , I daresay , he will let I live in London with he , ' she say ; ' but I do not   like to ask he that yet . ' " 

 " do she drop no hint as to the whereabouts of this place to which they be go ? " 

 " it be somewhere in Hampshire ; that be all I can remember . " 

 " I would give a great deal to know more , " Gilbert say with a sigh . " in what manner do this Mr. Holbrook impress you ? you be interested in the young lady , and would therefore naturally be interested in her lover . do he strike you as worthy of she ? " 

 " I can not say that he do , sir , " Miss Long answer doubtfully . " I could see that he have great power over she , though his manner to she be always very gentle ; but I can not say that I take to he myself . I daresay he be a very clever man ; but he have a cold proud way that keep one at a distance from he , and I seem to know no more of he at the last than I have know on the first day I see he . I believe he love Miss Nowell , and that be about all the good I do believe of he . " 

 after this , there be no more to be ask of Miss Long ; so Gilbert thank she for her civility , and bade good evening at once to she and to Miss Stoneham . there be time for he to catch the last coach to Grangewick station . he determine upon go from Grangewick to Lidford , instead of return to London . he want , if possible , to find out something more about this man Holbrook , who must surely have be know to some one at Lidford during his secret courtship of Marian Nowell . 

 he waste two day at Lidford , make inquiry on this subject , in as quiet a manner as possible and in every imaginable quarter ; but without the slight result . no one either at Lidford or Fairleigh have ever hear of Mr. Holbrook . 

 Gilbert 's last inquiry be make in a singular direction . after exhaust every likely channel of information , he have a few hour leave before the departure of the fast train by which he have determine to return to London ; and this leisure he devote to a visit to Heatherly Park , in the chance of find Sir David Forster at home . it be just possible that Mr. Holbrook might be one of Sir David 's innumerable bachelor acquaintance . 

 Gilbert walk from Lidford to Heatherly by that romantic woodland path by which he have go with Marian and her uncle on the bright September afternoon when he first see Sir David 's house . the solitary walk awaken very bitter thought ; the memory of those hope which have then make the sunshine of his life , and without which existence seem a weary purposeless journey across a desert land . 

 Sir David be at home , the woman at the lodge tell he ; and he go on to the house , and ring a great clanging bell , which make an alarming clamour in the utter stillness of the place . 

 a gray - haired old servant answer the summon , and usher Gilbert into the state drawing - room , an apartment with a lofty arched roof , eight long window , and a generally ecclesiastical aspect , which be more suggestive of solemn grandeur than of domestic comfort . 

 here Gilbert wait for about ten minute , at the end of which time the man return , to request that he would be so kind as to go to Sir David 's study . his master be something of an invalid , the man tell Gilbert . 

 they go through the billiard - room to a very snug little apartment , with dark - panel wall and one large window opening upon a rose - garden on the southern side of the house . there be a ponderous carve - oak bookcase on one side of the room ; on all the other the paraphernalia of sporting gunnery and fishing - tackle , small - sword , whip , and boxing - glove artistically arrange against the panelling ; and over the mantelpiece an elaborate collection of meerschaum pipe . through a half - open door Gilbert catch a glimpse of a comfortable bedchamber lead out of this room . 

 Sir David be sit on a low easy - chair near the window , with one leg support on a luxuriously - cushion rest , invent for the relief of gouty subject . although not yet forty , the baronet be a chronic sufferer from this complaint . 

 " my dear Mr. Fenton , how good of you to come to I ! " he exclaim , shake hand very cordially with Gilbert . " here I be , lay by the heel in this dreary old place , and quite alone . you can not   imagine what a treat it be to see a friendly intelligent face from the outer world . " 

 " the purpose of my visit be such a purely selfish one , that I be really ashamed to receive such a kindly greeting , Sir David . if I have know you be here and an invalid , I should have gladly come to see you ; but I do not   know it . I have be at Lidford on a matter of business for the last two day ; and I come here on the hazard of find you , and with a faint hope that you might be able to give I some help in an affair which be supremely important to I . " 

 Sir David Forster look at Gilbert Fenton curiously for a moment , and then take up an empty meerschaum that lie upon a little table near he , and begin to fill it with a thoughtful air . Gilbert have drop into an arm - chair on the opposite side of the open window , and be watch the baronet 's face , puzzle a little by that curious transient expression which have just flit across it . 

 " what be the business ? " Sir David ask presently ; " and how can I be of use to you ? " 

 " I think you know all about my engagement to Miss Nowell , when I be here last September , Sir David , " Gilbert begin presently . 

 " yes , Saltram tell I you be engage ; not but what it be easy enough to see how the land lie , without any telling . " 

 " Miss Nowell have jilt I . I love she too dearly to be able to entertain any vindictive feeling against she ; but I do feel vindictively dispose towards the man who have rob I of she , for I know that only a very powerful influence would have induce she to break faith with I ; and this man must need have know the dishonourable thing he be do when he tempt she away from I . I want to know who he be , Sir David , and how he come to acquire such an influence over my plighted wife . " 

 " my dear Fenton , you be go on so fast ! you say Miss Nowell have jilt you . she be married to some one else , then , I suppose ? " 

 " she be married to a Mr. Holbrook . I come to Lidford the night before last , with the hope of find out something about he ; but all my endeavour have result in failure . it strike I at last , as a kind of forlorn hope , that this Mr. Holbrook might possibly be one of your autumnal visitor ; and I come here to ask you that question . " 

 " no , " answer the baronet ; " I have have no visitor call Holbrook . be the name quite strange to yourself ? " 

 " entirely strange . " 

 " and this Mr. Holbrook be now Miss Nowell 's husband ? and you want to know who he be ? with what end ? " 

 " I want to find the man who have do I the deadly wrong one man can do another . " 

 " my dear fellow , do not   you see that it be fate , and not Mr. Holbrook , that have do you this wrong ? if Miss Nowell have really love you as she ought to have love you , it would have be quite impossible for she to be tempt away from you . it be her destiny to marry this Holbrook , rely upon it ; and have you be on the spot to protect your own interest , the result would have be just the same . believe I , I be very sorry for you , and can fully sympathise with your feeling in this business ; but I can not see what good could possibly arise out of a meeting between you and your fortunate rival . the day of duelling be past ; and even if it be not so , I think you be too generous to seek to deprive Miss Nowell of her husband . " 

 " I do not know about that . there be some wrong which all a man 's Christianity be not wide enough to cover . I think if that man and I be to meet , there would be very little question of mercy on my side . I hold a man who could act as he have act unworthy of all consideration utterly unworthy of the woman he have win from I . " 

 " my dear fellow , you know the old saying . a man who be in love think everything fair . there be no such thing as honour in such a case as this . of course , I do not   want to defend this Holbrook ; I only want to awaken your sens to the absurdity of any vindictive pursuit of the man . if the lady do not love you , believe I you be well out of the business . " 

 " yes , that be what every one would tell I , I daresay , " Gilbert answer impatiently . " but be there to be no atonement for my broken life , render barren to I by this man 's act ? I tell you , Sir David , there be no such thing as pardon for a wrong like this . but I know how foolish this talk must seem to you : there be always something ridiculous in the suffering of a jilted lover . " 

 " not at all , my dear Fenton . I heartily wish that I could be of use to you in this matter ; but there be very little chance of that ; and , believe I , there be only one rational course open to you , which be , to forget Miss Nowell , or Mrs. Holbrook , with all possible assiduity . " 

 Gilbert smile , a melancholy incredulous smile . Sir David 's advice be only the echo of John Saltram 's counsel the counsel which he would receive from every man of the world , no doubt the counsel which he himself would most likely have give to a friend under the same circumstance . 

 Sir David be very cordial , and want his visitor to dine and sleep at Heatherly ; but this Gilbert decline . he be eager to get back to London now that his business be finish . 

 he arrive in town late that night ; and go back to his office - work next day with a dreary feeling that he must need go through the same dull routine day after day in all the time to come , without purpose or hope in his life , only because a man must go on live somehow to the end of his earthly pilgrimage , whether the sun shine upon he or not . 

 he go to Queen Anne 's Court one evening soon after his return , and tell Mr. Nowell all he have discover at Wygrove . the old man show himself keenly interested in his grand - daughter 's fate . 

 " I would give a great deal to see she before I die , " he say . " whatever I have to leave will be her . it may be little or much I will not   speak about that ; but I have   live a hard life , and save where other man would have spend . I should like to see my son 's child ; I should like to have some one of my own flesh and blood about I in my last day . " 

 " would it not be a good plan to put an advertisement into the Times , address to Mrs. Holbrook , from a relation ? she would be likely to answer that , when she would not reply to any appeal come directly from I . " 

 " yes , " answer Jacob Nowell ; " and her husband would let she come to I for the sake of what I may have to leave she . but that can not   be help , I suppose ; it be the fate of a man who live as I have live , to be care for at last only for what he have to give . I will put in such an advertisement as you speak of ; and we will see what come of it . " 

 CHAPTER XII 

 a FRIENDLY COUNSELLOR 


 Gilbert Fenton call several time in the Temple without be able to see John Saltram ; a slip of paper paste on the outer door of that gentleman 's chamber inform the public that he be " out of town , " and that be all . Gilbert take the trouble to penetrate the domicile of the laundress who officiate in Mr. Saltram 's chamber , in order to obtain some more particular information as to her employer 's movement , and after infinite difficulty succeed in find that industrious matron in the remote obscurity of a narrow court near the river . but the laundress could tell Mr. Fenton very little . she do not know whither Mr. Saltram have go , or when he be likely to return . he be one of the most uncertingest gentleman she have to do for ; and he have be out of town a great deal lately ; which be not to be wonder at , consider the try hot weather , when it be not to be suppose that gentlefolk as be free to do what they please would stay in London . it be hard enough upon work people with five child to wash and mend and cook for , and over in the court besides , and provision dearer than they have be these ten year . Gilbert ask if Mr. Saltram have leave any order about his letter ; but the woman tell he , no ; there never be such a careless gentleman about letter . he never care about have they send after he , and would let they lie in the box till the dust get thick upon they . 

 Gilbert leave a brief note for John Saltram with the woman a note beg his friend to come to he when he be next in London ; and have do this , he pay no more visit to the Temple , but wait patiently for Mr. Saltram 's come , feel very sure that his request would not be neglect . if anything could have intensify the gloom of his mind at this time it would have be the absence of that one friend , whom he love well than he have ever love any one in this world , except Marian Nowell . he stay in town all through the blank August and September season , work hard than he have work since the early day of his commercial life , take neither pleasure nor interest in anything , and keep as much as possible out of the way of all his old acquaintance . 

 no answer come to Jacob Nowell 's advertisement , although it appear several time ; and the old man begin to despair of ever see his granddaughter . Gilbert use to drop in upon he sometimes of an evening during this period , at his urgent request . he be interested in the solitary silversmith for Marian 's sake , and very willingly sacrifice an occasional evening for his gratification . he fancy that these visit of his inspire some kind of jealousy in the breast of the sallow - faced , sleek - haired shopman ; who regard he always on these occasion with a look of suppress malevolence , and by every stratagem in his power try to find out the nature of the conversation between the visitor and his employer , make all kind of excuse to come into the parlour , and show himself proof against the most humiliating treatment from his master . 

 " do that young man expect you to leave he money ? and do he look upon I as a possible rival ? " Gilbert ask one night , provoke by the shopman 's conduct . 

 " very likely , " Mr. Nowell answer , with a malicious grin . 

 " one get good service from a man who expect his reward in the future . Luke Tulliver serve I very well indeed , and of course I be not responsible for his delusion . " 

 " do you know , Mr. Nowell , that be a man I should scarcely care to trust . to my mind there be a warning of danger in his countenance . " 

 " my dear sir , I have never trust any one in my life , " answer the silversmith promptly . " I do not   for a moment suppose that Luke Tulliver would be honest if I give he an opportunity to cheat I . as to the badness of his countenance , that be so much the well . I like to deal with an obvious rogue . the really dangerous subject be your honest fool , who go on straight enough till he have lull one into a false security , and then turn thief all at once at the instigation of some clever tempter . " 

 " that young man live in the house with you , I suppose ? " 

 " yes ; my household consist of Luke Tulliver , and an old woman who do the cooking and other work . there be a couple of garret at the top of the house where the two sleep ; my own bedroom be over this ; and the room over the shop be full of picture and other unsaleable stuff , which I have seldom occasion to show anybody . my business be not what it once be , Mr. Fenton . I have make some rather lucky hit in the way of picture - dealing in the course of my business career , but I have not   do a big line lately . " 

 Gilbert be inclined to believe that Jacob Nowell be a much rich man than he care to confess , and that the fortune which Marian Nowell might inherit in the future be a considerable one . the old man have all the attribute of a miser . the house in which he live have the aspect of a place in which money have be make and hoard day by day through long dull year . 

 it be not until the end of October that John Saltram make his appearance at his old friend 's lodging . he have just come up from the country , and be look his well bright and young than Gilbert have see he look for a long time . 

 " my dear Jack , I begin to think I should never see you again . what have you be do all this time , and where have you be ? " 

 " I have be hard at work , as usual , for the review , down Oxford way , at a little place on the river . and how have the world be go with you , Gilbert ? I see your advertisement offer a reward for evidence of Miss Nowell 's marriage . be there any result ? " 

 " yes ; I know all about the marriage now , but I do not   know who or what the man be , " Gilbert answer ; and then go on to give his friend a detailed account of his experience at Wygrove , and his visit to Sir David Forster . 

 " my dear foolish Gilbert , " say John Saltram , " how much useless trouble you have give yourself ! be it not enough to know that this girl have break faith with you ? I think , be I in your place , that would be the end of the story for I . and now you know more than that you know that she be another man 's wife . if you find she , nothing can come of it . " 

 " it be the man I want to find , John ; the man whom I shall make it the business of my life to discover . " 

 " for what good ? " 

 " for the deadly harm to he , " Gilbert answer moodily . " if ever he and I meet , I will have some payment for my broken life ; some compensation for my ruin hope . we two should not meet and part lightly , rely upon it . " 

 " you can make no excuse for his love , that fatal irresistible passion , which outweigh truth and honour when they be set in the opposite scale . I do not think you could be so hard , Gilbert ; I think you would have more mercy on the man who wrong you . " 

 " I could pardon any injury but this . I will never forgive this . " 

 John Saltram shrug his shoulder with a deprecate air . 

 " it be a mistake , my dear fellow , " he say . " life be not long enough for these strong passion . there be nothing in the world worth the price these bitter hatred and stormy anger cost we . you have throw away a great deal of deep feeling on a lady , whose misfortune it be not to be able to return your affection as she might have do as you most fully deserve at her hand . why waste any further emotion in regret that be as useless as they be foolish ? " 

 " you may as well ask I why I exist , " Gilbert answer quietly . " regret for all I have lose be a part of my life . " 

 after this there be no more to be say , and Mr. Saltram go on to speak of pleasanter topic . the two man din together , and sit by the fire afterwards with a bottle of claret between they , smoke their cigar , and talk till late into the night . 

 it be not to be suppose that Adela Branston 's name could be omit entirely from this confidential talk . 

 " I have see nothing and hear very little of she while I have be away , " John Saltram say , in answer to a question of Gilbert 's ; " but I call in Cavendish - square this afternoon , and be fortunate enough to find she at home . she want I to dine with she next Sunday , and I half promise to do so . will you come too ? I know that she would be glad to see you . " 

 " I can not see that I be want , John . " 

 " but I tell you that you be want . I wish you to go with I . Mrs. Branston like you amazingly , if you care to know the opinion of so frivolous a person . " 

 " I be very much flatter by Mrs. Branston 's kindly estimate of I , but I do not think I have any claim to it , except the fact that I be your friend . I shall be happy to go with you on Sunday , if you really wish it . " 

 " I do really wish it . I shall drop Mrs. Branston a line to say you will come . she ask I to bring you whenever I have an opportunity . the dinner - hour be seven . I will call for you here a few minute before . I do not   promise you a very lively evening , remember . there will only be Adela , and a lady she have take as her companion . " 

 " I do not   care about lively evening . I have be nowhere in society since I return from Melbourne . I have do with all that kind of thing . " 

 " my dear Gilbert , that sort of renunciation will never do , " John Saltram say earnestly . " a man can not turn his back upon society at your age . life lie all before you , and it rest with yourself to create a happy future . let the dead bury their dead . " 

 " yes , John ; and what be leave for the living when that burial be over ? I do not   want to make myself obnoxious by whine over my trouble , but they be not to be lessen by philosophy , and I can do nothing but bear they as well I may . I have long be grow tired of society , in the conventional acceptation of the word , and all the stereotyped pleasure of a commercial man 's life . those thing be less than nothing when a man have nothing bright and fair beyond they no inner life by which the common thing of this world be make precious . it be only drop out of the arena a little early than I might have do otherwise . I have a notion that I shall wind up my affair next year , sell my business , and go abroad . I could manage to retire upon a very decent income , in spite of my loss the other day . " 

 " do not   dream of that , Gilbert ; for heaven 's sake , do not   dream of anything so mad as that . what would a man of your age be without some kind of career ? a mere purposeless wanderer on the face of the earth . Stick to business , dear old fellow . believe I , there be nothing like work to make a man forget any foolish trouble of this kind . and you will forget it , Gilbert , be assure of that . if I be not certain it would be so , I should " 

 he stop suddenly , star absently at the fire with a darken brow . 

 " you would do what , John ? " 

 " hate this man Holbrook almost as savagely as you hate he , for have come between you and your happiness . yet , if Marian Nowell do not love you as a wife should love her husband , with all her heart and soul it be ten thousand time well that the knot should be cut in time , however roughly . think what your misery would have be if you have discover after your marriage that her heart have never be really your . " 

 " I can not imagine that possible . I have no shadow of doubt that I should have succeed in win her heart if this man have not rob I of she . my absence give he his opportunity . have I be at hand to protect my own interest , I do not think his influence could have prevail against I . " 

 " it be quite natural that you should think that , " John Saltram say gravely . " yet you may be mistake . a woman 's love be such a capricious thing , and so often bestow upon the least deserve amongst those who seek it . " 

 after this they be silent for some time , and then Gilbert tell his friend about his acquaintance with Jacob Nowell , and the old man 's futile endeavour to find his grandchild ; to all of which Mr. Saltram listen attentively . 

 " then you fancy there be a good bit of money in question ? " he say , when Gilbert tell he everything . 

 " I fancy so . but I have no actual ground for the belief . the place in which the old man live be poor enough , and he have carefully abstain from any hint as to what he might leave his granddaughter . whatever it be , Marian ought to have it ; and there be very little chance of that , unless she come forward in response to Mr. Nowell 's advertisement . " 

 " it be a pity she should lose the chance of this inheritance , certainly , " say Mr. Saltram . 

 and then the conversation change , and they talk of other subject until it be time for they to part . 

 John Saltram walk back to the Temple in a very sombre mood , meditate upon his friend 's trouble . 

 " poor old Gilbert , " he say to himself , " this business have touch he more deeply than I could have think possible . I wish thing have happen otherwise . what be it Lady Macbeth say ? ' Naught 's have , all be spend , when our desire be get without content . ' I wonder whether the fulfilment of one 's heart 's desire ever do bring perfect contentment ? I think not . there be always something want . and if a man come by his wish basely , there be a taint of poison in the wine of life that neutralize all its sweetness . " 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 MRS . PALLINSON have view 


 at seven o'clock on Sunday evening , as the neighbouring church bell be just sound their last peal , Mr. Fenton find himself on the threshold of Mrs. Branston 's house in Cavendish - square . it be rather a gloomy mansion , pervade throughout with evidence of its late owner 's oriental career ; old indian cabinet ; ponderous chair of elaborately - carve ebony , clumsy in form and barbaric in design ; curious old china and lacquered ware of every kind , from gigantic vas to the tiny cup and saucer ; ivory temple , and god in silver and clay , crowd the drawing - room and the broad landing on the staircase . the curtain and chair - cover be of indian embroidery ; the carpet of oriental manufacture . everything have a gaudy semi - barbarous aspect . 

 Mrs. Branston receive her guest in the back drawing - room , a small and somewhat snugger apartment than the spacious chamber in front , which be dimly visible in the light of a single moderator lamp and the red glow of a fire through the wide - open archway between the two room . in the inner room the lamp be bright , and the fire burn cheerily ; and here Mrs. Branston have establish for herself a comfortable nook in a deep velvet - cushion arm - chair , very low and capacious , shelter luxuriously from possible draught by a high seven - leave japanese screen . the fair Adela be a chilly personage , and like to bask in her easy - chair before the fire . she look very pretty this evening , in her dense black dress , with the airy pretence of a widow 's cap perch on her rich auburn hair , and a voluminous indian shawl of vivid scarlet make a drapery about her shoulder . she be evidently very pleased to see John Saltram , and give a cordial welcome to his friend . on the opposite side of the fire - place there be a tall , rather grim - look lady , also in mourning , and with an elaborate headdress of bugle and ornament of a feathery and beady nature , which be suppose to be flower . about her neck this lady wear numerous row of jet bead , from which depend cross and locket of the same material : she have jet earring and jet bracelet ; and have altogether a beaded and bugle appearance , which would have be eminently fascinating to the untutored taste of a North American Indian . 

 this lady be Mrs. Pallinson , a widow of limited mean , and a distant relation of Adela Branston 's . leave quite alone after her husband 's death , and feel herself thoroughly helpless , Adela have summon this experienced matron to her aid ; whereupon Mrs. Pallinson have give up a small establishment in the far north of London , which she be in the habit of speak about on occasion as her humble dwelling , and have take up her quarter in Cavendish - square , where she be a power of dread to the servant . 

 Gilbert fancy that Mrs. Pallinson be by no mean too favourably disposed towards John Saltram . she have sharp black eye , very much like the jet bead with which her person be decorate , and with these she keep a close watch upon Mrs. Branston and Mr. Saltram when the two be talk together . Gilbert see how great an effort it cost she at these time to keep up the commonplace conversation which he have commence with she , and how intently she be try to listen to the talk upon the other side of the fire - place . 

 the dinner be an admirable one , the wine perfection , Mr. Branston have be a past - master of the art of good living , and have stock his cellar with a view to a much long life than have be grant to he ; the attendance be careful and complete ; the dining - room , with its rather old - fashioned furniture and heavy crimson hanging , a picture of comfort ; and Mrs. Branston a most charming hostess . even Gilbert be fain to forget his own trouble and enjoy life a little in that agreeable society . 

 the two gentleman accompany the lady back to the drawing - room . there be a grand piano in the front room , and to this Adela Branston go at Mr. Saltram 's request , and begin to play some of Handel 's oratorio music , while he stand beside the piano , talk to she as she play . Mrs. Pallinson and Gilbert be thus leave alone in the back room , and the lady do she good to improve the occasion by extort what information she could from Mr. Fenton about his friend . 

 " Adela tell I that you and Mr. Saltram be friend of very long standing , Mr. Fenton , " she begin , fan herself slowly with a shin black fan as she sit opposite Gilbert , awful of aspect in the sombre splendour of her bead and bugle . 

 " yes ; we be at Oxford together , and have be fast friend ever since . " 

 " indeed ! how really delightful ! the young man of the present day appear to I generally so incapable of a sincere friendship . and you and Mr. Saltram have be friend all that time ? he be a literary man , I understand . I have not have the pleasure of read any of his work ; but Adela tell I he be extremely clever . " 

 " he be very clever . " 

 " and steady , I hope . literary man be so apt to be wild and dissipate ; and Adela have such a high opinion of your friend . I hope he be steady . " 

 " I scarcely know what a lady 's notion of steadiness may involve , " Gilbert answer , smile ; " but I daresay when my friend marry he will be steady enough . I can not see that literary taste and dissipate habit have any natural affinity . I should rather imagine that a man with resource of that kind would be likely to lead a quieter life than a man without such resource . " 

 " do you really think so ? I fancy that artist and poet and people of that kind be altogether a dangerous class . and you think that Mr. Saltram will be steady when he be marry ? he be engage to be marry , I conclude by your manner of say that . " 

 " I have no idea my word imply anything of the kind . no , I do not think John Saltram be engage . " 

 Mrs. Pallinson glance towards the piano , where the two figure seem very close to each other in the dim light of the room . Adela 's playing have be go on in a desultory kind of manner , break every now and then by her conversation with John Saltram , and have evidently be intend to give pleasure only to that one listener . 

 while she be still play in this careless fitful way , a servant announce Mr. Pallinson ; and a gentleman enter whom Gilbert have no difficulty in recognize as the son of the lady he have be converse with . this new - comer be a tall pale - faced young man , with intensely penetrate black eye exactly like his mother 's , sharp well - cut feature , and an extreme precision of dress and manner . his hand , which be small and thin , be remarkable for their whiteness , and be set - off by spotless wristband , which it be his habit to smooth fondly with his slim finger in the interval of his discourse . Mrs. Pallinson rise and embrace this gentleman with stately affection . 

 " my son Theobald Mr. Fenton , " she say . " my son be a medical practitioner , reside at Maida - hill ; and it be a pleasure to he to spend an occasional evening with his cousin Adela and myself . " 

 " whenever the exigency of professional life leave I free to enjoy that happiness , " Mr. Pallinson add in a brisk semi - professional manner . " Adela have be give you some music , I see . I hear one of Handel 's chorus as I come upstairs . " 

 he go into the front drawing - room , shake hand with Mrs. Branston , and establish himself with a permanent air beside the piano . Adela do not seem particularly glad to see he ; and John Saltram , who have meet he before in Cavendish - square , receive he with supreme indifference . 

 " I be bless , as I daresay you perceive , Mr. Fenton , in my only son , " Mrs. Pallinson say , when the young man have withdraw to the adjoining apartment . " it be my misfortune to lose an admirable husband very early in life ; and I have be ever since that loss wholly devoted to my son Theobald . my care have be amply reward by his goodness . he be a most estimable and talented young man , and have already attain an excellent position in the medical profession . " 

 " you have reason to be proud of he , " Gilbert answer kindly . 

 " I be proud of he , Mr. Fenton . he be the sole delight and chief object of my life . his career up to this hour have be all that the fond mother could desire . if I can only see he happily and advantageously marry , I shall have nothing leave to wish for . " 

 " indeed ! " think Gilbert . " then I begin to perceive the reason of Mrs. Pallinson 's anxiety about John Saltram . she want to secure Mrs. Branston 's handsome fortune for this son of her . not much chance of that , I think , fascinating as the doctor may be . Plain John Saltram stand to win that prize . " 

 they go into the front drawing - room presently , and hear Mr. Pallinson play the " Hallelujah Chorus , " arrange as a duet , with his cousin . he be a young man who possess several accomplishment in a small way could sing a little , and play the piano and guitar a little , sketch a little , and be guilty of occasional effusion in the poetical line which be the pale , most invertebrate reflection of Owen Meredith . in the Maida - hill and St. John's - wood district he be account an acquisition for an evening party ; and his dulcet accent and engage manner have render he a favourite with the young mother of the neighbourhood , who believe implicitly in Mr. Pallinson 's gray powder when their little one ' digestive organ have be impair by injudicious diet , and confide in Mr. Pallinson 's carefully - express opinion as the fiat of an inscrutable power . 

 Mr. Theobald Pallinson himself cherish a very agreeable opinion of his own merit . life seem to he make on purpose that Theobald Pallinson should flourish and succeed therein . he could hardly have form any idea of the world except as an arena for himself . he be not especially give to metaphysic ; but it would not have be very difficult for he to believe that the entire universe be an emanation from the brain of Theobald Pallinson a phenomenal world exist only in his sense of sight and touch . happy in this opinion of himself , it be not to be suppose that the surgeon have any serious doubt of ultimate success with his cousin . he regard John Saltram as an interloper , who have gain ground in Mrs. Branston 's favour only by the accident of his own absence from the stage . the Pallinsons have not be on visit term with Adela during the life of the East indian merchant , who have not show himself favourably disposed to his wife 's relation ; and by this mean Mr. Saltram have enjoy advantage which Theobald Pallinson tell himself could not have be his , have he , Theobald , be at hand to engage his cousin 's attention by those superior quality of mind and person which must need have utterly outshone the other . all that Mr. Pallinson want be opportunity ; and that be now afford he , he look upon the happy issue of event as a certainty , and already contemplate the house in Cavendish - square , the indian jar and cabinet , the ivory chessman and filigree - silver rosewater - bottle , the inlay desk and japanese screen , the ponderous plate and rare old wine , with a sense of prospective proprietorship . 

 it seem as if John Saltram have favour this gentleman 's view by his prolong absence from the scene , hold himself completely aloof from Adela Branston at a time when , have he be inclined to press his suit , he might have follow she up closely . Mrs. Branston have be not a little wound by this apparent neglect on the part of one whom she love well than anything else in the world ; but she be inclined to believe any thing rather than that John Saltram do not care for she ; and she have contrive to console herself with the idea that his avoidance of she have be prompt by a delicate consideration for her reputation , and a respect for the early period of her mourning . to - night , in his society , she have an air of happiness which become she wonderfully ; and Gilbert Fenton fancy that a man must need be hard and cold whose heart could not be win by so bright and gracious a creature . 

 she speak more than once , in a half - playful way , of Mr. Saltram 's absence from London ; but the deep feeling underneath the lightness of her manner be very evident to Gilbert . 

 " I suppose you will be run away from town again directly , " she say , " without give any one the faint notice of your intention . I can not   think what charm it be that you find in country life . I have so often hear you profess your indifference to shooting , and the ordinary routine of rustic existence . perhaps the secret be , that you fear your reputation as a man of fashion would suffer be you to be see in London at such a barbarous season as this . " 

 " I have never rejoice in a reputation for fashion , " Mr. Saltram answer , with his quiet smile a smile that give a wonderful brightness to his face ; " and I think I like London in the autumn well than at any other time . one have room to move about . I have be in the country of late because I really do appreciate rural surrounding , and have find myself able to write well in the perfect quiet of rural life . " 

 " it be rather hard upon your friend that you should devote all your day to literature . " 

 " and still hard upon the reading public , perhaps . but , my dear Mrs. Branston , remember , I must write to live . " 

 Adela give a little impatient sigh . she be think how gladly she would have make this man master of her ample fortune ; wonder whether he would ever claim from she the allegiance she be so ready to give . 

 Mr. Pallinson do his good to engage his cousin 's attention during the rest of the evening . he bring she her tea - cup , and hover about she while she sip the beverage with that graceful air of suppress tenderness which constant practice in the drawing - room of Maida - hill have render almost natural to he ; but , do what he would , he could not distract Mrs. Branston 's thought and look from John Saltram . it be on he that her eye be fix while the accomplished Theobald be give she a lively account of a concert at the Eyre Arms ; and it be the fascination of his presence which make her answer at random to her cousin 's question about the last volume of the Laureate 's , which she have be lately read . even Mr. Pallinson , obtuse as he be apt to be when call upon to comprehend any fact derogatory to his own self - esteem , be fain to confess to himself that this evening 's effort be futile , and that this dark - faced stranger be the favourite for those matrimonial stake he have enter himself to run for . he look at Mr. Saltram with a critical eye many time in the course of the evening , wonder what possible merit any sensible woman could perceive in such a man . but then , as Theobald Pallinson reflect , the misfortune be that so few woman be sensible ; and it be gradually become evident to he that Michael Branston 's widow be amongst the most foolish of her sex . 

 Mrs. Pallinson keep a sharp watch upon Adela throughout the evening , plunge into the conversation every now and then with a somewhat dictatorial and infallible air , and generally contrive to drag some praise of Theobald into her talk : now dilate rapturously upon that fever case which he have manage so wonderfully the other day , prove his judgment superior to that of an eminent consulting physician ; anon launch out into laudation of his last poem , which have be set to music by a young lady in St. John's - wood ; and by - and - by inform the company of her son 's artistic talent , and his extraordinary capacity as a judge of picture . to these thing the surgeon himself listen with a deprecate air , smooth his wristband , and caress his slim white hand , while he playfully reprove his parent for her maternal weakness . 

 Mr. Pallinson hold his ground near his cousin 's chair till the last moment , while John Saltram sit apart by one of the table , listlessly turn over a volume of engraving , and only look up at long interval to join in the conversation . he have an absent weary look , which puzzle Gilbert Fenton , who , be only a secondary personage in this narrow circle , have ample leisure to observe his friend . 

 the three gentleman leave at the same time , Mr. Pallinson drive away in a neat miniature brougham , after politely offer to convey his cousin 's guest to their destination . it be a bright starlight night , and Gilbert walk to the Temple with John Saltram , through the quiet of the street lead east - ward . they light their cigar as they leave the square , and walk for some time in a friendly companionable silence . when they do speak , their talk be naturally of Adela Branston . 

 " I think she be really charming to - night , " Gilbert say , " in spite of that fellow 's effort to absorb her attention . it be pretty easy to see how the land lie in that direction ; and if such a rival be likely to injure you , you have a very determined one in Mr. Pallinson . " 

 " yes ; the surgeon have evidently fix his hope upon poor old Michael Branston 's money . but I do not   think he will succeed . " 

 " you will not allow he to do so , I hope ? " 

 " I do not   know about that . then you really admire the little woman , Gilbert ? " 

 " very much ; as much as I have ever admire any woman except Marian Nowell . " 

 " ah , your Marian be a star , single and alone in her brightness , like that planet up yonder ! but Adela Branston be a good little soul , and will make a charming wife . Gilbert , I wish to heaven you would fall in love with she ! " 

 Gilbert Fenton star aghast at his companion , as he toss the end of his cigar into the gutter . 

 " why , John , you must be mad to say such a thing . " 

 " no , it be by no mean a mad notion . I want to see you cure , Gilbert . I do like you , dear boy , you know , as much as it be possible for a selfish worthless fellow like I to like any man . I would give a great deal to see you happy ; and I be sure that you might be so as Adela Branston 's husband . I grant you that I be the favourite at present ; but she be just the sort of woman to be win by any man who would really prove himself worthy of she . her liking for I be a mere idle fancy , which would soon die out for want of fuel . you be my superior in every way young , handsomer , well . why should you not go in for this thing , Gil ? " 

 " because I have no heart to give any woman , John . and even if I be free , I would not give my heart to a woman whose affection have to be divert from another channel before it could be bestow upon I . I can not   imagine what have put such a preposterous idea into your head , or why it be that you shrink from improve your own chance with Mrs. Branston . " 

 " you must not wonder at anything that I do or say , Gilbert . it be my nature to do strange thing my destiny to take the wrong turning in life ! " 

 " when shall I see you again ? " Gilbert ask , when they be part at the Temple gate . 

 " I can scarcely tell you that . I must go back to Oxford to - morrow . " 

 " so soon ? " 

 " yes , my work get on well down there . I will let you know directly I return to London . " 

 on this they part , Gilbert considerably mystify by his friend 's conduct , but not care to push his question far . he have his own affair to think of , that one business which absorb almost the whole of his thought the business of his search for the man who have rob he of his promise wife , this interval , in which he remain inactive , devote himself to the duty of his commercial life , be only a pause in his labour . he be not the less bent upon bring about a face - to - face meeting between himself and Marian 's husband because of this brief suspension of his effort . 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 FATHER and son 


 while Gilbert Fenton be deliberate what step to take next in his quest of his unknown enemy , a gentleman arrive at a small hotel near Charing Cross a gentleman who be evidently a stranger to England , and whose portmanteau and other travel paraphernalia bear the name of New York manufacturer . he be a portly individual of middle age , and be still eminently handsome . he dress well , live expensively , and have altogether a prosperous appearance . he take care to inform the landlord of the hotel that he be not an American , but have return to the land of his birth after an absence of something like fifteen year , and after realize a handsome fortune upon the other side of the Atlantic . he be a very gracious and communicative person , and seem to take life in an easy agreeable manner , like a man whose habit it be to look on the bright side of all thing , provide his own comfort be secure . Norton Percival be the name on this gentleman 's luggage , and on the card which he give to the waiter whom he desire to look after his letter . after din sumptuously on the evening of his arrival in London , this Mr. Percival stroll out in the autumn darkness , and make his way through the more obscure street between Charing Cross and wardour - street . the way seem familiar enough to he , and he only pause now and then to take note of some alteration in the building which he have to pass . the last twenty year have not make much change in this neighbourhood , and the traveller from New York find little to surprise he . 

 " the place look just as dull and dingy as it use to look when I be a lad , " he say to himself . " I daresay I shall find the old court unchanged in all these year . but shall I find the old man alive ? I doubt that . dead more likely , and his money go to stranger . I wonder whether he have much money , or whether he be really as poor as he make himself out . it be difficult to say . I know I make he bleed pretty freely , at one time and another , before he turn rusty ; and it be just possible I may have have pretty nearly all he have to give . " 

 he be in wardour - street by this time , look at the dimly - light shop where broker ' ware of more or less value , old oak carving , doubtful picture , and rust armour loom duskily upon the passer - by . at the corner of Queen Anne 's Court he pause , and peer curiously into the narrow alley . 

 " the court be still here , at any rate , " he mutter to himself , " and I shall soon settle the other question . " 

 his heart beat fast than it be will not to beat as he draw near his destination . be it any touch of real feeling , or only selfish apprehension , that quicken its throbbing ? the man 's life have be so utterly reckless of other , that it would be dangerous to give he credit for any affectionate yearn any natural remorseful pang in such a moment as this . he have live for self , and self alone ; and his own interest be involve in the issue of to - night . 

 a few step bring he before Jacob Nowell 's window . yes , it be just as he remember it twenty year before the same dingy old silver , the same little heap of gold , the same tray of tarnished jewelry glimmer in the faint light of a solitary gas - burner behind the murky glass . on the door - plate there be still Jacob Nowell 's name . yet all this might mean nothing . the grave might have close over the old silversmith , and the interest of trade necessitate the preservation of the familiar name . 

 the gentleman call himself Percival go into the shop . how well he remember the sharp jangling sound of the bell ! and how intensely he have hat it and all the surrounding of his father 's sordid life in the day when he be pursue his headlong career as a fine gentleman , and only come to Queen Anne 's Court for money ! he remember what an incubus the shop have be upon he ; what a pursue phantom and perpetual image of his degradation in the day of his University life , when he be incessantly haunt by the dread that his father 's social status would be discover . the atmosphere of the place bring back all the old feeling , and he be young again , a nervous supplicant for money , which be likely to be refuse to he . 

 the sharp peal of the bell produce Mr. Luke Tulliver , who emerge from a little den in a corner at the back of the shop , where he have be engage copying item into a stock - book by the light of a solitary tallow - candle . the stranger look like a customer , and Mr. Tulliver receive he graciously , turn up the gas over the counter , which have be burn at a diminished and economical rate hitherto . 

 " do you wish to look at anything in antique silver , sir ? " he ask briskly . " we have some very handsome specimen of the Queen Anne period . " 

 " no , I do not   want to look at anything . I want to know whether Jacob Nowell be still live ? " 

 " yes , sir . Mr. Nowell be my master . you might have notice his name upon the door - plate if you have look ! do you wish to see he ? " 

 " I do . tell he that I be an old friend , just come from America . " 

 Luke Tulliver go into the parlour behind the half - glass door , Norton Percival follow upon he closely . he hear the old man 's voice say , 

 " I have no friend in America ; but you may tell the person to come in ; I will see he . " 

 the voice tremble a little ; and the silversmith have raise himself from his chair , and be look eagerly towards the door as Norton Percival enter , not care to wait for any more formal invitation . the two man face each other silently in the dim light from one candle on the mantelpiece , Jacob Nowell look intently at the bearded face of his visitor . 

 " you can go , Tulliver , " he say sharply to the shopman . " I wish to be alone with this gentleman . " 

 Luke Tulliver depart with his usual reluctant air , close the door as slowly as it be possible for he to close it , and star at the stranger till the last moment that it be possible for he to stare . 

 when he be go the old man take the candle from the mantelpiece , and hold it up before the bearded face of the traveller . 

 " yes , yes , yes , " he say slowly ; " at last ! it be you , Percival , my only son . I think you be dead long ago . I have a right to consider you dead . " 

 " if I have think my existence could be a matter of interest to you , I should hardly have so long refrain from all communication with you . but your letter lead I to suppose you utterly indifferent to my fate . " 

 " I offer you and your wife a home . " 

 " yes , but on condition that be impossible to I . I have some pride in those day . my education have not fit I to stand behind a counter and drive hard bargain with dealer of doubtful honesty . nor could I bring my wife to such a home as this . " 

 " the time come when you leave that poor creature without any home , " say the old man sternly . 

 " necessity have no law , my dear father . you may imagine that my life , without a profession and without any reliable resource , have be rather precarious . when I seem to have act worst , I have be only the slave of circumstance . " 

 " indeed ! and have you no pity for the fate of your wife , no interest in the life of your only child ? " 

 " my wife be a poor helpless creature , who contrive to make my life wretche , " Mr. Nowell , alias Percival , answer coolly . " I give she every sixpence I possess when I send her home to England ; but luck go dead against I for a long time after that , and I could neither send her money nor go to she . when I hear of her death , I hear in an indirect way that my child have be adopt by some old fool of a half - pay officer ; and I be naturally glad of an accident which relieve I of a heavy incubus . an opportunity occur about the same time of my enter on a tolerably remunerative career as agent for some belgian ironwork in America ; and I have no option but to close with the offer at once or lose the chance altogether . I sail for New York within a fortnight after poor Lucy 's death , and have live in America for the last fifteen year . I have contrive to establish a tolerably flourish trade there on my own account ; a trade that only need capital to become one of the first in New York . " 

 " Capital ! " echo Jacob Nowell ; " I think there be something want . it would have be a foolish fancy to suppose that affection could have have anything to do with your come to I . " 

 " my dear father , it be surely possible that affection and interest may sometimes go together . be I a pauper , I would not venture to present myself before you at all ; but as a tolerably prosperous trader , with the ability to propose an alliance that should be to our mutual advantage , I consider I might fairly approach you . " 

 " I have no money to invest in your trade , " the old man answer sternly . " I be a very poor man , impoverished for life by the wicked extravagance of your youth . if you have come to I with any hope of obtain money from I , you have waste time and trouble . " 

 " let that subject drop , then , " Percival Nowell say lightly . " I suppose you have some remnant of regard for I , in spite of our old misunderstanding , and that my coming be not quite indifferent to you . " 

 " no , " the other answer , with a touch of melancholy ; " it be not indifferent to I . I have wait for your return these many year . you might have find I more tenderly dispose towards you , have you come early ; but there be some feeling which seem to wear out as a man grow old , affection that grow pale day by day , like colour fade in the sun . still , I be glad to see you once more before I die . you be my only son , and you must need be something near to I than the rest of the world , in spite of all that I have suffer at your hand . " 

 " I could not come back to England soon than this , " the young man say presently . " I have a hard battle to fight out yonder . " 

 there have be very little appearance of emotion upon either side so far . Percival Nowell take thing as coolly as it be his habit to take everything , while his father carefully conceal whatever deep feeling might be stir in the depth of his heart by this unexpected return . 

 " you do not ask any question about the fate of your only child , " the old man say , by - and - by . 

 " my dear father , that be of course a subject of lively interest to I ; but I do not suppose that you could be in a position to give I any information upon that point . " 

 " I do happen to know something about your daughter , but not much . " 

 Jacob Nowell go on to tell his son all that he have hear from Gilbert Fenton respect Marian 's marriage . of his own advertisement , and waste endeavour to find she , he say nothing . 

 " and this fellow whom she have jilt be pretty well off , I suppose ? " Percival say thoughtfully . 

 " he be an australian merchant , and , I should imagine , in prosperous circumstance . " 

 " foolish girl ! and this Holbrook be no doubt an adventurer , or he would scarcely have marry she in such a secret way . have you any wish that she should be find ? " 

 " yes , I have a fancy for see she before I die . she be my own flesh and blood , like you , and have not injure I as you have . I should like to see she . " 

 " and if she happen to take your fancy , you would leave she all your money , I suppose ? " 

 " who tell you that I have money to leave ? " cry the old man sharply . " have I not say that I be a poor man , hopelessly impoverished by your extravagance ? " 

 " Bah , my dear father , that be all nonsense . my extravagance be a question of nearly twenty year ago . if I have swamp all you possess in those day which I do not   for a moment believe you have have ample time to make a fresh fortune since then . you would never have live all those year in Queen Anne 's Court , except for the sake of money - making . why , the place stink of money . I know your trick : buy silver from man who be in too great a hurry to sell it to be particular about the price ; lend money at sixty per cent , a sixty which come to eighty before the transaction be finish . a man do not lead such a life as yours for nothing . you be roll in money , and you mean to punish I by leave it all to Marian . " 

 the silversmith grow pale with anger during this speech of his son 's . 

 " you be a consummate scoundrel , " he say , " and be at liberty to think what you please . I tell you , once for all , I be as poor as Job . but if I have a million , I would not give you a sixpence of it . " 

 " so be it , " the other answer gaily . " I have not perform the duty of a parent very punctually hitherto ; but I do not   mind take some trouble to find this girl while I be in England , in order that she may not lose her chance with you . " 

 " you need give yourself no trouble on that score . Mr. Fenton have promise to find she for I . " 

 " indeed ! I should like to see this Mr. Fenton . " 

 " you can see he if you please ; but you be scarcely likely to get a warm reception in that quarter . Mr. Fenton know what you have be to your daughter and to I . " 

 " I be not go to fle myself into his arm . I only want to hear all he can tell I about Marian . " 

 " how long do you mean to stay in England ? " 

 " that be entirely dependent upon the result of my visit . I have hop that if I find you live , which I most earnestly desire might be the case , I should find in you a friend and coadjutor . I be employ in start a great iron company , which be likely I may say certain to result in large gain to all concerned in it ; and I fancy I should experience no difficulty in secure your co - operation . there be the prospectus of the scheme "   he fling a heap of print paper on the table before his father , " and there be not a line in they that I can not guarantee on my credit as a man of business . you can look over they at your leisure , or not , as you please . I think you must know that I always have an independent spirit , and would be the last of mankind to degrade myself by any servile attempt to alter your line of conduct towards I . " 

 " independent spirit ! yes ! " cry the old man in a mocking tone ; " a son extort every sixpence he can from his father and mother ay , Percy , from his weak love mother ; I know who rob I to send you money and then , when he can extort no more , boast of his independence . but that will do . there be no need that we should quarrel . after twenty year ' severance , we can afford to let bygone be bygone . I have tell you that I be glad to see you . if you come to I with disintereste feeling , that be enough . you may take back your prospectus . I have nothing to embark in Yankee speculation . if your scheme be a good one , you will find plenty of enterprise spirit willing to join you ; if it be a bad one , I daresay you will contrive to find dupe . you can come and see I again when you please . and now good - night . I find this kind of talk rather tiring at my age . " 

 " one word before I leave you , " say Percival . " on reflection , I think it will be as well to say nothing about my presence in England to this Mr. Fenton . I shall be more free to hunt for Marian without his co - operation , even suppose he be inclined to give it . you have tell I all that he could tell I , I daresay . " 

 " I believe I have . " 

 " precisely . therefore no possible good could come of an encounter between he and I , and I shall be glad if you will keep my name dark . " 

 " as you please , though I can see no reason for secrecy in the matter . " 

 " it be not a question of secrecy , but only of prudential reserve . " 

 " it may be as you wish , " answer the old man , carelessly . " good - night . " 

 he shake hand with his son , who depart without have break bread in his father 's house , a little dash by the coldness of his reception , but not entirely without hope that some profit might arise to he out of this connection in the future . 

 " the girl must be find , " he say to himself . " I be convinced there have be a great fortune make in that dingy hole . well that it should go to she than to a stranger . I be very sorry she be marry ; but if this Holbrook be the adventurer I suppose he , the marriage may come to nothing . yes ; I must find she . a father return from foreign land be rather a romantic notion the sort of notion a girl be pretty sure to take kindly to . " 

 CHAPTER XV 

 on the TRACK 


 Gilbert Fenton see no more of his friend John Saltram after that Sunday evening which they have spend together in Cavendish - square . he call upon Mrs. Branston before the week be end , and be so fortunate as to find that lady alone ; Mrs. Pallinson have go on a shopping expedition in her kinswoman 's dash brougham . 

 the pretty little widow receive Gilbert very graciously ; but there be a slight shade of melancholy in her manner , a pensiveness which soften and refine she , Gilbert think . nor be it long before she allow he to discover the cause of her sadness . after a little conventional talk upon indifferent subject , she begin to speak of John Saltram . 

 " have you see much of your friend Mr. Saltram since Sunday ? " she ask , with that vain endeavour to speak carelessly with which a woman generally betray her real feeling . 

 " I have not see he at all since Sunday . he tell I he be go back to Oxford or the neighbourhood of Oxford , I believe almost immediately ; and I have not trouble myself to hunt he up at his chamber . " 

 " gone back already ! " Mrs. Branston exclaim , with a disappointed petulant look that be half - childish , half - womanly . " I can not imagine what charm he find in a dull village on the bank of the river . he have confess that the place be the dreary and most obscure in the world , and that he have neither shoot nor any other kind of amusement . there must be some mysterious attraction , Mr. Fenton . I think your friend be a good deal change of late . have not   you find he so ? " 

 " no , Mrs. Branston , I can not say that I have discover any marked alteration in he since my return from Australia . John Saltram be always wayward and fitful . he may have be a little more so lately , perhaps , but that be all . " 

 " you have a very high opinion of he , I suppose ? " 

 " he be very dear to I . we be something more than friend in the ordinary acceptation of the word . do you remember the story of those two noble young Venetians who inscribe upon their shield Fraires , non amici ? Saltram and I have be brother rather than friend . " 

 " and you think he a good man ? " Adela ask anxiously . 

 " most decidedly ; I have reason to think so . I believe he to be a noble - hearted and honourable man ; a little neglectful or disdainful of conventionality , wear his faith in God and his more sacred feeling anywhere than upon his sleeve ; but a man who can not fail to come right in the long - run . " 

 " I be so glad to hear you say that . I have know Mr. Saltram some time , as you may have hear and like he very much . but my cousin Mrs. Pallinson have quite an aversion to he , and speak against he with such a positive air at time , that I have be almost inclined to think she must be right . I be very inexperienced in the way of the world , and be naturally disposed to lean a little upon the opinion of other . " 

 " but do not   you think there may be a reason for Mrs. Pallinson 's dislike of my friend ? " 

 Adela Branston blush at this question , and then laugh a little . 

 " I think I know what you mean , " she say . " yes , it be just possible that Mrs. Pallinson may be jealously dispose towards any acquaintance of mine , on account of that paragon of perfection , her son Theobald . I have not be so blind as not to see her view in that quarter . but be assure , Mr. Fenton , that whatever may happen to I , I shall never become Mrs. Theobald Pallinson . " 

 " I hope not . I be quite ready to acknowledge Mr. Pallinson 's merit and accomplishment , but I do not think he worthy of you . " 

 " it be rather awful , be not   it , for I to speak of marriage at all within a few month of my husband 's death ? but when a woman have money , people will not allow she to forget that she be a widow for ever so short a time . but it be quite a question if I shall ever marry again . I have very little doubt that real happiness be most likely to be find in a wise avoidance of all the peril and perplexity of that foolish passion which we read of in novel , if one could only be wise ; do not   you think so , Mr. Fenton ? " 

 " my own experience incline I to agree with you , Mrs. Branston , " Gilbert answer , smile at the little woman 's naivetť . 

 " your own experience have be unfortunate , then ? I wish I be worthy of your confidence . Mr. Saltram tell I some time ago that you be engage to a very charming young lady . " 

 " the young lady in question have jilt I . " 

 " indeed ! and you be very angry with she , of course ? " 

 " I love she too well to be angry with she . I reserve my indignation for the scoundrel who steal she from I . " 

 " it be very generous of you to make excuse for the lady , " Mrs. Branston say ; and would fain have talk long of this subject , but Gilbert conclude his visit at this juncture , not care to discuss his trouble with the sympathetic widow . 

 he leave the great gloomy gorgeous house in Cavendish square more than ever convince of Adela Branston 's affection for his friend , more than ever puzzle by John Saltram 's indifference to so advantageous an alliance . 

 within a few day of this visit Gilbert Fenton leave London . he have devote himself unflinchingly to his business since his return to England , and have so plan and organize his affair as to be able now to absent himself for some little time from the City . he be go upon what most man would have call a fool 's errand his quest of Marian 's husband ; but he be go with a steady purpose in his breast a determination never to abandon the search till it should result in success . he might have to suspend it from time to time , should he determine to continue his commercial career ; but the purpose would be nevertheless the rule influence of his life . 

 he have but one clue for his guidance in set out upon this voyage of discovery . Miss Long have tell he that the newly - married couple be to go to some farm - house in Hampshire which have be lend to Mr. Holbrook by a friend . it be in Hampshire , therefore , that Gilbert resolve to make his first inquiry . he tell himself that success be merely a question of time and patience . the business of trace these people , who be not to be find by any public inquiry , would be slow and wearisome no doubt . he be prepare for that . he be prepare for a thousand failure and disappointment before he alight on the one place in which Mr. Holbrook 's name must need be know , the town or village near to the farm - house that have be lend to he . and even if , after unheard - of trouble and perseverance on his part , he should find the place he want , it be quite possible that Marian and her husband would have go elsewhere , and his quest would have to begin afresh . but he fancy that he could hardly fail to obtain some information as to their plan of life , if he could find the place where they have stay after their marriage . 

 his own scheme of action be simple enough . he have only to travel from place to place , make careful inquiry at post - office and in all likely quarter at every stage of his journey . he go straight to Winchester , have a fancy for the quiet old city and the fair pastoral scenery surround it , and think that Mr. Holbrook 's borrow retreat might possibly be in this neighbourhood . the business prove even slow and more tedious than he have suppose ; there be so many farm round about Winchester , so many place which seem likely enough , and to which he go , only to find that no person of the name of Holbrook have ever be hear of by the inhabitant . 

 he make his head - quarter in the cathedral city for nearly a week , and explore the country round , in a radius of thirty mile , without the faint success . it be fine autumn weather , calm and clear , the foliage still upon the tree , in all its glory of gold and brown , with patch of green lingering here and there in sheltered place . the country be very beautiful , and Gilbert Fenton 's work would have be pleasant enough if the element of peace have be in his breast . but they be not . bitter regret for all he have lose , uneasy fear and wild imagining about the fate of she whom he still love with a fond useless passion , these and other gloomy thought haunt he day by day , cloud the calm loveliness of the scene on which he look , until all outer thing seem to take their colour from his own mind . he have love Marian Nowell as it be not give to many man to love ; and with the loss of she , it seem to he as if the very spring of his life be break . all the machinery of his existence be loosen and out of gear , and he could scarcely have bear the dreary burden of his day , have it not be for that one feverish hope of find the man who have wrong he . 

 the week end without bring he in the small degree nearer the chance of success . happily for himself , he have not expect to succeed in a week . on leave Winchester , he start on a kind of vagabond tour through the county , on a horse which he hire in the cathedral city , and which carry he from twenty to thirty mile a day . this mode of travel enable he to explore obscure village and out - of - the - way place that lie off the line of railway . everywhere he make the same inquiry , everywhere with the same result . another week come to an end . he have make his voyage of discovery through more than half of the county , as his pocket - map tell he , and be still no nearer success than when he leave London . 

 he spend his Sunday at a comfortable inn in a quiet little town , where there be a curious old church , and a fine peal of bell that seem to he to be ring all day long . it be a dull rainy day . he go to church in the morning , and in the afternoon stand at the coffee - room window watch the townspeople go by to their devotion in an absent unseeing way , and think of his own trouble ; pausing , just a little , now and then , from that egotistical brooding to wonder how these people endure the dull monotonous round of their life , and what cross and disappointment they have to suffer in their small obscure way . 

 the inn be very empty , and the landlord wait upon Mr. Fenton in person at his dinner . Gilbert have the coffee - room all to himself , and it look comfortable enough when the curtain be draw , the lamp light , and the small dinner - table wheel in front of a blaze fire . 

 " I have be think over what you be ask I last night , sir , " the host of the White Swan begin , while Gilbert be eat his fish ; " and though I can not   say that I ever hear the name of Holbrook , I fancy I may have see the lady and gentleman you be look for . " 

 " indeed ! " exclaim Gilbert eagerly , push away his plate , and turn full on the landlord . 

 " I hope you will not   let I spoil your dinner , sir ; I know that sole 's fresh . I be a pretty good judge of those thing , and choose every bit of fish that be cook in this house . but as I be say , sir , with regard to this lady and gentleman , I think you say that the people you be look for be stranger to this part of the country , and be occupy a farm - house that have be lend to they . " 

 " precisely . " 

 " well , sir , I remember some time in the early part of the year , I think it must have be about March " 

 " yes , the people I be look for would have arrive in March . " 

 " indeed , sir ! that make it seem likely . I remember a lady and gentleman come here from the railway station we have   get a station close by our town , as you know , sir , I daresay . they want a fly to take they and their luggage on somewhere I can not   for the life of I remember the name of the place but it be a ten - mile drive , and it be a farm that I could swear to Something Farm . if it have be a place I have know , I think I should have remember the name . " 

 " can I see the man who drive they ? " Gilbert ask quickly . 

 " the young man that drive they , sir , have leave I , and have leave these part a month come next Tuesday . where he have go be more than I can tell you . he be very good with horse ; but he turn out badly , cheat I up hill and down dale , as you may say though what hill and dale have get to do with it be more than I can tell and I be oblige to get rid of he . " 

 " that be provoke . but if the people I want be anywhere within ten mile of this place , I do not   suppose I should be long find they . yet the mere fact of two stranger come here , and go on to some place call a farm , seem very slight ground to go upon . the month certainly correspond with the time at which Mr. and Mrs. Holbrook come to Hampshire . do you take any particular notice of they ? " 

 " I take particular notice of the lady . she be as pretty a woman as ever I set eye upon quite a girl . I notice that the gentleman be very careful and tender with she when he put she into the carriage , wrap she up , and so on . he look a good deal old than she , and I do not   much like his look altogether . " 

 " could you describe he ? " 

 " well no , sir . the time be short , and he be wrap up a good deal ; the collar of his overcoat turn up , and a scarf round his neck . he have dark eye , I remember , and rather a stern look in they . " 

 this be rather too vague a description to make any impression upon Gilbert . it be something certainly to know that his rival have dark eye , if indeed this man of whom the landlord speak really be his rival . he have never be able to make any mental picture of the stranger who have come between he and his betrothed . he have be inclined to fancy that the man must need be much handsomer than himself , possess of every outward attribute calculate to subjugate the mind of an inexperienced girl like Marian ; but the parish - clerk at Wygrove and Miss Long have both speak in a disparaging tone of Mr. Holbrook 's personal appearance ; and , remember this , he be fain to believe that Marian have be win by some charm more subtle than that of a handsome face . 

 he go on eat his dinner in silence for some little time , meditate upon what the landlord have tell he . then , as the man clear the table , linger over his work , as if eager to impart any stray scrap of information he might possess , Gilbert speak to he again . 

 " I should have fancy that , as a settle inhabitant of the place , you would be likely to know every farm and farm - house within ten mile or within twenty mile , " he say . 

 " well , sir , I daresay I do know the neighbourhood pretty well , in a general way . but I think , if I have know the name of the place this lady and gentleman be go to , it would have strike I more than it do , and I should have remember it . I be uncommonly busy through that afternoon , for it be market - day , and there be a mort of people go in and out . I never do interfere much with the fly business ; it be only by take the gentleman out some soda - and - brandy that I come to take the notice I do of the lady 's look and his care of she . I know it be a ten - mile drive , and that I tell the gentleman the fare , so as there might be no bother between he and William Tyler , my man , at the end ; and he agree to it in a liberal off - hand kind of way , like a man who do not   care much for money . as to farm within ten mile of here , there be a dozen at least , one way and another some small , and some large . " 

 " do you know of any place in the ownership of a gentleman who would be likely to lend his house to a friend ? " 

 " I can not   say I do , sir . they be tenant - farmer about here mostly , and rather a roughish lot , as you may say . there be a place over beyond Crosber , ten mile off and more ; I do not   know the name of it , or the person it belong to ; but I have   notice it many a time as I have   drive by ; a curious old - fashioned house , stand back off one of the lane out of Crosber , with a large garden before it . a queer lonesome place altogether . I should take it to be two or three hundred year old ; and I should not   think the house have have money spend upon it within the memory of man . it be a dilapidated tumbledown old gazabo of a place , and yet there be a kind of prettiness about it in summer - time , when the garden be full of flower . there be a river run through some of the land about half a mile from the house . " 

 " what kind of a place be Crosber ? " 

 " a bit of a village on the road from here to Portsmouth . the house I be tell you about be a mile from Crosber at the least , away from the main road . there be two or three lane or by - road about there , and it lie in one of they that turn sharp off by the Blue Boar , which be about the only inn where you can bait a horse thereabout . " 

 " I will ride over there to - morrow morning , and have a look at this queer old house . you might give I the name of any other farm you know about this neighbourhood , and their occupant . " 

 this the landlord be very ready to do . he run over the name of from ten to fifteen place , which Gilbert jot down upon a leaf of his pocket - book , afterwards plan his route upon the map of the county which he carry for his guidance . he set out early the next morning under a low gray sky , with cloud in the distance that threaten rain . the road from the little market - town to Crosber possess no especial beauty . the country be flat and uninteresting about here , and need the glory of its summer verdure to brighten and embellish it . but Mr. Fenton do not give much thought to the scene through which he go at this time ; the world around and about he be all of one colour the sunless gray which pervade his own life . to - day the low dull sky and the threatening cloud far away upon the level horizon harmonise well with his own thought with the utter hopelessness of his mind . hopelessness ! yes , that be the word . he have hazard all upon this one chance , and its failure be the shipwreck of his life . the ruin be complete . he could not build up a new scheme of happiness . in the full maturity of his manhood , his fate have come to he . he be not the kind of man who can survive the ruin of his plan , and begin afresh with other hope and still fair dream . it be his nature to be constant . in all his life he have choose for himself only one friend in all his life he have love but one woman . 

 he come to the little village , with its low sloping - roof cottage , whose upper story abut upon the road and overshadow the casement below ; and where here and there a few pennyworth of gingerbread , that seem mouldy with the mould of age , a glass pickle - bottle of bull' - eye or sugar - stick , and half a dozen penny bottle of ink , indicate the commercial tendency of Crosber . a little far on , he come to a rickety - look corner - house , with a steep thatched roof overgrow by stonecrop and other parasite , which be evidently the shop of the village , inasmuch as one side of the window exhibit a show of homely drapery , while the other side be devoted to grocery , and a shelf above laden with great sprawling loaf of bread . this establishment be also the post - office , and here Gilbert resolve to make his customary inquiry , when he have put up his horse . 

 almost immediately opposite this general emporium , the sign of the Blue Boar swing proudly across the street in front of a low rather dilapidate - look hostelry , with a wide frontage , and an archway lead into a spacious desolate yard , where one gloomy cock of spanish descent be crow hoarsely on the broken roof of a shed , surround by four or five shabby - look hen , all in the most wobegone stage of moulting , and appear as if egg be utterly remote from their intention . this Blue Boar be popularly suppose to have be a most distinguished and prosperous place in the coach day , when twenty coach pass daily through the village of Crosber ; and be even now much affect as a place of resort by the villager , to the sore vexation of the rector and such good people as believe in the perfectibility of the human race and the ultimate suppression of public - house . 

 here Mr. Fenton dismount , and surrender his horse to the keeping of an unkempt bareheade youth who emerge from one of the dreary - look building in the yard , announce himself as the hostler , and lead off the steed in triumph to a wilderness of a stable , where the landlord 's pony and a fine colony of rat be luxuriate in the space design for some twelve or fifteen horse . 

 have do this , Gilbert cross the road to the post - office , where he find the proprietor , a deaf old man , weigh half - pound of sugar in the background , while a brisk sharp - look girl stand behind the counter sort a little packet of letter . 

 it be to the damsel , as the more intelligent of these two , that Gilbert address himself , begin of course with the usual question . do she know any one , a stranger , sojourn in that neighbourhood call Holbrook ? 

 the girl shake her head without a moment 's hesitation . no , she know no one of that name . 

 " and I suppose all the letter for people in this neighbourhood pass through your hand ? " 

 " yes , sir , all of they ; I could not   have fail to notice if there have be any one of that name . " 

 Gilbert give a little weary sigh . the information give he by the landlord of the White Swan have seem to bring he so very near the object of his search , and here he be throw back all at once upon the wide field of conjecture , not a whit nearer any certain knowledge . it be true that Crosber be only one among several place within ten mile of the market - town , and the stranger who have be drive from the White Swan in March last might have go to any one of those other locality . his inquiry be not finish yet , however . 

 " there be an old house about a mile from here , " he say to the girl ; " a house belong to a farm , in the lane yonder that turn off by the Blue Boar . have you any notion to whom it belong , or who live there ? " 

 " an old house in that lane across the way ? " the girl say , reflect . " that be Golder 's lane , and lead to Golder's - green . there be not many house there ; it be rather a lonesome kind of place . do you mean a big old - fashioned house stand far back in a garden ? " 

 " yes ; that must be the place I want to know about . " 

 " it must be the Grange , surely . it be a gentleman 's house once ; but there be only a bailiff live there now . the farm belong to some gentleman down in Midlandshire , a baronet ; I can not   call to mind his name at this moment , though I have hear it often enough . Mr. Carley 's daughter Carley be the name of the bailiff at the Grange come here for all they want . " 

 Gilbert give a little start at the name of Midlandshire . Lidford be in Midlandshire . be it not likely to be a Midlandshire man who have lend Marian 's husband his house ? 

 " do you know if these people at the Grange have have any one stay with they lately any lodger ? " he ask the girl . 

 " yes ; they have lodger pretty well every summer . there be some people this year , a lady and gentleman ; but they never seem to have any letter , and I can not   tell you their name . " 

 " be they live there still ? " 

 " I can not   tell you that . I use to see they at church now and then in the summer - time ; but I have not   see they lately . there be a church at Golder's - green almost as near , and they may have be there . " 

 " will you tell I what they be like ? " Gilbert ask eagerly . 

 his heart be beat loud and fast , make a painful tumult in his breast . he feel assure that he be on the track of the people whom the innkeeper have describe to he ; the people who be , in all probability , Mr. and Mrs. Holbrook . 

 " the lady be very pretty and very young quite a girl . the gentleman old , dark , and not handsome . " 

 " yes . have the lady gray eye , and dark - brown hair , and a very bright expressive face ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " pray try to remember the name of the gentleman to whom the Grange belong . it be of great importance to I to know that . " 

 " I will ask my father , sir , " the girl answer good - naturedly ; " he be pretty sure to know . " 

 she go across the shop to the old man who be weigh sugar , and bawl her question into his ear . he scratch his head in a meditative way for some moment . 

 " I have   hear the name time and often , " he say , " though I never set eye upon the gentleman . William Carley have be bailiff at the Grange these twenty year , and I do not   believe as the owner have ever come nigh the place in all that time . let I see , it be a common name enough , though the gentleman be a baronight . Forster that be it Sir something Forster . " 

 " Sir David ? " cry Gilbert . 

 " you have   hit it , sir . Sir David Forster that be the gentleman . " 

 Sir David Forster ! he have little doubt after this that the stranger at the Grange have be marian and her husband . treachery , black treachery somewhere . he have question Sir David , and have receive his positive assurance that this man Holbrook be unknown to he ; and now , against that there be the fact that the baronet be the owner of a place in Hampshire , to be take in conjunction with that other fact that a place in Hampshire have be lend to Mr. Holbrook by a friend . at the very first he have be incline to believe that Marian 's lover must need be one of the worthless bachelor crew with which the baronet be accustom to surround himself . he have only abandon that notion after his interview with Sir David Forster ; and now it seem that the baronet have deliberately lie to he . it be , of course , just possible that he be on a false scent after all , and that it be to some other part of the country Mr. Holbrook have bring his bride ; but such a coincidence seem , at the least , highly improbable . there be no occasion for he to remain in doubt very long , however . at the Grange he must need be able to obtain more definite information . 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 face to FACE 


 Gilbert Fenton leave the homely little post - office and turn into the lane lead to Golder's - green a way which may have be pleasant enough in summer , but have no especial charm at this time . the level expanse of bare plough field on each side of the narrow road have a dreary look ; the hedge be low and thin ; a tall elm , with all its low limb mercilessly shorn , uplift its topmost branch to the dull gray sky , here and there , like some transform prophetess raise her gaunt arm in appeal or malediction ; an occasional five - bar gate mark the entrance to some by - road to the farm ; on one side of the way a deep black - look ditch lie under the scanty shelter of the low hedge , and hint at possible water rat to the traveller from city who might happen to entertain a fastidious aversion to such small deer . 

 the mile seem a very long one to Gilbert Fenton . since his knowledge of Sir David Forster 's ownership of the house to which he be go , his impatience be redouble . he have a feverish eagerness to come at the bottom of this mystery . that Sir David have lie to he , he have very little doubt . whoever this Mr. Holbrook be , it be more likely that he should have escape the notice of Lidford people as a guest at Heatherly than under any other circumstance . at Heatherly it be such a common thing for stranger to come and go , that even the rustic gossip have leave off take much interest in the movement of the Baronet or his guest . there be one thought that flash suddenly into Gilbert 's mind during that gloomy walk under the lower gray sky . 

 if this man Holbrook be indeed a friend of Sir David Forster 's , how do it happen that John Saltram have fail to recognize his name ? the intimacy between Forster and Saltram be of such old standing , that it seem scarcely likely that any acquaintance of Sir David 's could be completely unknown to the other . be they all unite in treachery against he ? have his choose friend the man he love so well be able to enlighten he , and have he coldly withhold his knowledge ? no , he tell himself , that be not possible . Sir David Forster might be the false , most unprincipled of mankind ; but he could not believe John Saltram capable of baseness , or even coldness , towards he . 

 he be at the end of his journey by this time . the Grange stand in front of he a great ramble building , with many gable , gray lichen - grow wall , and quaint old diamond - pan casement in the upper story . below , the window be large , and have an Elizabethan look , with patch of stain glass here and there . the house stand back from the road , with a spacious old - fashioned garden before it ; a garden with flower - bed of a dutch design , shelter from adverse wind by dense hedge of yew and holly ; a pleasant old garden enough , one could fancy , in summer weather . the flower - bed be for the most part empty now , and the only flower to be see be pale fade - look chrysanthemum and Michaelmas dais . the garden be surround by a high wall , and Gilbert contemplate it first through the rusty scroll - work of a tall iron gate , surmount by the arm and monogram of the original owner . on one side of the house there be a vast pile of building , comprise stable and coach - house , barn and granary , arrange in a quadrangle . the gate lead into this quadrangle be open , and Gilbert see the cattle stand knee - deep in a straw - yard . 

 he ring a bell , which have a hoarse rusty sound , as if it have not be ring very often of late ; and after he have wait for some minute , and ring a second time , a countrifie - look woman emerge from the house , and come slowly along the wide moss - grow gravel - walk towards he . she star at he with the broad open stare of rusticity , and do not make any attempt to open the gate , but stand with a great key in her hand , wait for Gilbert to speak . 

 " this be Sir David Forster 's house , I believe , " he say . 

 " yes , sir , it be ; but Sir David do not   live here . " 

 " I know that . you have some lodger here a lady and gentleman call Holbrook . " 

 he plunge at once at this assertion , as the easy way of arrive at the truth . he have a conviction that this solitary farm - house be the place to which his unknown rival have bring Marian . 

 " yes , sir , " the woman answer , still star at he in her slow stupid way . " Mrs. Holbrook be here , but Mr. Holbrook be away up in London . do you wish to see the lady ? " 

 Gilbert 's heart give a great throb . she be here , close to he ! in the next minute he would be face to face with she , with that one woman whom he love , and must continue to love , until the end of his life . 

 " yes , " he say eagerly , " I wish to see she . you can take I to she at once . I be an old friend . there be no occasion to carry in my name . " 

 he have scarcely think of see Marian until this moment . it be her husband he have come to seek ; it be with he that his reckoning be to be make ; and any meeting between Marian and himself be more likely to prove a hindrance to this reckoning than otherwise . but the temptation to seize the chance of see she again be too much for he . whatever hazard there might be to his scheme of vengeance in such an encounter slip out of his mind before the thought of look once more at that idolise face , of hear the love voice once again . the woman hesitate for a few moment , tell Gilbert that Mrs. Holbrook never have visitor , and she do not know whether she would like to see he ; but on his administering half - a - crown through the scroll - work of the gate , she put the key in the lock and admit he . he follow she along the moss - grow path to a wide wooden porch , over which the ivy hang like a voluminous curtain , and through a half - glass door into a low roomy hall , with massive dark oak - beam across the ceiling , and a broad staircase of ecclesiastical aspect lead to a gallery above . the house have evidently be a place of considerable grandeur and importance in day go by ; but everything in it bear trace of neglect and decay . the hall be dark and cold , the wide fire - place empty , the iron dog red with rust . some sack of grain be store in one corner , a rough carpenter 's bench stand under one of the mullione window , and some garden - seed be spread out to dry in another . 

 the woman open a low door at the end of this hall , and usher Gilbert into a sitting - room with three window look out upon a dutch bowling - green , a quadrangle of smooth turf shut in by tall hedge of holly . the room be empty , and the visitor have ample leisure to examine it while the woman go to seek Mrs. Holbrook . 

 it be a large room with a low ceiling , and a capacious old - fashioned fire - place , where a rather scanty fire be burn in a dull slow way . the furniture be old and worm - eat , furniture that have once be handsome , and be of a ponderous fashion that defy time . there be a massive oaken cabinet on one side of the room , a walnut - wood bureau with brass handle on the other . a comfortable look sofa , of an antiquated design , with chintz - cover cushion , have be wheel near the fire - place ; and close beside it there be a small table with an open desk upon it , and some paper scatter loosely about . there be a few autumn flower in a homely vase upon the centre table , and a work - basket with some slipper , in Berlin wool work , unfinishe . 

 Gilbert Fenton contemplate all these thing with supreme tenderness . it be here that Marian have live for so many month alone most likely for the great part of the time . he have a fix idea that the man who have steal his treasure be some dissipate worldling , altogether unworthy so sacred a trust . the room have a look of loneliness to he . he could fancy the long solitary hour in this remote seclusion . 

 he have to wait for some little time , walk slowly up and down ; very eager for the interview that be to come , yet with a consciousness that his fate would seem only so much the dark to he afterwards , when he have to turn his back upon this place , with perhaps no hope of ever see Marian again . at last there come a light footfall ; the door be open , and his lost love come into the room . 

 Gilbert Fenton be stand near the fire - place , with his back to the light . for the first few moment it be evident that Marian do not recognize he . she come towards he slowly , with a wonder look in her face , and then stop suddenly with a faint cry of surprise . 

 " you here ! " she exclaim . " o , how do you find this place ? why do you come ? " 

 she clasp her hand , look at he in a half - piteous way that go straight to his heart . what he have tell Mrs. Branston be quite true . it be not in he to be angry with this girl . whatever bitterness there might have be in his mind until this moment flee away at sight of she . his heart have no room for any feeling but tenderness and pity . 

 " do you imagine that I should rest until I have see you once more , marian ? do you suppose I should submit to lose you without hear from your own lip why I have be so unfortunate ? " 

 " I do not think you would waste time or think upon any one so wicked as I have be towards you , " she answer slowly , stand before he with a pale sad face and downcast eye . " I fancy that whatever love you have ever feel for I and I know how well you do love I would perish in a moment when you find how basely I have act . I hop that it would be so . " 

 " no , Marian ; love like mine do not perish so easily as that . o , my love , my love , why do you forsake I so cruelly ? what have I do to merit your desertion of I ? " 

 " what have you do ! you have only be too good to I . I know that there be no excuse for my sin . I have pray that you and I might never meet again . what can I say ? from first to last I have be wrong . from first to last I have act weakly and wickedly . I be flatter and gratify by your affection for I ; and when I find that my dear uncle have set his heart upon our marriage , I yield against my own well reason , which warn I that I do not love you as you deserve to be love . then for a long time I be blind to the truth . I do not examine my own heart . I be quite able to estimate all your noble quality , and I fancy that I should be very happy as your wife . but you must remember that at the last , when you be leave England , I ask you to release I , and tell you that it would be happy for both of we to be free . " 

 " why be that , Marian ? " 

 " because at that last moment I begin to doubt my own heart . " 

 " have there be any other influence at work , Marian ? have you see your husband , Mr. Holbrook , at that time ? " she blush crimson , and the slender hand nervously clasp and unclasp themselves before she speak . 

 " I can not answer that question , " she say at last . 

 " that be quite as good as say ' yes . ' you have see this man ; he have come between we already . o , Marian , Marian , why be you not more candid ? " 

 " because I be weak and foolish . I could not bear to make you unhappy . o , believe I , Gilbert , I have no thought of falsehood at that time . I fully mean to be true to my promise , come what might . " 

 " I be quite willing to believe that , " he answer gently . " I believe that you act from first to last under the influence of a strong will than your own . you can see that I feel no resentment against you . I come to you in sorrow , not in anger . but I want to understand how this thing come to pass . why be it that you never write to I to tell I the complete change in your feeling ? " 

 " it be think well not , " marian falter , after a pause . 

 " by you ? " 

 " no ; by my husband . " 

 " and you suffer he to dictate to you in that matter . against your own sense of right ? " 

 " I love he , " she answer simply . " I have never refuse to obey he in anything . I will own that I think it would be well to write and tell you the truth ; but my husband think otherwise . he wish our marriage to remain a secret from you , and from all the world for some time to come . he have his own reason for that reason I be bind to respect . I can not think how you come to discover this out - of - the - world place . " 

 " I have take some trouble to find you , Marian , and it be a hard thing to find you the wife of another ; but the bitterness of it must be bear . I do not want to reproach you when I tell you that my life have be break utterly by this blow . I want you to believe in my truth and honour , to trust I now as you might have trust I when you first discover that you could not love I . since I be not to be your husband , let I be the next good thing your friend . the day may come in which you will have need of an honest man 's friendship . " 

 she shake her head sadly . 

 " you be very good , " she say ; " but there be no possibility of friendship between you and I . if you will only say that you can forgive I for the great wrong I have do you , there will be a heavy burden lift from my heart ; and whatever you may think now , I can not doubt that in the future you will find some one far well worthy of your love than ever I could have be . " 

 " that be the stereotyped form of consolation , Marian , a man be always refer to that shadowy and perfect creature who be to appear in the future , and heal all his wound . there will be no such after - love for I . I stake all when I play the great game ; and have lose all . but why can not I be your friend , Marian ? " 

 " can you forgive my husband for his part in the wrong that have be do you ? can you be his friend , know what he have do ? " 

 " no ! " Gilbert answer fiercely between his set tooth . " I can forgive your weakness , but not the man 's treachery . " 

 " then you can never be mine , " Marian say firmly . 

 " remember , I be not talk of a common friendship , a friendship of daily association . I offer myself to you as refuge in the hour of trouble , a counsellor in perplexity , a brother always wait in the background of your life to protect or serve you . of course , it be quite possible you may never have need of protection or service God know , I wish you all happiness but there be not many life quite free from trouble , and the day may come in which you will want a friend . " 

 " if it ever do , I will remember your goodness . " 

 Gilbert look scrutinisingly at Marian Holbrook as she stand before he with the cold gray light of the sunless day full upon her face . he want to read the story of her life in that beautiful face , if it be possible . he want to know whether she be happy with the man who have steal she from he . 

 she be very pale , but that might be fairly attribute to the agitation cause by his presence . Gilbert fancy that there be a careworn look in her face , and that her beauty have fade a little since those peaceful day at Lidford , when these two have waste the summer hour in idle talk under the walnut tree in the Captain 's garden . she be dress very plainly in black . there be no coquettish knot of ribbon at her throat ; no girlish trinket dangle at her waist all those little grace and embellishment of costume which seem natural to a woman whose life be happy , be want in her toilet to - day ; and slight as these indication be , Gilbert do not overlook they . 

 do he really wish she to be happy happy with the rival he so fiercely hat ? he have say as much ; and in say so , he have believe that he be speak the truth . but he be only human ; and it be just possible that , tenderly as he still love this girl , he may have be hardly capable of take pleasure in the thought of her happiness . 

 " I want you to tell I about your husband , Marian , " he say after a pause ; " who and what he be . " 

 " why should I do that ? " she ask , look at he with a steady , almost defiant , expression . " you have say that you will never forgive he . what interest can you possibly feel in his affair ? " 

 " I be interested in he upon your account . " 

 " I can not tell you anything about he . I do not know how you could have discover even his name . " 

 " I learn that at Wygrove , where I first hear of your marriage . " 

 " do you go to Wygrove , then ? " 

 " yes ; I have tell you that I spar no pain to find you . nor shall I spare any pain to discover the history of the man who have wrong I . it would be wise for you to be frank with I , Marian . rely upon it that I shall soon or later learn the secret underlie this treacherous business . " 

 " you profess to be my friend , and yet be avowedly say husband 's enemy . why can not you be truly generous , Gilbert , and pardon he ? believe I , he be not willingly treacherous ; it be his fate to do you this wrong . " 

 " a poor excuse for a man , Marian . no , my charity will not stretch far enough for that . but I do not come to you quite on a selfish errand , to speak solely of my own wrong . I have something to tell you of real importance to yourself . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 Gilbert Fenton describe the result of his first advertisement , and his acquaintance with Jacob Nowell . 

 " it be my impression that this old man be rich , Marian ; and there be little doubt that he would leave all he possess to you , if you go to he at once . " 

 " I do not care very much about money for my own sake , " she answer with rather a mournful smile ; " but we be not rich , and I should be glad of anything that would improve my husband 's position . I should like to see my grandfather : I stand so much alone in the world that it would be very sweet to I to find a near relation . " 

 " your husband must surely have see Mr. Nowell 's advertisement , " Gilbert say after a pause . " it be odd that he do not tell you about it that he do not wish you to reply to it . " 

 " the advertisement may have escape he , or he may have look upon it as a trap to discover our retreat , " Marian answer frankly . 

 " I can not understand the motive for such secrecy . " 

 " there be no occasion that you should understand it . every life have its own mystery its peculiar perplexity . when I marry my husband , I be prepared to share all his trouble . I have be obedient to he in everything . " 

 " and have your marriage bring you happiness , Marian ? " 

 " I love my husband , " she answer with a plaintive reproachful look , as if there have be a kind of cruelty in his straight question . " I do not suppose that there be such a thing as perfect happiness in the world . " 

 the answer be enough for Gilbert Fenton . it tell he that this girl 's life be not all sunshine . 

 he have not the heart to push his inquiry far . he feel that he have no right to remain any long , when in all probability his presence be a torture to the girl who have injure he . 

 " I will not prolong my visit , Marian , " he say regretfully . " it be altogether a foolish one , perhaps ; but I want so much to see you once more , to hear some explanation of your conduct from your own lip . " 

 " my conduct can admit of neither explanation nor justification , " she reply humbly . " I know how wickedly I have act . believe I , Gilbert , I be quite conscious of my unworthiness , and how little right I have to expect your forgiveness . " 

 " it be my weakness , rather than my merit , not to be able to cherish any angry feeling against you , Marian . Mine have be a slavish kind of love . I suppose that sort of thing never be successful . woman have an instinctive contempt for man who love they with such blind unreasonable idolatry . " 

 " I do not know how that may be ; but I know that I have always respect and esteem you , " she answer in her gentle plead way . 

 " I be grateful to you even for so much as that . and now I suppose I must say good - bye rather a hard word to say under the circumstance . Heaven know when you and I may meet again . " 

 " will not   you stop and take some luncheon ? I dine early when my husband be away ; it save trouble to the people of the house . the bailiff 's daughter always din with I when I be alone ; but I do not   suppose you will mind sit down with she . she be a good girl , and very fond of I . " 

 " I would sit down to dinner with a chimney - sweep , if he be a favourite of your , Marian or Mrs. Holbrook ; I suppose I must call you that now . " 

 after this they talk of Captain Sedgewick for a little , and the tear come to Marian 's eye as she speak of that generous and faithful protector . while they be talk thus , the door be open , and a bright - faced countrifie - look girl appear carry a tray . she be dress in a simple pretty fashion , a little above her station as a bailiff 's daughter , and have altogether rather a superior look , in spite of her rusticity , Gilbert think . 

 she be quite at her ease in his presence , lay the cloth briskly and cleverly , and chatter all the time . 

 " I be sure I be very glad any visitor should come to see Mrs. Holbrook , " she say ; " for she have have a sad lonely time of it ever since she have be here , poor dear . there be not many young married woman would put up with such a life . " 

 " nelly , " Marian exclaim reproachfully , " you know that I have have nothing to put up with that I have be quite happy here . " 

 " ah , it be all very well to say that , Mrs. Holbrook ; but I know well . I know how many lonely day you have   spend , so downhearted that you could scarcely speak or look up from your book , and that only an excuse for fret . if you be a friend of Mr. Holbrook 's , you might tell he as much , sir ; that he be kill his pretty young wife by inch , by leave she so often alone in this dreary place . Goodness know , it be not   that I want to get rid of she . I like she so much that I sha'n't   know what to do with myself when she be go . but I love she too well not to speak the truth when I see a chance of its get to the right ear . " 

 " I be no friend of Mr. Holbrook 's , " Gilbert answer ; " but I think you be a good generous - hearted girl . " 

 " you be a very foolish girl , " Marian exclaim ; " and I be extremely angry with you for talk such utter nonsense about I . I may have be a little out of spirit sometimes in my husband 's absence ; but that be all . I shall begin to think that you really do want to get rid of I , Nell , say what you will . " 

 " that be a pretty thing , when you know that I love you as dearly as if you be my sister ; to say nothing of father , who make a profit by your be here , and would be fine and angry with I for interfere . no , Mrs. Holbrook ; it be your own happiness I be think of , and nothing else . and I do say that it be a shame for a pretty young woman like you to be shut up in a lonely old farm - house while your husband be away , enjoy himself goodness know where ; and when he be here , I can not   see that he be very good company , consider that he spend the good part of his time " 

 the girl stop abruptly , warn by a look from Marian . Gilbert see this look , and wonder what revelation of Mr. Holbrook 's habit the bailiff 's daughter have be upon the point of make ; he be so eager to learn something of this man , and have be so completely baffle in all his endeavour hitherto . 

 " I will not have my affair talk about in this foolish way , Ellen Carley , " Marian say resolutely . 

 and then they all three sit down to the dinner - table . the dish be bring in by the woman who have admit Gilbert . the dinner be excellent after a simple fashion , and very nicely serve ; but for Mr. Fenton the barn - door fowl and home - cure ham might as well have be the grass which the philosopher believe the french people might learn to eat . he be conscious of nothing but the one fact that he be in Marian 's society for perhaps the last time in his life . he wonder at himself not a little for the weakness which make it so sweet to he to be with she . 

 the moment come at last in which he must need take his leave , have no possible excuse for remain any long . 

 " good - bye , Marian , " he say . " I suppose we be never likely to meet again . " 

 " one never know what may happen ; but I think it be far well we should not meet , for many reason . " 

 " what be I to tell your grandfather when I see he ? " 

 " that I will come to he as soon as I can get my husband 's permission to do so . " 

 " I should not think there would be any difficulty about that , when he know that this relationship be likely to bring you fortune . " 

 " I daresay not . " 

 " and if you come to London to see Mr. Nowell , there will be some chance of our meeting again . " 

 " what good can come of that ? " 

 " not much to I , I daresay . it would be a desperate , melancholy kind of pleasure . anything be well than the idea of lose sight of you for ever of leave this room to - day never to look upon your face again . " 

 he write Jacob Nowell 's address upon one of his own card , and give it to Marian ; and then prepare to take his departure . he have an idea that the bailiff 's daughter would conduct he to the gate , and that he would be able to make some inquiry about Mr. Holbrook on his way . it be possible that Marian guess his intention in this respect ; for she offer to go with he to the gate herself ; and he could not with any decency refuse to be so honour . 

 they go through the hall together , where all be as still and lifeless as it have be when he arrive , and walk slowly side by side along the broad garden - path in utter silence . at the gate Gilbert stop suddenly , and give Marian his hand . 

 " my darling , " he say , " I forgive you with all my heart ; and I will pray for your happiness . " 

 " will you try to forgive my husband also ? " she ask in her plaintive beseech way . 

 " I do not know what I be capable of in that direction . I promise that , for your sake , I will not attempt to do he any injury . " 

 " God bless you for that promise ! I have so dread the chance of a meeting between you two . it have often be the thought of that which have make I unhappy when that faithful girl , Nelly , have notice my low spirit . you have remove a great weight from my mind . " 

 " and you will trust I well after that promise ? " 

 " yes ; I will trust you as you deserve to be trust , with all my heart . " 

 " and now , good - bye . it be a hard word for I to say ; but I must not detain you here in the cold . " 

 he bend his head , and press his lip upon the slender little hand which hold the key of the gate . in the next moment he be outside that tall iron barrier ; and it seem to he as if he be leave Marian in a prison . the garden , with its poor pale scentless autumn flower , have a dreary look under the dull gray sky . he think of the big empty house , with its fade trace of vanish splendour , and of Marian 's lonely life in it , with unspeakable pain . how different from the sunny home which he have dream of in the day go by the happy domestic life which he have fancy they two might lead ! 

 " and she love this man well enough to endure the dull existence for his sake , " he say to himself as he turn his back at last upon the tall iron gate , have linger there for some minute after Marian have re - enter the house . " she could forget all our plan for the future at his bidding . " 

 he think of this with a jealous pang , and with all his old anger against his unknown rival . move by an impulse of love and pity for Marian , he have promise that this man should suffer no injury at his hand ; and , have so pledge himself , he must need keep his word . but there be certain savage feeling and primitive instinct in his breast not easily to be vanquish ; and he feel that now he have bind himself to keep the peace in relation to Mr. Holbrook , it would be well that those two should not meet . 

 " but I will have some explanation from Sir David Forster as to that lie he tell I , " he say to himself ; " and I will question John Saltram about this man Holbrook . " 

 John Saltram John Holbrook . an idea flash into his brain that seem to set it on fire . what if John Saltram and John Holbrook be one ! what if the bosom friend whom he have introduce to his betrothed have play the traitor , and steal she from he ! in the next moment he put the supposition away from he , indignant with himself for be capable of think such a thing , even for an instant . of all the man upon earth who could have do he this wrong , John Saltram be the last he could have believe guilty . yet the thought recur to he many time after this with a foolish tiresome persistence ; and he find himself go over the circumstance of his friend 's acquaintance with Marian , his hasty departure from Lidford , his return there later during Sir David Forster 's illness . let he consider these fact as closely as he might , there be no especial element of suspicion in they . there might have be a hundred reason for that hurried journey to London nay , the very fact itself argue against the supposition that Mr. Saltram have fall in love with his friend 's plighted wife . 

 and now , the purpose of his life be so far achieve , Gilbert Fenton ride back to Winchester next day , restore his horse to its proprietor , and go on to London by an evening train . 

 CHAPTER XVII 

 MISS CARLEY 's admirer 


 there be time in which Marian Holbrook 's life would have be utterly lonely but for the companionship of Ellen Carley . this warm - hearted outspoken country girl have take a fancy to Mr. Holbrook 's beautiful wife from the hour of her arrival at the Grange , one cheerless March evening , and have attach herself to Marian from that moment with unalterable affection and fidelity . the girl 's own life at the Grange have be lonely enough , except during the brief summer month , when the roomy old house be now and then enliven a little by the advent of a lodger , some stray angler in search of a seclude trout stream , or an invalid who want quiet and fresh air . but in none of these stranger have Ellen ever take much interest . they have come and go , and make very little impression upon her mind , though she have help to make their sojourn pleasant in her own brisk cheery way . 

 she be twenty - one year of age , very bright - look , if not absolutely pretty , with dark expressive eye , a rosy brunette complexion , and very white tooth . the nose belong to the inferior order of pug or snub ; the forehead be low and broad , with dark - brown hair ripple over it hair which seem always want to escape from its neat arrangement into a multitude of mutinous curl . she be altogether a young person whom the admirer of the soubrette style of beauty might have find very charming ; and , seclude as her life at the Grange have be , she have already more than one admirer . 

 she use to relate her love affair to Marian Holbrook in the quiet summer evening , as the two sit under an old cedar in the meadow nearest the house a meadow which have be a lawn in the day when the Grange be in the occupation of great folk ; and be divide from a broad terrace - walk at the back of the house by a dry grass - grow moat , with steep slop bank , upon which there be a wealth of primrose and violet in the early spring . Ellen Carley tell Mrs. Holbrook of her admirer , and receive sage advice from that experienced young matron , who by - and - by confess to her humble companion the error of her own girlhood , and how she have jilt the most devoted and generous lover that ever a woman could boast of . 

 for some month for the bright honeymoon period of her wed life Marian have be completely happy in that out - of - the - world region . it be not to be suppose that she have do so great a wrong to Gilbert Fenton except under the influence of a great love , or the dominion of a nature powerful enough to subjugate her own . both these influence have be at work . too late she have discover that she have never really love Gilbert Fenton ; that the calm grateful liking which she have tell herself must need be the sole version of the grand passion whereof her nature be capable , have be only the tamest , most ordinary kind of friendship after all , and that in the depth of her soul there be a capacity for an utterly different attachment a love which be found on neither respect nor gratitude , but which spring into life in a moment , fatal and all - absorbing from its birth . 

 Heaven know she have struggle bravely against this luckless passion , have resist long and steadily the assiduous pursuit , the passionate half - despairing pleading , of her lover , who would not be drive away , and who invent all kind of expedient for see she , however difficult the business might be , or however resolutely she might endeavour to avoid he . it be only after her uncle 's death , when her mind be weaken by excessive grief , that her strong determination to remain faithful to her absent betroth have at last give way before the force of those tender passionate prayer , and she have consent to the hasty secret marriage which her lover have propose . her consent once give , not a moment have be lose . the business have be hurry on with the utmost eagerness by the impetuous lover , who would give she as little opportunity as possible of change her mind , and who have obtain complete mastery of her will from the moment in which she promise to be his wife . 

 she love he with all the unselfish devotion of which her nature be capable ; and no thought of the year to come , or of what her future life might be with this man , of whose character and circumstance she know so very little , ever trouble she . have sacrifice her fidelity to Gilbert Fenton , she hold all other sacrifice light as air never consider they at all , in fact . when do a generous romantic girl of nineteen ever stop to calculate the chance of the future , or fear to encounter poverty and trouble with the man she love ? to Marian this man be henceforth all the world . it be not that he be handsomer , or well , or in any obvious way superior to Gilbert Fenton . it be only that he be just the one man able to win her heart . that mysterious attraction which reason can never reduce to rule , which know no law of precedent or experience , reign here in full force . it be just possible that the desperate circumstance of the attachment , the passionate pursuit of the lover , not to be check by any obstacle , may have have an influence upon the girl 's mind . there be a romance in such love as this that have not exist in Mr. Fenton 's straightforward wooing ; and Marian be too young to be quite proof against the subtle charm of a secret , romantic , despairing passion . 

 for some time she be very happy ; and the remote farm - house , with its old - fashioned garden and fair stretch of meadow - land beyond they , where all shade and beauty have not yet be sacrifice to the interest of agriculture , seem to she in those halcyon day a kind of earthly paradise . she endure her husband 's occasional absence from this rural home with perfect patience . these absence be rare and brief at first , but afterwards grow long and more frequent . nor do she ever sigh for any bright or gayer life than this which they lead together at the Grange . in he be the beginning and end of her hope and dream ; and so long as he be pleased and content , she be completely happy . it be only when a change come in he very slight at first , but still obvious to his wife 's tender watchful eye that her own happiness be cloud . that change tell she that whatever he might be to she , she be no long all the world to he . he love she still , no doubt ; but the bright holiday - time of his love be over , and his wife 's presence have no long the power to charm away every dreary thought . he be a man in whose disposition there be a lurking vein of melancholy a kind of chronic discontent very common to man of whom it have be say that they might do great thing in the world , and who have succeed in do nothing . 

 it be not to be suppose that Mr. Holbrook intend to keep his wife shut away from the world in a lonely farm - house all her life . the place suit he very well for the present ; the apartment at the Grange , and the service of Mr. Carley and his dependent , have be put at his disposal by the owner of the estate , together with all farm and garden produce . Existence here therefore cost he very little ; his chief expense be in gift to the bailiff and his underling , which he bestow with a liberal hand . his plan for the future be as yet altogether vague and unsettled . he have thought of emigration , of begin life afresh in a new country anything to escape from the perplexity that surround he here ; and he have his reason for keep his wife seclude . nor do his conscience disturb he much he be a man who have his conscience in very good training as to the unfairness of this proceeding . Marian be happy , he tell himself ; and when time come for some change in the manner of her existence , he doubt if the change would be for the well . 

 so the day and week and month have pass away , bring little variety with they , and none of what the world call pleasure . marian read and work and ramble in the country lane and meadow with Ellen Carley , and visit the poor people now and then , as she have be in the habit of do at Lidford . she have not very much to give they , but give all she could ; and she have a gentle sympathetic manner , which make she welcome amongst they , most of all where there be child , for whom she have always a special attraction . the little one clung to she and trust she , look up at her lovely face with spontaneous affection . 

 William Carley , the bailiff , be a big broad - shoulder man , with a heavy forbidding countenance , and a taciturn habit by no mean calculate to secure he a large circle of friend . his daughter and only child be afraid of he ; his wife have be afraid of he in her time , and have fade slowly out of a life that have be very joyless , unaware , hide her illness from he to the last , as if it have be a sort of offence against he to be ill . it be only when she be die that the bailiff know he be go to lose she ; and it must be confess that he take the loss very calmly . 

 whatever natural grief he may have feel be carefully lock in his own breast . his underling , the farm - labourer , find he a little more " grumpy " than usual , and his daughter scarcely dare open her lip to he for a month after the funeral . but from that time forward Miss Carley , who be rather a spirited damsel , take a very different tone with her father . she be not to be crush and subdue into a mere submissive shadow , as her mother have be . she have a way of speak her mind on all occasion which be by no mean agreeable to the bailiff . if he drink too much overnight , she take care to tell he of it early next morning . if he go about slovenly and unshaven , her sharp tongue take notice of the fact . yet with all this , she wait upon he , and provide for his comfort in a most dutiful manner . she save his money by her dexterous management of the household , and be in all practical matter a very treasure among daughter . William Carley like comfort , and like money still well , and he be quite aware that his daughter be valuable to he , though he be careful not to commit himself by any expression of that opinion . 

 he know her value so well that he be jealously averse to the idea of her marrying and leave he alone at the Grange . when young Frank Randall , the lawyer 's son , take to call at the old house very often upon summer evening , and by various sign and token show himself smitten with Ellen Carley , the bailiff treat the young man so rudely that he be fain to cease from come altogether , and to content himself with an occasional chance meeting in the lane , when Ellen have business at Crosber , and walk there alone after tea . he would not have be a particularly good match for any one , be only an article clerk to his father , whose business in the little market - town of Malsham be by no mean extensive ; and William Carley speak of he scornfully as a pauper . he be a tall good - looking young fellow , however , with a candid pleasant face and an agreeable manner ; so Ellen be not a little angry with her father for his rudeness , still more angry with he for his encouragement of her other admirer , a man call Stephen Whitelaw , who live about a mile from the Grange , and farm his own land , an estate of some extent for that part of the country . 

 " if you must marry , " say the bailiff , " and it be what girl like you seem to be always think about , you can not   do well than take up with Steph Whitelaw . he be a warm man , Nell , and a wife of his will never want a meal of victual or a good gown to she back . you would well not waste your smile and your civil word on a beggar like young Randall , who will not   have a home to take you to for these ten year to come not then , perhaps for there be not much to be make by law in Malsham now - a - day . and when his father die suppose he be accommodate enough to die in a reasonable time , which it be ten to one he will not   be the young man will have his mother and sister to keep upon the business very likely , and there would be a nice look - out for you . now , if you marry my old friend Steph , he can make you a lady . " 

 this be a very long speech for Mr. Carley . it be grumble out in short spasmodic sentence between the slow whiff of his pipe , as he sit by the fire in a little parlour off the hall , with his indefatigable daughter at work at a table near he . 

 " Stephen Whitelaw have need be a gentleman himself before he could make I a lady , " Nelly answer , laugh . " I do not   think fine clothe can make gentlefolk ; no , nor farm one 's own land , either , though that sound well enough . I be not in any hurry to leave you , father , and I be not one of those girl who be always think of get marry ; but come what may , depend upon it , I shall never marry Mr. Whitelaw . " 

 " why not , pray ? " the bailiff ask savagely . 

 Nelly shake out the shirt she have be repair for her father , and then begin to fold it , shake her head resolutely at the same time . 

 " because I detest he , " she say ; " a mean , close , discontent creature , who can see no pleasure in life except money - making . I hate the very sight of his pale pinch face , father , and the sound of his hard shrill voice . if I have to choose between the workhouse and marry Stephen Whitelaw , I would choose the workhouse ; yes , and scrub , and wash , and drudge , and toil there all my day , rather than be mistress of Wyncomb Farm . " 

 " well , upon my word , " exclaim the father , take the pipe from his mouth , and star aghast at his daughter in a stupor of indignant surprise , " you be a pretty article ; you be a nice piece of good for a man to bring up and waste his substance upon a piece of good that will turn round upon one and refuse a man who farm his own land . mind , he have not   ask you yet , my lady ; and never may , for aught I know . " 

 " I hope he never will , father , " Nelly answer quietly , unsubdue by this outburst of the bailiff 's . 

 " if he do , and you do not   snap at such a chance , you need never look for a sixpence from I ; and you would well make yourself scarce pretty soon into the bargain . I will have no such trumpery about my house . " 

 " very well , father ; I daresay I can get my living somewhere else , without work much hard than I do here . " 

 this open opposition on the girl 's part make William Carley only the more obstinately bent upon that marriage , which seem to he such a brilliant alliance , which open up to he the prospect of a comfortable home for his old age , where he might repose after his labour , and live upon the fat of the land without toil or care . he have a considerable contempt for the owner of Wyncomb Farm , whom he think a poor creature both as a man and a farmer ; and he fancy that if his daughter marry Stephen Whitelaw , he might become the actual master of that profitable estate . he could twist such a fellow as Stephen round his finger , he tell himself , when invest with the authority of a father - in - law . 

 Mr. Whitelaw be a pale - face little man of about five - and - forty year of age ; a man who have remain a bachelor to the surprise of his neighbour , who fancy , perhaps , that the owner of a good house and a comfortable income be in a manner bind by his obligation to society to take to himself a partner with whom to share these advantage . he have remain unmarried , give no damsel ground for complaint by any delusive attention , and be suppose to have save a good deal of money , and to be about the rich man in those part , with the exception of the land gentry . 

 he be by no mean an attractive person in this the prime of his manhood . he have a narrow mean - looking face , with sharp feature , and a pale sickly complexion , which look as if he have spend his life in some close London office rather than in the free sweet air of his native field . his hair be of a reddish tint , very sleek and straight , and always comb with extreme precision upon each side of his narrow forehead ; and he have scanty whisker of the same unpopular hue , which he be in the habit of smooth with a meditative air upon his sallow cheek with the knobby finger of his bony hand . he be of a rather nervous temperament , incline to silence , like his big burly friend , William Carley , and have a deprecate doubtful way of express his opinion at all time . in spite of this humility of manner , however , he cherish a secret pride in his superior wealth , and be apt to remind his associate , upon occasion , that he could buy up any one of they without feel the investment . 

 after have attain the discreet age of forty - five without be a victim to the tender passion , Mr. Whitelaw might reasonably have suppose himself exempt from the weakness so common to mankind . but such self - gratulation , have he indulge in it , would have be premature ; for after have be a visitor at the Grange , and boon - companion of the bailiff 's for some ten year , it slowly dawn upon he that Ellen Carley be a very pretty girl , and that he would have she for his wife , and no other . her brisk off - hand manner have a kind of charm for his slow apathetic nature ; her rosy brunette face , with its bright black eye and flash tooth , seem to he the perfection of beauty . but he be not an impetuous lover . he take his time about the business , come two or three time a week to smoke his pipe with William Carley , and pay nelly some awkward blunder compliment now and then in his deliberate hesitating way . he have supreme confidence in his own position and his money , and be trouble by no doubt as to the ultimate success of his suit . it be true that Nelly treat he in by no mean an encouraging manner be , indeed , positively uncivil to he at time ; but this he suppose to be mere feminine coquetry ; and it enhance the attraction of the girl he design to make his wife . as to she refuse he when the time come for his proposal , he could not for a moment imagine such a thing possible . it be not in the nature of any woman to refuse to be mistress of Wyncomb , and to drive her own whitechapel cart a comfortable hooded vehicle of the wagonette species , which be popular in those part . 

 so Stephen Whitelaw take his time , content to behold the object of his affection two or three evening a week , and to gaze admiringly upon her beauty as he smoke his pipe in the snug little oak - wainscote parlour at the Grange , while his passion grow day by day , until it do really become a very absorbing feeling , second only to his love of money and Wyncomb Farm . these dull sluggish nature be capable of deep passion than the world give they credit for ; and be as slow to abandon an idea as they be to entertain it . 

 it be Ellen Carley 's delight to tell Marian of her trouble , and to protest to this kind confidante again and again that no persuasion or threat of her father 's should ever induce she to marry Stephen Whitelaw which resolution Mrs. Holbrook fully approve . there be a little gate opening from a broad green lane into one of the field at the back of the Grange ; and here sometimes of a summer evening they use to find Frank Randall , who have ride his father 's white pony all the way from Malsham for the sake of smoke his evening cigar on that particular spot . they use to find he seat there , smoke lazily , while the pony crop the grass in the lane close at hand . he be always eager to do any little service for Mrs. Holbrook ; to bring her book or anything else she want from Malsham anything that might make an excuse for his come again by appointment , and with the certainty of see Ellen Carley . it be only natural that Marian should be incline to protect this simple love - affair , which offer she favourite a way of escape from the odious marriage that her father press upon she . the girl might have to endure poverty as Frank Randall 's wife ; but that seem a small thing in the eye of Marian , compare with the horror of marry that pale - face mean - looking little man , whom she have see once or twice sit by the fire in the oak parlour , with his small light - grey eye fix in a dull stare upon the bailiff 's daughter . 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 JACOB NOWELL 's WILL 


 at his usual hour , upon the evening after his arrival in London , Gilbert Fenton call at the silversmith 's shop in Queen Anne 's Court . he find Jacob Nowell weak than when he have see he last , and with a strange old look , as if extreme age have come upon he suddenly . he have be compel to call in a medical man , very much against his will ; and this gentleman have tell he that his condition be a critical one , and that it would be well for he to arrange his affair quickly , and to hold himself prepared for the bad . 

 he seem to be slightly agitated when Gilbert tell he that his granddaughter have be find . 

 " will she come to I , do you think ? " he ask . 

 " I have no doubt that she will do so , directly she hear how ill you have be . she be very much pleased at the idea of see you , and only wait for her husband 's permission to come . but I do not   suppose she will wait for that when she know of your illness . I shall write to she immediately . " 

 " do , " Jacob Nowell say eagerly ; " I want to see she before I die . you do not meet the husband , then , I suppose ? " 

 " no ; Mr. Holbrook be not there . " 

 he tell Jacob Nowell all that it be possible for he to tell about his interview with Marian ; and the old man seem warmly interested in the subject . death be very near he , and the saving of the long dreary year during which his joyless life have be devote to money - making must soon pass into other hand . he want to know something of the person who be to profit by his death ; he want to be sure that when he be go some creature of his own flesh and blood would remember he kindly ; not for the sake of his money alone , but for something more than that . 

 " I shall make my will to - morrow , " he say , before Gilbert leave he . " I do not   mind own to you that I have something considerable to bequeath ; for I think I can trust you . and if I should die before my grandchild come to I , you will see that she have her right , will not   you ? you will take care that she be not cheat by her husband , or by any one else ? " 

 " I shall hold it a sacred charge to protect her interest , so far as it be possible for I to do so . " 

 " that be well . I shall make you one of the executor to my will , if you have   no objection . " 

 " no . the executorship will bring I into collision with Mr. Holbrook , no doubt ; but I have resolve upon my line of conduct with regard to he , and I be prepare for whatever may happen . my chief desire now be to be a real friend to your granddaughter ; for I believe she have need of friend . " 

 the will be draw up next day by an attorney of by no mean spotless reputation , who have often do business for Mr. Nowell in the past , and who may have know a good deal about the origin of some of the silver which find its way to the old silversmith 's store . he be a gentleman frequently employ in the defence of those injure innocent who appear at the bar of the Old Bailey ; and be not at all particular as to the merit of the case he conduct . this gentleman embody Mr. Nowell 's desire with reference to the disposal of his worldly good in a very simple and straightforward manner . all that Jacob Nowell have to leave be leave to his granddaughter , Marian Holbrook , for her own separate use and maintenance , independent of any husband whatsoever . 

 this be clear enough . it be only when there come the question , which a lawyer put with such deadly calmness , as to what be to be do with the money in the event of Marian Holbrook 's die intestate , that any perplexity arise . 

 " of course , if she have child , you would like the money to go to they , " say Mr. Medler , the attorney ; " that be clear enough , and have well be set out in your will . but suppose she should have no child , you would scarcely like all you leave to go to her husband , who be quite a stranger to you , and who may be a scoundrel for aught you know . " 

 " no ; I certainly should not   much care about enrich this Holbrook . " 

 " of course not ; to say nothing of the danger there would be in give he so strong an interest in his wife 's death . not but what I daresay he will contrive to squander the great part of the money during her lifetime . be it all in hard cash ? " 

 " no ; there be some house - property at Islington , which pay a high interest ; and there be other freehold . " 

 " then we might tie those up , give Mrs. Holbrook only the income . it be essential to provide against possible villany or extravagance on the part of the husband . woman be so weak and helpless in these matter . and in the event of your granddaughter die without child , would not   you rather let the estate go to your son ? " 

 " to he ! " exclaim Jacob Nowell . " I have swear that I would not leave he sixpence . " 

 " that be a kind of oath which no man ever consider himself bind to keep , " say the lawyer in his most insinuating tone . " remember , it be only a remote contingency . the chance be that your granddaughter will have a family to inherit this property , and that she will survive her father . and then , if we give her power to make a will , of course it be pretty certain that she will leave everything to this husband of her . but I do not   think we ought to do that , Mr. Nowell . I think it would be a far wise arrangement to give this young lady only a life interest in the real estate . that make the husband a loser by her death , instead of a possible gainer to a large amount . and I consider that your son 's name have a right to come in here . " 

 " I can not acknowledge that he have any such right . his extravagance almost ruin I when he be a young man ; and his ingratitude would have break my heart , if I have be weak enough to suffer myself to be crush by it . " 

 " time work change amongst the bad of we , Mr. Nowell , I daresay your son have improve his habit in all these year and be heartily sorry for the error of his youth . " 

 " have you see he , Medler ? " the old man ask quickly . 

 " seen your son lately ? no ; indeed , my dear sir , I have no notion that he be in England . " 

 the fact be , that Percival Nowell have call upon Mr. Medler more than once since his arrival in London ; and have discuss with that gentleman the chance of his father 's have make , or not make , a will , and the possibility of the old man 's be so far reconcile to he as to make a will in his favour . Percival Nowell have go far than this , and have promise the attorney a handsome percentage upon anything that his father might be induce to leave he by Mr. Medler 's influence . 

 the discussion last for a long time ; Mr. Medler push on , stage by stage , in the favour of his secret client , anxious to see whether Jacob Nowell might not be persuade to allow his son 's name to take the place of his granddaughter , whom he have never see , and who be really no more than a stranger to he , the attorney take care to remind he . but on this point the old man be immovable . he would leave his money to Marian , and to no one else . he have no desire that his son should ever profit by the labour and deprivation of all those joyless year in which his fortune have be scrap together . it be only as the choice of the less evil that he would consent to Percival 's inherit the property from his daughter , rather than it should fall into the hand of Mr. Holbrook . the lawyer have hard work before he could bring his client to this point ; but he do at last succeed in do so , and Percival Nowell 's name be write in the will . 

 " I do not   suppose Nowell will thank I much for what I have   do , though I have   have difficulty enough in do it , " Mr. Medler say to himself , as he walk slowly homeward after this prolonged conference in Queen Anne 's Court . " for of course the chance be ten to one against his survive his daughter . still these young woman sometimes go off the hook in an unexpected way , and he may come into the reversion . " 

 there be only one satisfaction for the attorney , and that lie in the fact that this long , laborious interview have be all in the way of business , and could be charge for accordingly : " to attend at your own house with relation to draw up the rough draft of your will , and consultation of two hour and a half thereupon ; " and so on . the will be to be execute next day ; and Mr. Medler be to take his clerk with he to Queen Anne 's Court , to act as one of the witness . he have obtain one other triumph in the course of the discussion , which be the insertion of his own name as executor in place of Gilbert Fenton , against whom he raise so many specious argument as to shake the old man 's faith in Marian 's jilted lover . 

 Percival Nowell drop in upon his father that night , and smoke his cigar in the dingy little parlour , which be so crowded with diver kind of merchandise as to be scarcely habitable . the old man 's son come here almost every evening , and behave altogether in a very dutiful way . Jacob Nowell seem to tolerate rather than to invite his visit , and the adventurer try in vain to get at the real feeling underlie that emotionless manner . 

 " I think I might work round the governor if I have time , " this dutiful son say to himself , as he reflect upon the aspect of affair in Queen Anne 's Court ; " but I fancy the old chap have take his ticket for the next world book through per express train , and the chance be that he will keep his word and not leave I sixpence . rather hard line that , after my take the trouble to come over here and hunt he up . " 

 there be one fact that Mr. Nowell the young seem inclined to ignore in the course of these reflection ; and that be the fact that he have not leave America until he have completely use up that country as a field for commercial enterprise , and have indeed make his name so far notorious in connection with numerous shady transaction as to leave no course open to he except a speedy departure . since his come to England he have live entirely on credit ; and , beyond the fine clothe he wear and the content of his two portmanteau , he possess nothing in the world . it be quite true that he have do very well in New York ; but his well - being have be secure at the cost of other people ; and after have start some half - dozen speculation , and live extravagantly upon the fund of his victim , he be now as poor as he have be when he leave Belgium for America , the commission - agent of a house in the iron trade . in this position he might have prosper in a moderate way , and might have profit by the expensive education which have give he nothing but showy agreeable manner , have he be capable of steadiness and industry . but of these virtue he be utterly deficient , possess instead a genius for that kind of swindling which keep just upon the safe side of felony . he have live pleasantly enough , for many year , by the exercise of this agreeable talent ; so pleasantly indeed that he have trouble himself very little about his chance of inherit his father 's saving . it be only when he have exhaust all expedient for make money on " the other side " that he turn his thought in the direction of Queen Anne 's Court , and begin to speculate upon the probability of Jacob Nowell 's good grace be worth the trouble of cultivation . the prospectus which he have show his father be mere waste paper , the useless surplus stationery remain from a scheme that have fail to enlist the sympathy of a transatlantic public . but he fancy that his only chance with the old man lie in an assumption of prosperity ; so he carry matter with a high hand throughout the business , and swagger in the little dusky parlour behind the shop just as he have swagger on New - York Broadway or at Delmonico 's in the heyday of his commercial success . 

 he call at Mr. Medler 's office the day after Jacob Nowell 's will have be execute , have have no hint of the fact from his father . the solicitor tell he what have be do , and how the most strenuous effort on his part have only result in the insertion of Percival 's name after that of his daughter . 

 whatever indignation Mr. Nowell may have feel at the fact that his daughter have be prefer before he , he contrive to keep hide in his own mind . the lawyer be surprise at the quiet gravity with which he receive the intelligence . he listen to Mr. Medler 's statement of the case with the calm air of deliberation , seem indeed to be think so deeply that it be as if his thought have wander away from the subject in hand to some theme which allow of more profound speculation . 

 " and if she should die childless , I should get all the free - hold property ? " he say at last , wake up suddenly from that state of abstraction , and turn his thoughtful face upon the lawyer . 

 " yes ; all the real estate would be your . " 

 " have you any notion what the property be worth ? " 

 " not an exact notion . your father give I a list of investment . altogether , I should fancy , the income will be something handsome between two and three thousand a year , perhaps . strange , be not   it , for a man with all that money to have live such a life as your father 's ? " 

 " strange indeed , " Percival Nowell cry with a sneer . " and my daughter will step into two or three thousand a year , " he go on : " very pleasant for she , and for her husband into the bargain . of course I be not go to say that I would not   rather have have the income myself . you would scarcely swallow that , as a man of the world , you see , Medler . but the girl be my only child , and though circumstance have divide we for the great part of our life , blood be thick than water ; and in short , since there be no get the governor to do the right thing , and leave this money to I , it be the next good thing that he should leave it to Marian . " 

 " to say nothing of the possibility of she die without child , and your come into the property after all , " say Mr. Medler , wonder a little at Mr. Nowell 's philosophical manner of look at the question . 

 " Sir , " exclaim Percival indignantly , " do you imagine I capable of speculate upon the untimely death of my only child ? " 

 the lawyer shrug his shoulder doubtfully . in the course of his varied experience he have find man and woman capable of very queer thing when their pecuniary interest be at stake ; and he have not a most exalted opinion of Mr. Nowell 's virtue he know too many secret connect with his early career . 

 " remember , if ever by any strange chance you should come into this property , you have I to thank for get your name into the will , and for give your daughter only a life interest . she would have have every penny leave to she without reserve , if I have not   fight for your interest as hard as ever I fight for anything in the whole course of my professional career . " 

 " you be a good fellow , Medler ; and if ever fortune should favour I , which hardly seem on the card , I sha'n't   forget what I promise you the other day . I daresay you do the good you could for I , though it do not   amount to much when it be do . " 

 long after Percival Nowell have leave he , Mr. Medler sit idle at his desk meditate upon his interview with that gentleman . 

 " I can not   half understand his coolness , " he say to himself ; " I expect he to be as savage as a bear when he find that the old man have leave he nothing . I think I should hear nothing but execration and blasphemy ; for I think I know my gentleman pretty well of old , and that he be not a person to take a disappointment of this kind very sweetly . there must be something under that quiet manner of his . perhaps he know more about his daughter than he care to let out ; know that she be sickly , and that he stand a good chance of survive she . " 

 there be indeed a lurking desperation under Percival Nowell 's airy manner , of which the people amongst whom he live have no suspicion . unless some sudden turn in the wheel of fortune should change the aspect of affair for he very soon , ruin , most complete and utter , be inevitable . a man can not go on very long without money ; and in order to pay his hotel - bill Mr. Nowell have be oblige to raise the fund from an accommodate gentleman with whom he have do business in year go by , and who be very familiar with his own and his father 's autograph . the bill upon which this gentleman advance the money in question bear the name of Jacob Nowell , and be draw at three month . Percival have persuade himself that before the three month be out his father would be in his grave , and his executor would scarcely be in a position to dispute the genuineness of the signature . in the meantime the money thus obtain enable he to float on . he pay his hotel - bill , and remove to lodging in one of the narrow street to the north - east of Tottenham Court Road ; an obscure lodge enough , where he have a couple of comfortable room on the first floor , and where his go out and come in attract little notice . here , as at the hotel , he choose to assume the name of Norton instead of his legitimate cognoman . 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 gilbert ask a QUESTION 


 Gilbert Fenton call at John Saltram 's chamber within a day or two of his return from Hampshire . he have a strange , almost feverish eagerness to see his old friend again ; a sense of have wrong he for that one brief moment of thought in which the possibility of his guilt have flash across his mind ; and with this feeling there be mingle a suspicion that John Saltram have not act quite fairly to he ; that he have keep back knowledge which must have come to he as an intimate ally of Sir David Forster . 

 he find Mr. Saltram at home in the familiar untidy room , with the old chaos of book and paper about he . he look tired and ill , and rise to greet his visitor with a weary air , as if nothing in the world possess much interest for he now - a - day . 

 " why , John , you be as pallid as a ghost ! " Gilbert exclaim , grasp the hand extend to he , and think of that one moment in which he have fancy he be never to touch that hand again . " you have be at the old work , I suppose overdo it , as usual ! " 

 " no , I have be work very little for these last few day . the truth be , I have not be able to work . the divine afflatus would not   come down upon I . there be time when a man 's brain seem to be make of melted butter . mine have be like that for the last week or so . " 

 " I think you be go back to your fishing village near Oxford . " 

 " no , I be not in spirit for that . I have din two or three time in Cavendish Square , and have be make much of , and have contrive to forget my trouble for a few hour . " 

 " you talk of your trouble as if you be very heavily burden ; and yet , for the life of I , I can not see what you have to complain of , " Gilbert say wonderingly . 

 " of course not . that be always the case with one 's friend even the good of they . it be only the man who wear the shoe that know why it pinch and gall he . but what have you be do since I see you last ? " 

 " I have be in Hampshire . " 

 " indeed ! " say John Saltram , look he full in the face . " and what take you into that quarter of the world ? " 

 " I think you take more interest in my affair than to have to ask that question . I go to look for Marian Holbrook , and I find she . " 

 " poor old fellow ! " Mr. Saltram say gently . " and be there any satisfaction for you in the meeting ? " 

 " yes , and no . there be a kind of mournful pleasure in see the dear face once more . " 

 " she must have be surprised to see you . " 

 " she be , no doubt , surprise unpleasantly , perhaps ; but she receive I very kindly , and be perfectly frank upon every subject except her husband . she would tell I nothing about he neither his position in the world , nor his profession , if he have one , as I suppose he have . she own he be not rich , and that be about all she say of he . poor girl , I do not think she be happy ! " 

 " what ground have you for such an idea ? " 

 " her face , which tell I a great deal more than her word . her beauty be very much fade since the summer evening when I first see she in Lidford Church . she seem to lead a lonely life in the old farm - house to which her husband bring she immediately after their marriage a life which few woman would care to lead . and now , John , I want to know how it be you have keep back the truth from I in this matter ; that you have treat I with a reserve which I have no right to expect from a friend . " 

 " what have I keep from you " 

 " your knowledge of this man Holbrook . " 

 " what make you suppose that I have any knowledge of he ? " 

 " the fact that he be a friend of Sir David Forster 's . the house in which I find Marian belong to Sir David , and be lend by he to Mr. Holbrook . " 

 " I do not know every friend of Forster 's . he be a man who pick up his acquaintance in the highway and byway , and drop they when he be tired of they . " 

 " will you tell I , on your honour , that you know nothing of this Mr. Holbrook ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 Gilbert Fenton give a weary sigh , and then seat himself silently opposite Mr. Saltram . he could not afford to doubt this friend of his . the whole fabric of his life must have drop to piece if John Saltram have play he false . his single venture as a lover have end in shipwreck , he seem to have nothing leave he but friendship ; and that kind of hero - worship which have make his friend always appear to he something well than he really be , have grow strong with he since Marian 's desertion . 

 " o Jack , " he say presently , " I could bear anything in this world well than the notion that you could betray I that you could break faith with I for the sake of another man . " 

 " I be not likely to do that . there be no man upon this earth I care for very much except you . I be not a man prone to friendship . in fact , I be a selfish worthless fellow at the good , Gilbert , and hardly merit your serious consideration . it would be wise of you to think of I as I really be , and to think very little of I . " 

 " you do not show yourself remarkably selfish when you nurse I through that fever , at the hazard of your own life . " 

 " Pshaw ! that be nothing . I could not have do less in the position in which we two be . such sacrifice as those count for very little . it be when a man 's own happiness be in the scale that the black spot show itself . I tell you , Gilbert , I be not worth your friendship . it would be well for you to go your own way , and have nothing more to do with I . " 

 Mr. Saltram have say this kind of thing very often in the past , so that the word have no especial significance to Gilbert . he only think that his friend be in one of those gloomy mood which be common to he at time . 

 " I could not do without your friendship , Jack , " he say . " remember how barren the world be to I now . I have nothing leave but that . " 

 " a poor substitute for well thing , Gilbert . I be never likely to be much good to you or to myself . by the way , have you see anything lately of that old man you tell I about Miss Nowell 's grandfather ? " 

 " I see he the other night . he be very ill dying , I believe . I have write to Marian to tell she that if she do not come very quickly to see he , there be a chance of she not find he alive . " 

 " and she will come of course . " 

 " I suppose so . she talk of wait for her husband 's consent ; but she will scarcely do that when she know her grandfather 's precarious state . I shall go to Queen Anne 's Court after I leave you , to ascertain if there have be any letter from she to announce her come . she be a complete stranger in London , and may be embarrassed if she arrive at the station alone . but I should imagine her husband would meet she there suppose he to be in town . " 

 Mr. Fenton stay with his friend about an hour after this ; but John Saltram be not in a communicative mood to - night , and the talk lag wearily . it be almost a relief to Gilbert when they have bid each other good - night , and he be out in the noisy street once more , make his way towards Queen Anne 's Court . 

 CHAPTER XX 

 drift AWAY 


 Gilbert Fenton find Jacob Nowell worse ; so much bad , that he have be oblige to take to his bed , and be lie in a dull shabby room upstairs , faintly light by one tallow candle on the mantelpiece . Marian be there when Gilbert go in . she have arrive a couple of hour before , and have take her place at once by the sick - bed . her bonnet and shawl be throw carelessly upon a dilapidated couch by the window . Gilbert fancy she look like a minister angel as she sit by the bed , her soft brown hair fall loosely round the lovely face , her countenance almost divine in its expression of tenderness and pity . 

 " you come to town alone , Marian ? " he ask in a low voice . 

 the old man be in a doze at this moment , lie with his pinched withered face turn towards his granddaughter , his feeble hand in her . 

 " yes , I come alone . my husband have not come back , and I would not delay any long after receive your letter . I be very glad I come . my poor grandfather seem so pleased to see I . he be wander a little when I first come in , but brighten wonderfully afterwards , and quite understand who I be . " 

 the old man awake presently . he be in a semi - delirious state , but seem to know his granddaughter , and clung to she , call she by name with senile fondness . his mind wander back to the past , and he talk to his son as if he have be in the room , reproach he for his extravagance , his college debt , which have be the ruin of his careful hard - work father . at another moment he fancy that his wife be still alive , and speak to she , tell she that their grandchild have be christen after she , and that she be to love the girl . and then the delirium leave he for a time , his mind grow clear , and he talk quite rationally in his low feeble way . 

 " be that Mr. Fenton ? " he ask ; " the room 's so dark , I can not   see very well . she have come to I , you see . she be a good girl . her eye be like my wife 's . yes , she be a good girl . it seem a hard thing that I should have live all these year without know she ; live alone , with no one about I but those that be on the watch for my money , and eager to cheat I at every turn . my life might have be happy if I have have a grandchild to keep I company , and I might have leave this place and live like a gentleman for her sake . but that be all past and go . you will be rich when I be dead , marian ; yes , what most people would count rich . you will not   squander the money , will you , my dear , as your father would , if it be leave to he ? " 

 " no , grandfather . but tell I about my father . be he still live ? " the girl ask eagerly . 

 " never mind he , child , " answer Jacob Nowell . " he have not   trouble himself about you , and you can not   do well than keep clear of he . no good ever come of anything he do yet , and no good ever will come . do not   you have anything to do with he , Marian . he will try to get all your money away from you , if you give he a chance depend upon that . " 

 " he be live , then ? o , my dear grandfather , do tell I something more about he . remember that whatever his error may have be , he be my father the only relation I have in the world except yourself . " 

 " his whole life have be one long error , " answer Jacob Nowell . " I tell you , child , the less you know of he the well . " 

 he be not to be move from this , and would say no more about his son , in spite of Marian 's earnest pleading . the doctor come in presently , for the second time that evening , and forbid his patient be talk any more . he tell Gilbert , as he leave the house , that the old man 's life be now only a question of so many day or so many hour . 

 the old woman who do all the work of Jacob Nowell 's establishment a dilapidate - look widow , whom nobody in that quarter ever remember in any other condition than that of widowhood have prepare a small bedroom at the back of the house for Marian ; a room in which Percival have sleep in his early boyhood , and where the daughter find faint trace of her father 's life . Mr. Macready as Othello , in a spangled tunic , with vest of actual satin let into the picture , after the pre - raphaelite or realistic tendency commonly find in such juvenile work of art , hang over the narrow paint mantelpiece . the fond mother have have this masterpiece frame and glaze in the day when her son be still a little lad , unspoile by University life and those splendid aspiration which afterwards make his home hateful to he . there be some tattered book upon a shelf by the bed school prize , an old Virgil , a " Robinson Crusoe " shorn of its binding . the boy 's name be write in they in a scrawling schoolboy hand ; not once , but many time , after the fashion of juvenile bibliopole , with primitive rhyme in Latin and English set forth his proprietorship in the volume . caricature be scribble upon the fly - leaf and margin of the book , the date whereof look very old to Marian , long before her own birth . 

 it be not till very late that she consent to leave the old man 's side and go to the room which have be get ready for she , to lie down for an hour . she would not hear of any long rest though the humble widow be quite pathetic in her entreaty that the dear young lady would try to get a good night 's sleep , and would leave the care of Mr. Nowell to she , who know his way , poor dear gentleman , and would watch over he as carefully as if he have be her own poor husband , who keep his bed for a twelvemonth before he die , and have to be wait on hand and foot . Marian tell this woman that she do not want rest . she have come to town on purpose to be with her grandfather , and would stay with he as long as he need her care . 

 she do , however , consent to go to her room for a little in the early November dawn , when Jacob Nowell have fall into a profound sleep ; but when she do lie down , sleep would not come to she . she could not help listen to every sound in the opposite room the fall of a cinder , the stealthy footfall of the watcher move cautiously about now and then ; listen still more intently when all be silent , expect every moment to hear herself summon suddenly . the sick - room and the dark shadow of come death bring back the thought of that bitter time when her uncle be lie unconscious and speechless in the pretty room at Lidford , with the wintry light shin coldly upon his stony face ; while she sit by his pillow , watch he in hopeless silent agony , wait for that dread change which they have tell she be the only change that could come to he on earth . the scene re - act itself in her mind to - night , with all the old anguish . she shut it out at last with a great effort , and begin to think of what her grandfather have say to she . 

 she be to be rich . she who have be a dependant upon other all her life be to know the security and liberty that must need go along with wealth . she be glad of this , much more for her husband 's sake than her own . she know that the care which have cloud their life of late , which have make he seem to love she less than he have love she at first , have their chief origin in want of money . what happiness it would be for she to lift this burden from his life , to give he peace and security for the year to come ! her thought wander away into the bright region of day - dream after this , and she fancy what their life might be without that dull sordid trouble of pecuniary embarrassment . she fancy her husband , with all the fetter remove that have hamper his footstep hitherto , win a name and a place in the world . it be so natural for a romantic inexperienced girl to believe that the man she love be bear to achieve greatness ; and that if he miss distinction , it be from the perversity of his surrounding or from his own carelessness , never from the fact of his be only a very small creature after all . 

 it be broad daylight when Marian rise after an hour of sleeplessness and thought , and refresh herself with the content of the crack water - jug upon the rickety little wash - stand . the old man be still asleep when she go back to his room ; but his breathing be more troubled than it have be the night before , and the widow , who be experience in sickness and death , tell Marian that he would not last very long . the shopman , Luke Tulliver , have come upstairs to see his master , and be hover over the bed with a ghoulish aspect . this young man look very sharply at Marian as she come into the room seem indeed hardly able to take his eye from her face and there be not much favour in his look . he know who she be , and have be tell how kindly the old man have take to she in those last moment of his life ; and he hat she with all his heart and soul , have devote all the force of his mind for the last ten year to the cultivation of his employer 's good grace , hop that Mr. Nowell , have no one else to whom to leave his money , would end by leave it all to he . and here be a granddaughter , spring from goodness know where , to cheat he out of all his chance . he have always suspect Gilbert Fenton of be a dangerous sort of person , and it be no doubt he who have bring about this introduction , to the annihilation of Mr. Tulliver 's hope . this young man take his place in a vacant chair by the fire , as if determine to stop ; while Marian seat herself quietly by the sleeper 's pillow , think only of that one occupant of the room , and suppose that Mr. Tulliver 's presence be a mark of fidelity . 

 the old man wake with a start presently , and look about he in a slow bewildered way for some moment . 

 " who be that ? " he ask presently , point to the figure by the hearth . 

 " it be only Mr. Tulliver , sir , " the widow answer . " he be so anxious about you , poor young man . " 

 " I do not   want he , " say Jacob Nowell impatiently . " I do not   want his anxiety ; I want to be alone with my granddaughter . " 

 " do not   send I away , sir , " Mr. Tulliver plead in a piteous tone . " I do not   deserve to be send away like a stranger , after serve you faithfully for the last ten year " 

 " and be well pay for your service , " gasp the old man . " I tell you I do not   want you . go downstairs and mind the shop . " 

 " it be not open yet , sir , " remonstrate Mr. Tulliver . 

 " then it ought to be . I will have no idling and shirk because I be ill . go down and take down the shutter directly . let the business go on just as if I be there to watch it . " 

 " I be go , sir , " whimper the young man ; " but it do seem rather a poor return after have serve you as I have , and love you as if you have be my own father . " 

 " very much man love their father now - a - day ! I do not   ask you to love I , do I ? or hire you for that , or pay you for it ? Pshaw , man , I know you . you want my money like the rest of they , and I do not   mind your thinking there be a chance of your get it . I have   rather encourage the notion at odd time . it make you a well servant , and keep you honest . but now that I be die , I can afford to tell the truth . this young lady will have all my money , every sixpence of it , except five - and - twenty pound to Mrs. Mitchin yonder . and now you can go . you would have get something perhaps in a small way , if you have be less of a sneak and a listener ; but you have   play your card a trifle too well . " 

 the old man have raise himself up in his bed , and rally considerably while he make this speech . he seem to take a malicious pleasure in his shopman 's disappointment . but when Luke Tulliver have slowly withdraw from the room , with a last venomous look at Marian , Jacob Nowell sink back upon his pillow exhaust by his unwonted animation . 

 " you do not   know what a deep schemer that young man have be , marian , " he say , " and how I have laugh in my sleeve at his manoeuvre . " 

 the dull November day drag itself slowly through , Marian never leave her post by the sick - bed . Jacob Nowell spend those slow hour in fitful sleep and frequent interval of wakefulness , in which he would talk to Marian , however she might urge he to remember the doctor 's injunction that he should be keep perfectly quiet . it seem indeed to matter very little whether he obey the doctor or not , since the end be inevitable . 

 one of the curate of the parish come in the course of the day , and read and pray beside the old man 's bed , Jacob Nowell join in the prayer in a half - mechanical way . for many year of his life he have neglect all religious duty . it be year since he have be inside a church ; perhaps he have not be once since the death of his wife , who have persuade he to go with she sometimes to the evening service , when he have generally scandalise she by fall asleep during the delivery of the sermon . all that the curate tell he now about the necessity that he should make his peace with his God , and prepare himself for a world to come , have a far - off sound to he . he think more about the silver downstairs , and what it be likely to realize in the auction - room . even in this supreme hour his conscience do not trouble he much about the doubtful mode by which some of the plate he have deal in have reach his hand . if he have not buy the thing , some other dealer would have buy they . that be the easy - go way in which he would have argue the question , have he be call upon to argue it at all . 

 Mr. Fenton come in the evening to see the old man , and stand for a little time by the bedside watch he as he sleep , and talk in a low voice to Marian . he ask she how long she be go to remain in Queen Anne 's Court , and find her idea very vague upon that subject . 

 " if the end be so near as the doctor say , it would be cruel to leave my grandfather till all be over , " she say . 

 " I wonder that your husband have not come to you , if he be in London , " Gilbert remark to she presently . he find himself very often wonder about her husband 's proceeding , in no indulgent mood . 

 " he may not be in London , " she answer , seem a little vex by the observation . " I be quite sure that he will do whatever be good . " 

 " but if he should not come to you , and if your grandfather should die while you be alone here , I trust you will send for I and let I give you any help you may require . you can scarcely stay in this house after the poor old man 's death . " 

 " I shall go back to Hampshire immediately ; if I be not want here for anything to make arrangement for the funeral . o , how hard it seem to speak of that while he be still live ! " 

 " you need give yourself no trouble on that account . I will see to all that , if there be no more proper person to do so . " 

 " you be very good . I be anxious to go back to the Grange as quickly as possible . " 

 Gilbert leave soon after this . he feel that his presence be of no use in the sick - room , and that he have no right to intrude upon Marian at such a time . 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 FATHER and DAUGHTER 


 almost immediately after Gilbert 's departure , another visitor appear in the dimly light shop , where Luke Tulliver be pore over a newspaper at one end of the counter under a solitary gas - burner . 

 the new - comer be Percival Nowell , who have not be to the house since his daughter 's arrival . 

 " well , " say this gentleman , in his usual off - hand manner , " how be the governor ? " 

 " very ill ; go fast , the doctor say . " 

 " eh ? as bad as that ? then there be be a change since I be here last . " 

 " yes ; Mr. Nowell be take much bad yesterday morning . he have a kind of fit , I fancy , and could not   get his speech for some time afterwards . but he get over that , and have talk well enough since then , " Mr. Tulliver conclude ruefully , remember his master 's candid remark that morning . 

 " I will step upstairs and have a look at the old gentleman , " say Percival . 

 " there be a young lady with he , " Mr. Tulliver remark , in a somewhat mysterious tone . 

 " a young lady ! " the other cry . " what young lady ? " 

 " his granddaughter . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " yes ; she come up from the country yesterday evening , and she be be sit with he ever since . he seem to have take to she very much . you would think she have be about he all her life ; and she be to have all his money , he say . I wonder what his only son will say to that , " add Mr. Tulliver , look very curiously at Percival Nowell , ' suppose he to be alive ? rather hard upon he , be not   it ? " 

 " uncommonly , " the other answer coolly . he see that the shopman suspect his identity , though he have carefully avoid all reference to the relationship between himself and the old man in Luke Tulliver 's presence , and have beg his father to say nothing about he . 

 " I should like to see this young lady before I go up to Mr. Nowell 's room , " he say presently . " will you step upstairs and ask she to come down to I ? " 

 " I can go if you wish , but I do not   suppose she will leave the old gentleman . " 

 " never mind what you suppose . tell she that I wish to say a few word to she upon particular business . " 

 Luke Tulliver depart upon his errand , while Percival Nowell go into the parlour , and seat himself before the dull neglect fire in the lumber old arm - chair in which his father have sit through the long lonely evening for so many year . Mr. Nowell the young be not disturb by any sentimental reflection upon this subject , however ; he be think of his father 's will , and the wrong which be inflict upon he thereby . 

 " to be cheat out of every sixpence by my own flesh and blood ! " he mutter to himself . " that seem too much for any man to bear . " 

 the door be open by a gentle hand presently , and Marian come into the room . Percival Nowell rise from his seat hastily and stand face she , surprise by her beauty and an indefinable likeness which she bear to her mother a likeness which bring his dead wife 's face back to his mind with a sudden pang . he have love she after his own fashion once upon a time , and have grow weary of she and neglect she after the death of that short - live selfish passion ; but something , some faint touch of the old feeling , stir his heart as he look at his daughter to - night . the emotion be as brief as the breath of a pass wind . in the next moment he be think of his father 's money , and how this girl have emerge from obscurity to rob he of it . 

 " you wish to speak to I on business , I be tell , " she say , in her clear low voice , wonder at the stranger 's silence and deliberate scrutiny of her face . 

 " yes , I have to speak to you on very serious business , Marian , " he answer gravely . 

 " you be an utter stranger to I , and yet call I by my christian name . " 

 " I be not an utter stranger to you . look at I , Mrs. Holbrook . have you never see my face before ? " 

 " never . " 

 " be you quite sure of that ? look a little long before you answer again . " 

 " yes ! " she cry suddenly , after a long pause . " you be my father ! " 

 there have come back upon she , in a rapid flash of memory , the picture of a room in Brussels a room light dimly by two wax - candle on the chimney - piece , where there be a tall dark man who snatch she up in his arm and kiss she before he go out . she remember care very little for his kiss , and have a childish consciousness of the fact that it be he who make her mamma cry so often in the quiet lonely evening , when the mother and child be together in that desolate continental lodging . 

 yet at this moment she be scarcely disposed to think much about her father 's ill - conduct . she consider only that he be her father , and that they have find each other after long year of separation . she stretch out her arm , and would have fall upon his breast ; but something in his manner repel she , something downcast and nervous , which have a chilling effect upon she , and give her time to remember how little cause she have to love he . he do not seem aware of the affectionate impulse which have move she towards he at first . he give she his hand presently . it be deadly cold , and lie loosely in her own . 

 " I be ask my grandfather about you this morning , " she say , wonder at his strange manner , " but he would not tell I where you be . " 

 " indeed ! I be surprised to find you feel so much interest in I ; I be aware that I do not   deserve as much . yet I could plead plenty of excuse for my life , if I care to trouble you with they ; but I do not . it would be a long story ; and when it be tell , you might not believe it . Most man be , more or less , the slave of circumstance . I have suffer that kind of bondage all my life . I have know , too , that you be in good hand well off in every way than you could have be in my care or I should have act differently in relation to you . " 

 " there be no occasion to speak of the past , " Marian reply gravely . " Providence be very good to I ; but I know my poor mother 's last day be full of sorrow . I can not tell how far it might have be in your power to prevent that . it be not my place to blame , or even to question your conduct . " 

 " you be an uncommonly dutiful daughter , " Mr. Nowell exclaim with rather a bitter laugh ; " I think that you would have repudiate I altogether perhaps ; would have take your tone from my father , who have grow pig - head with old age , and can not forgive I for have have the aspiration of a gentleman . " 

 " it be a pity there should not be union between my grandfather and you at such a moment as this , " Marian say . 

 " o , we be civil enough to each other . I bear no malice against the old man , though many son in my position might consider themselves hardly use . and now I may as well go upstairs and pay my respect . why be not your husband with you , by the bye ? " 

 " he be not want here ; and I do not even know that he be in London . " 

 " Humph ! he seem rather a mysterious sort of person , this husband of your . " 

 Marian take no notice of this remark , and the father and daughter go upstairs to the sick - room together . the old silversmith receive his son with obvious coolness , and be evidently displeased at see Marian and her father together . 

 Percival Nowell , however , on his part , appear to be in an unusually affectionate and dutiful mood this evening . he hold his place by the bedside resolutely , and insist on share Marian 's watch that night . so all through the long night those two sit together , while the old man pass from uneasy slumber to more uneasy wakefulness , and back to troubled sleep again , his breathing grow heavy and more laboured with every hour . they be very quiet , and could have find but little to say to each other , have there be no reason for their silence . that first brief impulsive feeling of affection past , Marian could only think of this newly - find father as the man who have make her mother 's life lonely and wretche while he pursue his own selfish pleasure ; and who have allow she to grow to womanhood without have be the object of one thought or care upon his part . she could not forget these thing , as she sit opposite to he in the awful silence of the sick - room , steal a glance at his face now and then , and wonder at the strange turn of fortune which have bring they thus together . 

 it be not a pleasant face by any mean not a countenance to inspire love or confidence . handsome still , but with a faded look , like a face that have grow pallid and wrinkle in the feverish atmosphere of vicious haunt under the flare gas that glare down upon the green cloth of a rouge - et - noir table , in the tumult of crowded race - course , the press and confusion of the betting - ring it be the face of a batter rouť , who have live his life , and outlive the smile of fortune ; the face of a man to whom honest thought and hope have long be unknown . there be a disappointed peevish look about the droop corner of the mouth , an angry glitter in the eye . 

 he do not look at his daughter very often as they sit together through that weary vigil , but keep his eye for the great part of the time upon the waste face on the pillow , which look like a parchment mask in the dim light . he seem to be deep in thought , and several time in the night Marian hear he breathe an impatient sigh , as if his thought be not pleasant to he . More than once he rise from his chair and pace the room softly for a little time , as if the restlessness of his mind have make that force quiet unendurable . the early morning light come at last , faint and wan and gray , across a forest of blacken chimney - pot , and by that light the watcher could see that Jacob Nowell have change for the bad . 

 he linger till late that afternoon . it be grow dusk when he die , make a very peaceful end of life at the last , with his head rest upon Marian 's shoulder , and his cold hand clasp in her . his son stand by the bed , look down upon he at that final moment with a fix inscrutable face . Gilbert Fenton call that evening , and hear of the old man 's death from Luke Tulliver . he hear also that Mrs. Holbrook intend to sleep in Queen Anne 's Court that night , and do not therefore intrude upon she , rely upon be able to see she next morning . he leave his card , with a few word of condolence write upon it in pencil . 

 Mr. Nowell be with his daughter in the little parlour behind the shop when Luke Tulliver give she this card . he ask who the visitor be . 

 " Mr. Fenton , a gentleman I know at Lidford in my dear uncle 's lifetime . my grandfather like he very much . " 

 " Mr. Fenton ! yes , my father tell I all about he . you be engage to he , and jilt he for this man you have marry very foolishly , as it seem to I ; for he could certainly have give you a well position than that which you appear to occupy now . " 

 " I choose for my own happiness , " Marian answer quietly , " and I have only one subject for regret ; that be , that I be compel to act with ingratitude towards a good man . but Mr. Fenton have forgive I ; have promise to be my friend , if ever I should have need of his friendship . he have very kindly offer to take all trouble off my hand with respect to to the arrangement for the funeral . " 

 " he be remarkably oblige , " say Percival Nowell with a sneer ; " but as the only son of the deceased , I consider myself the proper person to perform that final duty . " 

 " I do not wish to interfere with your do so . of course I do not know how near at hand you be when Mr. Fenton make that offer , or I should have tell he . " 

 " you mean to remain until the funeral be over , I suppose ? " 

 " I think not ; I want to go back to Hampshire as soon as possible by an early train to - morrow morning , if I can . I do not see that there be any reason for my remaining . I could not prove my respect or affection for my grandfather any more by stay . " 

 " certainly not , " her father answer promptly . " I think you will be quite right in get away from this dingy hole as quick as you can . " 

 " it be not for that . but I have promise to return directly I be free to do so . " 

 " and you go back to Hampshire ? to what part of Hampshire ? " 

 Marian tell he the name of the place where she be live . he write the address in his pocket - book , and be especially careful that it should be correctly write , as to the name of the near town , and in all other particular . 

 " I may have to write to you , or to come to you , perhaps , " he say . " it be as well to be prepare for the contingency . " 

 after this Mr. Nowell send out for a " Railway Guide , " in order to give his daughter all necessary information about the train for Malsham . there be a tolerably fast train that leave Waterloo at seven in the morning , and Marian decide upon go by that . she have to spend the evening alone with her father while Mrs. Mitchin keep watch in the dismal chamber upstairs . Mr. Nowell ask his daughter 's permission to light his cigar , and have obtain it , sit smoke moodily all the evening , star into the fire , and very rarely address his companion , who have take a Bible out of her travel - bag , and be read those solemn , chapter which well harmonise with her feeling at this moment ; think as she read of the time when her guardian and benefactor lie in his last calm rest , and she have vainly try to find comfort in the same word , and have find herself star blankly at the sacred page , with eye that be dry and burn , and to which there come no merciful relief from tear . 

 her father glance at her askance now and then from his arm - chair by the fire , as she sit by the little round table look down at her book , the light of the candle shin full upon her pensive face . he look at she with no friendliness in his eye , but with that angry sparkle which have grow almost habitual to they of late , since the world have go ill with he . after one of those brief steal look , a strange smile creep over his face . he be think of a little speech of Shakespeare 's Richard about his nephew , the youthful Prince of Wales : 

 so young , so wise , they say do ne'er live long . 
 " how pious she be ! " he say to himself with a diabolical sneer . " do the half - pay Captain teach she that , I wonder ? or do church - go , and psalm - singing , and Bible - reading come natural to all woman ? I know my mother be good at it , and my wife too . she use to fly to her Bible as a man fly to dram - drinking , or his pipe , when thing go wrong . " 

 he get tired of his cigar at last , and go out into the shop , where he begin to question Mr. Tulliver as to the extent and value of the stock - in - trade , and upon other detail of the business ; to all of which inquirie the shopman reply in a suspicious and grudging spirit , give his questioner the small possible amount of information . 

 " you be an uncommonly cautious young man , " Mr. Nowell exclaim at last . " you will never stand in your own light by be too anxious to oblige other people . I daresay , though , you could speak fast enough , if it be make worth your while . " 

 " I do not   see what be to make it worth my while , " Luke Tulliver answer coolly . " my duty be to my dead master , and those that be to come after he . I do not   want stranger come sniff and pry into the stock . Mr. Nowell 's book be keep so that I could not   cheat he out of a sixpence , or the value of a sixpence ; and I mean to hand them over to the lawyer in a manner that will do I credit . my master have not be a generous master to I , consider how I have   serve he , and I have   get nothing but my character to look to ; but that I have get , and I do not   want it tamper with . " 

 " who be go to tamper with it ? " say Mr. Nowell . " so you will hand over the stock - book to the lawyer , will you , without a leaf missing , or an erasure , or an item mark off as sell that never be sell , or any little dodge of that kind , eh , Mr. Tulliver ? " 

 " of course , " answer the shopman , look defiantly at the questioner , who be lean across the counter with fold arm , star at Luke Tulliver with an ironical grin upon his countenance . 

 " then you be a very remarkable man . I should have think such a chance as a death as unexpected as my as old Mr. Nowell 's would have make the fortune of a confidential clerk like you . " 

 " I be not a thief , " answer Mr. Tulliver with an air of virtuous indignation ; " and you can not   know much about old Jacob Nowell if you think that anybody could cheat he , living or dead . there be not an entry in the book that be not   sign with his initial , in his own hand . when a thing be sell and cross off the book , he put his initial to the entry of the sale . he go through the book every night till a week ago , and he would as soon have cut his own head off as omit to do it , so long as he could see the figure in the book or hold his pen . " 

 Mr. Medler the lawyer come in while Percival Nowell and the shopman be talk . he have be away from his office upon business that evening , and have only just receive the tiding of the silversmith 's death . 

 Luke Tulliver hand he the book and key of the case in which the tarnish plate be exhibit . he go into all the detail of the business carefully , set his seal upon book and paper , and do all that he could to make matter secure without hindrance to the carrying on of the trade . 

 he be surprised to hear that Mrs. Holbrook be in the house , and propose pay his respect to she that evening ; but this Mr. Nowell prevent . she be tired and out of spirit , he tell the attorney ; it would be well for he to see she next day . it be convenient to Mr. Nowell to forget Marian 's intention of return to Hampshire by an early train on the follow morning at this juncture . 

 when he go back to the parlour by - and - by , after Mr. Medler have finish his business in the shop , and be trudge briskly towards his own residence , Mr. Nowell tell his daughter that the lawyer have be there , but do not inform she of his desire to see she . 

 " I suppose you know all about your grandfather 's will ? " he say by - and - by , when he have half - finish another cigar . 

 Marian have put away her book by this time , and be look dreamily at the fire , think of her husband , who need never know those weary sordid care about money again , now that she be to be rich . 

 her father 's question startle she out of that agreeable day - dream . 

 " yes , " she say ; " my grandfather tell I that he have leave all his money to I . I know that must seem unjust to you , papa ; but I hope my husband will allow I to do something towards repair that injustice in some measure . " 

 " in some measure ! " Mr. Nowell think savagely . " that mean a pittance that would serve to keep life in a pauper , I suppose ; and that be to be contingent upon her husband 's permission . " he make no audible reply to his daughter 's speech , and seem , indeed , so much absorb in his own thought , that Marian doubt if he have hear she ; and so the rest of the long evening wear itself out in dismal silence , whilst stealthy footstep sound now and then upon the stair . later Mr. Nowell be summon to a conference with some mysterious person in the shop , whom Marian suppose to be the undertaker ; and return from this interview with a gloomy face , he resume his seat by the fire . 

 it seem very strange to Marian that they two , father and daughter , should be together thus , so near and yet so wide apart ; unite by the close tie of kindred , bring together thus after year of severance , yet with no bond of sympathy between they ; no evidence of remorseful tenderness on the side of he whose life have be one long neglect of a father 's duty . 

 " how could I expect that he would care for I in the small degree , after his desertion of my mother ? " marian think to herself , as she meditate upon her father 's coldness , which at first have seem so strange to she . she have fancy that , what ever his sin in the past have be , his heart would have melt at the sight of his only child . she have think of he and dream of he so often in her girlhood , elevate he in her romantic fancy into something much well and bright than he really be a sinner at well , it be true , but a sinner of a lofty type , a noble nature go astray . she have imagine a reunion with he in the day to come , when it should be her delight to minister to his decline year to be the consolation of his repentant soul . and now she have find he she know these thing could never be that there be not one feeling of sympathy possible between she and that break - down , dissipate - look man of the world . 

 the dismal evening come to an end at last , and marian bade her father good - night , and go upstairs to the little room where the trace of his boyhood have interest she so keenly when first she look upon they . Mr. Nowell promise to come to Queen Anne 's Court at a quarter past six next morning , to escort his daughter to the station , an act of parental solicitude she have not expect from he . he take his departure immediately afterwards , be let out of the shop - door by Luke Tulliver , who be in a very cantankerous humour , and take no pain to disguise the state of his feeling . the lawyer Mr. Medler have pry into everything , the shopman tell Percival Nowell ; have declare himself empower to do this , as the legal adviser of the deceased ; and have seem as suspicious as if he , Luke Tulliver , mean to rob his dead master . Mr. Tulliver 's sensitive nature have be outrage by such a line of conduct . 

 " and what have he do with the book ? " Mr. Nowell ask . 

 " they be all in the desk yonder , and that fellow Medler have take away the key . " 

 " sharp practice , " say Mr. Nowell ; " but to a man with your purity of intention it can not   matter what precaution be take to insure the safety of the property . " 

 " of course it do not   matter , " the other answer peevishly ; " but I like to be treat as a gentleman . " 

 " Humph ! and you expect to retain your place here , I suppose , if the business be carry on ? " 

 " it be too good a business to be let drop , " reply Mr. Tulliver ; " but I should not   think that young lady upstairs would be much of a hand at trade . I would not   mind offer a fair price for the business , I have   get a tidy little bit of money put away , though my salary have be small enough , goodness know ; but I have   live with the old gentleman , and never waste a penny upon pleasure ; none of your music - hall , or dancing - saloon , or anything of that kind , for I , or I would not   mind pay an annual sum out of the profit of the trade for a reasonable term . if you have   any influence with the young lady , perhaps you could put it to she , and get she to look at thing in that light , " Mr. Tulliver add , become quite obsequious as it dawn upon he that this interlope stranger might be able to do he a service . 

 " I will do my good for you , Tulliver , " Mr. Nowell reply , in a patronise tone . " I daresay the young lady will be quite willing to entertain any reasonable proposition you may make . " 

 faithful to his promise Mr. Nowell appear at a quarter past six next morning , at which hour he find his daughter quite ready for her journey . she be very glad to get away from that dreary house , make a hundredfold more dismal by the sense of what lie in the closed chamber , where the candle be still burn in the yellow fog of the November morning , and to which Marian have go with hush footstep to kneel for the last time beside the old man who be so near she by the tie of relationship , and whom she have know for so brief a space . she be glad to leave that dingy quarter of the town , which to one who have never live in an english city seem unspeakably close and wretche ; still more glad to think that she be go back to the quiet home , where her husband would most likely join she very soon . she might find he there when she arrive , perhaps ; for he know nothing of this journey to London , or could only hear of it at the Grange , where she have leave a letter for he , enclose that brief note of Gilbert Fenton 's which have inform she of her grandfather 's fatal illness . there be special reason why she should not ask he to meet she in Queen Anne 's Court , however long she might have be compel to stay there . 

 Mr. Nowell be much more affectionate in his manner to his daughter this morning , as they sit in the cab drive to the station , and walk side by side upon the platform in the quarter of an hour 's interval before the departure of the train . he question she closely upon her life in the present , and her plan for the future , express himself in a remarkably generous manner upon the subject of her grandfather 's will , and declare himself very well pleased that his own involuntary neglect be to be so amply atone for by the old man 's liberality . he find his daughter completely ignorant of the world , as gentle and confide as he have find her mother in the past . he sound the depth of her innocent mind during that brief promenade ; and when the train bear she away at last , and the platform be clear , he remain for some time walk up and down in profound meditation , scarcely know where he be . he look round he in an absent way by - and - by , and then hurriedly leave the station , and drive straight to Mr. Medler 's office , which be upon the ground floor of a gloomy old house in one of the dingy street in the Soho district , and in the upper chamber whereof the attorney 's wife and numerous offspring have their abode . he come down to his client from his unpretende breakfast - table in a faded dressing - gown , with smear of egg and greasy trace of butter toast about the region of his mouth , and seem not particularly pleased to see Mr. Nowell . but the conference that follow be a long one ; and it be to be presume that it involve some chance of future profit , since the lawyer forget to return to his unfinished breakfast , much to the vexation of Mrs. Medler , a fade lady with everything about she in the extreme stage of limpness , who wash the breakfast - thing with her own fair hand , in consideration of the multitudinous duty to be perform by that hapless solitary damsel who in such modest household be usually denominate " the girl . " 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 AT LIDFORD AGAIN 


 Gilbert Fenton call in Queen Anne 's Court within a few hour of Marian 's departure , and be not a little disappointed when he be tell that she have go back to Hampshire . he have rely upon see she again not once only , but several time before her return . he have promise Jacob Nowell that he would watch over and protect her interest ; and it be a sincere unqualified wish to do this that influence he now . More than a dear friend , the sweetest and dearest of all womankind , she could never be to he . he accept the position with resignation . the first sharp bitterness of her loss be over . that he should ever cease to love she be impossible ; but it seem to he that a chivalrous friendship for she , a disinterested brotherly affection , be in no manner incompatible with that hapless silent love . no word of his , in all their intercourse to come , should ever remind she of that hide devotion ; no shadow of the past should ever cloud the calm brightness of the present . it be a romantic fancy , perhaps , for a man of business , whose day be spend in the very press and tumult of commercial life ; but it have lift Gilbert Fenton out of that slough of despond into which he have fall when Marian seem utterly lose to he vanish altogether out of his existence . 

 he have a sense of bitter disappointment , therefore , when he find that she have go , leave neither letter nor message for he . how little value his friendship must need possess for she , when she could abandon he thus without a word ! he have feel sure that she would consult he upon her affair ; but no , she have her husband to whom to appeal , and have no need of any other counsellor . 

 " I be a fool to think that I could ever be anything to she , even a friend , " he say to himself bitterly ; " woman be incapable of friendship . it be all or nothing with they ; a blind self - abnegation or the cold indifference . devotion can not touch they , unless the man who give it happen to be that one man out of a thousand who have the power to bewitch their sens . truth and affection , of themselves , have no value with they . how many people speak to I of this Holbrook as an unattractive man ; and yet he win my love away from I , and hold she with an influence so complete , that my friendship seem worthless to she . she can not give I a word or a thought . " 

 Mr. Fenton make some inquiry about the funeral arrangement and find that these have be duly attend to by the lawyer , and a gentleman who have be with Jacob Nowell a good deal of late , who seem to be some relation to the old man , Mr. Tulliver say , and take a great deal upon himself . this be do , there be , of course , no occasion for Gilbert to interfere , and he be glad to be release from all responsibility . have ascertain this , he ask for the address of the late Mr. Nowell 's lawyer ; and be tell it , go at once to Mr. Medler 's office . he do not consider himself absolve from the promise he have make the old man by Marian 's indifference , and be none the less anxious to watch over her interest because she seem to set so little value on his friendship . 

 he tell Mr. Medler who he be , and the promise he have give to Jacob Nowell , abstain , of course , from any reference to the position he have once occupy towards Marian . he describe himself as her friend only a friend of long standing , who have be intimate with her adopt guardian . 

 " I know how ignorant Mrs. Holbrook be of the world and of all business matter , " he go on to say , " and I be naturally anxious that her interest should be protect . " 

 " I should think there be very little doubt that her husband will see after those , " the lawyer answer , with something of a sneer ; " husband be generally suppose to do that , especially where there be money at stake . " 

 " I do not know Mr. Holbrook ; and he have keep himself in the background so persistently up to this point , and have be altogether so underhanded in his proceeding , that I have by no mean a good opinion of he . Mr. Nowell tell I that he intend to leave his money to his granddaughter in such a manner , that it would be hers and her only free from the control of any husband . he have do so , I presume ? " 

 " yes , " Mr. Medler reply , with the air of a man who would fain have withhold the information ; " he have leave it for her own separate use and maintenance . " 

 " and it be a property of some importance , I conclude ? " 

 " of some importance yes , " the lawyer answer , in the same tone . 

 " ought not Mrs. Holbrook to have remain to hear the reading of the will ? " 

 " well , yes , decidedly ; it would have be more in the usual way of thing ; but her absence can have no ill effect upon her interest . of course it will be my duty to make she acquainted with the content of the will . " 

 Gilbert Fenton be not prepossess by Mr. Medler 's countenance , which be not an open candid index to a spotless soul , nor by his surrounding , which be of the shabby ; but the business be in this man 's hand , it might be rather difficult to withdraw it dangerous even . the man hold the will , and in hold that have a certain amount of power . 

 " there be no one except Mrs. Holbrook interested in Mr. Nowell 's will , I suppose ? " Gilbert say presently . 

 " no one directly and immediately , except an old charwoman , who have a legacy of five - and - twenty pound . " 

 " but there be some one else interested in an indirect manner I infer from your word ? " 

 " yes . Mrs. Holbrook take the whole of the personalty , but she have only a life - interest in the real estate . if she should have child , it will go to they on her death ; if she should die childless , it will go to her father , suppose he to survive she . " 

 " to her father ? that be rather strange , be not   it ? " 

 " I do not   know that . it be the old man 's wish that the will should be to that effect . " 

 " I understand from he that he do not know whether his son be alive or dead . " 

 " indeed ! I believe he have news of his son very lately . " 

 " curious that he should not have tell I , know as he do my interest in everything relate to Mrs. Holbrook . " 

 " old people be apt to be close ; and Jacob Nowell be about one of the close customer I ever meet with , " answer the lawyer . 

 Gilbert leave he soon after this , and charter a hansom in the next street , which carry he back to the City . he be very uncertain as to what he ought to do for Marian , doubtful of Mr. Medler 's integrity , and yet anxious to abstain from any act that might seem uncalled for or officious . she have her husband to look after her interest , as the lawyer have remind he , and it be scarcely probable that Mr. Holbrook would neglect any step necessary to secure his wife 's succession to whatever property Jacob Nowell have leave . it seem to Gilbert that he could do nothing at present , except write to Marian , tell she of his interview with the lawyer , and advise she to lose no time in place the conduct of her affair in more respectable hand than those of Mr. Medler . he mention his own solicitor , a City firm of high standing , as gentleman whom she might wisely trust at this crisis of her life . 

 this do , he could only wait the issue of event , and he try to occupy himself as much as possible with his business at St. Helens that business which he seriously intend get rid of as soon as he could meet with a favourable opportunity for so do . he work with that object in view . in spite of his loss in Australia , he be in a position to retire from commerce with a very fair income . he have lose all motive for sustained exertion , all desire to become rich . a man who have no taste for expensive bachelor pleasure and no home have very little opportunity for get rid of large sum of money . Mr. Fenton have take life pleasantly enough , and yet have never spend five hundred a year . he could retire with an income of eight hundred and have abandon all idea of ever marry this seem to he more than sufficient . 

 the Listers have come back to England , and Mrs. Lister have write to her brother more than once , beg he to run down to Lidford . of course she have express herself freely upon the subject of Marian 's conduct in these letter , reprobate the girl 's treachery and ingratitude , and congratulate Gilbert upon his escape from so ineligible a connection . Mr. Fenton have put his sister off with excuse hitherto , and have subject himself thereby to sundry feminine reproach upon his coldness and want of affection for Mrs. Lister and her child . " it be very different when Marian Nowell be here , " she write ; " you think it no trouble to come to we then . " 

 no answer come to his letter to Mrs. Holbrook which scarcely call for a reply , unless it have be a few line of thank , in acknowledgment of his interest in her behalf . he have look for such a letter , and be a little disappointed by its non - appearance . the omission , slight as it be , serve to strengthen his bitter feeling that his friendship in this quarter be unneeded and unvalue . 

 business in the City happen to be rather slack at this time ; and it strike Mr. Fenton all at once that he could scarcely have a well opportunity for waste two or three day in a visit of duty to the Listers , and put an end to his sister 's reproachful letter . he have a second motive for go to Lidford ; a motive which have far great weight with he than his brotherly affection just at this time . he want to see Sir David Forster , to call that gentleman to some account for the deliberate falsehood he have utter at their last meeting . he have no bloodthirsty or ferocious feeling upon the subject , he could even understand that the Baronet might have be bind by his own idea of honour to tell a lie in the service of his friend ; but he want to extort some explanation of the line of conduct Sir David have take , and he want to ascertain from he the character of Marian 's husband . he have make inquiry about Sir David at the club , and have be tell that he be still at Heatherly . 

 he go down to Lidford by an afternoon train , without have trouble himself to give Mrs. Lister any notice of his coming . the November evening have close in upon the quiet rural landscape when he drive from the station to Lidford . a cold white mist enfold all thing here , instead of the stifle yellow fog that have fill the London street when he walk westward from the City at the same hour on the previous evening . above his head the sky be clear and bright , the mist - wreath melt away as they mount towards the star . the light window in the village street have a pleasant homely look ; the snug villa , lie back from the high road with a middle distance of dark lawn and glisten shrubbery , shine brightly upon the traveller as he drive by , the curtain not yet draw before some of the window , the room ruddy in the firelight . in one of they he catch a brief glimpse of a young matron seat by the fire with her child cluster at her knee , and the transient picture strike he with a sudden pang . he have dream so fondly of a home like this ; pleasant room shin in the sacred light of the hearth , his wife and child wait to bid he welcome when the day 's work be do . all other object which man live and toil for seem to he poor and worthless in the absence of this one dear incentive to exertion , this one sweet recompense for every care . even Lidford House , which have never before seem to he the perfection of a home , have a new aspect for he to - night , and remind he sharply of his own loss . he envy Martin Lister the quiet jog - trot happiness of his domestic life ; his love for and pride in his child ; the calm haven of that comfortable hearth by which he sit to - night , with his slippere foot stretch luxuriously upon a fender - stool of his wife 's manufacture , and his daughter sit on a hassock close to his easy - chair , read in a book of fairy tale . 

 of course they be all delighted to see he , at once pleased and surprised by the unexpected visit . he have bring a great parcel of toy for the two child ; and Selwyn Lister , a fine boisterous boy in a Highland costume , be summon downstairs to assist at the unpacking of these treasure . it be half - past seven , and the Listers have din at six : but in an incredibly short space of time the Sutherland table have be draw out to a cosy position near the fire and spread with a substantial repast , while Mrs. Lister take her place behind the ponderous old silver urn which have be an heirloom in her husband 's family for the last two century . the Listers be full of talk about their own travel a long - delay continental tour which have be talk of ever since their return from the honeymoon trip to Geneva and Chamouni ; and be also very eager to hear Gilbert 's adventure in Australia , of which he have give they only very brief account in his letter . there be nothing say that night about Marian , and Gilbert be grateful for his sister 's forbearance . 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 call to ACCOUNT 


 Gilbert walk over to Heatherly after luncheon next day , take of preference the way which lead he past Captain Sedgewick 's cottage and through the leafless wood where he and Marian have walk together when the foliage be in its summer glory . the leaf lie thick upon the mossy ground now ; and the gaunt bare branch of the tree have a weird awful look in the utter silence of the place . his footstep trample upon the fall leaf have an echo ; and he turn to look behind he more than once , fancy he be follow . 

 the old house , with its long line of window , have a prison - like aspect under the dull November day . Gilbert wonder how such a man as Sir David Forster could endure his existence there , embitter as it be by the memory of that calamity which have take all the sunlight out of his life , and leave he a weary and purposeless hunter after pleasure . but Sir David have be prostrate under the heavy hand of his hereditary foe , the gout , for a long time past ; and be fain to content himself with such company as come to he at Heatherly , and such amusement as be to be find in the society of man who be boon companion rather than friend . Gilbert Fenton hear the familiar clash of the billiard - ball as he go into the hall , where a couple of liver - colour setter be doze before a great fire that roar half - way up the wide chimney . there be no other life in the hall ; and Mr. Fenton be conduct to the other end of the house , and usher into that tobacco - taint snuggery in which he have last see the Baronet . his suspicion be on the alert this time ; and he fancy he could detect a look of something more than surprise in Sir David 's face when the servant announce he an uneasy look , as of a man take at a disadvantage . 

 the Baronet be very gracious , however , and give he a hearty welcome . 

 " I be uncommonly glad to see you , my dear Fenton , " he say , " indeed , I have be pleased to see bad fellow than you lately , since this infernal gout have lay I up in this dreary old place . the house be pretty full now , I be happy to say . I have friend who will come to shoot my partridge , though they will not   remember my solitude in a charitable spirit before the first of September . you will stop and dine , I hope ; or perhaps you can put up here altogether for a week or so . my housekeeper shall find you a good room ; and I can promise you pleasant company . say yes , now , like a good fellow , and I will send a man to Lidford for your trap . " 

 " thank no . you be very kind ; but I be stay with my sister for a few day , and must return to town before the end of the week . the fact of the matter be , Sir David , I have come here to - day to ask you for some explanation of your conduct at our last interview . I do not   want to say anything rude or disagreeable ; for I be quite willing to believe that you feel kindly towards I , even at the time when you deceive I . I suppose there be some position in which a man can hardly expect fair play , and that mine be such a position . but you certainly do deceive I , Sir David , and grossly . " 

 " that last be rather an unpleasant word , Mr. Fenton . in what respect do I deceive you ? " 

 " I come here on purpose to ask you if Mr. Holbrook , the man who rob I of my promise wife , be a friend of your , and you deny all knowledge of he . " 

 " grant . and what then , my dear sir ? " 

 " when I come to ask you that question , I have no special reason for suppose this Mr. Holbrook be know to you . it only strike I that , be a stranger in the village , as the result of my inquiry have prove to I , he might be one of your many visitor . I know at that time that Mr. Holbrook have take his wife to a farm - house in Hampshire immediately after their marriage a house lent to he by a friend ; but I do not know that you have any estate in that county . I have be to Hampshire since then , and have find Mrs. Holbrook at the Grange , near Crosber in your house . " 

 " you have find she ! well , Mr. Fenton , the circumstantial evidence be too strong for I , so I must plead guilty . yes ; I do deceive you when I tell you that Holbrook be unknown to I ; but I pledge my word to keep his secret to give you no clue , should you ever happen to question I , that could lead to your discovery of your lost love 's whereabout . it be consider , I conclude , that any meeting between you two must need result unpleasantly . at any rate , there be a strong desire to avoid you ; and in common duty to my friend I be compel to respect that desire . " 

 " not a very manly wish on the part of my successful rival , " say Gilbert . 

 " it may have be the lady 's wish rather than Mr. Holbrook 's . " 

 " I have reason to know that it be otherwise . I have hear from Marian 's own lip that she would have write a candid confession of the truth have she be free to do so . it be her husband who prevent she give I notice of my desertion . " 

 " I can not pretend to explain his conduct , " Sir David answer gravely . " I only know that I pledge myself to keep his secret ; and feel bind to do so , even at the cost of a lie . " 

 " and this man be your friend . you must know whether he be worthy to be Marian Nowell 's husband . the circumstance of her life do not seem to I favourable to happiness , so far as I have be able to discover they ; nor do I think her look happy when we meet . but I should be glad to know that she have not fall into bad hand . " 

 " and I suppose by this time your feeling have cool down a little . you have abandon those revengeful intention you appear to entertain , when you be last in this house ? " 

 " in a great measure , yes . I have promise Marian that , should I and her husband meet , as we must do , I believe , soon or later , she need apprehend no violence on my part . he have win the prize ; any open resentment would seem mere schoolboy folly . but you can not suppose that I feel very kindly towards he , or ever shall . " 

 " upon my soul , I think man be hardly responsible for their action where a woman be concern , " Sir David exclaim after a pause . " we be the veri slave of destiny in these matter . a man see the only woman in the world he can love too late to win she with honour . if he be strong enough to act nobly , he turn his back upon the scene of his temptation , all the more easily should the lady happen to be staunch to she affiance , or her husband , as the case may be . but if she waver if he see that his love be return heaven help he ! honour , generosity , friendship , all go by the board ; and for the light in those fatal eye , for the dangerous music of that one dear voice , he sacrifice all that he have hold high in life until that luckless time . I know that Holbrook hold it no light thing to do you this wrong ; I know that he fight manfully against temptation . but , you see , fate be the strong ; and he have to give way at the last . " 

 " I can not agree with that way of look at thing , Sir David . the world be make up of people who take their own pleasure at any cost to other , and then throw the onus of their misdoing upon Providence . I have long ago forgive the girl who jilt I , and have swear to be her faithful and watchful friend in all the day to come . I want to be sure that her future be a bright one much bright than it seem when I see she in your lonely old house near Crosber . she have have money leave she since then ; so poverty can no long be a reason for she be hide from the world . " 

 " I be very glad to hear that ; my friend be not a rich man . " 

 " so Marian tell I . but I want to learn something more than that about he . up to this moment he have be the most intangible being I ever hear of . will you tell I who and what he be his position in the world , and so on ? " 

 " Humph ! " mutter Sir David meditatively ; " I do not   know that I can tell you much about he . his position be like that of a good many other of my acquaintance rather vague and intangible , to use the word you employ just now . he be not well off ; he be a gentleman by birth , with some small mean of his own , and he ' live , sir , live . ' that be about all I can say of he from a worldly point of view . with regard to his affection for Miss Nowell , I know that he love she passionately , devotedly , desperately the strong expression you can supply to describe a man 's folly . I never see any fellow so far go . Heaven know , I do my good to argue he out of his fancy urge your claim , the girl 's poverty , every reason against the marriage ; but friendly argumentation of that kind go very little way in such a case . he take his own course . it be only when I find the business be decide upon , that I offer he my house in Hampshire ; a place to which I never go myself , but which bring I in a decent income in the hand of a clever bailiff . I know that Holbrook have no home ready for his wife , and I think it would give they a pleasant retreat enough for a few month , while the honey and rose - leaf still sweeten the wine - cup of their wed life . they have stay there ever since , as you seem to know ; so I conclude they have find the place agreeable . confoundedly dreary , I should fancy it myself ; but then I be not a newly marry man . " 

 the Baronet give a brief sigh , and his thought go back for a moment to the time when he too be in Arcadia ; when a fair young wife be by his side , and when no hour of his existence seem ever dull or weary to he . it be all change now ! he have billiard and whist , and horse and hound , and a vast collection of gunnery , and great store of wine in the gloomy arch vault beneath the house , where a hundred prisoner have be keep under lock and key when Heatherly have fall into the hand of the cromwellian soldiery , and the faithful retainer of the household be fain to lay down their arm . he have all thing that make up the common pleasure and delight of a man 's existence ; but he have lose the love which have give these thing a new charm , and without which all life seem to he flat , stale , and unprofitable . he could sympathise with Gilbert Fenton much more keenly than that gentleman would have suppose possible ; for a man suffer from this kind of affliction be apt to imagine that he have a copyright in that species of grief , and that no other man ever do or ever can experience a like calamity . the same manner of trouble may come to other , of course , but not with a similar intensity . other will suffer and recover , and find a balm elsewhere . he alone be constant until death ! 

 " and you can tell I nothing more about Mr. Holbrook ? " he ask after a pause . 

 " upon my honour , nothing . I think you will do wisely to leave these two people to take their own way in the future without any interference on your part . you speak of watchful friendship and all that kind of thing , and I can quite appreciate your disinterested desire to befriend the woman whom you once hop to make your wife . but , believe I , my dear Fenton , no manner of good can possibly come of your intervention . those two have choose their road in life , and must travel along it , side by side , through good or evil fortune . Holbrook would naturally be jealous of any friendship between his wife and you ; while such a friendship could not fail to keep alive bitter thought in your mind could not fail to sharpen the regret which you fancy just now be to be life - long . I have no doubt I seem to speak in a hard worldly spirit . " 

 " you speak like a man of the world , Sir David , " the other answer quietly ; " and I can not deny that there be a certain amount of wisdom in your advice . no , my friendship be not want by either of those two , suppose even that I be generous enough to be able to give it to both . I have learn that lesson already from marian herself . but you must remember that I promise her poor old grandfather the man who die a few day ago that I would watch over her interest with patient fidelity , that I would be her friend and protector , if ever the hour should come in which she would need friendship and protection . I be not go to forget this promise , or to neglect its performance ; and in order to be true to my word , I be bind to make myself acquainted with the circumstance of her married life , and the character of her husband . " 

 " can not you be satisfied with know that she be happy ? " 

 " I have see she , Sir David , and be by no mean assure of her happiness . " 

 " and yet it be a love - match on both side . Holbrook , as I have tell you , love she passionately . " 

 " that passionate kind of love be apt to wear itself out very quickly with some man . your bailiff 's daughter complain bitterly of Mr. Holbrook 's frequent absence from the Grange , of the dulness and loneliness of my poor girl 's life . " 

 " woman be apt to be exact , " Sir David answer with a deprecate shrug of the shoulder . " my friend Holbrook have the battle of life to fight , and could not spend all his day play the lover . if his wife have have money leave she , that will make some difference in their position . a man be never at his good when he be worry by debt and financial difficulty . " 

 " and Mr. Holbrook be in debt when he marry , I suppose ? " 

 " he be . I must confess that I find that complaint a very common one among my acquaintance , " the Baronet add with a laugh . 

 " will you tell I what this Holbrook be like in person , Sir David ? I have question several people about he , and have never obtain anything beyond the vague kind of description . " 

 Sir David Forster laugh aloud at this request . 

 " what ! you want to know whether your rival be handsome , I suppose ? like a woman , who always commence her inquiry about another woman by ask whether she be pretty . my dear Fenton , all personal description be vague . it be almost impossible to furnish a correct catalogue of any man 's feature . Holbrook be just one of those man whom it be most difficult to describe not particularly good - look , nor especially ill - looking ; very clever , and with plenty of expression and character in his face . old than you by some year , and look old than he really be . " 

 " thank ; but there be not one precise statement in your description . be the man dark or fair short or tall ? " 

 " rather dark than fair ; rather tall than short . " 

 " that will do , Sir David , " Gilbert say , start suddenly to his foot , and look the Baronet in the face intently . " the man who rob I of my promise wife be the man whom I introduce to she ; the man who have come between I and all my hope , who hide himself from my just anger , and skulk in the background under a feigned name , be the one friend whom I have love above all other man John Saltram ! " 

 Sir David face he without flinch . if it be act surprise which appear upon his countenance at the sound of John Saltram 's name , the acting be perfect . Gilbert could discover nothing from that broad stare of blank amazement . 

 " in heaven 's name , what can have put such a preposterous notion into your head ? " Sir David ask coolly . 

 " I can not tell you . the conviction have grow upon I , against my own will . yes , I have hat myself for be able to suspect my friend . you do not know how I have love that man , or how our friendship begin at Oxford long ago with something like hero - worship on my side . I think that he be bear to be great and noble ; and heaven know I have feel the disappointment and shortcoming of his career more keenly than he have feel they himself . no , Sir David , I do not   think it be possible for any man to comprehend how I have love John Saltram . " 

 " and yet , without a shred of evidence , you believe he guilty of betray you . " 

 " will you give I your word of honour that Marian 's husband and John Saltram be not one and the same person ? " 

 " no , " answer Sir David impatiently ; " I be tired of the whole business . you have question and cross - question I quite long enough , Mr. Fenton , and I have answer you to the good of my ability , and have give you rational advice , which you will of course decline to take . if you think your friend have wrong you , go to he , and tax he with that wrong . I wash my hand of the affair altogether , from this moment ; but , without wish to be offensive , I can not help tell you , that to my mind you be act very foolishly in this business . " 

 " I daresay it may seem so to you . you would think well of I if I could play the stoic , and say , ' she have jilt I , and be dead to I henceforward . ' but I can not do that . I have the memory of her peaceful girlhood the happy day in which I know she first the generous protector who shelter her life . I be pledge to the dead , Sir David . " 

 he leave Heatherly soon after this , though the Baronet press he to stay to dinner . 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 TORMENTED by DOUBT 


 the long homeward walk give Gilbert ample leisure for reflection upon his interview with Sir David ; a very unsatisfactory interview at the good . yes , the conviction that the man who have wrong he be no other than his own familiar friend , have flash upon he with a new force as the Baronet answer his question about John Holbrook . the suspicion which have enter his mind after he leave the lonely farm - house near Crosber , and which he have do his uttermost to banish , as if it have be a suggestion of the evil one , come back to he to - day with a form and reality which it have lack before . it seem no long a vague fancy , a dark unwelcome thought that border on folly . it have take a new shape altogether , and appear to he almost a certainty . 

 Sir David 's refusal to make any direct denial of the fact seem to confirm his suspicion . yet it be , on the other hand , just possible that Sir David , find he on a false scent , should have be willing to let he follow it , and that the real offender should be screen by this suspicion of John Saltram . but then there arise in his mind a doubt that have perplex he sorely for a long time . if his successful rival have be indeed a stranger to he , what reason could there be for so much mystery in the circumstance of the marriage ? and why should Marian have so carefully avoid tell he anything about her husband ? that his friend , have betray he , should shrink from the revelation of his falsehood , should adopt any underhand course to avoid discovery , seem natural enough . yet to believe this be to think meanly of the man whom he have love so well , whom he have confide in so implicitly until the arising of this cruel doubt . 

 he have know long ago , when the first freshness of his boyish delusion fade away before the penetrate clear daylight of reality , he have know long ago that his friend be not faultless ; that except in that one faithful alliance with himself , John Saltram have be fickle , wayward , vacillating , unstable , and inconstant , true to no dream of his youth , no ambition of his early manhood , content to drop one purpose after another , until his life be leave without any exalted aim . but Gilbert have fancy his friend 's nature be still a noble one in spite of the comparative failure of his life . it be very difficult for he to imagine it possible that this friend could act falsely and ungenerously , could steal his betrothed from he , and keep the secret of his guilt , pretend to sympathise with the jilt lover all the while . 

 but though Mr. Fenton tell himself at one moment that this be impossible , his thought travel back to the same point immediately afterwards , and the image of John Saltram arise before he as that of his hide foe . he remember the long autumn day which he and his friend have spend with Marian those unclouded utterly happy day , which he look back upon now with a kind of wonder . they have be so much together , Marian so bright and fascinating in her innocent enjoyment of the present , bright and happy just then than she have ever seem to he before , Gilbert remember with a bitter pang . he have be completely unsuspicious at the time , untrouble by one doubtful thought ; but it appear to he now that there have be a change in Marian from the time of his friend 's come a new joyousness and vivacity , a keener delight in the simple pleasure of their daily life , and withal a fitfulness , a tendency to change from gaiety to thoughtful silence , that he have not remark in she before . 

 be it strange if John Saltram have fall in love with she ? be it possible to see she daily in all the glory of her girlish loveliness , make doubly bewitch by the sweetness of her nature , the indescribable charm of her manner be it possible to be with she often , as John Saltram have be , and not love she ? Gilbert Fenton have think of his friend as utterly impregnable to any such danger ; as a man who have spend all his stock of tender emotion long ago , and who look upon matrimony as a transaction by which he might mend his broken fortune . that this man should fall a victim to the same subtle charm which have subjugate himself , be a possibility that never occur to Gilbert 's mind , in this happy period of his existence . he want his friend 's approval of his choice ; he wish to see his passion justify in the eye of the man whom it be his habit to regard in somewise as a superior creature ; and it have be a real delight to he to hear Mr. Saltram 's warm praise of Marian . 

 look back at the past to - day from a new point of view , he wonder at his own folly . what be more natural than that John Saltram should have find his doom , as he have find it , unthought of , undreame of , swift , and fatal ? nor be it difficult for he to believe that Marian who have perhaps never really love he , who have be induce to accept he by his own pertinacity and her uncle 's eager desire for the match should find a charm and a power in John Saltram that have be want in himself . he have see too many instance of his friend 's influence over man and woman , to doubt his ability to win this innocent inexperienced girl , have he set himself to win she . he recall with a bitter smile how his informant have all describe his rival in a disparaging tone , as unworthy of so fair a bride ; and he know that it be precisely those quality which these common people be unable to appreciate that constitute the subtle charm by which John Saltram influence other . the rugged power and grandeur of that dark face , which vulgar critic denounce as plain and unattractive , the rare fascination of a manner that vary from an extreme reserve to a wild reckless vivacity , the magic of the deep full voice , with its capacity for the expression of every shade of emotion these be attribute to be pass over and ignore by the vulgar , yet to exercise a potent influence upon sensitive sympathetic nature . 

 " how that poor little anglo - indian widow love he , without any effort to win or hold her affection on his side ! " Gilbert say to himself , as he walk back to Lidford in the darkening November afternoon , brood always on the one subject which occupy all his thought ; " and can I doubt his power to supersede I if he care to do so if he really love Marian , as he never have love Mrs. Branston ? what shall I do ? go to he at once , and tell he my suspicion , tax he broadly with treachery , and force he to a direct confession or denial ? shall I do this ? or shall I bide my time , wait and watch with dull dog patience , till I can collect some evidence of his guilt ? yes , let it be so . if he have be base enough to do I this great wrong mean enough to steal my betrothed under a false name , and to keep the secret of his wrong - doing at any cost of lie and deceit let he go on to the end , let he act out the play to the last ; and when I bring his falsehood home to he , as I must surely do , soon or later , yes , if he be capable of deceive I , he shall continue the lie to the last , he shall endure all the infamy of his false position . " 

 and then , after a pause , he say to himself , 

 " and at the end , if my suspicion be confirm , I shall have lose all I have ever value in life since my mother die my plighted wife , and the one choose friend whose companionship could make existence pleasant to I . God grant that this fancy of mine be as baseless as Sir David Forster declare it to be ! God grant that I may never find a secret enemy in John Saltram ! " 

 toss about thus upon a sea of doubt , Mr. Fenton return to Lidford House , where he be expect to be bright and cheerful , and entertain his host and hostess with the fresh gossip of the London world . he do make a great effort to keep up a show of cheerfulness at the dinner - table ; but he feel that his sister 's eye be watch he with a pitiless scrutiny , and he know that the attempt be an ignominious failure . 

 when honest Martin be snore in his easy - chair before the drawing - room fire , with the red light shin full upon his round healthy countenance , Mrs. Lister beckon her brother over to her side of the hearth , where she have an embroidery - frame , whereon be stretch some grand design in Berlin wool - work , to which she devote herself every now and then with a great show of industry . she have be absorb in a profound calculation of the stitch upon the canvas and on the coloured pattern before she until this moment ; but she lay aside her work with a solemn air when Gilbert go over to she , and he know at once what be come . 

 " sit down , Gilbert , " she say ; and her brother drop into a chair by her side with a faint sigh of resignation . " I want to talk to you seriously , as a sister ought to talk to a brother , without any fear of offend . I be very sorry to see you have not yet forget that wicked ungrateful girl Marian Nowell . " 

 " who tell you that I have not forget she ? " 

 " your own face , Gilbert . it be no use for you to put on a pretence of be cheerful and light - hearted with I . I know you too well to be deceive by that kind of thing I could see how absent - minded you be all dinner - time , in spite of your talk . you can not   hoodwink an affectionate sister . " 

 " I do not   wish to hoodwink you , my dear , " Mr. Fenton answer quietly , " or to affect a happiness which I do not feel , any more than I wish to make a parade of my grief . it be natural for an Englishman to be reticent on such matter ; but I do not mind own to you that Marian Nowell be unforgotten by I , and that the loss of she will have an endure influence upon my life ; and have say as much as that , Belle , I must request that you will not expatiate any more upon this poor girl 's breach of faith . I have forgive she long ago , and I shall always regard she as the purest and dearest of woman . " 

 " what ! you can hold she up as a paragon of perfection after she have throw you over in the most heartless manner ? upon my word , Gilbert , I have no common patience with such folly . your weakness in this affair from first to last have be positively deplorable . " 

 " I be sorry you disapprove of my conduct , Belle ; but as it be not a very pleasant subject , do not   you think we may as well avoid it now and henceforward ? " 

 " o , very well , Gilbert , " the lady exclaim , with an offend air ; " of course , if you choose to exclude I from your confidence , I must submit ; but I do think it rather hard that your only sister should not be allow to speak of a business that concern you so nearly . " 

 " what good can arise out of any discussion of this subject , Belle ? you think I weak and foolish ; grant that I be both , you can not cure I of my weakness or my folly . " 

 " and be I never to hope that you will find some one else , well worthy of your regard than Marian Nowell ? " 

 " I fear not , Belle . for I there be no one else . " 

 Mrs. Lister breathe a profound sigh , and resume the counting of her stitch . yet perhaps , after all , it be well that her brother should cherish the memory of this unlucky attachment . it would preserve he from the hazard of any imprudent alliance in the future , and leave his fortune free , to descend by - and - by to the juvenile Listers . Isabella be not a particularly mercenary person , but she be a woman of the world , and have an eye to the future aggrandisement of her child . 

 she be very kind and considerate to Gilbert after this , carefully avoid any farther allusion to his lost love , and take all possible pain to make his visit pleasant to he . she be so affectionate and cordial , and seem so really anxious for he to stay , that he could not in common decency hurry back to town quite so soon as he have intend . he prolong his visit to the end of that week , and then to the beginning of the next ; and when he do at last find himself free to return to London , the second week be nearly end . 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 miss again 


 Gilbert Fenton be very glad to have make his escape from Lidford at last , for his mind be full of anxiety about Marian . again and again he have argue with himself upon the folly and uselessness of this anxiety . she , for whose interest he be so troubled , be safe enough no doubt , protect by a husband , who be most likely a man of the world , and quite as able to protect she as Gilbert himself could be . he tell himself this ; but still the restless uneasy sense that he be neglect his duty , that he be false to the promise make to old Jacob Nowell , torment and perplex he . he feel that he ought to be do something that he have no right to remain in ignorance of the progress of Marian 's affair that he should be at hand to frustrate any attempt at knavery on the part of the lawyer to be sure that the old man 's wealth suffer no diminution before it reach the hand of his heiress . 

 Gilbert Fenton feel that his promise to the dead bind he to do these thing , and feel at the same time the weakness of his own position with relation to Marian . by what right could he interfere in the conduct of her affair ? what claim could he assert to defend her interest ? who would listen to any romantic notion about a promise make to the dead ? 

 he go to Queen Anne 's Court upon the night of his return to London . the silversmith 's shop look exactly the same as when he have first see it : the gas burn dimly , the tarnish old salver and tankard gleam duskily in the faint light , with all manner of purple and greenish hue . Mr. Tulliver be in his little den at the back of the shop , and emerge with his usual rapidity at the ringing of the door - bell . 

 " o , it be you , be it , sir ? " he ask in an indifferent , half - insolent tone . " what can I do for you this evening ? " 

 " be your late master 's granddaughter , Mrs. Holbrook , here ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " no ; Mrs. Holbrook go away on the morning after my master 's death . I tell you that when you call here last . " 

 " I be quite aware of that ; but I think it likely Mrs. Holbrook might return here with her husband , to take possession of the property , which I suppose you know now belong to she . " 

 " yes , I know all about that ; but she have not   come yet to take possession ; she do not   seem in such a desperate hurry about it . I daresay she know that thing be safe enough . Medler the lawyer be not the kind of party to be cheat out of sixpence . he have take an inventory of every article in the place , and the weight and value of every article . your friend Mrs. Holbrook need not   be afraid . I suppose she be some relation of your , by - the - bye , sir , judge by the interest you seem to take in her affair ? " 

 " yes , " Gilbert say , not care to answer this question directly , " I do take a warm interest in Mrs. Holbrook 's affair , and I be very anxious to see she place in undisputed possession of her late grandfather 's property . " 

 " I should think her husband would see after that , " Mr. Tulliver remark with a sneer . 

 Gilbert leave the court after have ask a few question about Jacob Nowell 's funeral . the old man have be bury at Kensalgreen , follow to the grave only by the devoted Tulliver , Mr. Medler , and the local surgeon who have attend he in his last illness . he have live a lonely friendless life , hold himself aloof from his fellow - creature ; and there be neither neighbour nor friend to lament his ending . the vagabond boy of the neighbourhood have cluster round the door to witness the last dismal ceremony of Mr. Nowell 's existence , and have hang about the shop - front for some time after the funeral cortege have depart , peer curiously down into the darksome area , and speculate upon the hoard of wealth which the old miser have hide away in coal - cellar and dust - bin , under the stone flag of the scullery , or in the cranny of the dilapidated wall . there be no bound to the imagination of these street Arabs , who have be in the habit of yelping and whooping at the old man 's heel when he take his infrequent walk abroad , assail he with derisive epithet allude to his miserly propensity . amongst the elder of the court there be some little talk about the dead man , and the probable disposal of his property , with a good deal of argument and lay down of the law on the part of the graver and wise member of that community ; some people affect to know to a sixpence the amount of Jacob Nowell 's saving , other accredit he with the possession of fabulous rich , and all be unanimous in the idea that the old man 's heir or heir , as the case might be , would speedily scatter his long - hoard treasure . many of these people could remember the silversmith 's prodigal son ; but none among they be aware of that gentleman 's return . they wonder a good deal as to whether he be still live , and whether the money have be leave to he or to that pretty young woman who have appear in the last day of the old man 's life , no one know whence she have come . there be nothing to be gain from question Luke Tulliver , the court know of old experience . the most mysterious dungeon of the Spanish Inquisition , the secret chamber under the lead in Venice , be not close or deep than the mind of that young man . the court have be incline to think that Luke Tulliver would come into all his master 's money ; and opinion incline that way even yet , see that Mr. Tulliver still hold his ground in the shop , and that no stranger have be see to enter the place since the funeral . 

 from Queen Anne 's Court Gilbert Fenton go on to the gloomy street where Mr. Medler have his office and abode . it be not an hour for a professional visit ; but Gilbert find the lawyer still hard at work at his desk , under the lurid light of a dirty - look battered old oil - lamp , which leave the corner of the dingy wainscote room in profound obscurity . he look up from his paper with some show of surprise on hear Mr. Fenton 's name announce by the slipshod maid - of - all - work who have admit the late visitor , Mr. Medler 's solitary clerk have depart to his own dwelling some hour before . 

 " I must ask you to excuse this untimely call , Mr. Medler , " Gilbert say politely ; " but the fact of the matter be , I be a little anxious about my friend Mrs. Holbrook and her affair , and I think you the most likely person to give I some information about they . I should have call in business hour ; but I have only just return from the country , and do not care to delay my inquiry until to - morrow . I have just come from Queen Anne 's Court , and be rather surprised to find that neither Mrs. Holbrook nor her husband have be there . you have see or hear from they since the funeral , I suppose ? " 

 " no , Mr. Fenton , I have neither see nor hear of they . I write a formal letter to Mrs. Holbrook , set out the content of the will ; but there have be no answer as yet . " 

 " strange , be it not ? " Gilbert exclaim , with an anxious look . 

 " well , yes , it be certainly not the usual course of proceeding . however , there be time enough yet . the funeral have not be over much more than a week . the property be perfectly safe , you know . " 

 " of course ; but it be not the less extraordinary that Mr. Holbrook should hang back in this manner . I will go down to Hampshire the first thing to - morrow and see Mrs. Holbrook . " 

 " Humph ! " mutter the lawyer ; " I can not   say that I see any necessity for that . but of course you know well . " 

 Gilbert Fenton do start for Hampshire early the next morning by the same train in which Marian have travel after her grandfather 's death . it be still quite early in the day when he find himself at Malsham , that quiet comfortable little market - town where he have first discover a clue to the abode of his lost love . he go to the hotel , and hire a fly to take he to Crosber , where he leave the vehicle at the old inn , prefer to walk on to the Grange . it be a bright November day , with a pale yellow sunlight shin on the level field , and distant hill that rise beyond they crown with a scanty fringe of fir , that stand out black and sharp against the clear autumn sky . it be a cheerful day , and a solitary bird be sing here and there , as if beguile by that pleasant warmth and sunshine into the fond belief that winter be still far off and the glory of field and wood not yet depart . Gilbert 's spirit rise in some degree under the influence of that late brightness and sweet rustic calm . he fancy that there might be still some kind of happiness for he in the long year to come ; pale and faint like the sunlight of to - day an autumnal calm . if he might be Marian 's friend and brother , her devoted counsellor , her untiring servant , it seem to he that he could be content , that he could live on from year to year moderately happy in the occasional delight of her society ; reward for his devotion by a few kind word now and then , a letter , a friendly smile , reward still more richly by her perfect trust in he . 

 these thought be in his mind to - day as he go along the lonely country lane lead to the Grange ; thought which seem inspire by the tranquil landscape and peaceful autumn day ; thought which be full of the pure love and charity , yes , even for his unknown rival , even if that rival should prove to be the one man in all this world from whom a deep wrong would seem most bitter . 

 " what be I , that I should measure the force of his temptation , " he say to himself , " or the strength of his resistance ? let I be sure that he love my darling as truly as I love she , that the chief object of his life have be and will be her happiness , and then let I put away all selfish vindictive thought , and fall quietly into the background of my dear one 's life , content to be her brother and her friend . " 

 the Grange look unchanged in its sombre lonely aspect . the chrysanthemum be all wither by this time , and there be now no flower in the old - fashioned garden . the bell be answer by the same woman who have admit he before , and who make no parley about let he in this time . 

 " my young missus say I be to be sure and let she know if you come , sir , " she say ; ' she be very anxious to see you . " 

 " your young mistress ; do you mean Mrs. Holbrook ? " 

 " no , sir ; Miss Carley , master 's daughter . " 

 " indeed ! I remember the young lady ; I shall be very happy to see she if she have anything to say to I ; but it be Mrs. Holbrook I have come to see . she be at home , I suppose ? " 

 " o dear no , sir ; Mrs. Holbrook have leave , without a word of notice , go nobody know where . that be what have make our young missus fret about it so . " 

 " Mrs. Holbrook have leave ! " Gilbert exclaim in blank amazement ; " when ? " 

 " it be more than a week ago now , sir . " 

 " and do none of you know why she go away , or where she have go ? " 

 " no more than the dead , sir . but you would well see Miss Carley ; she will be able to tell you all about it . " 

 the woman lead he into the house , and to the room in which he have see Marian . there be no fire here to - day , and the room have a desolate unoccupied look , though the sun be shin cheerfully on the old - fashioned many - pan window . there be a few book , which Gilbert remember as Marian 's literary treasure , neatly arrange on a rickety old chiffonier by the fire - place , and the desk and work - basket which he have see on his previous visit . 

 he be half bewilder by what the woman have tell he , and his heart beat tumultuously as he stand by the empty hearth , wait for Ellen Carley 's come . it seem to he as if the girl never would come . the ticking of an old eight - day clock in the hall have a ghastly sound in the dead silence of the house , and an industrious mouse make itself distinctly hear behind the wainscot . 

 at last a light rapid footstep come trip across the hall , and Ellen Carley enter the room . she be look pale than when Gilbert have see she last , and the bright face be very grave . 

 " for heaven 's sake tell I what this mean , Miss Carley , " Gilbert begin eagerly . " your servant tell I that Mrs. Holbrook have leave you in some mysterious way , I imagine , from what the woman say . " 

 " o , sir , I be so glad you have come here ; I should have write to you if I have know where to address a letter . yes , sir , she have go that dear sweet young creature and I fear some harm have come to she . " 

 the girl burst into tear , and for some minute could say no more . 

 " pray , pray be calm , " Gilbert say gently , " and tell I all you can about this business . how do Mrs. Holbrook leave this place ? and why do you suspect that any harm have befall she ? " 

 " there be every reason to think so , sir . be it like she to leave we without a word of notice , know , as she must have know , the unhappiness she would cause to I , who love she so well , by such a step ? she know how I love she . I think she have scarcely a secret from I . " 

 " if you will only tell I the manner of her departure , " Gilbert say rather impatiently . 

 " yes , yes , sir ; I be come to that directly . she seem happy after she come back from London , poor dear ; and she tell I that her grandfather have leave her money , and that she be likely to become quite a rich woman . the thought of this give she so much pleasure not for her own sake , but for her husband 's , whose care and difficulty would all come to an end now , she tell I . she have be back only a few day , when I leave home for a day and a night , to see my aunt an old woman and a constant invalid , who live at Malsham . I have put off go to she for a long time , for I do not   care about leave Mrs. Holbrook ; but I have to go at last , my aunt think it hard that I could not   spare time to spend a day with she , and tidy up her house a bit , and see to the girl that wait upon she , poor helpless thing . so I start off before noon one day , after tell Mrs. Holbrook where I be go , and when I hop to be back . she be in very good spirit that morning , for she expect her husband next day . ' I have tell he nothing about the good fortune that have come to I , Nelly , ' she say ; ' I have only write to he , beg he to return as quickly as possible , and he will be here to - morrow by the afternoon express . ' Mr. Holbrook be a great walker , and generally walk from Malsham here , by a short way than the high - road , across some field and by the river - bank . his wife use always to go part of the way to meet he when she know he be come . I know she mean to go and meet he this time . the way be very lonely , and I have often feel fidgety about she go alone , but she have not   a bit of fear ; and I do not   like to offer to go with she , feel sure that Mr. Holbrook would be vex by see I at such a time . well , sir , I have arrange everything comfortably , so that she should miss nothing by my be away , and I bade her good - bye , and start off to walk to Malsham . I can not   tell you how hard it seem to I to leave she , for it be the first time we have be part for so much as a day since she come to the Grange . I think of she all the while I be at my aunt 's ; who have very fidgety way , poor old lady , and be not   a pleasant person to be with . I feel quite in a fever of impatience to get home again ; and be very glad when a neighbour 's spring - cart drop I at the end of the lane , and I see the gray old chimney above the top of the tree . it be four o'clock in the afternoon when I get home ; father be at tea in the oak - parlour where we take our meal , and the house be as quiet as a grave . I come straight to this room , but it be empty ; and when I call Martha , she tell I Mrs. Holbrook have go out at one o'clock in the day , and have not be home since , though she be expect back to dinner at three . she have be away three hour then , and at a time when I know she could not expect Mr. Holbrook , unless she have receive a fresh letter from he to say that he be come by an early train than usual . I ask Martha if there have be any letter for Mrs. Holbrook that day ; and she tell I yes , there have be one by the morning post . it be no use ask Martha what kind of letter it look , and whether it be from Mr. Holbrook , for the poor ignorant creature can neither read nor write , and one handwriting be the same as another to she . Mrs. Holbrook have tell she nothing as to where she be go , only say that she would be back in an hour or two . Martha let she out at the gate , and watch she take the way towards the river - bank , and , see this , make sure she be go to meet her husband . well , sir , five o'clock strike , and Mrs. Holbrook have not come home . I begin to feel seriously uneasy about she . I tell my father so ; but he take the matter lightly enough at first , say it be no business of our , and that Mrs. Holbrook be just as well able to take care of herself as any one else . but after five o'clock I could not   rest a minute long ; so I put on my bonnet and shawl and go down by the river - bank , after send one of the farm - labourer to look for my poor dear in the opposite direction . it be a very lonely walk at the good of time , though a few of the country folk do go that way between Malsham and Crosber on market - day . there be scarcely a house to be see for mile , except Wyncomb Farmhouse , Stephen Whitelaw 's place , which lie a little way back from the river - bank , about a mile from here ; besides that and a solitary cottage here and there , you will not   see a sign of human life for four or five mile . anybody might be push into the river and make away with in broad daylight , and no one need be the wiser . the loneliness of the place strike I with an awful fear that afternoon , and from that moment I begin to think that I should never see Mrs. Holbrook again . " 

 " what of her husband ? he be expect on this particular afternoon , you say ? " 

 " he be , sir ; but he do not come till the next day . it be almost dark when I go to the river - bank . I walk for about three mile and a half , to a gate that open into the field by which Mr. Holbrook come across from Malsham . I know his wife never go far than this gate , but use to wait for he here , if she happen to be the first to reach it . I hurry along , half run all the way , and call aloud to Mrs. Holbrook every now and then with all my might . but there be no answer . some man in a boat load with hay stop to ask I what be the matter , but they could tell I nothing . they be come from Malsham , and have see no one along the bank . I call at Mr. Whitelaw 's as I come back , not with much hope that I should hear anything ; but what could I do but make inquiry anywhere and everywhere ? I be almost wild with fright by this time . they could tell I nothing at Wyncomb Farm . Stephen Whitelaw be alone in the kitchen smoke his pipe by a great fire . he have not   be out all day , he tell I , and none of his people have see or hear anything out of the common . as to any harm have come to Mrs. Holbrook by the river - bank , he say he do not   think that be possible , for his man have be at work in the field near the river all the afternoon , and must have see or hear if there have be anything wrong . there be some kind of comfort in this , and I leave the farm with my mind a little light than it have be when I go in there . I know that Stephen Whitelaw be no friend to Mrs. Holbrook ; that he have a kind of grudge against she because she have be on some one else 's side in in something . " Ellen Carley blush as she come to this part of her story , and then go on rather hurriedly to hide her confusion . " he do not   like she , sir , you see . I know this , but I do not   think it possible he could deceive I in a matter of life and death . so I come home , hop to find Mrs. Holbrook there before I . but there be no sign of she , nor of her husband either , though I have fully expect to see he . even father own that thing look bad now , and he let I send every man about the place some one way , and some another to hunt for my poor darling . I go into Crosber myself , though it be get late by this time , and make inquiry of every creature I know in the village ; but it be all no good : no one have see anything of the lady I be look for . " 

 " and the husband ? " Gilbert ask again ; " what of he ? " 

 " he come next day at the usual hour , after we have be astir all night , and the farm - labourer have be far and wide look for Mrs. Holbrook . I never see any one seem so shocked and horrify as he do when we tell he how his wife have be miss for more than four - and - twenty hour . he be not a gentleman to show his feeling much at ordinary time , and he be quiet enough in the midst of his alarm ; but he turn as white as death , and I never see the natural colour come back to his face all the time he be down here . " 

 " how long do he stay ? " 

 " he only leave yesterday . he be travel about the country all the time , come back here of a night to sleep , and with the hope that we might have hear something in his absence . the river be drag for three day ; but , thank God , nothing come of that . Mr. Holbrook set the Malsham police to work not that they be much good , I think ; but he would not   leave a stone unturned . and now I believe he have go to London to get help from the police there . but o , sir , I can not   make it out , and I have lie awake , night after night thinking of it , and puzzle myself about it , until all sort of dreadful fancy come into my mind . " 

 " what fancy ? " 

 " o , sir , I scarcely dare tell you ; but I love that sweet young lady so well , that I have be as watchful and jealous in all thing that concern she as if she have be my own sister . I have think sometimes that her husband have grow tired of she ; that , however dearly he might have love she at first , as I suppose he do , his love have wear out little by little , and he feel she a burden to he . what other reason could there be for he to keep she hide away in this dull place , month after month , when he must have see that her youth and beauty and gaiety of heart be slowly vanish away , if he have eye to see anything ? " 

 " but , good Heavens ! " Gilbert exclaim , startle by the sudden horror of the idea which Ellen Carley 's word suggest , " you surely do not imagine that Marian 's husband have any part in her disappearance ? that he could be capable of " 

 " I do not   know what to think , sir , " the girl answer , interrupt he . " I know that I have never like Mr. Holbrook never like or trust he from the first , though he have be civil enough and kind enough in his own distant way to I . that dear young lady could not disappear off the face of the earth , as it seem she have do , without the evil work of some one . as to she leave this place of her own free will , without a word of warning to her husband or to I , that I be sure she would never dream of do . no , sir , there have be foul play of some kind , and I be afraid I shall never see that dear face again . " 

 the girl say this with an air of conviction that send a deadly chill to Gilbert Fenton 's heart . it seem to he in this moment of supreme anguish as if all his trouble of the past , all his vague fear and anxiety about the woman he love , have be the foreshadowing of this evil to come . he have a blank helpless feeling , a dismal sense of his own weakness , which for the moment master he . against any ordinary calamity he would have hold himself bravely enough , with the natural strength of an ardent hopeful character ; but against this mysterious catastrophe courage and manhood could avail nothing . she be go , the fragile helpless creature he have pledge himself to protect ; go from all who know she , leave not the faint clue to her fate . could he doubt that this energetic warm - hearted girl be right , and that some foul deed have be do , of which Marian Holbrook be the victim ? 

 " if she live , I will find she , " he say at last , after a long pause , in which he have sit in gloomy silence , with his eye fix upon the ground , meditate the circumstance of Marian 's disappearance . " live or dead , I will find she . it shall be the business of my life from this hour . all my serious thought have be of she from the moment in which I first know she . they will be doubly hers henceforward . " 

 " how good and true you be ! " Ellen Carley exclaim admiringly ; " and how you must have love she ! I guess when you be here last that it be you to whom she be engage before her marriage , and tell she as much ; but she would not acknowledge that I be right . o , how I wish she have keep faith with you ! how much happy she might have be as your wife ! " 

 " People have different notion of happiness , you see , Miss Carley , " Gilbert answer with a bitter smile . " yes , you be right ; it be I who be to have be Marian Nowell 's husband , whose every hope of the future be bind up in she . but all that be past ; whatever bitterness I feel against she at first and I do not think I be ever very bitter have pass away . I be nothing now but her friend , her steadfast and constant friend . " 

 " thank heaven that she have such a friend , " Ellen say earnestly . " and you will make it your business to look for she , sir ? " 

 " the chief object of my life , from this hour . " 

 " and you will try to discover whether her husband be really true , or whether the search that he have make for she have be a blind to hide his own guilt ? " 

 " what ground have you for suppose his guilt possible ? " ask Gilbert . " there be crime too detestable for credibility ; and this would be such a one . you may imagine that I have no friendly feeling towards this man , yet I can not for an instant conceive he capable of harm a hair of his wife 's head . " 

 " because you have not brood upon this business as I have , sir , for hour and hour together , until the small thing seem to have an awful meaning . I have think of every word and every look of Mr. Holbrook 's in the past , and all my thought have point one way . I believe that he be tired of his sweet young wife ; that his marriage be a burden and a trouble to he somehow ; that it have arise out of an impulse that have pass away . " 

 " all this might be , and yet the man be innocent . " 

 " he might be yes , sir . it be a hard thing , perhaps , even to think he guilty for a moment . but it be so difficult to account in any common way for Mrs. Holbrook 's disappearance . if there have be murder do "   the girl shudder as she say the word   " a common murder , such as one hear of in lonely country place surely it must have come to light before this , after the search that have be make all round about . but it would have be easy enough for Mr. Holbrook to decoy his wife away to London or anywhere else . she would have go anywhere with he , at a moment 's notice . she obey he implicitly in everything . " 

 " but why should he have take she away from this place in a secret manner ? " ask Gilbert ; " he be free to remove she openly . and then you describe he as take an amount of trouble in his search for she , which might have be so easily avoid , have he act with ordinary prudence and caution . say that he want to keep the secret of his marriage from the world in which he live , and to place his wife in even a more secluded spot than this which scarcely seem possible what could have be easy for he than to take she away when and where he please ? no one here would have have any right to question his action . " 

 Ellen Carley shake her head doubtfully . 

 " I do not   know , sir , " she answer slowly ; " I daresay my fancy be very foolish ; they may have come , perhaps , out of think about this so much , till my brain have get addle , as one may say . but it flash upon I all of a sudden one night , as Mr. Holbrook be stand in our parlour talk about his wife it flash upon I that he be in the secret of her disappearance , and that he be only act with we in his pretence of anxiety and all that ; I fancy there be a guilty look in his face , somehow . " 

 " do you tell he about his wife 's good fortune the money leave she by her grandfather ? " 

 " I do , sir ; I think it right to tell he everything I could about my poor dear young lady 's journey to London . she have tell he of that in her letter , it seem , but not about the money . she have be keep that back for the pleasure of tell he with her own lip , and see his face light up , she say to I , when he hear the good news . I ask he about the letter which have come in the morning of the day she disappear , and whether it be from he ; but he say no , he have not write , count upon be with his wife that evening . it be only at the last moment he be prevent come . " 

 " you have look for that letter , I suppose ? " 

 " o yes , sir ; I search , and Mr. Holbrook too , in every direction , but the letter be not   to be find . he seem very vexed about it , very anxious to find it . we could not but think that Mrs. Holbrook have go to meet some one that day , and that the letter have something to do with she go out . I be sure she would not have go beyond the garden and the meadow for pleasure alone . she never have be outside the gate without I , except when she go to meet her husband . " 

 " strange ! " mutter Gilbert . 

 he be wonder about that letter : what could have be the lure which have beguile Marian away from the house that day ; what except a letter from her husband ? it seem hardly probable that she would have go to meet any one but he , or that any one else would have appoint a meeting on the river - bank . the fact that she have go out at an early hour than the time at which she have be in the habit of meet her husband when he come from the Malsham station , go some way to prove that the letter have influence her movement . Gilbert think of the fortune which have be leave to Marian , and which give her existence a new value , perhaps expose she to new danger . her husband 's interest be involve in her life ; her death , should she die childless , must need deprive he of all advantage from Jacob Nowell 's wealth . the only person to profit from such an event would be Percival Nowell ; but he be far away , Gilbert believe , and completely ignorant of his reversionary interest in his father 's property . there be Medler the attorney , a man whom Gilbert have distrust from the first . it be just possible that the letter have be from he ; yet most improbable that he should have ask Mrs. Holbrook to meet he out of door , instead of come to she at the Grange , or that she should have accede to such a request , have he make it . 

 the whole affair be encompass with mystery , and Gilbert Fenton 's heart sink as he contemplate the task that lie before he . 

 " I shall spend a day or two in this neighbourhood before I return to town , " he say to Ellen Carley presently ; " there be inquiry that I should like to make with my own lip . I shall be only go over old ground , I daresay , but it will be some satisfaction to I to do it for myself . can you give I house - room here for a night or two , or shall I put up at Crosber ? " 

 " I be sure father would be very happy to accommodate you here , sir . we have   plenty of room now ; too much for my taste . the house seem like a wilderness now Mrs. Holbrook be go . " 

 " thank . I shall be very glad to sleep here . there be just the chance that you may have some news for I , or I for you . " 

 " ah , sir , it be only a very poor chance , I be afraid , " the girl answer hopelessly . 

 she go with Gilbert to the gate , and watch he as he walk away towards the river . his first impulse be to follow the path which Marian have take that day , and to see for himself what manner of place it be from which she have so mysteriously vanish . 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 in BONDAGE 


 Adela Branston find life very dreary in the splendid gloom of her town house . she would have infinitely prefer the villa near Maidenhead for the place of her occupation , have it not be for the fact that in London she be near John Saltram , and that any moment of any day might bring he to her side . 

 the day pass , however empty useless day , fritter away in frivolous occupation , or waste in melancholy idleness ; and John Saltram do not come , or come so rarely that the only effect of his visit be to keep up the fever and restlessness of the widow 's mind . 

 she have fancy that life would be so bright for she when the day of her freedom come ; that she would reap so rich a harvest of happiness as a reward for the sacrifice which she have make in marry old Michael Branston , and endure his peevishness and ill - health with tolerable good - humour during the half - dozen year of their wed life . she have fancy this ; and now her release have come to she , and be worthless in her sight , because the one man she care for have prove himself cold and indifferent . 

 in spite of his coldness , however , she tell herself that he love she , that he have love she from the early period of their acquaintance . 

 she be a poor weak little woman , the veri spoilt child of fortune , and she cling to this belief with a fond foolish persistence , a blind devoted obstinacy , against which the argument of Mrs. Pallinson be utterly vain , although that lady devote a great deal of time and energy to the agreeable duty which she call " open dear Adela 's eye about that dissipate good - for - nothing Mr. Saltram . " 

 to a correct view of this subject Adela Branston 's eye be not to be open in any wise . she be wilfully , resolutely blind , cling to the hope that this cruel neglect on John Saltram 's part arise only from his delicacy of feeling , and tender care for her reputation . 

 " but o , how I wish that he would come to I ! " she say to herself again and again , as those slow dreary day go by , burden and weigh down by the oppressive society of Mrs. Pallinson , as well as by her own sad thought . " my husband have be dead ever so long now , and what need have we to study the opinion of the world so much ? of course I would not   marry he till a year , or more , after poor Michael 's death ; but I should like to see he often , to be sure that he still care for I as he use to care yes , I be sure he use in the dear old day at Maidenhead . why do not   he come to I ? he know that I love he . he must know that I have no bright hope than to make he the master of my fortune ; and yet he go on in those dismal Temple chamber , toil at his literary work as if he have not a thought in the world beyond earn so many pound a week . " 

 this be the perpetual drift of Mrs. Branston 's meditation ; and in the absence of any sign or token of regard from John Saltram , all Mrs. Pallinson 's attempt to amuse she , all the fascination and accomplishment of the elegant Theobald , be throw away upon an unreceptive soil . 

 there be not many amusement open to a London public at that dull season of the year , except the theatre , and for those place of entertainment Mrs. Pallinson cherish a shudder aversion . but there be occasional morning and evening " recital , " or concert , where the music for the most part be of a classical and recondite character feast of melody , at which long - bury and forget sonata of Gluck , or Bach , or Chembini be introduce to a discriminating public for the first time ; and to these Mrs. Pallinson and Theobald conduct poor Adela Branston , whose musical proclivity have never yet soar into high region than those occupy by the sparkling joyous genius of Rossini , and to whom the revive sonata , or the familiar old - establish gem of classical art , be as unintelligible as so much Hebrew or Syriac . perhaps they be not much more delightful to Mrs. Pallinson ; but that worthy matron have a profound veneration for the conventionality of life , and these classical matinťes and recital seem to she exactly the correct sort of thing for the amusement of a young widow whose husband have not very long ago be consign to the tomb . 

 so poor Adela be drag hither and thither to gloomy concert - room , where the cold winter 's light make the performer look pale and wan , or to aristocratic drawing - room , graciously lend to some favour pianiste by their distinguished owner ; and so , harass and weary , but lack spirit to oppose her own feeble inclination to the overpowering force of Mrs. Pallinson 's will , the helpless little widow go submissively wherever they choose to take she , torment all the while by the thought of John Saltram 's coldness , and wonder when this cruel time of probation would be at an end , and he would show himself her devoted slave once more . it be very weak and foolish to think of he like this , no doubt ; undignified and unwomanly , perhaps ; but Adela Branston be little more than a child in knowledge of the world , and John Saltram be the only man who have ever touch her heart . she stand quite alone in the world too , lonely with all her wealth , and there be no one to share her affection with this man , who have acquire so complete an influence over she . 

 she endure the dreary course of her day patiently enough for a considerable time , not know any mean whereby she might release herself from the society of her kinswoman , or put an end to the indefatigable attention of the popular Maida Hill doctor . she would have gladly offer Mrs. Pallinson a liberal allowance out of her fortune to buy that lady off , and be her own mistress once more , free to act and think for herself , have she dare to make such a degrading proposition to a person of Mrs. Pallinson 's dignity . but she could not venture to do this ; and she feel that no one but John Saltram , in the character of her future husband , could release she from the state of bondage into which she have weakly suffer herself to fall . in the meantime she defend the man she love with an unflinche spirit , resolutely refuse to have her eye open to the worthlessness of his character , and boldly declare her disbelief of those sad account which Theobald affect to have hear from well - inform acquaintance of his own , respect the folly and dissipation of Mr. Saltram 's career , his debt , his love of gambling , his dealing with money - lender , and other foible common to the rake 's progress . 

 it be rather a hard battle for the lonely little woman to fight , but she have fortune on her side ; and at the bad , her kinsfolk treat she with a certain deference , even while they be do their utmost to worry she into an untimely grave . if little flattery , and a perpetual indulgence in all small matter , such as a foolish nurse might give to a spoilt child , could have make Adela happy , she have certainly no reason to complain , for in this manner Mrs. Pallinson be the most devoted and affectionate of companion . if her darling Adela look a little paler than usual , or confess to suffer from a headache , or own to be nervous or out of spirit , Mrs. Pallinson 's anxiety know no bound , and Theobald be summon from Maida Hill without a minute 's delay , much to poor Adela 's annoyance . indeed , she grow in time to deny the headache , and the low spirit , or the nervousness resolutely , rather than bring upon herself a visitation from Mr. Theobald Pallinson ; and in spite of all this care and indulgence she feel herself a prisoner in her own house , somehow ; more dependent than the humblest servant in that spacious mansion ; and she look out helplessly and hopelessly for some friend through whose courageous help she might recover her freedom . perhaps she only think of one champion as at all likely to come to her rescue ; indeed , her mind have scarcely room for more than that one image , which occupy her thought at all time . 

 her captivity have last for a period which seem a very long time , though it be short enough when compute by the ordinary standard of week and month , when a circumstance occur which give she a brief interval of liberty . Mr. Pallinson fall a victim to some slight attack of low fever ; and his mother , who be really most devoted to this paragon of a son , retire from the citadel in Cavendish Square for a few day in order to nurse he . it be not that the surgeon 's illness be in any way dangerous , but the mother could not trust she darling to the care of stranger and hireling . 

 Adela Branston seem to breathe more freely in that brief holiday . relieve from Mrs. Pallinson 's dismal presence , life appear bright and pleasanter all at once ; a faint colour come back to the pale cheek , and the widow be even beguile into laughter by some uncomplimentary observation which her confidential maid venture upon with reference to the absent lady . 

 " I be sure the house itself seem light and more cheerful - like without she , ma'am , " say this young person , who be of a vivacious temperament , and upon whom the dowager 's habitual dreariness have be a heavy affliction ; " and you be look all the well already for not be worry by she . " 

 " berner , you really must not say such thing , " Mrs. Branston exclaim reproachfully . " you ought to know that my cousin be most kind and thoughtful , and do everything for the good . " 

 " o , of course , ma'am ; but some people 's good be quite as bad as other people 's bad , " the maid answer sharply ; " and as to kindness and thoughtfulness , Mrs. Pallinson be a great deal too kind and thoughtful , I think ; for her kindness and thoughtfulness will not   allow you a moment 's rest . and then , as if anybody could not   see through her scheme about that precious son of hers with his finicking affect way ! " 

 and at this point the vivacious Berners give a little imitation of Theobald Pallinson , with which liberty Adela pretend to be very much offended , laugh at the performance nevertheless . 

 Mrs. Branston pass the first day of her freedom in luxurious idleness . it be such an inexpressible relief not to hear the perpetual click of Mrs. Pallinson 's needle travel in and out of the canvas , as that irreproachable matron sit at her embroidery - frame , on which a group of spaniel , after Sir Edwin Landseer , be slowly grow into the fluffy life of Berlin wool ; a still great relief , not to be call upon to respond appropriately to the dull platitude which form the lady 's usual conversation , when she be not abuse John Saltram , or sound the praise of her beloved son . 

 the day be a long one for Adela , in spite of the pleasant sense of freedom ; for she have begin the morning with the thought of what a delightful thing it would be if some happy accident should bring Mr. Saltram to Cavendish - square on this particular day ; and have once start with this idea , she find herself count the hour and half - hour with impatient watchfulness until the orthodox time for visit be quite over , and she could no long beguile herself with the hope that he would come . she want so much to see he alone . since her husband 's death , they have meet only in the presence of Mrs. Pallinson , beneath the all - pervade eye and within perpetual ear - shot of that oppressive matron . Adela fancy that if they could only meet for one brief half - hour face to face , without the restraint of that foreign presence , all misunderstanding would be at an end between they , and John Saltram 's affection for she , in which she believe with a fond credulity , would reveal itself in all its truth and fulness . 

 " I daresay it be my cousin Pallinson who have keep he away from I all this time , " Adela say to herself with a very impatient feeling about her cousin Pallinson . " I know how intolerant he be of any one he dislike ; and no doubt he have take a dislike to she ; she have do everything to provoke it , indeed , by her coldness and rudeness to he . " 

 that day go by , and the second and third day of the dowager 's absence ; but there be no sign of John Saltram . Adela think of write to ask he to come to she ; but that seem such a desperate step , she could not think how she should word the letter , or how she could give it to one of the servant to post . no , she would contrive to post it herself , if she do bring herself to write . and then she think of a still more desperate step . what if she be to call upon Mr. Saltram at his Temple chamber ? it would be a most unwarrantable thing for she to do , of course ; an act which would cause Mrs. Pallinson 's hair to stand on end in virtuous horror , could it by any mean come to her knowledge ; but Adela do not intend that it ever should be know to Mrs. Pallinson ; and about the opinion of the world in the abstract , Mrs. Branston tell herself that she care very little . what be the use of be a rich widow , if she be to be hedge - in by the restriction which encompass the step of an unwedded damsel just begin life ? embolden by the absence of her dowager kinswoman , Mrs. Branston feel herself independent , free to do a foolish thing , and ready to abide the hazard of her folly . 

 so , upon the fourth day of her freedom , despair of any visit from John Saltram , Adela Branston order the solemn - look butler to send for a cab , much to the surprise of that portly individual . 

 " Josephs have just be round ask about the carriage , mum , " he say , in a kind of suggestive way ; " whether you would please to want the b'rouche or the broom , and whether you would drive before or after luncheon . " 

 " I shall not want the carriage this morning ; send for a cab , if you please , Parker . I be go into the City , and do not   care about take the horse there . " 

 the solemn Parker bow and retire , not a little mystify by this order . his mistress be a kind little woman enough , but such extreme consideration for equine comfort be hardly a feminine attribute , and Mr. Parker be puzzle . he tell Josephs the coachman as much when he have dispatch an underling to fetch the clean four - wheeler procurable at an adjacent stand . 

 " she be a - go to her banker 's I suppose , " he say meditatively ; " go to make some new investment perhaps . woman be always a - fidgeting and chop and change with their money . " 

 Mrs. Branston keep the cab wait half an hour , accord to the fairest reckoning . she be very particular about she toilette that morning , and incline to be discontent with the sombre plainness of her widow 's garb , and to fancy that the delicate border of white crape round her girlish face make she look pale , not to say sallow . she come downstairs at last , however , look very graceful and pretty in her trail mourning robe and fashionable crape bonnet , in which the profound depth of woe be make to express itself with a due regard to elegance . she come down to the homely hackney vehicle attend by the obsequious Berners , whose curiosity be naturally excite by this solitary expedition . 

 " where shall I tell the man to drive , mum ? " the butler ask with the cab - door in his hand . 

 Mrs. Branston feel herself blushing , and hesitate a little before she reply . 

 " the Union Bank , Chancery - lane . tell he to go by the Strand and Temple - bar . " 

 " I can not   think what be come to my mistress , " Miss Berners remark as the cab drive off . " catch I drive in one of those nasty vulgar four - wheel cab , if I have a couple of carriage and a couple of pair of horse at my disposal . there be some style about a hansom ; but I never could abide those creepy - crawley four - wheeler . " 

 " I admire your taste , Miss Berners ; and a dash young woman like you be a credit to a hansom , " reply Mr. Parker gallantly . " but there be no accounting for the vagary of the female sex ; and I fancy somehow Mrs. B. do not   want any of we to know where she be go ; she colour - up so when I ask she for the direction . you may depend there be something up , Jane Berners . she be go to see some poor relation perhaps mile - end or kentish - town way and be ashamed to give the address . " 

 " I do not   believe she have any relation , except old Mother Pallinson and her son , " Miss Berners answer . 

 and thereupon the handmaiden withdraw to her own region with a discontent air , as one who have be that day cheat out of her legitimate right . 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 only a woman 


 the cabman do not hurry his tall raw - boned steed , and the drive to Temple - bar seem a very long one to Adela Branston , whose mind be disturb by the consciousness that she be do a foolish thing . many time during the journey , she be on the point of stop the man and tell he to drive back to Cavendish - square ; but in spite of these moment of doubt and vacillation she suffer the vehicle to proceed , and only stop the man when they be close to Temple - bar . 

 here she tell he where she want to go ; upon which he plunge down an obscure side street , and stop at one of the entrance to the Temple . here Mrs. Branston alight , and have to inquire her way to Mr. Saltram 's chamber . she be so unaccustomed to be out alone , that this expedition seem something almost awful to she when she find herself helpless and solitary in that strange locality . she have fancy that the cab would drive straight to Mr. Saltram 's door . 

 the busy lawyer flit across those grave court and passage turn to glance curiously at the pretty little widow . she have the air of a person not use to be on foot and unattende a kind of aerial butterfly air , as of one who belong to the useless and ornamental class of society ; utterly different from the appearance of such humble female pedestrian as be will not to make the court and alley of the Temple a short - cut in their toilsome journey to and fro . happily a porter appear , who be able to direct she to Mr. Saltram 's chamber , and civilly offer to escort she there ; for which service she reward he with half - a - crown , instead of the sixpence which he expect as his maximum recompense ; she be so glad to have reach the shelter of the dark staircase in safety . the man whom she have meet have frighten she by their bold admire stare ; and yet she be pleased to think that she be look pretty . 

 the porter do not leave she until she have be admit by Mr. Saltram 's boy , and then retire , promise to be in the way to see she back to her carriage . how the poor little thing tremble when she find herself on the threshold of that unfamiliar door ! what a horrible dingy lobby it be ! and how she pity John Saltram for have to live in such place ! he be at home and alone , the boy tell she ; would she please to send in her card ? 

 no , Mrs. Branston decline to send in her card . the boy could say that a lady wish to see Mr. Saltram . 

 the truth be , she want to surprise this man ; to see how her unlooke - for presence would affect he . she fancy herself belove by he , poor soul ! and that she would be able to read some evidence of his joy at see she in this unexpected manner . 

 the boy go in to his master and announce the advent of a lady , the first he have ever see in those dismal premise . 

 John Saltram start up from his desk and come with a hurried step to the door , very pale and almost breathless . 

 " a lady ! " he gasp , and then fall back a pace or two on see Adela , with a look which be very much like disappointment . 

 " you here , Mrs. Branston ! " he exclaim ; " I you be the last person in the world I should have expect to see . " 

 perhaps he feel that there be a kind of rudeness in this speech , for he add hastily , and with a faint smile , 

 " of course I be not the less honoured by your visit . " 

 he move a chair forward , the least dilapidated of the three or four which form his scanty stock , and place it near the neglect fire , which he try to revive a little by a judicious use of the poker . 

 " you expect to see some one else , I think , " Adela say ; quite unable to hide her wound feeling . 

 she have see the eagerness in his pale face when he come to the door , and the disappointed look with which he have recognise she . 

 " Scarcely ; but I expect to receive news of some one else . " 

 " some one you be very anxious to hear about , I should imagine , from your manner just now , " say Adela , who could not forbear press the question a little . 

 " yes , Mrs. Branston , some one about whom I be anxious ; a relation , in short . " 

 she look at he with a puzzled air . she have never hear he talk of his relation , have indeed suppose that he stand almost alone in the world ; but there be no reason that it should be so , except his silence on the subject . she watch he for some moment in silence , as he stand lean against the opposite angle of the chimney - piece wait for she to speak . he be look very ill , much change since she have see he last , haggard and worn , with the air of a man who have not sleep properly for many night . there be an absent far - away look in his eye : and Adela Branston feel all at once that her presence be nothing to he ; that this desperate step which she have take have no more effect upon he than the commonest event of every - day life ; in a word , that he do not love she . a cold deathlike feeling come over she as she think this . she have set her heart upon this man 's love , and have indeed some justification for suppose that it be her . it seem to she that life be useless bad than useless , odious and unendurable without it . 

 but even while she be think this , with a cold blank misery in her heart , she have to invent some excuse for this unseemly visit . 

 " I have wait so anxiously for you to call , " she say at last , in a nervous hesitate way , " and I begin to fear that you must be ill , and I wish to consult you about the management of my affair . my lawyer worry I so with question which I do not   know how to answer , and I have so few friend in the world whom I can trust except you ; so at last I screw up my courage to call upon you . " 

 " I be deeply honour by your confidence , Mrs. Branston , " John Saltram answer , look at she gravely with those weary haggard eye , with the air of a man who bring his thought back to common life from some far - away region with an effort . " if my advice or assistance can be of any use to you , they be completely at your service . what be this business about which your solicitor bother you ? " 

 " I will explain that to you directly , " Adela answer , take some letter from her pocket - book . " how good you be ! I know that you would help I ; but tell I first why you have never be to Cavendish - square in all this long time . I fear I be right ; you have be ill , have you not ? " 

 " not exactly ill , but very much worried and overwork . " 

 a light dawn on Adela Branston 's troubled mind . she begin to think that Mr. Saltram 's strange absent manner , his apparent indifference to her presence , might arise from preoccupation , cause by those pecuniary difficulty from which the Pallinsons declare he so constant a sufferer . yes , she tell herself , it be trouble of this kind that oppress he , that have banish he from she all this time . he be too generous to repair his shattered fortune by mean of her money ; he be too proud to confess his fallen state . 

 a tender pity take possession of she . all that be most sentimental in her nature be awaken by the idea of John Saltram 's generosity . what be the use of her fortune , if she could not employ it for the relief of the man she love ? 

 " you be so kind to I , Mr. Saltram , " she falter , after a troubled pause ; ' so ready to help I in my perplexity , I only wish you would allow I to be of some use to you in your , if you have any perplexity ; and I suppose everybody have , of some kind or other . I should be so proud if you would give I your confidence so proud and happy ! " her voice tremble a little as she say this , look up at he all the while with soft confide blue eye , the fair delicate face look its prettiest in the coquettish widow 's head - gear . 

 a man must have be hard of heart than John Saltram who could remain unmove by a tenderness so evident . this man be touch , and deeply . the pale careworn face grow more troubled , the firmly - mould lip quiver ever so little , as he look down at the widow 's plead countenance ; and then he turn his head aside with a sudden half - impatient movement . 

 " my dear Mrs. Branston , you be too good to I ; I be unworthy , I be in every way unworthy of your kindness . " 

 " you be not unworthy , and that be no answer to my question ; only an excuse to put I off . we be such old friend , Mr. Saltram , you might trust I . you own that you have be worry overwork worry about money matter , perhaps . I know that gentleman be generally subject to that kind of annoyance ; and you know how rich I be , how little employment I have for my money , though you can never imagine how worthless and useless it seem to I . why will not   you trust I ? why will not   you let I be your banker ? " 

 she blush crimson as she make this offer , dread that the man she love would turn upon she fiercely in a passion of offended pride . she sit before he tremble , dread the might of his indignation . 

 but there be no anger in John Saltram 's face when he look round at she ; only grief and an expression that be like pity . 

 " the offer be like you , " he say with suppress feeling ; " but the worry of which I speak just now be not money trouble . I do not pretend to deny that my affair be embarrassed , and have be for so long that entanglement have become their normal state ; but if they be ever so much more desperate , I could not afford to trade upon your generosity . no , Mrs. Branston , that be just the very last thing in this world that I could consent to do . " 

 " it be very cruel of you to say that , " Adela answer , with the tear gather in her clear blue eye , and with a little childish look of vexation , which would have seem infinitely charming in the eye of a man who love she . " there can be no reason for your say this , except that you do not think I worthy of your confidence that you despise I too much to treat I like a friend . if I be that Mr. Fenton now , whom you care for so much , you would not treat I like this . " 

 " I never borrow a sixpence from Gilbert Fenton in my life , though I know that his purse be always open to I . but friendship be apt to end when money transaction begin . believe I , I feel your goodness , Mrs. Branston , your womanly generosity ; but it be my own unworthiness that come between I and your kindness . I can accept nothing from you but the sympathy which it be your nature to give to all who need it . " 

 " I do indeed sympathise with you ; but it seem so hard that you will not consent to make some use of all that money which be lie idle . it would make I so happy if I could think it be useful to you ; but I dare not say any more . I have say too much already , perhaps ; only I hope you will not think very badly of I for have act on impulse in this way . " 

 " think badly of you , my dear kind soul ! what can I think , except that you be one of the most generous of woman ? " 

 " and about these other trouble , Mr. Saltram , which have no relation to money matter ; you will not give I your confidence ? " 

 " there be nothing that I can confide in you , Mrs. Branston . other be involve in the matter of which I speak , I be not free to talk about it . " 

 Poor Adela feel herself repulse at every point . it seem very hard . have she be mistake about this man all the time ? mistaken and delude in those old happy day during her husband 's lifetime , when he have be so constant a visitor at the river - side villa , and have seem exactly what a man might seem who cherish a tenderness which he dare not reveal in the present , but which in a bright future might blossom into the full - blow flower of love ? 

 " and now about your own affair , my dear Mrs. Branston ? " John Saltram say with a forced cheerfulness , draw his chair up to the table and assume a business - like manner . " these tiresome letter of your lawyer ' ; let I see what use I can be in the matter . " 

 Adela Branston produce the letter with rather an absent air . they be letter about very insignificant affair ; the renewal of a lease or two ; the reinvestment of a sum of money that have be lend on mortgage , and have fall in lately ; transaction that scarcely call for the employment of Mr. Saltram 's intellectual power . but he give they very serious attention nevertheless , well aware , all the time that this business consultation be only the widow 's excuse for her visit ; and while she seem to be listen to his advice , her eye be wander round the room all the time , note the dust and confusion , the soda - water bottle huddle in one corner , the pile of book heap in a careless mass in another , the half - empty brandy - bottle between a couple of stone ink - jar on the mantelpiece . she be think what a dreary place it be , and that there be the stamp of decay and ruin somehow upon the man who occupy it . and she love he so well , and would have give all the world to have redeem his life . 

 it be doubtful whether Adela Branston hear one syllable of that counsel which Mr. Saltram administer so gravely . her mind be full of the failure of this desperate step which she have take . he seem far from she now than before they have meet , obstinately adverse to profit by her friendship , cold and cruel . 

 " you will come and dine with we very soon , I hope , " she say as she rise to go , " my cousin , Mrs. Pallinson , will be home in a day or two . she have be nurse her son for the last few day ; but he be much well , and I expect she back immediately . we shall be so pleased to see you ; you will name an early day , will not   you ? Monday shall we say , or Sunday ? you can not   plead business on Sunday . " 

 " my dear Mrs. Branston , I really be not well enough for visit . " 

 " but dining with we do not come under the head of visit . we will be quite alone , if you wish it . I shall be hurt if you refuse to come . " 

 " if you put it in that way , I can not refuse ; but I fear you will find I wretched company . " 

 " I be not afraid of that . and now I must ask you to forgive I for have waste so much of your time , before I say good - morning . " 

 " there have be no time of mine waste . I have learn to know your generous heart even well than I know it before , and I think I always know that it be a noble one . believe I , I be not ungrateful or indifferent to so much goodness . " 

 he accompany she downstair , and through the court and passage to the place where she have leave her cab , in spite of the ticket - porter , who be hang about ready to act as escort . he see she safely seat in the hackney vehicle , and then walk slowly back to his chamber , think over the interview which have just conclude . 

 " poor little soul , " he say softly to himself ; " dear little soul ! there be man who would go to the end of the world for a woman like that ; yes , if she have not a sixpence . and to think that I , who think myself so strong in the wisdom of the world , should have let such a prize slip through my finger ? for what ? for a fancy , for a caprice that have bring confusion and shame upon I disappointment and regret . " 

 he breathe a profound sigh . from first to last life have be more or less a disappointment to this man . he have live alone ; live for himself , despise the ambitious aim and lofty hope of other man , think the good prize this world can give scarcely worth that long struggle which be so apt to end in failure ; perfect success be so rare a result , it seem to he . he make a rough calculation of his chance in any give line when he be still fresh from college , and find the figure against he , give up all thought of do great thing . by - and - by , when his creditor grow press and it be necessary for he to earn money in some way , he find that it be no trouble to he to write ; so he write with a spasmodic kind of industry , but a forty - horse power when he choose to exercise it . for a long time he have no thought of win name or fame in literature . it be only of late it have dawn upon he that he have waste labour and talent , out of which a wise man would have create for himself a reputation ; and that reputation be worth something , if only as a means of make money . 

 this conviction once arrive at , he have work hard at a book which he think must need make some impression upon the world whenever he could afford time to complete it . in the meanwhile his current work occupy so much of his life , that he be fain to lay the magnum opus aside every now and then , and it still need a month or two of quiet labour . 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 AT FAULT 


 Gilbert Fenton take up his abode at the dilapidated old inn at Crosber , think that he might be free there than at the Grange ; a dismal place of sojourn under the bright circumstance , but unspeakably dreary for he who have only the sad thought for his companion . he want to be on the spot , to be close at hand to hear tiding of the miss girl , and he want also to be here in the event of John Holbrook 's return to come face to face with this man , if possible , and to solve that question which have sorely perplex he of late the mystery that hang about the man who have wrong he . 

 he consult Ellen Carley as to the probability of Mr. Holbrook 's return . the girl seem to think it very unlikely that Marian 's husband would ever again appear at the Grange . his last departure have appear like a final one . he have pay every sixpence he owe in the neighbourhood , and have be liberal in his donation to the servant and hanger - on of the place . Marian 's belonging he have leave to Ellen Carley 's care , tell she to pack they , and keep they in readiness for be forward to any address he might send . but his own book and paper he have carefully remove . 

 " have he many book here ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " not many , " the girl answer ; " but he be a very studious gentleman . he spend almost all his time shut up in his own room reading and writing . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 in this respect the habit of the unknown correspond exactly with those of John Saltram . Gilbert Fenton 's heart beat a little quick at the thought that he be come near by a step to the solution of that question which be always uppermost in his mind now . 

 " do you know if he write book if he be what be call a literary man live by his pen ? " he ask presently . 

 " I do not   know ; I never hear his wife say so . but Mrs. Holbrook be always reserve about he and his history . I think he have forbid she to talk about his affair . I know I use to fancy it be a dull life for she , poor soul , sit in his room hour after hour , work while he write . he use not to allow she to be with he at all at first , but little by little she persuade he to let she sit with he , promise not to disturb he by so much as a word ; and she never do . she seem quite happy when she be with he , content , and proud to think that her presence be no hindrance to he . " 

 " and you think he love she , do not   you ? " 

 " at first , yes ; but I think a kind of weariness come over he afterwards , and that she see it , and almost break her heart about it . she be so simple and innocent , poor darling , it be not   easy for she to hide anything she feel . " 

 Gilbert ask the bailiff 's daughter to describe Mr. Holbrook to he , as she have do more than once before . but this time he question she closely , and contrive that her description of this man 's outward semblance should be especially minute and careful . 

 yes , the picture which arise before he as Ellen Carley speak be the picture of John Saltram . the description seem in every particular to apply to the face and figure of his one choose friend . but then all such verbal picture be at good vague and shadowy , and Gilbert know that he carry that one image in his mind , and would be apt unconsciously to twist the girl 's word into that one shape . he ask if any picture or photograph of Mr. Holbrook have be leave at the Grange , and Ellen Carley tell he no , she have never even see a portrait of Marian 's husband . 

 he be therefore fain to be content with the description which seem so exactly to fit the friend he love , the friend to whom he have clung with a deep , strong feeling since this miserable suspicion have take root in his mind . 

 " I think I could have forgive he if he have come between we in a bold and open way , " he say to himself , brood over this harass doubt of his friend ; " yes , I think I could have forgive he , in spite of the bitterness of lose she . but to steal she from I with cowardly treacherous secrecy , to hide my treasure in an obscure corner , and then grow weary of she , and blight her fair young life with his coldness , can I forgive he these thing ? can all the memory of the past plead with I for he when I think of these thing ? o God , grant that I be mistaken ; that it be some other man who have do this , and not John Saltram ; not the man I have love and honour for fifteen year of my life ! " 

 but his suspicion be not to be put away , not to be drive out of his mind , let he argue against they as he might . he resolve , therefore , that as soon as he should have make every effort and take every possible mean towards the recovery of the miss girl , he would make it his business next to bring this thing home to John Saltram , or acquit he for ever . 

 it be needless to dwell upon that weary work , which seem destine to result in nothing but disappointment . the local constabulary and the London police alike exert all their power to obtain some trace of Marian Holbrook 's lose footstep ; but no clue to the painful mystery be to be find . from the moment when she vanish from the eye of the servant - woman watch her departure from the Grange gate , she seem to have disappear altogether from the sight of mankind . if by some witchcraft she have melt into the dim autumnal mist that hang about the river - bank , she could not have leave less trace , or vanish more mysteriously than she have do . the local constabulary give in very soon , in spite of Gilbert Fenton 's handsome payment in the present , and noble promise of reward in the future . the local constabulary be honest and uninventive . they shake their head gloomily , and say " drownde . " 

 " but the river have be drag , " Gilbert cry eagerly , " and there have be nothing find . " 

 he shudder at the thought of that which might have be haul to shore in the foul weedy net . the face he love , change , disfigured , awful the damp cling hair . 

 " Holes , " reply the chief of the local constabulary , sententiously ; " there be hole in that there river where you might hide half a dozen drownde man , and never hope to find them , no more than if they be at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean . Lord bless your heart , sir , you londoner do not   know what a river be , in a manner of speak , " add the man , who be most likely unacquainted with the existence of the Thames , compare with which noble stream this sluggish Hampshire river be the veri ditch . " I have   know a many poor creature drownde in that river , and never one of them to come to light not that the river be drag for they . their friend be not   of the drag class , they be not . " 

 the London police be more hopeful and more delusive . they be always hear of some young lady newly arrive at some neighbour town or village who seem to answer exactly to the description of Mrs. Holbrook . and , behold , when Gilbert Fenton hurry off post - haste to the village or town , and present himself before the lady in question , he find for the most part that she be ten year old than Marian , and as utterly unlike she as it be possible for one Englishwoman to be unlike another . 

 he possess a portrait of the miss girl a carefully finish photograph , which have be give to he in the brief happy time when she be his promise wife ; and he cause this image to be multiply and distribute wherever the search for Marian be be make . he neglect no possible mean by which he might hope to obtain tiding ; advertising continually , in town and country , and vary his advertisement in such a manner as to insure attention either from the object of his inquiry , or any one acquaint with she . 

 but all his trouble be in vain . no reply , or , what be bad , worthless and delusive reply , come to his advertisement . the London police , who have pretend to be so hopeful at first , begin to despair in a visible manner , have put all their machinery into play , and fail to obtain even the most insignificant result . they be fain to confess at last that they could only come to pretty much the same conclusion as that arrive at by their inferior , the rustic official ; and agree that in all probability the river hide the secret of Marian Holbrook 's fate . she have be the victim of either crime or accident . who should say which ? the former seem the more likely , as she have vanish in broad daylight , when it be scarcely possible that her footstep could go astray ; while in that lonely neighbourhood a crime be never impossible . 

 " she have a watch and chain , I suppose ? " the officer inquire . " lady will wear them . " 

 Gilbert ascertain from Ellen Carley that Marian have always wear her watch and chain , have wear they when she leave the Grange for the last time . she have a few other trinket too , which she wear habitually , quaint old - fashioned thing , of some value . 

 how well Gilbert remember those little family treasure , which she have exhibit to he at Captain Sedgewick 's bidding ! 

 " ah , " mutter the officer when he hear this , " quite enough to cost she her life , if she meet with one of your ugly customer . I have   know a murder commit for the sake of three - and - sixpence in my time ; and push a young woman into the river do not   count for murder among that sort of people . you see , some one may come by and fish she out again ; so it can not   well be more than manslaughter . " 

 a dull horror come over Gilbert Fenton as he hear these professional speculation , but at the bad he could not bring himself to believe that these man be right , and that the woman he love have be the victim of some obscure wretch 's greed , slay in broad daylight for the sake of a few pound ' worth of jewelry . 

 when everything have be do that be possible to be do in that part of the country , Mr. Fenton go back to London . but not before he have become very familiar with the household at the Grange . from the first he have like and trust Ellen Carley , deeply touch by her fidelity to Marian . he make a point of drop in at the Grange every evening , when not away from Crosber follow up some delusive track start by his metropolitan counsellor . he always go there with a faint hope that Ellen Carley might have something to tell he , and with a vague notion that John Holbrook might return unexpectedly , and that they two might meet in the old farm - house . but Mr. Holbrook do not reappear , nor have Ellen any tiding for her evening visitor ; though she think of little else than Marian , and never let a day pass without make some small effort to obtain a clue to that mystery which now seem so hopeless . Gilbert grow to be quite at home in the little wainscote parlour at the Grange , smoke his cigar there nightly in a tranquil contemplative mood , while Mr. Carley puff vigorously at his long clay pipe . there be a special charm for he in the place that have so long be Marian 's home . he feel near to she , somehow , under that roof , and as if he must need be on the right road to some discovery . the bailiff , although prone to silence , seem to derive considerable gratification from Mr. Fenton 's visit , and talk to that gentleman with great freedom than he be will not to display in his intercourse with mankind . Ellen be not always present during the whole of the evening , and in her absence the bailiff would unbosom himself to Gilbert on the subject of his daughter 's undutiful conduct ; tell he what a prosperous marriage the girl might make if she have only common sense enough to see her own interest in the right light , and be not   the most obstinate self - willed hussy that ever set her own foolish whim and fancy against a father 's wish . 

 " but a woman 's fancy sometimes mean a very deep feeling , Mr. Carley , " plead Gilbert ; " and what worldly - wise people call a good home , be not always a happy one . it be a hard thing for a young woman to marry against her inclination . " 

 " Humph ! " mutter the bailiff in a surly tone . " it be a hard thing for she to marry a pauper , I should think , and to bring a regiment of child into the world , always want shoe and stocking . but you be a bachelor , you see , Mr. Fenton , and can not   be expect to know what shoe and stocking be . now there happen to be a friend of mine a steady , respectable , middle - aged man who worship the ground my girl walk on , and could make her mistress of as good a house as any within twenty mile of this , and give a home to her father in his old age , into the bargain ; for I be only a servant here , and it can not   be expect that I be to go on toil and slave about this place for ever . I do not   say but what I have   save a few pound , but I have not   save enough to keep I out of the workhouse . " 

 this seem to Gilbert rather a selfish manner of look at a daughter 's matrimonial prospect , and he venture to hint as much in a polite way . but the bailiff be immovable . 

 " what a young woman want be a good home , " he say decisively ; " whether she have the sense to know it herself , or whether she have not , that be what she be get to look for in life . " 

 Gilbert have not spend many evening at the Grange before he have the honour of be introduce to the estimable middle - aged suitor , whose claim Mr. Carley be always set forth to his daughter . he see Stephen Whitelaw , and that individual 's colourless expressionless countenance , redeem from total blankness only by the cunning visible in the small grey eye , impress he with instant distrust and dislike . 

 " God forbid that frank warm - hearted girl should ever be sacrifice to such a fellow as this , " he say to himself , as he sit on the opposite side of the hearth , smoke his cigar , and meditatively contemplate Mr. Whitelaw converse in his slow solemn fashion with the man who be so eager to be his father - in - law . 

 in the course of that first evening of their acquaintance , Gilbert be surprised to see how often Stephen Whitelaw look at he , with a strangely - attentive expression , that have something furtive in it , some hidden meaning , as it seem to he . whenever Gilbert speak , the farmer look up at he , always with the same sharp inquisitive glance , the same cunning twinkle in his small eye . and every time he happen to look at Mr. Whitelaw during that evening , he find the watchful eye turn towards he in the same unpleasant manner . the sensation cause by this kind of surveillance on the part of the farmer be so obnoxious to he , that at part he take occasion to speak of it in a friendly way . 

 " I fancy you and I must have meet before to - night , Mr. Whitelaw , " he say ; " or that you must have some notion to that effect . you have   look at I with an amount of interest my personal merit could scarcely call for . " 

 " no , no , sir , " the farmer answer in his usual slow deliberate way ; " it be not   that ; I never set eye on you before I come into this room to - night . but you see , Ellen , she be interested in you , and I take an interest in any one she take to . and we have   all of we think so much about your search for that poor young lady that be missing , and take such pain , and be so patient - like where another would have give in at the first set - off so , altogether , you be a general object of interest , you see . " 

 Gilbert do not appear particularly flatter by this compliment . he receive it at first with rather an angry look , and then , after a pause , be vex with himself for have be annoy by the man 's clumsy expression of sympathy for it be sympathy , no doubt , which Mr. Whitelaw wish to express . 

 " it have be sad work , so far , " he say . " I suppose you can give I no hint , no kind of advice as to any step to be take in the future . " 

 " Lord bless you , no sir . everything that could be do be do before you come here . Mr. Holbrook do not   leave a stone unturned . he do his duty as a man and a husband , sir . the poor young lady be drown there be no doubt about that . " 

 " I do not   believe it , " Gilbert say , with a quiet resolute air , which seem quite to startle Mr. Whitelaw . 

 " you do not   believe she be drown ! you mean to say you think she be alive , then ? " he ask , with unusual sharpness and quickness of speech . 

 " I have a firm conviction that she still live ; that , with God 's blessing , I shall see she again . " 

 " well , sir , " Mr. Whitelaw reply , relapse into his accustomed slowness , and rub his clumsy chin with his still clumsier hand , in a thoughtful manner , " of course it be not   my place to go against any gentleman 's conviction far from it ; but if you see Mrs. Holbrook before the dead rise out of their graf , my name be not   Stephen Whitelaw . you may waste your time and your trouble , and you may spend your money as it be so much water , but set eye upon that miss lady you never will ; take my word for it , or do not   take my word for it , as you please . " 

 Gilbert wonder at the man 's earnestness . do he really feel some kind of benevolent interest in the fate of a helpless woman , or be it only a vulgar love of the marvellous and horrible that move he ? Gilbert lean to the latter opinion , and be by no mean incline to give Stephen Whitelaw credit for any surplus stock of benevolence . he see a good deal more of Ellen Carley 's suitor in the course of his evening visit to the Grange , and have ample opportunity for observe Mr. Whitelaw 's mode of courtship , which be by no mean of the demonstrative order , consist in a polite silence towards the object of his affection , break only by one or two clumsy but florid compliment , deliver in a deliberate but semi - jocose manner . the owner of Wyncomb Farm have no idea of make hard work of his courtship . he have be angle for by so many damsel , and court by so many father and mother , that he fancy he have but to say the word when the time come , and the thing would be do . any evidence of avoidance , indifference , or even dislike upon Ellen Carley 's part , trouble he in the small degree . he have hear people talk of young Randall 's fancy for she , and of she like for he , but he know that her father mean to set his heel upon any nonsense of this kind ; and he do not for a moment imagine it possible that any girl would resolutely oppose her father 's will , and throw away such good fortune as he could offer she to ride in her own chaise - cart , and wear a silk gown always on Sundays , to say nothing of a gold watch and chain ; and Mr. Whitelaw mean to endow his bride with a ponderous old - fashioned timepiece and heavy brassy - look cable which have belong to his mother . 

 CHAPTER XXIX 

 BAFFLED , not BEATEN 


 the time come when Gilbert Fenton be fain to own to himself that there be no more to be do down in Hampshire : professional science and his own effort have be alike futile . if she whom he seek still live and he have never for a moment suffer himself to doubt this it be more than likely that she be far away from Crosber Grange , that there have be some motive for her sudden flight , unaccountable as that flight might seem in the absence of any clue to the mystery . 

 every mean of inquiry be exhaust in Hampshire , there be nothing leave to Gilbert but to return to London that marvellous city , where there always seem the most hope of find the lost , wide as the wilderness be . 

 " in London I shall have clever detective always at my service , " Gilbert think ; " in London I may be able to solve the question of John Holbrook 's identity . " 

 so , apart from the fact that his own affair necessitate his prompt return to the great city , Gilbert have another motive for leave the dull rural neighbourhood where he have waste so many anxious hour , so much thought and care . 

 for the rest , he know that Ellen Carley would be faithful always on the watch for any clue to the mystery of Marian Holbrook 's fate , always ready to receive the wanderer with open arm , should any happy chance bring she back to the Grange . Assured of this , he feel less compunction in turn his back upon the spot where his lose love have vanish from the eye of man . 

 before leave , he give Ellen a letter for Marian 's husband , in the improbable event of that gentleman 's reappearance at the Grange a few simple earnest line , entreat Mr. Holbrook to believe in the writer 's faithful and brotherly affection for his wife , and to meet he in London on an early occasion , in order that they might together concert fresh mean for bring about her restoration to her husband and home . he remind Mr. Holbrook of his friendship for Captain Sedgewick , and that good man 's confidence in he , and declare himself bind by his respect for the dead to be faithful to the live faithful in all forgiveness of any wrong do he in the past . 

 he go back to London cruelly depress by the failure of his effort , and with a blank dreary feeling that there be little more for he to do , except to wait the working of Providence , with the faint hope that one of those happy accident which sometimes bring about a desire result when all human endeavour have be in vain , might throw a sudden light on Marian Holbrook 's fate . 

 during the whole of that homeward journey he brood an those dark suspicion of Mr. Holbrook which Ellen Carley have let fall in their early interview . he have check the girl on these occasion , and have prevent the full utterance of her thought , generously indignant that any suspicion of foul play should attach to Marian 's husband , and utterly incredulous of such a depth of guilt as that at which the girl 's hint point ; but now that he be leave Hampshire , he feel vex with himself for not have urge she to speak freely not have consider her suspicion , however preposterous those suspicion might have appear to he . 

 Marian 's disappearance have take a dark colour in his mind since that time . grant that she have leave the Grange of her own accord , have some special reason for leave secretly , at whose bidding would she have so act except her husband 's she who stand so utterly alone , without a friend in the world ? but what possible motive could Mr. Holbrook have have for such an underhand course for make a conspiracy and a mystery out of so simple a fact as the removal of his wife from a place whence he be free to remove she at any moment ? fair and honest motive for such a course there could be none . be it possible , look at the business from a dark point of view , to imagine any guilty reason for the carrying out of such a plot ? if this man have want to bring about a life - long severance between himself and his wife , to put she away somewhere , to keep she hide from the eye of the world in plainer word , to get rid of she might not this pretence of lose she , this affectation of distress at her loss , be a safe way of accomplish his purpose ? who else be interested in do she any wrong ? who else could have have sufficient power over she to beguile she away from her home ? 

 ponder on these question throughout all that weary journey across a wintry landscape of bare brown field and leafless tree , Gilbert Fenton travel London - ward , to the city which be so little of a home for he , but in which his life have seem pleasant enough in its own commonplace fashion until that fatal summer evening when he first see Marian Nowell 's radiant face in the quiet church at Lidford . 

 he scarcely stop to eat or drink at the end of his journey , regale himself only with a bottle of soda - water , imperceptibly flavour with cognac by the hand of a minister angel at the refreshment - counter of the Waterloo Station , and then hurry on at once in a hansom to that dingy street in Soho where Mr. Medler sit in his parlour , like the proverbial spider wait for the advent of some too - confide fly . 

 the lawyer be at home , and seem in no way surprised to see Mr. Fenton . 

 " I have come to you about a bad business , Mr. Medler , " Gilbert begin , seat himself opposite the shabby - look office - table , with its covering of dusty fade baize , upon which there seem to be always precisely the same array of paper in little bundle tie with red tape ; " but first let I ask you a question : have you hear from Mrs. Holbrook ? " 

 " not a line . " 

 " and have you take no further step , no other mean of communicate with she ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " not yet . I think of send my clerk down to Hampshire , or of go down myself perhaps , in a day or two , if my business engagement will permit I . " 

 " do you not consider the case rather an urgent one , Mr. Medler ? I should have suppose that your curiosity would have be arouse by the absence of any reply to your letter that you would have look at the business in a more serious light than you appear to have do that you would have take alarm , in short . " 

 " why should I do so ? " the lawyer demand carelessly . 

 " it be Mrs. Holbrook 's business to look after her affair . the property be safe enough . she can administer to the will as soon as she please . I certainly wonder that the husband have not be a little sharp and more active in the business . " 

 " you have hear nothing of he , then , I presume ? " 

 " nothing . " 

 Gilbert remember what Ellen Carley have tell he about Marian 's keep the secret of her newly - acquire fortune from her husband , until she should be able to tell it to he with her own lip ; wait for that happy moment with innocent girlish delight in the thought that he be to owe prosperity to she . 

 it seem evident , therefore , that Mr. Holbrook could know nothing of his wife 's inheritance , nor of Mr. Medler 's existence , suppose the lawyer 's letter to have reach the Grange before Marian 's disappearance , and to have be destroy or carry away by she . 

 he inquire the date of this letter ; whereupon Mr. Medler refer to a letter - book in which there be a facsimile of the document . it have be post three day before Marian leave the Grange . 

 Gilbert now proceed to inform Mr. Medler of his client 's mysterious disappearance , and all the useless effort that have be make to solve the mystery . the lawyer listen with an appearance of profound interest and astonishment , but make no remark till the story be quite finish . 

 " you be right , Mr. Fenton , " he say at last . " it be a bad business , a very bad business . may I ask you what be the common opinion among people in that part of the world in the immediate neighbourhood of the event , as to this poor lady 's fate ? " 

 " an opinion with which I can not bring myself to agree an opinion which I pray God may prove as unfounded as I believe it to be . it be generally think that Mrs. Holbrook have fall a victim to some common crime that she be rob , and then throw into the river . " 

 " the river have be drag , I suppose ? " 

 " it have ; but the people about there seem to consider that no conclusive test . " 

 " have Mrs. Holbrook anything valuable about she at the time of her disappearance ? " 

 " her watch and chain and a few other trinket . " 

 " Humph ! there be scoundrel about the country who will commit the dark crime for the small inducement . I confess the business have rather a black look , Mr. Fenton , and that I be inclined to concur with the country people . " 

 " an easy way of settle the question for those not vitally interested in the lady 's fate , " Gilbert answer bitterly . 

 " the lady be my client , sir , and I be bind to feel a warm interest in her affair , " the lawyer say , with the lofty tone of a man whose fine feeling have be outraged . 

 " the lady be once my promise wife , Mr. Medler , " return Gilbert , " and now stand to I in the place of a beloved and only sister . for I the mystery of her fate be an all - absorb question , an enigma to the solution of which I mean to devote the rest of my life , if need be . " 

 " a waste life , Mr. Fenton ; and in the meantime that river down yonder may hide the only secret . " 

 " o God ! " cry Gilbert passionately , " how eager every one be to make an end of this business ! even the man whom I pay and bribe to help I grow tired of their work , and abandon all hope after the feeble , most miserable attempt to earn their reward . " 

 " what can be do in such a case , Mr. Fenton ? " demand the lawyer , shrug his shoulder with a deprecate air . " what can the police do more than you or I ? they have only a little more experience , that be all ; they have no recondite mean of solve these social mystery . you have advertise , of course ? " 

 " yes , in many channel , with a certain amount of caution , but in such a manner as to insure Mrs. Holbrook 's identification , if she have fall into the hand of any one willing to communicate with I , and to insure her own attention , be she free to act for herself . " 

 " Humph ! then it seem to I that everything have be do that can be do . " 

 " not yet . the man whom I employ in Hampshire they be recommend to I by the Scotland - yard authority , certainly may not have be up to the mark . in any case , I shall try some one else . do you know anything of the detective force ? " 

 Mr. Medler assume an air of consideration , and then say , " no , he do not know the name of a single detective ; his business do not bring he in contact with that class of people . " he say this with the tone of a man whose practice be of the lofty and choicest kind conveyancing , perhaps , and the management of estate for the land gentry , marriage - settlement involve the disposition of large fortune , and so on ; whereas Mr. Medler 's business lie chiefly among the criminal population , his path in life might have be suppose to be not very remote from the footstep of eminent police - officer . 

 " I can get the information elsewhere , " Gilbert say carelessly . " believe I , I do not mean to let this matter drop . " 

 " my dear sir , if I might venture upon a word of friendly advice not in a professional spirit , but as between man and man I should warn you against waste your time and fortune upon a useless pursuit . if Mrs. Holbrook have vanish from the world of her own free will a thing that often happen , eccentric as it may be she will reappear in good time of her own free will . if she have be the victim of a crime , that crime will no doubt come to light in due course , without any effort of your . " 

 " that be the common kind of advice , Mr. Medler , " answer Gilbert . " prudent counsel , no doubt , if a man could be content to take it , and well mean ; but , you see , I have love this lady , love she still , and shall continue so to love she till the end of my life . it be not possible for I to rest in ignorance of her fate . " 

 " although she jilt you in favour of Mr. Holbrook ? " suggest the lawyer with something of a sneer . 

 " that wrong have be forgive . Fate do not permit I to be her husband , but I can be her friend and brother . she have need of some one to stand in that position , poor girl ! for her lot be very lonely . and now I want you to explain the condition of her grandfather 's will . it be her father who would profit , I think I gather from our last conversation , in the event of Marian 's death . " 

 " in the event of her die childless yes , the father would take all . " 

 " then he be really the only person who could profit by her death ? " 

 " well , yes , " reply the lawyer with some slight hesitation ; " under her grandfather 's will , yes , her father would take all . of course , in the event of her father have die previously , the husband would come in as heir - at - law . you see it be not easy to exclude the husband altogether . " 

 " and do you believe that Mr. Nowell be still live to claim his inheritance ? " 

 " I believe so . I fancy the old man have some tiding of his son before the will be execute ; that he , in short , hear of his have be meet with not long ago , over in America . " 

 " no doubt he will speedily put in an appearance now , " say Gilbert bitterly " now that there be a fortune to be gain by the assertion of his identity . " 

 " Humph ! " mutter the lawyer . " it would not be very easy for he to put his hand on sixpence of Jacob Nowell 's money , in the absence of any proof of Mrs. Holbrook 's death . there would be no end of appeal to the Court of Chancery ; and after all manner of formula he might obtain a decree that would lock up the property for twenty - four year . I doubt , if the executor choose to stick to technical , and the business get into chancery , whether Percival Nowell would live long enough to profit by his father 's will . " 

 " I be glad of that , " say Gilbert . " I know the man to be a scoundrel , and I be very glad that he be unlikely to be a gainer by any misfortune that have befall his daughter . have it be otherwise , I should have be incline to think that he have have some hand in this disappearance . " 

 the lawyer look at Mr. Fenton with a sharp inquisitive glance . 

 " in other word , you would imply that Percival Nowell may have make away with his daughter . you must have a very bad opinion of human nature , Mr. Fenton , to conceive anything so horrible . " 

 " my suspicion do not go quite so far as that , " say Gilbert . " God forbid that it should be so . I have a firm belief that Marian Holbrook live . but it be possible to get a person out of the way without the last bad crime of which mankind be capable . " 

 " it would seem more natural to suspect the husband than the father , I should imagine , " Mr. Medler answer , after a thoughtful pause . 

 " I can not see that . the husband have nothing to gain by his wife 's disappearance , and everything to lose . " 

 " he might have suppose the father to be dead , and that he would step into the fortune . he might not know enough of the law of property to be aware of the difficulty attend a succession of that kind . there be a most extraordinary ignorance of the law of the land prevail among well - educate englishman . or he may have be tired of his wife , and have see his way to a more advantageous alliance . man be not always satisfied with one wife in these day , and a man who marry in such a strange underhand manner would be likely to have some hide motive for secrecy . " 

 the suggestion be not without force for Gilbert Fenton . his face grow dark , and he be some time before he reply to Mr. Medler 's remark . that suspicion which of late have be perpetually float dimly in his brain that vague distrust of his one choose friend , John Saltram , flash upon he in this moment with a new distinctness . if this man , whom he have so love and trust , have betray he , have so utterly falsify his friend 's estimate of his character , be it not easy enough to believe he capable of still deep baseness , capable of grow weary of his steal wife , and cast she off by some foul secret mean , in order to marry a rich woman ? the marriage between John Holbrook and Marian Nowell have take place several month before Michael Branston 's death , at a time when perhaps Adela Branston 's admirer have begin to despair of her release . and then fate have go against he , and Mrs. Branston 's fortune lie at his foot when it be too late . 

 thus , and thus only , could Gilbert Fenton account in any easy manner for John Saltram 's avoidance of the Anglo - Indian 's widow . a little more than a year ago it have seem as if the whole plan of his life be build upon a marriage with this woman ; and now that she be free , and obviously willing to make he the master of her fortune , he recoil from the position , unreasonably and unaccountably blind or indifferent to its advantage . 

 " there shall be an end of these shapeless unspoken doubt , " Gilbert say to himself . " I will see John Saltram to - day , and there shall be an explanation between we . I will be his dupe and fool no long . I will get at the truth somehow . " 

 Gilbert Fenton say very little more to the lawyer , who seem by no mean sorry to get rid of he . but at the door of the office he pause . 

 " you do not tell I the name of the executor to Jacob Nowell 's will , " he say . 

 " you do not   ask I the question , " answer Mr. Medler curtly . " there be only one executor myself . " 

 " indeed ! Mr. Nowell must have have a very high opinion of you to leave you so much power . " 

 " I do not   know about power . Jacob Nowell know I , and he do not   know many people . I do not   say that he put any especial confidence in I for it be his habit to trust no one , his boast that he trust no one . but he be oblige to name some one for his executor , and he name I . " 

 " shall you consider it your duty to seek out or advertise for Percival Nowell ? " ask Gilbert . 

 " I shall be in no hurry to do that , in the absence of any proof of his daughter 's death . my first duty would be to look for she . " 

 " God grant you may be more fortunate than I have be ! there be my card , Mr. Medler . you will be so good as to let I have a line immediately , at that address , if you obtain any tiding of Mrs. Holbrook . " 

 " I will do so . " 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 STRICKEN down 


 a hansom carry Gilbert Fenton to the Temple , without loss of time . there be a fierce hurry in his breast , a heat and fever which he have scarcely feel since the beginning of his trouble ; for his lurking suspicion of his friend have gather shape and strength all at once , and possess his mind now to the exclusion of every other thought . 

 he run quickly up the stair . the outer and inner door of John Saltram 's chamber be both ajar . Gilbert push they open and go in . the familiar sitting - room look just a little more dreary than usual . the litter of book and paper , ink - stand and portfolio , be transfer to one of the side - table , and in its place , on the table where his friend have be accustom to write , Gilbert see a cluster of medicine - bottle , a jug of toast - and - water , and a tray with a basin of lukewarm greasy - look beef - tea . 

 the door between the two room stand half open , and from the bedchamber within Gilbert hear the heavy painful breathing of a sleeper . he go to the door and look into the room . John Saltram be lie asleep , in an uneasy attitude , with both arm throw over his head . his face have a haggard look that be make all the more ghastly by two vivid crimson spot upon his sunken cheek ; there be dark purple ring round his eye , and his beard be of more than a week 's growth . 

 " Ill , " Gilbert mutter , look aghast at this dreary picture , with strangely conflict feeling of pity and anger in his breast ; ' strike down at the very moment when I have determine to know the truth . " 

 the sick man toss himself restlessly from side to side in his feverish sleep , change his position two or three time with evident weariness and pain , and then open his eye and star with a blank unseeing gaze at his friend . that look , without one ray of recognition , go to Gilbert 's heart somehow . 

 " o God , how fond I be of he ! " he say to himself . " and if he have be a traitor ! if he be to die like this , before I have wring the truth from he to die , and I not dare to cherish his memory to be oblige to live out my life with this doubt of he ! " 

 this doubt ! have he much reason to doubt two minute afterwards , when John Saltram raise himself on his gaunt arm , and look piteously round the room ? 

 " Marian ! " he call . " Marian ! " 

 " yes , " mutter Gilbert , " it be all true . he be call his wife . " 

 the revelation scarcely seem a surprise to he . little by little that suspicion , so vague and dim at first , have gather strength , and now that all his doubt receive confirmation from those unconscious lip , it seem to he as if he have know his friend 's falsehood for a long time . 

 " Marian , come here . come , child , come , " the sick man cry in feeble implore tone . " what , be you afraid of I ? be this death ? be I dead , and part from she ? would anything else keep she from I when I call for she , the poor child that love I so well ? and I have wish myself free of her God forgive I ! wish myself free . " 

 the word be mutter in broken gasp fragment of sentence ; but Gilbert hear they and understand they very easily . then , after look about the room , and look full at Gilbert without see he , John Saltram fall back upon his tumble pillow and close his eye . Gilbert hear a slipshod step in the outer room , and turn round , find himself face to face with the laundress that mature and somewhat depressing matron whom he have seek out a little time before , when he want to discover Mr. Saltram 's whereabout . 

 this woman , upon see he , burst forth immediately into jubilation . 

 " o , sir , what a providence it be that you have   come ! " she cry . " poor dear gentleman , he have be that ill , and I not know what to do more than a baby , except in the way of send for a doctor when I see how bad he be , and wait on he myself day and night , which I have do faithful , and be that wear - out in consequence , that I shake like a haspen , and can not   touch a bit of victual . I have but just slip round to the court , while he be asleep , poor dear , to give my child their dinner ; for it be a hard trial , sir , have a helpless young family depend upon one ; and it would but be fair that all I have go through should be consider ; for though I say it as should not , there be not   one of your hire nurse would do more ; and I be willing to continue of it , provisoe as I have help at night , and my trouble consider in my wage . " 

 " you need have no apprehension ; you shall be pay for your trouble . have he be long ill ? " 

 " well , sir , he take the cold as be the beginning of his illness a fortnight ago come next Thursday . you may remember , perhaps , as it come on awful wet in the afternoon , last Thursday week , and Mr. Saltram be out in the rain , and walk home in it , not be able to get a cab , I suppose , or perhaps not care to get one , for he be always a careless gentleman in such respect , and come in wet through to the skin ; and instead of change his clothe , as a Christian would have do , just give himself a shake like , as he might have be a New - fondling dog that have be swim , and sit down before the fire , which of course draw out the steam from his thing and make it bad , and write away for dear life till twelve o'clock that night , have something particular to finish for they magazine , he say ; and so , when I come to tidy - up a bit the last thing at night , I find he sit at the table writing , and do not   take no more notice of I than a dog , which be his way , though never mean unkindly quite the reverse . " 

 the laundress pause to draw breath , and to pour a dose of medicine from one of the bottle on the table . 

 " well , sir , the next day , he have a vi'lent cold , as you may suppose , and be low and languid - like , but go on with his writing , and it be not   no good ask he not . ' I want money , Mrs. Pratt , ' he say ; ' you can not   tell how bad I want money , and these people pay I for my stuff as fast as I send it in . ' the day after that he be a deal bad , and have a wandering way like , as if he do not   know what he be do ; and sit turn over his paper with one hand , and lean his head upon the other , and groan so that it go through one like a knife to hear he . ' it be no use , ' he say at last ; ' it be no use ! ' and then go and throw hisself down upon that bed , and have never get up since , poor dear gentleman ! I go round to fetch a doctor out of Essex Street , find as he be no well in the evening , and awful hot , and still more wandering - like Mr. Mew by name , a very nice gentleman which say as it be rheumatic fever , and have be here twice a day ever since . " 

 " have Mr. Saltram never be in his right sens since that day ? " Gilbert ask . 

 " o yes , sir ; off and on for the first week he be quite hisself at time ; but for the last three day he have not   know any one , and have talk and jabber a deal , and have be dreadful restless . " 

 " do the doctor call it a dangerous case ? " 

 " well , sir , not to deceive you , he ast I if Mr. Saltram have any friend as I could send for ; and I say no , not to my knowledge ; ' for , ' say Mr. Mew , ' if he have any relation or friend near at hand , they ought to be tell that he be in a bad way ; ' and only this morning he say as how he should like to call in a physician , for the case be a bad one . " 

 " I see . there be danger evidently , " Gilbert say gravely . " I will wait and hear what the doctor say . he will come again to - day , I suppose ? " 

 " yes , sir ; he be sure to come in the evening . " 

 " good ; I will stay till the evening . I should like you to go round immediately to this Mr. Mew 's house , and ask for the address of some skilled nurse , and then go on , in a cab if necessary , and fetch she . " 

 " I could do that , sir , of course , not but what I feel myself capable of nurse the poor dear gentleman . " 

 " you can not   nurse he night and day , my good woman . do what I tell you , and bring back a professional nurse as soon as you can . if Mr. Mew should be out , his people be likely to know the address of such a person . " 

 he give the woman some silver , and despatch she ; and then , be alone , sit down quietly in the sick - room to think out the situation . 

 yes , there be no long any doubt ; that piteous appeal to Marian have settle the question . John Saltram , the friend whom he have love , be the traitor . John Saltram have steal his promise wife , have come between he and his fair happy future , and have keep the secret of his guilt in a dastardly spirit that make the act fifty time black than it would have seem otherwise . 

 sit in the dreary silence of that sick chamber , a silence break only by the painful sound of the sleeper 's difficult breathing , many thing come back to his mind ; circumstance trivial enough in themselves , but invest with a grave significance when contemplate by the light of today 's revelation . 

 he remember those happy autumn afternoon at Lidford ; those long , drowsy , idle day in which John Saltram have give himself up so entirely to the pleasure of the moment , with surely something more than mere sympathy with his friend 's happiness . he remember that last long evening at the cottage , when this man have be at his good , full of life and gaiety ; and then that sudden departure , which have puzzle he so much at the time , and yet have seem no surprise to Marian . it have be the result of some suddenly - form resolution perhaps , Gilbert think . 

 " poor wretch ! he may have try to be true to I , " he say to himself , with a sharp bitter pain at his heart . 

 he have love this man so well , that even now , know himself to have be betray , there be a strange mingling of pity and anger in his mind , and mix with these a touch of contempt . he have believe in John Saltram ; have fancy he nobler and grander than himself , somehow ; a man who , under a careless half - scornful pretence of be bad than his fellow , conceal a nature that be far above the common herd ; and yet this man have prove the mere caitiff , a weak cowardly villain . 

 " to take my hand in friendship , know what he have do , and how my life be break ! to pretend sympathy ; to play out the miserable farce to the very last ! great heaven ! that the man I have honour could be capable of so much baseness ! " 

 the sleeper move restlessly , the eye be open once more and turn upon Gilbert , not with the same utter blankness as before , but without the faint recognition . the sick man see some one watch he , and the figure be associate with an unreal presence , the phantom of his brain , which have be with he often in the day and night . 

 " the man again ! " he mutter . " when will she come ? " and then raise himself upon his elbow , he cry imploringly , " Mother , you fetch she ! " 

 he be speak to his mother , whom he have love very dearly his mother who have be dead fifteen year . 

 Gilbert 's mind go back to that far - away time in Egypt , when he have lain like this , helpless and unconscious , and this man have nurse and watch he with unwearye tenderness . 

 " I will see he safely through this , " he say to himself , " and then " 

 and then the account between they must be square somehow . Gilbert Fenton have no thought of any direful vengeance . he belong to an age in which injury be take very quietly , unless they be wrong which the law can redress wound which can be heal by a golden plaster in the way of damage . 

 he could not kill his friend ; the age of duelling be past , and he not romantic enough to be guilty of such an anachronism as mortal combat . yet nothing less than a duel to the death could avenge such a wrong . 

 so friendship be at an end between those two , and that be all ; it be only the utter severance of a tie that have last for year , nothing more . yet to Gilbert it seem a great deal . his little world have crumble to ash ; love have perish , and now friendship have die this sudden bitter death , from which there be no possible resurrection . 

 in the midst of such thought as these he remember the sick man 's medicine . Mrs. Pratt have give he a few hurried direction before depart on her errand . he look at his watch , and then go over to the table and prepare the draught and administer it with a firm and gentle hand . 

 " who be that ? " John Saltram mutter faintly . " it seem like the touch of a friend . " 

 he drop back upon the pillow without wait for any reply , and fall into a string of low incoherent talk , with closed eye . 

 the laundress be a long time go , and Gilbert sit alone in the dismal little bedroom , where there have never be the small attempt at comfort since John Saltram have occupy it . he sit alone , or with that awful companionship of one whose mind be far away , which be so much more dreary than actual loneliness sit brood over the history of his friend 's treachery . 

 what have he do with Marian ? be her disappearance any work of his , after all ? have he hide she away for some secret reason of his own , and then act out the play by pretend to search for she ? know he for the traitor he be , could Gilbert Fenton draw any positive line of demarcation between the amount of guilt which be possible and that which be not possible to he ? 

 what have he do with Marian ? how soon would he be able to answer that question ? or would he ever be able to answer it ? the thought of this delay be torture to Gilbert Fenton . he have come here to - day thinking to make an end of all his doubt , to force an avowal of the truth from those false lip . and behold , a hand strong than his hold he back . his interrogation must await the answer to that awful question life or death . 

 the woman come in presently , bustling and out of breath . she have find a very trustworthy person , recommend by Mr. Mew 's assistant a person who would come that evening without fail . 

 " it be all the way up at Islington , sir , and I pay the cabman three - and - six altogether , which he say it be his fare . and how have the poor dear been while I be away ? " ask Mrs. Pratt , with her head on one side and an air of extreme solicitude . 

 " very much as you see he now . he have mention a name once or twice , the name of Marian . have you ever hear that ? " 

 " I should say I have , sir , time and often since he be be ill . ' Marian , why do not   you come to I ? ' so pitiful ; and then , ' lost , lose ! ' in such a awful wild way . I think it must be some favourite sister , sir , or a young lady as he have kep ' company with . " 

 " Marian ! " cry the voice from the bed , as if their cautious talk have penetrate to that dim brain . " marian ! o no , no ; she be go ; I have lose she ! well , I wish it ; I want my freedom . " 

 Gilbert start , and stand transfix , look intently at the unconscious speaker . yes , here be the clue to the mystery . John Saltram have grow tired of his steal bride have sigh for his freedom . who should say that he have not take some iniquitous mean to rid himself of the tie that have grow troublesome to he ? 

 Gilbert Fenton remember Ellen Carley 's suspicion . he be no long incline to despise they . 

 it be dreary work to sit by the bedside watch that familiar face , to which fever and delirium have give a strange weird look ; dismal work to count the moment , and wonder when that voice , now so thick of utterance as it go on mutter incoherent sentence and meaningless phrase , would be able to reply to those question which Gilbert Fenton be burn to ask . 

 be it a guilty conscience , the dull slow agony of remorse , which have stricken this man down this strong powerfully - build man , who be a stranger to illness and all physical suffering ? be the body only crush by the burden of the mind ? Gilbert could not find any answer to these question . he only know that his sometime friend lie there helpless , unconscious , remove beyond his reach as completely as if he have be lie in his coffin . 

 " o God , it be hard to bear ! " he say half aloud : " it be a bitter trial to bear . if this illness should end in death , I may never know Marian 's fate . " 

 he sit in the sick man 's room all through that long dismal afternoon , wait to see the doctor , and with the same hopeless thought repeat themselves perpetually in his mind . 

 it be nearly eight o'clock when Mr. Mew at last make his evening visit . he be a grave gray - haired little man , with a shrewd face and a pleasant manner ; a man who inspire Gilbert with confidence , and whose presence be cheer in a sick - room ; but he do not speak very hopefully of John Saltram . 

 " it be a bad case , sir a very bad case , " he say gravely , after he have make his careful examination of the patient 's condition . " there have be a violent cold catch , you see , through our poor friend 's recklessness in neglect to change his damp clothe , and rheumatic fever have set in . but it appear to I that there be other cause at work mental disturbance , and so on . our friend have be tax his brain a little too severely , I gather from Mrs. Pratt 's account of he ; and these thing will tell , sir ; soon or later they have their effect . " 

 " then you apprehend danger ? " 

 " well , yes ; I dare not tell you that there be an absence of danger . Mr. Saltram have a fine constitution , a noble frame ; but the strain be a severe one , especially upon the mind . " 

 " you speak just now of over - work as a cause for this mental disturbance . might it not rather proceed from some secret trouble of mind , some hide care ? " Gilbert ask anxiously . 

 " that , sir , be an open question . the mind be unhinge ; there be no doubt of that . there be something more here than the ordinary delirium we look for in fever case . " 

 " you have talk of a physician , Mr. Mew ; would it not be well to call one in immediately ? " 

 " I should feel more comfortable if my opinion be support , sir : not that I believe there be anything more can be do for our patient than I have be do ; but the case be a critical one , and I should be glad to feel myself support . " 

 " if you will give I the name and address of the gentleman you would like to call in , I will go for he immediately . " 

 " to - night ? Nay , my dear sir , there be no occasion for such haste ; to - morrow morning will do very well . " 

 " to - morrow morning , then ; but I will make the appointment to - night , if I can . " 

 Mr. Mew name a physician high in reputation as a specialist in such case as John Saltram 's ; and Gilbert dash off at once in a hansom to obtain the promise of an early visit from this gentleman on the following morning . he succeed in his errand ; and on return to the Temple find the professional nurse instal , and the sick - room brighten and freshen a little by her handiwork . the patient be asleep , and his slumber be more quiet than usual . 

 Gilbert have eat nothing since breakfast , and it be now nearly nine o'clock in the evening ; but before go out to some neighbour tavern to snatch a hasty dinner , he stop to tell Mrs. Pratt that he should sleep in his friend 's chamber that night . 

 " why , you do not   mean that , sir , sure to goodness , " cry the laundress , alarmed ; " and not so much as a sofy bedstead , nor nothing anyway comfortable . " 

 " I could sleep upon three or four chair , if it be necessary ; but there be an old sofa in the bedroom . you might bring that into this room for I ; and the nurse can have it in the day - time . she will not   want to be lie down to - night , I daresay . I do not   suppose I shall sleep much myself , but I be a little knock up , and shall be glad of some sort of rest . I want to be on the spot , come what may . " 

 " but , sir , with the new nurse and I , there surely can not   be no necessity ; and you might be round the first thing in the morning like to see how the poor dear gentleman have slep ' . " 

 " I know that , but I would rather be on the spot . I have my own especial reason . you can go home to your child . " 

 " thank you kindly , sir ; which I shall be very glad to take care of them , poor thing . and I hope , sir , as you will not   forget that I have   go through a deal for Mr. Saltram if so be as he should not   get well himself , which the Lord forbid to take my trouble into consideration , bein ' as he be always a free - handed gentleman , though not rich . " 

 " your service will not be forget , Mrs. Pratt , depend upon it . perhaps I would well give you a couple of sovereign on account : that will make matter straight for the present . " 

 " yes , sir ; and many thank for your generosity , " reply the laundress , agreeably surprise by this prompt donation , and drop grateful curtsey before her benefactor ; " and Mr. Saltram shall want nothing as my care can provide for he , you may depend upon it . " 

 " that be well . and now I be go out to get some dinner ; I shall be back in half an hour . " 

 the press and bustle of the day 's work be over at the tavern to which Gilbert bend his step . dinner and diner seem to be do with for one more day ; and there be only a couple of drowsy - look waiter fold table - cloth and put away cruet - stand and other paraphernalia in long narrow closet cut in the paper wall , and invisible by day . 

 one of these functionary grow brisk again , with a wan factitious briskness , at sight of Gilbert , make haste to redecorate one of the table , and in bland insinuate tone suggest a dinner of six course or so , as likely to be agreeable to a lonely and belate diner ; well aware in the depth of his inner consciousness that the six course would be all more or less warming - up of viand that have figure in the day 's bill of fare . 

 " bring I a chop or a steak , and a pint of dry sherry , " Gilbert say wearily . 

 " have a slice of turbot and lobster - sauce , sir the turbot be uncommon fine to - day ; and a briled fowl and mushroom . it will be ready in five minute . " 

 " you may bring I the fowl , if you like : I will not   wait for fish . I be in a hurry . " 

 the attendant give a faint sigh , and communicate the order for the fowl and mushroom through a speaking - tube . it be the business of his life to beguile his master 's customer into over - eat themselves , and to set his face against chop and steak ; but he feel that this particular customer be proof against his blandishment . he take Gilbert an evening paper , and then subside into a pensive silence until the fowl appear in an agreeable frizzling state , fresh from the gridiron , but a bird of some experience notwithstanding , and wingless . it be a very hasty meal . Gilbert be eager to return to those chamber in the Temple eager to be listen once more for some chance word of meaning that might be drop from John Saltram 's pale parch lip in the midst of incoherent raving . come what might , he want to be near at hand , to watch that sick - bed with a close vigil than hire nurse ever keep ; to be ready to surprise the brief interval of consciousness that might come all of a sudden to that hapless fever - stricken sinner . who should say that such an interval would not come , or who could tell what such an interval might reveal ? 

 Gilbert Fenton pay for his dinner , leave half his wine undrunk , and hurry away ; leave the waiter with rather a contemptuous idea of he , though that individual condescend to profit by his sobriety , and finish the dry sherry at a draught . 

 it be nearly ten when Gilbert return to the chamber , and all be still quiet , that heavy slumber continue ; an artificial sleep at the good , produce by one of Mr. Mew 's sedative . the sofa have be wheel from the bedroom to the sitting - room , and place in a comfortable corner by the fire . there be preparation too for a cup of tea , to be make and consume at any hour agreeable to the watcher ; a small teakettle simmer on the hob ; a tray with a cup and saucer , and queer little black earthenware teapot , on the table ; a teacaddy and other appliance close at hand , all testify to the grateful attention of the vanish Pratt . 

 Gilbert share the nurse 's watch till past midnight . long before that John Saltram wake from his heavy sleep , and there be more of that incoherent talk so painful to hear talk of people that be dead , of scene that be far away , even of those careless happy wandering in which those two college friend have be together ; and then mere nonsense talk , shred and patch of random thought , that scorn to be draw from some rubbish - chamber , some waste - paper basket of the brain . 

 it be weary work . he wake towards eleven , and a little after twelve drop asleep again ; but this time , the effect of the sedative have wear off , the sleep be restless and uneasy . then come a brief interval of quiet ; and in this Gilbert leave he , and fling himself down upon the sofa , to sink into a slumber that be scarcely more peaceful than that of the sick man . 

 he be thoroughly wear out , however , and sleep for some hour , to be awaken suddenly at last by a shrill cry in the next room . he spring up from the sofa , and rush in . John Saltram be sit up in bed , prop by the pillow on which his two elbow be plant , look about he with a fierce haggard face , and call for " Marian . " the nurse have fall asleep in her arm - chair by the fire , and be slumber placidly . 

 " Marian , " he cry , " Marian , why have you leave I ? God know I love you ; yes , even when I seem cold and neglectful . everything be against I ; but I love you , my dear , I love you ! do I ever say that you come between I and fortune be I mean enough , base enough , ever to say that ? it be a lie , my love ; you be my fortune . be poverty and obscurity hard thing to bear for you ? no , my darling , no ; I will face they to - morrow , if you will come back to I . o no , no , she be go ; my life have go : I break her heart with my hard bitter word ; I drive my angel away from I . " 

 he have not speak so coherently since Gilbert have be with he that day . surely this must be an interval of consciousness , or semi - consciousness . Gilbert go to the bedside , and , seat himself there quietly , look intently at the altered face , which star at he without a gleam of recognition . 

 " speak to I , John Saltram , " he say . " you know I , do not   you the man who be once your friend , Gilbert Fenton ? " 

 the other burst into a wild bitter laugh . " Gilbert Fenton my friend , the man who trust I still ! poor old Gilbert ! and I fancy that I love he , that I would have freely sacrifice my own happiness for his . " 

 " and yet you betray he , " Gilbert say in a low distinct voice . " but that may be forgive , if you have be guilty of no deeply wrong than that . John Saltram , as you have a soul to be save , what have you do with Marian with your wife ? " 

 it cost he something , even in that moment of excitement , to pronounce those two word . 

 " kill she ! " the sick man answer with the same mad laugh . " she be too good for I , you see ; and I grow weary of her calm beauty , and I sicken of her tranquil goodness . first I sacrifice honour , friendship , everything to win she ; and then I get tired of my prize . it be my nature , I suppose ; but I love she all the time ; she have twin herself about my heart somehow . I know it when she be lose . " 

 " what have you do with she ? " repeat Gilbert , in a low stern voice , with his grasp upon John Saltram 's arm . 

 " what have I do with she ? I forget . she be go I want my freedom ; I feel myself fetter , a ruined man . she be go ; and I be free , free to make a well marriage . " 

 " o God ! " mutter Gilbert , " be this man the black villain that ever cumber the earth ? what be I to think , what be I to believe ? " 

 again he repeat the same question , with a stern kind of patience , as if he would give this guilty wretch the benefit of every possible doubt , the unwilling pity which his condition demand . alas ! he could obtain no coherent answer to his persistent questioning . Vague self - accusation , mad reiteration of that one fact of his loss ; nothing more distinct come from those fevere lip , nor do one look of recognition flash into those bloodshot eye . 

 the time at which this mystery be to be solve have not come yet ; there be nothing to be do but to wait , and Gilbert wait with a sublime patience through all the alternation of a long and wearisome sickness . 

 " talk of friend , " Mrs. Pratt exclaim , in a private conference with the nurse ; " never do I see such a friend as Mr. Fenting , sacrifice of himself as he do , day and night , to look after that poor creature in there , and take no well rest than he can get on that old horsehair sofy , which brickbat or knife board be not   hard , and never do you hear he murmur . " 

 and yet for this man , whose battle with the grim enemy , death , he watch so patiently , what feeling could there be in Gilbert Fenton 's heart in all the day to come but hatred or contempt ? he have love he so well , and trust he so completely , and this be the end of it . 

 Christmas come while John Saltram be lie at death 's door , feebly fight that awful battle , struggle unconsciously with the bony hand that be try to drag he across that fatal threshold ; just able to keep himself on this side of that dread portal beyond which there lie so deep a mystery , so profound a darkness . Christmas come ; and there be bell ring , and festive gathering here and there about the great dreary town , and Gilbert Fenton be besiege by friendly invitation from Mrs. Lister , remonstrate with he for his want of common affection in prefer to spend that season among his London friend rather than in the bosom of his family . 

 Gilbert write : to his sister tell she that he have particular business which detain he in town . but have it be otherwise , have he not be bind prisoner to John Saltram 's sick - room , he would scarcely have care to take his part in the conventional feasting and commonplace joviality of Lidford House . have he not dream of a bright home which be to be his at this time , a home beautify by the presence of the woman he love ? ah , what delight to have welcome the sacred day in the holy quiet of such a home , they two alone together , with all the world shut out ! 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 ELLEN CARLEY 's TRIALS 


 Christmas come in the old farm - house near Crosber ; and Ellen Carley , who have no idea of make any troubled thought of her own an excuse for neglect of her household duty , make the sombre panel room bright with holly and ivy , laurel and fir , and busy herself briskly in the confection of such pie and pudding as Hampshire consider necessary to the due honour of that pious festival . there be not many people to see the greenery and bright holly - berry which embellish the grave old room , not many whom Ellen very much care for to taste the pie and pudding ; but duty must be do , and the bailiff 's daughter do she work with a steady industry which know no wavering . 

 her life have be a hard one of late , very lonely since Mrs. Holbrook 's disappearance , and haunt with a presence which be most hateful to she . Stephen Whitelaw have take to come to the Grange much oftener than of old . there be seldom an evening now on which his insignificant figure be not to be see plant by the hearth in the snug little oak - parlour , smoke his pipe in that dull silent way of his , which be calculate to aggravate a lively person like Ellen Carley into some open expression of disgust or dislike . of late , too , his attention have be of a more pronounced character ; he take to drop sly hint of his pretension , and it be impossible for Ellen any long to doubt that he want she to be his wife . More than this , there be a tone of assurance about the man , quiet as he be , which exasperate Miss Carley beyond all measure . he have the air of be certain of success , and on more than one occasion speak of the day when Ellen would be mistress of Wyncomb Farm . 

 on his repetition of this offensive speech one evening , the girl take he up sharply : 

 " not quite so fast , if you please , Mr. Whitelaw , " she say ; " it take two to make a bargain of that kind , just the same as it take two to quarrel . there be many curious change may come in a person 's life , no doubt , and folk never know what be go to happen to they ; but whatever change may come upon I , that be not   one of they . I may live to see the inside of the workhouse , perhaps , when I be too old for service ; but I shall never sleep under the roof of Wyncomb Farmhouse . " 

 Mr. Whitelaw give a spiteful little laugh . 

 " what a spirited one she be , be not   she , now ? " he say with a sneer . " o , you will not , will not   you , my lass ; you turn up that pretty little nose of yours it do turn up a bit of itself , do not   it , though ? at Wyncomb Farm and Stephen Whitelaw ; your father tell a different story , Nell . " 

 " then my father tell a lie story , " answer the girl , blush crimson with indignation ; " and it be not   for want o ' know the truth . he know that , if it be put upon I to choose between your house and the union , I would go to the union and with a light heart too , to be free of you . I do not   want to be rude , Mr. Whitelaw ; for you have   be civil - speak enough to I , and I daresay you be a good friend to my father ; but I can not   help speak the truth , and you have   bring it on yourself with your nonsense . " 

 " she be get a devil of a tongue of her own , you see , Whitelaw , " say the bailiff , with a savage glance at his daughter ; " but she do not   mean above a quarter what she say and when her time come , she will do as she be bid , or she be no child of mine . " 

 " o , I forgive she , " reply Mr. Whitelaw , with a placid air of superiority ; " I be not the man to bear malice against a pretty woman , and to my mind a pretty woman look all the pretty when she be in a passion . I be not in a hurry , you see , Carley ; I can bide my time ; but I shall never take a mistress to Wyncomb unless I can take the one I like . " 

 after this particular evening , Mr. Whitelaw 's presence seem more than ever disagreeable to poor Ellen . he have the air of her fate somehow , sit root to the hearth night after night , and she grow to regard he with a half superstitious horror , as if he possess some occult power over she , and could bend she to his wish in spite of herself . the very quietude of the man become appalling to she . such a man seem capable of accomplish anything by the mere force of persistence , by the negative power that lie in his silent nature . 

 " I suppose he mean to sit in that room night after night , smoke his pipe and star with those pale stupid eye of his , till I change my mind and promise to marry he , " Ellen say to herself , as she meditate angrily on the annoyance of Mr. Whitelaw 's courtship . " he may sit there till his hair turn gray if ever such red hair do turn to anything well than itself and he will find no change in I . I wish Frank be here to keep up my courage . I think if he be to ask I to run away with he , I should be tempt to say yes , at the risk of bring ruin upon both of we ; anything to escape out of the power of that man . but come what may , I will not   endure it much long . I will run away to service soon after Christmas , and father will only have himself to thank for the loss of I . " 

 it be Mr. Whitelaw who appear as principal guest at the Grange on Christmas - day ; Mr. Whitelaw , support on this occasion by a widow cousin of his who have keep house for he for some year , and who bear a strong family likeness to he both in person and manner , and Ellen Carley think that it be impossible for the world to contain a more disagreeable pair . these be the guest who consume great quantity of Ellen 's pie and pudding , and who sit under her festal garland of holly and laurel . she have be especially careful to hang no scrap of mistletoe , which might have afford Mr. Whitelaw an excuse for a practical display of his gallantry ; a fact which do not escape the playful observation of his cousin , Mrs. Tadman . 

 " young lady do not   often forget to put up a bit of mistletoe , " say this matron , " when there be a chance of they they like be by ; " and she glance in a meaning way from Ellen to the master of Wyncomb Farm . 

 " Miss Carley be not   like the generality of young lady , " Mr. Whitelaw answer with a glum look , and his kinswoman be fain to drop the subject . 

 alone with Ellen , sly Mrs. Tadman take occasion to launch out into enthusiastic praise of her cousin ; to which the girl listen in profound silence , closely watch all the time by the woman 's sharp gray eye . and then by degree her tone change ever so little , and she own that her kinsman be not altogether faultless ; indeed it be curious to perceive what numerous shortcoming be coexistent with those shin merit of his . 

 " he have be a good friend to I , " continue the matron ; " that I never have deny and never shall deny . but I have be a good servant to he ; ah ! there be not   a hire servant as would toil and drudge , and watch and pinch , as I have do to please he , and never have have payment from he more than a new gown at Christmas , or a five - pound note after harvest . and of course , if ever he marry , I shall have to look for a new home ; for I know too much of his way , I daresay , for a wife to like to have I about she and I of an age when it seem a hard to have to go among stranger and not have save sixpence , where I might have put by a hundred pound easy , if I have not   be work without wage for a relation . but I have   not be call a servant , you see ; and I suppose Stephen think that be payment enough for my trouble . goodness know I have   save he many a pound , and that he will know when I be go ; for he be near , be Stephen , and it go to his heart to part with a shilling . " 

 " but why should you ever leave he , Mrs. Tadman ? " Ellen ask kindly . " I should not   think he could have a well housekeeper . " 

 " perhaps not , " answer the widow , shake her head with mysterious significance ; " but his wife will not   think that ; and when he be get a wife he will want she to be his housekeeper , and to pinch and scrape as I have   pinch and scrap for he . Lord help she ! " conclude Mrs. Tadman , with a faint groan , which be far from complimentary to her relative 's character . 

 " but perhaps he never will marry , " argue Ellen coolly . 

 " o , yes , he will , Miss Carley , " reply Mrs. Tadman , with another significant movement of her head ; " he be set his heart on that , and he be set his heart on the young woman he mean to marry . " 

 " he can not   marry she unless she be willing to be his wife , any how , " say Ellen , redden a little . 

 " o , he will find a way to make her consent , Miss Carley , depend upon that . whatever Stephen Whitelaw set his mind upon , he will do . but I do not   envy that poor young woman ; for she will have a hard life of it at Wyncomb , and a hard master in my cousin Stephen . " 

 " she must be a very weak - minded young woman if she marry he against her will , " Ellen say laugh ; and then run off to get the tea ready , leave Mrs. Tadman to her meditation , which be not of a lively nature at the good of time . 

 that Christmas - day come to an end at last , after a long evening in the oak parlour enliven by a solemn game at whist and a ponderous supper of cold sirloin and mince pie ; and look out at the wintry moonlight , and the shadowy garden and flat waste of farm - land from the narrow casement in her own room . Ellen Carley wonder what those she love well in the world be do and think of under that moonlit sky . where be Marian Holbrook , that new - find friend whom she have love so well , and whose fate remain so profound a mystery ? and what be Frank Randall do , far away in London , where he have go to fill a responsible position in a large City firm of solicitor , and whence he have promise to return faithful to his first love , as soon as he find himself fairly on the road to a competence wherewith to endow she ? 

 thus it be that poor Ellen keep the close of her Christmas - day , look out over the cold moonlit field , and wonder how she be to escape from the persecution of Stephen Whitelaw . 

 that obnoxious individual have invite Mr. Carley and his daughter to spend New - year's - day at Wyncomb ; a display of hospitality so foreign to his character , that it be scarcely strange that Mrs. Tadman open her eye and star aghast as she hear the invitation give . it have be accept too , much to Ellen 's disgust ; and her father tell she more than once in the course of the ensue week that she be to put on her good gown , and smarten herself up a bit , on New - year's - day . 

 " and if you want a new gown , Nell , I do not   mind give it you , " say the bailiff , in a burst of generosity , and with the prevail masculine idea that a new gown be a panacea for all feminine grief . " you can walk over to Malsham and buy it any afternoon you like . " 

 but Ellen do not care for a new gown , and tell her father so , with a word or two of thank for his offer . she do not desire fine dress ; she have indeed be look over and furbish up her wardrobe of late , with a view to that possible flight of her , and it be to her cotton working gown that she have pay most attention : look forward to begin a hard life in some stranger 's service ready to endure anything rather than to marry Stephen Whitelaw . and of late the conviction have grow upon she that her father be very much in earnest , and that before long it would be a question whether she should obey he , or be turn out of door . she have see his dealing with other people , and she know he to be a passionate determine man , hard as iron in his anger . 

 " I will not   give he the trouble to turn I out of door , " Ellen say to herself . " when I know his mind , and that there be no hope of turn he , I will get away quietly , and find some new home . he have no real power over I , and I have but to earn my own living to be independent of he . and I do not   suppose Frank will think any the bad of I for have be a servant , " think the girl , with something like a sob . it seem hard that she must need sink lower in her lover 's eye , when she be so far beneath he already ; he a lawyer 's son , a gentleman by education , and she an untaught country girl . 

 CHAPTER XXXII 

 the padlocked door AT WYNCOMB 


 the countenance of the new year be harsh , rugged , and gloomy as of a stony - hearted , strong - minded new year , that have no idea of make his wintry aspect pleasant , or brighten the gloom of his infancy with any deceptive gleam of January sunshine . a bitter north wind make a dreary howling among the leafless tree , and sweep across the broad bare field with merciless force a bleak cruel new - year's - day , on which to go out a - pleasuring ; but it be more in harmony with Ellen Carley 's thought than bright weather could have be ; and she go to and fro about her morning 's work , up and down cold windy passage , and in and out of the frozen dairy , unmove by the bitter wind which sweep the crisp wave of dark brown hair from her low brow , and ting the tip of her impertinent little nose with a faint wintry bloom . 

 the bailiff be in very high spirit this first morning of the new year almost uproarious spirit indeed , which vent themselves in snatch of boisterous song , as he bustle backwards and forwards from house to stable , dress in his good blue coat and bright button and a capacious buff waistcoat ; with his ponderous nether limb clothe in knee - cord , and boot with vinegar top ; look altogether the typical british farmer . 

 those riotous burst of song make his daughter shudder . somehow , his gaiety be more alarming to she than his customary morose humour . it be all the more singular , too , because of late William Carley have be especially silent and moody , with the air of a man whose mind be weigh down by some heavy burden so gloomy indeed , that his daughter have question he more than once , entreat to know if he be distress by any secret trouble , anything go wrong about the farm , and so on . the girl have only bring upon herself harsh angry answer by these considerate inquiry , and have be tell to mind her own business , and not pry into matter that in no way concern she . 

 " but it do concern I to see you downhearte , father , " she answer gently . 

 " do it really , my girl ? what ! your father 's something more than a stranger to you , be he ? I should not   have think it , see how you have   go again I in some thing lately . Howsomedever , when I want your help , I shall know how to ask for it , and I hope you will give it freely . I do not   want fine word ; they never pull anybody out of the ditch that I have   hear tell of . " 

 whatever the bailiff 's trouble have be , it seem to be lighten to - day , Ellen think ; and yet that unusual noisy gaiety of his give she an uncomfortable feeling : it do not seem natural or easy . 

 her household work be do by noon , and she dress hurriedly , while her father call for she impatiently from below stand at the foot of the wide bare old staircase , and bawl up to she that they should be late at Wyncomb . she look very pretty in her neat dark - blue merino dress and plain linen collar , when she come trip downstairs at last , flush with the hurry of her toilet , and altogether so bright a creature that it seem a hard thing she should not be set out upon some real pleasure trip , instead of that most obnoxious festival to which she be summon . 

 her father look at she with a grim kind of approval . 

 " you will do well enough , lass , " he say ; " but I should like you to have have something smart than that blue stuff . I would not   have mind a couple of pound or so to buy you a silk gown . but you will be able to buy yourself as many silk gown as ever you like by - and - by , if you play your card well and do not   make a fool of yourself . " 

 Ellen know what he mean well enough , but do not care to take any notice of the speech . the time would soon come , no doubt , when she must take her stand in direct opposition to he , and in the meanwhile it would be bad than foolish to waste breath in idle squabbling . 

 they be to drive to Wyncomb in the bailiff 's gig ; rather an obsolete vehicle , with a yellow body , a mouldy leather apron , and high wheel pick out with red , draw by a tall gray horse that do duty with the plough on ordinary occasion . Stephen Whitelaw 's house be within an easy walk of the Grange ; but the gig be a more dignified mode of approach than a walk , and the bailiff insist on drive his daughter to her suitor 's abode in that conveyance . 

 Wyncomb be a long low gray stone house , of an unknown age ; a spacious habitation enough , with many room , and no less than three staircase , but possess no trace of that fall grandeur which pervade the Grange . it have be nothing well than a farm - house from time immemorial , and have be add to and extend and alter to suit the convenience of successive generation of farmer . it be a gloomy - look house at all time , Ellen Carley think , but especially gloomy under that leaden winter sky ; a house which it would have be almost impossible to associate with pleasant family gathering or the joyous voice of young child ; a grim desolate - look house , that seem to freeze the pass traveller with its cold blank stare , as if its gloomy portal have a voice to say to he , " however lose you may be for lack of shelter , however weary for want of rest , come not here ! " 

 idle fancy , perhaps ; but they be the thought with which Wyncomb Farmhouse always inspire Ellen Carley . 

 " the place just suit its master 's hard miserly nature , " she say . " one would think it have be make on purpose for he ; or perhaps the Whitelaws have be like that from generation to generation . " 

 there be no such useless adornment as a flower - garden at Wyncomb . Stephen Whitelaw care about as much for rose and lily as he care for greek poetry or Beethoven 's sonata . at the back of the house there be a great patch of bare shadowless ground devote to cabbage and potato , with a straggling border of savoury herb ; a patch not even divide from the farm land beyond , but melt imperceptibly into a field of mangel - wurzel . there be no superfluous hedge upon Mr. Whitelaw 's dominion ; not a solitary tree to give shelter to the tired cattle in the long hot summer day . noble old oak and patriarch beech , tall sycamore and grand flowering chestnut , have be stub up remorselessly by that economical agriculturist ; and he be now the proud possessor of one of the ugly and most profitable farm in Hampshire . 

 in front of the gray - stone house the sheep browse up to the parlour window , and on both side of the ill - keep carriage - drive lead from the white gate that open into the meadow to the door of Mr. Whitelaw 's abode . no sweet - scented woodbine or pale monthly rose beautify the front of the house in spring or summer time . the neglected ivy have overgrow one end of the long stone building and creep almost to the ponderous old chimney ; and this decoration , which have come of itself , be the only spot of greenery about the place . five tall poplar grow in a row about a hundred yard from the front window ; these , strange to say , Mr. Whitelaw have suffer to remain . they serve to add a little extra gloom to the settle grimness of the place , and perhaps harmonise with his taste . 

 within Wyncomb Farmhouse be no more attractive than without . the room be low and dark ; the window , make obscure by mean of heavy woodwork and common glass , let in what light they do admit with a grudging air , and seem to frown upon the inmate of the chamber they be suppose to beautify . there be all manner of gloomy passage , and unexpected flight of half - a - dozen stair or so , in queer angle of the house , and there be a prevail darkness everywhere ; for the Whitelaws of depart generation , object to the window tax , have block up every casement that it be possible to block up ; and the stranger explore Wyncomb Farmhouse be always come upon those blank plaster window , which have an unpleasant ghostly aspect , and set he long for a fireman 's hatchet to hew they open and let in the light of day . 

 the furniture be of the old , black with age , worm - eat , ponderous ; queer old four - post bedstead , with dingy hanging of greenish brown or yellowish green , from which every vestige of the original hue have fade long ago ; clumsy bureau , and stiff high - back chair with thick leg and gouty foot , heavy to move and uncomfortable to sit upon . the house be clean enough , and the bare floor of the numerous bed - chamber , which be only enliven here and there with small strip or band of dutch carpet , send up a homely odour of soft soap ; for Mrs. Tadman take a fierce delight in cleaning , and the solitary household drudge who toil under her order have a hard time of it . there be a dismal kind of neatness about everything , and a bleak empty look in the sparsely furnish room , which wear no pleasant sign of occupation , no look of home . the humblest cottage , with four tiny square room and a thatched roof , and just a patch of old - fashioned garden with a sweetbri hedge and rose grow here and there among the cabbage ; would have be a pleasanter habitation than Wyncomb , Ellen Carley think . 

 Mr. Whitelaw exhibit an unwonted liberality upon this occasion . the dinner be a ponderous banquet , and the dessert a noble display of nut and orange , fig and almond and raisin , flank by two old - fashioned decanter of port and sherry ; and both the bailiff and his host do ample justice to the feast . it be a long dreary afternoon of eat and drink ; and Ellen be not sorry to get away from the prim wainscote parlour , where her father and Mr. Whitelaw be solemnly sip their wine , to wander over the house with Mrs. Tadman . 

 it be about four o'clock when she slip quietly out of the room at that lady 's invitation , and the lobby and long passage have a shadowy look in the decline light . there be light enough for she to see the room , however ; for there be no rare collection of old china , no picture or adornment of any kind , to need a minute inspection . 

 " it be a fine old place , be not   it ? " ask Mrs. Tadman . " there be not many farmer can boast of such a house as Wyncomb . " 

 " it be large enough , " Ellen answer , with a tone which imply the reverse of admiration ; " but it be not a place I should like to live in . I be not one to believe in ghost or such nonsense , but if I could have any such foolish thought , I should have they here . the house look as if it be haunt , somehow . " 

 Mrs. Tadman laugh a shrill hard laugh , and rub her skinny hand with an air of satisfaction . 

 " you be not easy to please , Miss Carley , " she say ; " most folk think a deal of Wyncomb ; for , you see , it be only they that live in a house as can know how dull it be ; and as to the place be haunt , I never hear tell of anything of that kind . the Whitelaws be not   the kind of people to come back to this world , unless they come to fetch their money , and then they would come fast enough , I warrant . I use to see a good deal of my uncle , John Whitelaw , when I be a girl , and never do a son take after his father close than my cousin Stephen take after he ; just the same saving prudent way , and just the same masterful temper , always keep under in that quiet way of his . " 

 as Ellen Carley show herself profoundly indifferent to the light and shade of Mr. Whitelaw 's character , Mrs. Tadman do not pursue the subject , but with a gentle sigh lead the way to another room , and so on from room to room , till they have explore all that floor of the house . 

 " there be the attic above ; but you will not   care to see they , " she say . " the shepherd and five other man sleep up there . Stephen think it keep they steadier sleeping under the same roof with their master ; and he be able to ring they up of a morning , and to know when they go to their work . it be weary for I to have to get up and see to their breakfast , but I can not   trust Martha Holden to do that , or she would let they eat we out of house and home . there be no knowing what man like that can eat , and a side of bacon would go as fast as if you be to melt it down to tallow . but you must know what they be , Miss Carley , have to manage for your father . " 

 " yes , " Ellen answer , " I be use to hard work . " 

 " ah , " murmur the matron , with a sigh , " you would have plenty of it , if you come here . " 

 they be at the end of a long passage by this time ; a passage lead to the extreme end of the house , and form part of that ivy - cover wing which seem old than the rest of the building . it be on a low level than the other part , and they have descend two or three step at the entrance to this passage . the ceiling be low too , the beam that support they more massive , the diamond - pan window small and more heavily leaded , and there be a faint musty odour as of a place that be keep shut up and uninhabited . 

 " there be nothing more to see here , " say Mrs. Tadman quickly ; " I have well go back . I do not   know what bring I here ; it be talk , I suppose , make I come without think . there be nothing to show you this way . " 

 " but there be another room there , " Ellen say , point to a door just before they a heavy clumsily - make door , paint black . 

 " that room well , yes ; it be a kind of a room , but have not   be use for fifty year and more , I have   hear say . Stephen keep seed there and such - like . it be always lock , and he keep the key of it . " 

 there be nothing in this closed room to excite either curiosity or interest in Ellen 's mind , and she be turn away from the door with perfect indifference , when she start and suddenly seize Mrs. Tadman 's arm . 

 " Hark ! " she say , in a frightened , breathless way ; " do you hear that ? " 

 " what , child ? " 

 " do you say there be no one in there no one ? " 

 " Lord bless your heart , no , Miss Carley , nor ever be . what a turn you do give I , grasp hold of my arm like that ! " 

 " I hear something in there a footstep . it must be the servant . " 

 " what , Martha Holden ! I should like to see she venture into any room Stephen keep private to himself . besides , that door 's keep lock ; try it , and satisfy yourself . " 

 the door be indeed lock a door with a clumsy old - fashioned latch , securely fasten by a staple and padlock . Ellen try it with her own hand . 

 " be there no other door to the room ? " she ask . 

 " none ; and only one window , that look into the wood - yard , and be almost always block up with the wood pile outside it . you must have hear the muslin bag of seed blow about , if you hear anything . " 

 " I hear a footstep , " say Ellen firmly ; " a human footstep . I tell you the house be haunt , Mrs. Tadman . " 

 " Lor , Miss Carley , I wish you would not   say such thing ; it be enough to make one 's blood turn cold . do come downstairs and have a cup of tea . it be quite dark , I declare ; and you have   give I the shiver with your queer talk . " 

 " I be sorry for that ; but the noise I hear must have be either real or ghostly , and you will not   believe it be real . " 

 " it be the seed - bag , of course . " 

 " they could not   make a noise like human footstep . however , it be no business of mine , Mrs. Tadman , and I do not   want to frighten you . " 

 they go downstairs to the parlour , where the tea - tray and a pair of candle be soon bring , and where Mrs. Tadman stir the fire into a blaze with an indifference to the consumption of fuel which make her kinsman stare , even on that hospitable occasion . the blaze make the dark wainscote room cheerful of aspect , however , which the two candle could not have do , as their light be almost absorb by the gloomy panelling . 

 after tea there be whist again , and a considerable consumption of spirit - and - water on the part of the two gentleman , in which Mrs. Tadman join modestly , with many protestation , and , with the air of take only an occasional spoonful , contrive to empty her tumbler , and allow herself to be persuade to take another by the bailiff , whose joviality on the occasion be inexhaustible . 

 the day 's entertainment come to an end at last , to Ellen 's inexpressible relief ; and her father drive her home in the yellow gig at rather an alarming pace , and with some tendency towards heel over into a ditch . they get over the brief journey safely , however , and Mr. Carley be still in high good humour . he go off to see to the putting up of his horse himself , tell his daughter to wait till he come back , he have something particular to say to she before she go to bed . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 " what must be shall be " 


 Ellen Carley wait in the little parlour , dimly light by one candle . the fire have very nearly go out , and she have some difficulty in brighten it a little . she wait very patiently , wonder what her father could have to say to she , and not anticipate much pleasure from the interview . he be go to talk about Stephen Whitelaw and his hateful money perhaps . but let he say what he would , she be prepared to hold she own firmly , determined to provoke he by no open opposition , unless matter come to an extremity , and then to let he see at once and for ever that her resolution be fix , and that it be useless to persecute she . 

 " if I have to go out of this house to - night , I will not flinch , " she say to herself . 

 she have some time to wait . it have be past midnight when they come home , and it be a quarter to one when William Carley come into the parlour . he be in an unusually communicative mood to - night , and have be superintend the grooming of his horse , and talk to the underling who have wait up to receive he . 

 he be a little unsteady in his gait as he come into the parlour , and Ellen know that he have drink a good deal at Wyncomb . it be no new thing for she to see he in this condition unhappily , and the shrink shudder sensation with which he inspire she to - night be painfully familiar . 

 " it be very late , father , " she say gently , as the bailiff fling himself heavily into an arm - chair by the fire - place . " if you do not   want I for anything particular , I should be glad to go to bed . " 

 " would you , my lass ? " he ask grimly . " but , you see , I do want you for something particular , something uncommon particular ; so there be no call for you to be in a hurry . sit down yonder , " he add , point to the chair opposite his own . " I have   get something to say to you , something serious . " 

 " Father , " say the girl , look he full in the face , pale to the lip , but very firm , " I do not   think you be in a state to talk seriously of anything . " 

 " o , you do not , do not   you , Miss Impudence ? you think I be drunk , perhaps . you will find that , drunk or sober , I have   only one mind about you , and that I mean to be obey . sit down , I tell you . I be not in the humour to stand any nonsense to - night . sit down . " 

 Ellen obey this mandate , utter with a fierceness unusual even in Mr. Carley , who be never a soft - speak man . she seat herself quietly on the opposite side of the hearth , while her father take down his pipe from the chimney - piece , and slowly fill it , with hand that tremble a little over the accustomed task . 

 when he have light the pipe , and smoke about half - a - dozen whiff with a great assumption of coolness , he address himself to his daughter in an altered and conciliate tone . 

 " well , Nelly , " he say , " you have   have a rare day at Wyncomb , and a regular ramble over the old house with Steph 's cousin . what do you think of it ? " 

 " I think it be a queer gloomy old place enough , father . I wonder there be any one can live in it . the dark bare - look room give I the horror . I use to think this house be dull , and seem as if it be haunt ; but it be lively and gay as can be , compare to Wyncomb . " 

 " Humph ! " mutter the bailiff . " you be a fanciful young lady , Miss Nell , and do not   know a fine substantial old house when you see one . life 's come a little too easy to you , perhaps . it might have be well for you if you have see more of the rough side . be your own missus too soon , and missus of such a place as this , have spoil you a bit . I tell you , Nell , there be not   a well house in Hampshire than Wyncomb , though it may not   suit your fanciful notion . do you know the size of Stephen Whitelaw 's farm ? " 

 " no , father ; I have   never think about it . " 

 " what do you say to three hundred acre over three hundred , nigh to four perhaps ? " 

 " I suppose it be a large farm , father . but I know nothing about such thing . " 

 " you suppose it be large , and you know nothing about such thing ! " cry the bailiff , with an air of supreme irritation . " I do not   believe any man be ever plague with such an aggravating daughter as mine . what do you say to be mistress of such a place , girl ? mistress of close upon four hundred acre of land ; not another man 's servant , bind to account for every blade of grass and every ear of corn , as I be , but free and independent mistress of the place , with the chance of be leave a widow by and by , and have it all under your own thumb ; what do you say to that ? " 

 " only the same that I have always say , father . nothing would ever persuade I to marry Stephen Whitelaw . I would rather starve . " 

 " and you shall starve , if you stick to that , " roar William Carley with a blasphemous oath . " but you will not   be such a fool , Nell . you will hear reason ; you will not   stand out against your poor old father and against your own interest . the long and the short of it be , I have   give Whitelaw my promise that you shall be his wife between this and Easter . " 

 " what ! " exclaim Ellen , with a faint cry of horror ; " you do not   mean that you have   promise that , father ! you can not   mean it ! " 

 " I can and do mean it , lass . " 

 " then you have   make a promise that will never be keep . you might have know as much when you make it . I be sure I have   be plain - speak enough about Stephen Whitelaw . " 

 " that be a girl 's silly talk . I do not   think to find you a fool when I come to the point . I let you have your say , and look to time to bring you to reason . Come , Nell , you be not go against your father , be you ? " 

 " I must , father , in this . I would rather die twenty death than marry that man . there be nothing I would not   rather do . " 

 " be not   there ? you would rather see your father in gaol , I suppose , if it come to that ? " 

 " see you in gaol ! " cry the girl aghast . " for heaven 's sake , what do you mean , father ? what fear be there of your be send to prison , because I will not   marry Stephen Whitelaw ? I be not a baby , " she add , with a hysterical laugh ; " you can not   frighten I like that . " 

 " no ; you be a very wise young woman , I daresay ; but you do not   know everything . you have   see I downhearted and out of sort for this last half - year ; but I do not   suppose you have   trouble yourself much about it , except to worry I with silly question sometimes , when I have   not be in the humour to be talk to . thing have be go wrong with I ever since hay - harvest , and I have not   send Sir David sixpence yet for last year 's crop . I have   put he off with one excuse after another from month to month . he be a careless master enough at most time , and never over - sharp with my account . but the time have come when I can not   put he off any long . he want money badly , he say ; and I be afraid he begin to suspect something . any way , he talk of come here in a week or so to look into thing for himself . if he do that , I be ruin . " 

 " but the money , father the money for the crop how have it go ? you have it , have not   you ? " 

 " yes , " the bailiff answer with a groan ; " I have   have it , bad luck . " 

 " and how have it go ? " 

 " what be that to you ? what be the good of my muddling my brain with figure to - night ? it be go , I tell you . you know I be fond of see a race , and never miss anything in that way that come - off within a day 's drive of this place . I use to be pretty lucky once upon a time , when I back a horse or bet against one . but this year thing have go dead against I ; and my bad luck make I savage somehow , so that I go deep than I have   be before , think to get back what I have lose . " 

 " o , father , father ! how could you , and with another man 's money ? " 

 " do not   give I any of your preaching , " the bailiff answer gloomily ; " I can get enough of that at Malsham Chapel if I want it . it be in your power to pull I through this business if you choose . " 

 " how can I do that , father ? " 

 " a couple of hundred pound will set I square . I do not   say there have not   be more take , first and last ; but that would do it . Stephen Whitelaw would lend I the money give it I , indeed , for it come to that the day he get your consent to be his wife . " 

 " and you would sell I to he for two hundred pound , father ? " the girl ask bitterly . 

 " I do not   want to go to gaol . " 

 " and if you do not   get the money from Stephen , what will happen ? " 

 " I can not   tell you that to a nicety . penal servitude for life , most likely . they would call mine a bad case , I daresay . " 

 " but Sir David might be merciful to you , father . you have   serve he for along time . " 

 " what would he care for that ? I have   have his money , and he be not a man that can afford to lose much . no , Nell , I look for no mercy from Sir David ; those careless easy - go man be generally the hard in such a business as this . it be a clear case of embezzlement , and nothing can save I unless I can raise money enough to satisfy he . " 

 " could not   you borrow it of some one else besides Stephen Whitelaw ? " 

 " who else be there that would lend I two hundred pound ? ask yourself that , girl . why , I have not   five pound ' worth of security to offer . " 

 " and Mr. Whitelaw will only lend the money upon one condition ? " 

 " no , curse he ! " cry William Carley savagely . " I have   be at he all this afternoon , when you and that woman be out of the room , try to get it out of he as a loan , without wait for your promise ; but he be too cautious for that . ' the day Ellen give her consent , you shall have the money , ' he tell I ; ' I can not   say anything fair than that or more liberal . ' " 

 " he do not   suspect why you want it , do he , father ? " Ellen ask with a painful sense of shame . 

 " who can tell what he may suspect ? he be as deep as Satan , " say the bailiff , with a temporary forgetfulness of his desire to exhibit this intended son - in - law of his in a favourable light . " he know that I want the money very badly ; I could not   help his know that ; and he must think it be something out of the common that make I want two hundred pound . " 

 " I daresay he guess the truth , " Ellen say , with a profound sigh . 

 it seem to she the bitter trial of all , that her father 's wrong - doing should be know to Stephen Whitelaw . that hideous prospect of the dock and the gaol be far off as yet ; she have not even begin to realise it ; but she do fully realise the fact of her father 's shame , and the blow seem to she a heavy one , heavy than she could bear . 

 for some minute there be silence between father and daughter . the girl sit with her face hide in her hand ; the bailiff smoke his pipe in sullen meditation . 

 " be there no other way ? " Ellen ask at last , in a plaintive despairing tone ; " no other way , father ? " 

 " none , " growl William Carley . " you need not   ask I that question again ; there be no other way ; you can get I out of my difficulty if you choose . I should never have be so venturesome as I be , if I have not   make sure my daughter would soon be a rich woman . you can save I if you like , or you can hold - off and let I go to prison . there be no good preaching about it or argue about it ; you have   get the choice and you must make it . Most young woman in your place would think themselves uncommon lucky to have such a chance as you have   get , instead of make a trouble about it , let alone be able to get their father out of a scrape . but you be your own mistress , and you must do as you please . " 

 " let I have time to think , " the girl plead piteously ; " let I have only a little time to think , father . and you do believe that I be sorry for you , do not   you ? " she ask , kneel beside he and clasp his unwilling hand . " o father , I hope you believe that ! " 

 " I shall know what to believe when I know what you be go to do , " the bailiff answer moodily ; and his daughter know he too well to hope for any more gracious speech than this . 

 she bid he good - night , and go slowly up to her own room to spend the weary wakeful hour in a bitter struggle , pray that she might be enlighten as to what she ought to do ; pray that she might die rather than become the wife of Stephen Whitelaw . 

 when she and her father meet at breakfast in the dull gray January morning , his aspect be even dark than it have be on the previous night ; but he do not ask she if she have arrive at any conclusion . he take his meal in sullen silence , and leave she without a word . 

 they meet again a little before noon , at which hour it be Mr. Carley 's habit to consume a solid luncheon . he take his seat in the same gloomy silence that he have preserve at breakfast - time , but fling an open letter across the table towards his daughter . 

 " be I to read this ? " she ask gently . 

 " yes , read it , and see what I have   get to look to . " 

 the letter be from Sir David Forster ; an angry one , reveal strong suspicion of his agent 's dishonesty , and announce that he should be at the Grange on the fifth of the month , to make a close investigation of all matter connect with the bailiff 's administration . it be a letter that give little hope of mercy , and Ellen Carley feel that it be so . she see that there be no two side to the question : she must save her father by the utter sacrifice of her own feeling , or suffer he to perish . 

 she sit for some minute in silence , with Sir David 's letter in her hand , star blankly at the line in a kind of stupor ; while her father eat cold roast - beef and pickle - cabbage she wonder how he could eat at such a time look up at she furtively every now and then . 

 at last she lay down the letter , and lift her eye to his face . a deadly whiteness and despair have come over the bright soubrette beauty , and even William Carley 's hard nature be move a little by the altered expression of his daughter 's countenance . 

 " it must be as you wish , father , " she say slowly ; " there be no help for it ; I can not see you bring to disgrace . Stephen Whitelaw must have the price he ask for his money . " 

 " that be a good lass , " cry the bailiff , spring up and clasp his daughter in his arm , a most unusual display of affection on his part ; " that be bravely speak , Nell , and you never need repent the choice that will make you mistress of Wyncomb Farm , with a good home to give your father in his old age . " 

 the girl draw herself hastily from his embrace , and turn away from he with a shudder . he be her father , and there be something horrible in the idea of his disgrace ; but there be very little affection for he in her mind . he be willing to sell she into bondage in order to save himself . it be in this light she regard the transaction with Stephen Whitelaw . 

 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 DOUBTFUL INFORMATION 


 the early day of the new year bring little change in John Saltram 's condition . Mr. Mew , and the physician who see he once in every three day , seem perhaps a shade more hopeful than they have be , but would express no decide opinion when Gilbert press they with close questioning . the struggle be still go on the issue still doubtful . 

 " if we could keep the mind at rest , " say the physician , " we should have every chance of do well ; but this constant restlessness , this hyper - activity of the brain , of which you and Mr. Mew tell I , must need make a perpetual demand upon the patient 's physical power . the waste be always go on . we can not look for recovery until we obtain more repose . " 

 several week have pass since the beginning of John Saltram 's illness , and there be no tiding from Mr. Medler . every day Gilbert have expect some communication from that practitioner , only to be disappoint . he have call twice in Soho , and on both occasion have be receive by a shabby - look clerk , who tell he that Mr. Medler be out , and not likely to come home within any definite time . he be inclined to fancy , by the clerk 's manner on his second visit , that there be some desire to avoid an interview on Mr. Medler 's part ; and this fancy make he all the more anxious to see that gentleman . he do not , therefore , allow much time to elapse between this second visit to the dingy chamber in Soho and a third . this time he be more fortunate ; for he see the lawyer let himself in at the street - door with his latch - key , just as the cab that drive he approach the house . 

 the same shabby clerk open the door to he . 

 " I want to see your master , " he say decisively , make a move towards the office - door . 

 the clerk contrive to block his way . 

 " I beg your pardon , sir , I do not   think Mr. Medler 's in ; but I will go and see . " 

 " you need not   give yourself the trouble . I see your master let himself in at this door a minute ago . I suppose you be too busy to hear he come in . " 

 the clerk cough a doubtful kind of cough , significant of perplexity . 

 " upon my word , sir , I believe he be out ; but I will see . " 

 " thank ; I would rather see myself , if you please , " Gilbert say , pass the perturb clerk before that functionary could make up his mind whether he ought to intercept he . 

 he open the office - door and go in . Mr. Medler be sit at his desk , bend over some formidable document , with the air of a man who be profoundly absorb by his occupation ; with the air also , Gilbert think , of a man who have be what be vernacularly call " on the listen . " 

 " good - morning , Mr. Medler , " Gilbert say politely ; " your clerk have such a conviction of your be out , that I have some difficulty in convince he you be at home . " 

 " I have   only just come in ; I suppose Lucas do not   hear I . " 

 " I suppose not ; I have   be here twice before in search of you , as I conclude you have be tell . I have expect to hear from you daily . " 

 " well , yes yes , " reply the lawyer in a meditative way ; " I be aware that I promise to write under certain circumstance . " 

 " be I to conclude , then , that you be silent because you have nothing to communicate ? that you have obtain no tiding of any kind respect Mrs. Holbrook ? " 

 Mr. Medler cough ; a cough no less expressive of embarrassment than that of his clerk . 

 " why , you see , Mr. Fenton , " he begin , cross his leg , and rub his hand in a very deliberate manner , " when I make that promise with reference to Mrs. Holbrook , I make it of course without prejudice to the interest or inclination of my client . I might be free to communicate to you any information I receive upon this subject or I might find myself pledge to withhold it . " 

 Gilbert 's face flush with sudden excitement . 

 " what ! " he cry , " do you mean to say that you have solve the mystery of Marian Holbrook 's fate ? that you know she to be alive safe well , and have keep back the knowledge from I ? " 

 " I have be compel to submit to the wish of my client . I will not say that I have not offer considerable opposition to her desire upon this point , but find her resolution fix , I be bind to respect it . " 

 " she be safe then all this alarm have be needless ? you have see she ? " 

 " yes , Mr. Fenton , I have see she . " 

 " and she she forbid you to let I know of her safety ? she be willing that I should suffer all the anguish of uncertainty as to her fate ? I could not have believe she so unkind . " 

 " Mrs. Holbrook have especial reason for wish to avoid all communication with former acquaintance . she explain those reason to I , and I fully concur in they . " 

 " she might have such reason with regard to other people ; she could have none with reference to I . " 

 " Pardon I , she mention your name in a very particular manner . " 

 " and yet she have have good cause to trust in my fidelity . " 

 " she have a very great respect and esteem for you , I be aware . she say as much to I . but her reason for keep her affair to herself just now be quite apart from her personal feeling for yourself . " 

 " I can not understand this . I be not to see she then , I suppose ; not to be tell her address ? " 

 " no ; I be strictly forbid to disclose her address to any one . " 

 " yet you can positively assure I that she be in safety her own mistress happy ? " 

 " she be in perfect safety her own mistress and as happy as it be possible she can be under the unfortunate circumstance of her married life . she have leave her husband for ever ; I will venture to tell you so much as that . " 

 " I be quite aware of that fact . " 

 " how so ? I think Mr. Holbrook be quite unknown to you ? " 

 " I have learn a good deal about he lately . " 

 " indeed ! " exclaim the lawyer , with a genuine air of surprise . 

 " but of course your client have be perfectly frank in her communication with you upon this subject ? " Gilbert say . " yes ; I know that Mrs. Holbrook have leave her husband , but I do not for a moment suppose she have leave he of her own free will . from my knowledge of her character and sentiment , that be just the last thing I could have imagine possible . there be no quarrel between they ; indeed , she be expect his return with delight at the very time when she leave her home in Hampshire . the thought of share her fortune with he be one of perfect happiness . how can you explain her abrupt flight from he in the face of this ? " 

 " I be not free to explain matter , Mr. Fenton , " answer the lawyer ; " you must be satisfied with the knowledge that the lady about whom you have be so anxious be safe . " 

 " I thank God for that , " Gilbert say earnestly ; " but that , knowledge of itself be not quite enough . I shall be uneasy so long as there be this secrecy and mystery surround her fate . there be something in this sudden abandonment of her husband which be painfully inexplicable to I . " 

 " Mrs. Holbrook may have receive some sudden revelation of her husband 's unworthiness . you be aware that a letter reach she a few hour before she leave Hampshire ? there be no doubt that letter influence her action . I do not mind admit a fact which be so obvious . " 

 " the revelation that could move she to such a step must have be a very startling one . " 

 " it be strong enough to decide her course , " reply the lawyer gravely . 

 " and you can assure I that she be in good hand ? " Gilbert ask anxiously . 

 " I have every reason to suppose so . she be with her father . " 

 Mr. Medler announce this fact as if there be nothing extraordinary in it . Gilbert start to his foot . 

 " what ! " he exclaim ; ' she be with Mr. Nowell the father who neglect she in her youth , who of course seek she now only for the sake of her fortune ? and you call that be in good hand , Mr. Medler ? for my own part , I can not imagine a more dangerous alliance . when do Percival Nowell come to England ? " 

 " a very short time ago . I have only be aware of his return within the last two or three week . his first step on arrive in this country be to seek for his daughter . " 

 " yes ; when he know that she be rich , no doubt . " 

 " I do not think that he be influence by mercenary motif , " the lawyer say , with a calm judicial air . " of course , as a man of the world , I be not give to look at such matter from a sentimental point of view . but I really believe that Mr. Nowell be anxious to find his daughter , and to atone in some measure for his former neglect . " 

 " a very convenient repentance , " exclaim Gilbert , with a short bitter laugh . " and his first act be to steal his daughter from her home , and hide she from all her former friend . I do not   like the look of this business , Mr. Medler ; I tell you so frankly . " 

 " Mr. Nowell be my client , you must remember , Mr. Fenton . I can not consent to listen to any aspersion of his character , direct or indirect . " 

 " and you positively refuse to tell I where Mrs. Holbrook be to be find ? " 

 " I be compel to respect her wish as well as those of her father . " 

 " she have be place in possession of her property , I suppose ? " 

 " yes ; her grandfather 's will have be prove , and the estate now stand in her name . there be no difficulty about that no reason for delay . " 

 " will you tell I if she be in London ? " Gilbert ask impatiently . 

 " pardon I , my dear sir , I be pledge to say nothing about Mrs. Holbrook 's whereabout . " 

 Gilbert give a weary sigh . 

 " well , I suppose it be useless to press the question , Mr. Medler , " he say . " I can only repeat that I do not   like the look of this business . your client , Mr. Nowell , must have a very strong reason for secrecy , and my experience of life have show I that there be very seldom mystery without wrong doing of some kind behind it . I thank God that Mrs. Holbrook be safe , for I suppose I must accept your assurance that she be so ; but until her position be relieve from all this secrecy , I shall not cease to feel uneasy as to her welfare . I be glad , however , that the issue of event have exonerate her husband from any part in her disappearance . " 

 he be glad to know this glad to know that however base a traitor to himself , John Saltram have not be guilty of that deep villany which he have at time be lead to suspect . 

 Gilbert Fenton leave Mr. Medler 's office a happy man than when he have enter it , and yet only half satisfied . it be a great thing to know that Marian be safe ; but he would have wish she in the keeping of any one rather than of he whom the world would have call her natural protector . 

 nor be his opinion of Mr. Medler by any mean an exalt one . no assertion of that gentleman inspire he with heart - feel confidence ; and he have not leave the lawyer 's office long before he begin to ask himself whether there be truth in any portion of the story he have hear , or whether he be not the dupe of a lie . 

 strange that Marian 's father should have return at so opportune a moment ; still more strange that Marian should suddenly desert the husband she have so devotedly love , and cast in her lot with a father of whom she know nothing but his unkindness . what if this man Medler have be lie to he from first to last , and be plot to get old Jacob Nowell 's fortune into his own hand ? 

 " I must find she , " Gilbert say to himself ; " I must be certain that she be in safe hand . I shall know no rest till I have find she . " 

 harass and perplex beyond measure , he walk through the busy street of that central district for some time without know where he be go , and without the faint purpose in his step . then the notion suddenly flash upon he that he might hear something of Percival Nowell at the shop in Queen Anne 's Court , suppose the old business to be still carry on there under the sway of Mr. Tulliver ; and it seem too early yet for the probability of any change in that quarter . 

 Gilbert be in the Strand when this notion occur to he . he turn his step immediately , and go back to wardour - street , and thence to the dingy court where he have first discover Marian 's grandfather . 

 there be no change ; the shop look exactly the same as it have look in the lifetime of Jacob Nowell . there be the same old guineas in the wooden bowl , the same tarnished tankard and teapot on view behind the wire - guard glass , the same obscure hint of untold rich within , in the general aspect of the place . 

 Mr. Tulliver dart forward from his usual lurking - place as Gilbert go in at the door . 

 " o ! " he exclaim , with undisguised disappointment , " it be you , be it , sir ? I think it be a customer . " 

 " I be sorry to disappoint your expectation of profit . I have look in to ask you two or three question , Mr. Tulliver ; that be all . " 

 " any information in my power I be sure I shall be happy to afford , sir . will not   you be pleased to take a seat ? " 

 " how long be it since you see Mr. Nowell , your former employer 's son ? " Gilbert ask , drop into the chair indicate by the shopman , and come at once to the point . 

 Mr. Tulliver be somewhat startled by the question . that be evident , though he be not a man who wear his heart upon his sleeve . 

 " how long be it since I have   see Mr. Nowell Mr. Percival Nowell , sir ? " he repeat , star thoughtfully at his questioner . 

 " yes ; you need not be afraid to speak freely to I ; I know Mr. Nowell be in London . " 

 " well , sir , I have   not see he often since his father 's death . " 

 since his father 's death ! and accord to Mr. Medler , Jacob Nowell 's son have only arrive in England after the old man 's death ; or stay , the lawyer have declare that he have be only aware of Percival 's return within the last two or three week . that be a different thing , of course ; yet be it likely this man could have return , and his father 's lawyer have remain ignorant of his arrival ? 

 Gilbert do not allow the faint expression of surprise to appear on his countenance . 

 " not often since your master 's death : but how often before ? " 

 " well , he use to come in pretty often before the old man die ; but they be both of them precious close . Mr. Percival never let out that he be my master 's son , but I guess as much before he have be here many time . " 

 " how be it that I never come across he ? " 

 " Chance , I suppose ; but he be a deep one . if you have happen to come in when he be here , I daresay he would have contrive to slip away somehow without your see he . " 

 " when do he come here last ? " ask Gilbert . 

 " about a fortnight ago . he come with Mr. Medler , the lawyer , who introduce he formally as my master 's son ; and they take possession of the place between they for Mrs. Holbrook , make an arrangement with I to carry on the business , and make precious hard term too . " 

 " have you see Mrs. Holbrook since that morning when she leave London for Hampshire , immediately after her grandfather 's death ? " 

 " never set eye on she since then ; but she be in London , they tell I , live with her father . she come up to claim the property . I say , the husband must be rather a curious party , must not   he , to stand that kind of thing , and part company with she just when she be come into a fortune ? " 

 " have you any notion where Mrs. Holbrook or her father be to be find ? I should be glad to make you a handsome present if you could enlighten I upon that point . " 

 " I wish I could , sir . no , I have not   the least idea where the gentleman hang out . oyster be not   close than that party . I think he would get his paw upon his father 's money , somehow , when I use to see he hang about this place . but I do not   believe the old man ever mean he to have a sixpence of it . " 

 there be very little satisfaction , to be obtain from Mr. Tulliver ; and except as to the one fact of Percival Nowell 's return , Gilbert leave Queen Anne 's Court little wise than when he enter it . 

 brood upon the revelation of that day as he walk slowly westward , he begin to think that Percival and Mr. Medler have be in league from the time of the prodigal son 's return , and that his own exclusion from the will as executor , and the substitution of the lawyer 's name , have be bring about for no honourable purpose . what would a weak inexperienced woman be between two such man ? or what power could Marian have , once under her father 's influence , to resist his will ? how she have fall under that influence so completely as to leave her husband and her quiet country home , without a word of explanation , be a difficult question to answer ; and Gilbert Fenton meditate upon it with a troubled mind . 

 he walk westward , indifferent where he go in the perplexity of his thought , anxious to walk off a little of his excitement if he could , and to return to his sick charge in the temple in a calm frame of mind . it be something gain , at the bad , to be able to return to John Saltram 's bedside free from that hideous suspicion which have torment he of late . 

 walk thus , he find himself , towards the close of the brief winter day , at the Marble Arch . he go through the gate into the empty Park , and be cross the broad road near the entrance , when an open carriage pass close beside he , and a woman 's voice call to the coachman to stop . 

 the carriage stop so abruptly and so near he that he pause and look up , in natural wonderment at the circumstance . a lady dress in mourning be lean forward out of the carriage , look eagerly after he . a second glance show he that this lady be Mrs. Branston . 

 " how do you do , Mr. Fenton , " she cry , hold out her little black - gloved hand : " what an age since I have see you ! but you have not forget I , I hope ? " 

 " that be quite impossible , Mrs. Branston . if I have not be very much absorb in thought just now , I should have recognise you soon . it be very kind of you to stop to speak to I . " 

 " not at all . I have something most particular to say to you . if you be not in a very great hurry , would you mind get into the carriage , and let I drive you round the Park ? I can not   keep you stand in the road to talk . " 

 " I be in no especial hurry , and I shall be most happy to take a turn round the Park with you . " 

 Mrs. Branston 's footman open the carriage - door , and Gilbert take his seat opposite the widow , who be enjoy her afternoon drive alone for once in a way ; a propitious toothache have keep Mrs. Pallinson within door . 

 " I have be expect to see you for ever so long , Mr. Fenton . why do you never call upon I ? " the pretty little widow begin , with her usual frankness . 

 " I have be so closely occupy lately ; and even if I have not be so , I should have scarcely expect to find you in town at this unfashionable season . " 

 " I do not   care the least in the world for fashion , " Mrs. Branston say , with an impatient shrug of her shoulder . " that be only an excuse of your , Mr. Fenton ; you completely forget my existence , I have no doubt . all my friend desert I now - a - day old friend than you . there be Mr. Saltram , for instance . I have not see he for O , not for ever so long , " conclude the widow , blush in the dusk as she remember that visit of hers to the Temple that dare step which ought to have bring John Saltram so much near to she , but which have result in nothing but disappointment and regret bitter regret that she should have cast her womanly pride into the very dust at this man 's foot to no purpose . 

 but Adela Branston be not a proud woman ; and even in the midst of her regret for have do this foolish thing , she be always ready to make excuse for the man she love , always in danger of commit some new folly in his behalf . 

 Gilbert Fenton feel for the poor foolish little woman , whose fair face be turn to he with such a pleading look in the wintry twilight . he know that what he have to tell she must need carry desolation to her heart know that in the background of John Saltram 's life there lurk even a deep cause of grief for this gentle impressionable little soul . 

 " you will not wonder that Mr. Saltram have not call upon you lately when you know the truth , " he say gravely : " he have be very ill . " 

 Mrs. Branston clasp her hand , with a faint cry of terror . 

 " very ill that mean dangerously ill ? " 

 " yes ; for some time he be in great danger . I believe that be past now ; but I be not quite sure of his safety even yet . I can only hope that he may recover . " 

 hope that he might recover , yes ; but to be a friend of his , Gilbert 's , never more . it be a dreary prospect at well . John Saltram would recover , to seek and reclaim his wife , and then those two must need pass for ever out of Gilbert Fenton 's life . the story would be finish , and his own part of it bald enough to be tell on the fly - leaf at the end of the book . 

 Mrs. Branston bear the shock of his ill news well than Gilbert have expect . there be good material even in the weak of womankind when the heart be womanly and true . 

 she be deeply shocked , intensely sorry ; and she make no attempt to mask her sorrow by any conventional speech or pretence whatsoever . she make Gilbert give she all the detail of John Saltram 's illness , and when he have tell she all , ask he plainly if she might be permit to see the sick man . 

 " do let I see he , if it be possible , " she say ; " it would be such a comfort to I to see he . " 

 " I do not say such a thing be not possible , my dear Mrs. Branston ; but I be sure it would be very foolish . " 

 " o , never mind that ; I be always do foolish thing . it would only be one folly more , and would hardly count in my history . dear Mr. Fenton , do let I see he . " 

 " I do not   think you quite know what you be ask , Mrs. Branston . such a sick - bed as John Saltram 's would be a most painful scene for you . he have be delirious from the beginning of his illness , and be so still . he rarely have an interval of anything like consciousness , and in all the time that I have be with he have never yet recognise I ; indeed , there be moment when I be inclined to fear that his brain may be permanently derange . " 

 " God forbid ! " exclaim Adela , in a voice that be choke with tear . 

 " yes , such a result as that would be indeed a sore calamity . I have every wish to set your mind at ease , believe I , Mrs. Branston , but in John Saltram 's present state I be sure it would be ill - advise for you to see he . " 

 " of course I can not press the question if you say that , " Adela answer despondently ; " but I should have be so glad if you could have allow I to see he . not that I pretend to the small right to do so ; but we be very good friend once before my husband 's death . he have change to I strangely since that time . " 

 Gilbert feel that it be almost cruel to keep this poor little soul in utter ignorance of the truth . he do not consider himself at liberty to say much ; but some vague word of warning might serve as a slight check upon the waste of feeling which be go on in the widow 's heart . 

 " there may be a reason for that change , Mrs. Branston , " he say . " Mr. Saltram may have form some tie of a kind to withdraw he from all other friendship . " 

 " some attachment , you mean ! " exclaim the widow ; ' some other attachment , " she add , forget how much the word betray . " do you think that , Mr. Fenton ? do you think that John Saltram have some secret love - affair upon his mind ? " 

 " I have some reason to suspect as much , from word that he have drop during his delirium . " 

 there be a look of unspeakable pain in Mrs. Branston 's face , which have grow deadly pale when Gilbert first speak of John Saltram 's illness . the pretty childish lip quiver a little , and her companion know that she be suffer keenly . 

 " have you any idea who the lady be ? " she ask quietly , and with more self - command than Gilbert have expect from she . 

 " I have some idea . " 

 " it be no one whom I know , I suppose ? " 

 " the lady be quite a stranger to you . " 

 " he might have trust I , " she say mournfully ; " it would have be kind in he to have trust I . " 

 " yes , Mrs. Branston ; but Mr. Saltram have unfortunately make concealment the policy of his life . he will find it a false policy soon or late . " 

 " it be very cruel of he not to tell I the truth . he might have know that I should look kindly upon any one he care for . I may be a very foolish woman , Mr. Fenton , but I be not ungenerous . " 

 " I be sure of that , " Gilbert say warmly , touch by her candour . 

 " you must let I know every day how your friend be go on , Mr. Fenton , " Adela say after a pause ; " I shall consider it a very great favour if you will do so . " 

 " I will not fail . " 

 they have return to Cumberland - gate by this time , and at Gilbert 's request Mrs. Branston allow he to be set down near the Arch . he call a cab , and drive to the Temple ; while poor Adela go back to the splendid gloom of Cavendish - square , with all the fabric of her future life shatter . 

 until this hour she have look upon John Saltram 's fidelity to herself as a certainty ; she know , now that her hope be slay all at once , what a live thing it have be , and how great a portion of her own existence have take its colour therefrom . 

 it be fortunate for Mrs. Branston that Mrs. Pallinson 's toothache , and the preparation and medicament supply to she by her son all declare to be infallible , and all end in ignominious failure occupy that lady 's attention at this period , to the exclusion of every other thought , or Adela 's pale face might have excite more curiosity than it do . as it be , the matron content herself by make some rather snappish remark upon the folly of go out to drive late on a January afternoon , and retire to administer poultice and cataplasm to herself in the solitude of her own apartment soon after dinner , leave Adela Branston free to ponder upon John Saltram 's cruelty . 

 " if he have only trust I , " she say to herself more than once during those mournful meditation ; " if he have only give I credit for some little good sense and generosity , I should not feel it as keenly as I do . he must have know that I love he yes , I have be weak enough to let he see that and I think that once he use to like I a little in those old happy day when he come so often to Maidenhead . yes , I believe he almost love I then . " 

 and then the thought that this man be lie desperately ill , perhaps in danger of death , blot out every other thought . it be so bitter to know he in peril , and to be powerless to go to he ; bad than useless to he be she by his side , since it be another whose image haunt his wandering brain another whose voice he long to hear . 

 she spend a sleepless melancholy night , and have no rest next day , until a commissionnaire bring she a brief note from Gilbert Fenton , tell she that if there be any change at all in the patient , it be on the side of improvement . 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 BOUGHT with a price 


 Ellen Carley be not allow any time to take back the promise give to her father , have she be inclined to do so . Mr. Whitelaw make his appearance at the Grange early in the evening of the 2nd of January , with a triumphant simper upon his insipid countenance , which be inexpressibly provoke to the unhappy girl . it be clear to she , at first sight of he , that her father have be at Wyncomb that afternoon , and her hateful suitor come secure of success . his wooing be not a very romantic episode in his commonplace existence . he do not even attempt to see Ellen alone ; but after he have be seat for about half - an - hour in the chimney - corner , nestle close to the fire in a manner he much affect , be of a particularly chilly temperament , give to shiver and turn blue on the small provocation , he deliver himself solemnly of the following address : 

 " I make no doubt , Miss Carley , that you have take notice for some time past of my sentiment towards yourself . I have never make any secret of those sentiment , neither have I talk much about they , not be a man of many word . I use to fancy myself the very reverse of a marry man , and I do not   say but what at this moment I think the man who live and die a bachelor do the wise for his own comfort and his own prosperity . but we be not the master of our feeling , Miss Carley . you have grow upon I lately somehow , so that I have   get not to care for my life without you . ask Mrs. Tadman if my appetite have not   fall off within this last six month to a degree that have frighten she ; and a man of my regular habit must be very far go in love , Miss Carley , when his appetite forsake he . from the time I come to know you as a young woman , in the bloom of a young woman 's beauty , I say to myself , ' that be the girl I will marry , and no other . ' your father can bear I out in that , for I say the same to he . and find that I have his approval , I be satisfied to bide my time , and wait till you come round to the same way of thinking . your father tell I yesterday afternoon , and again this afternoon , that you have come round to that way of feeling . I hope he have not   deceive I , Miss Carley . " 

 this be a very long speech for Stephen Whitelaw . it be utter in little gasp or snatch of speech , the speaker stop at the end of every sentence to take breath . 

 Ellen Carley sit on that side of the comfortable round table most remote from Mr. Whitelaw , deadly pale , with her hand clasp before she . once she lift her eye with a piteous look to her father 's face ; but he be smoke his pipe solemnly , with his gaze fix upon the blaze log in the grate , and contrive not to see that mute despairing appeal . he have not look at his daughter once since Stephen Whitelaw 's arrival , nor have he make any attempt to prepare she for this visit , this rapid consummation of the sacrifice . 

 " come , Miss Carley , " say the former rather impatiently , after there have be a dead silence of some minute , " I want to get an answer direct from your own lip . your father have not   be deceive I , have he ? " 

 " no , " Ellen say in a low voice , almost as if the reply be drag from she by some physical torture . " if my father have give you a promise for I , I will keep it . but I do not   want to deceive you , on my part , Mr. Whitelaw , " she go on in a somewhat firm tone . " I will be your wife , since you and my father have settle that it must be so ; but I can promise no more than that . I will be dutiful and submissive to you as a wife , you may be sure only " 

 Mr. Whitelaw smile a very significant smile , which imply that it would be his care to insure his wife 's obedience , and that he be trouble by no doubt upon that head . 

 the bailiff break - in abruptly at this juncture . 

 " Lord bless the girl , what need be there of all this talk about what she will be and what she will not   be ? she will be as good a wife as any woman in England , I will stake my life upon that . she be be a good daughter , as all the world know , and a good daughter be bind to make a good wife . say no more about it , Nell . Stephen Whitelaw know he will make no bad bargain in marry you . " 

 the farmer receive this remark with a loud sniff , expressive of offended dignity . 

 " very likely not , William Carley , " he say ; " but it be not   every man that can make your daughter mistress of such a place as Wyncomb ; and such man as could do it would look for money with a wife , however young and pretty she might be . there be two side to a bargain , you see , William , and I should like thing to be look at in that light between you and I . " 

 " you have   no call to take offence , Steph , " answer the bailiff with a conciliate grin . " I never say you be not   a good match for my girl ; but a pretty girl and a prudent clever housekeeper like Nell be a fortune in herself to any man . " 

 " then the matter 's settle , I suppose , " say Mr. Whitelaw ; " and the soon the wedding come off the well , to my mind . if my wife that be to be want anything in the way of new clothe , I shall be happy to put down a twenty - pound note or I would go as far as thirty towards them . " 

 Ellen shake her head impatiently . 

 " I want nothing new , " she say ; " I have as many thing as I care to have . " 

 " Nonsense , Nell , " cry her father , frown at she in a significant manner to express his disapproval of this folly , and in so do look at she for the first time since her suitor 's advent . " every young woman like new gown , and of course you will take Steph 's friendly offer , and thank he kindly for it . he know that I be pretty hard - up just now , and will not   be able to do much for you ; and it would not   do for Mrs. Whitelaw of Wyncomb to begin the world with a shabby turn - out . " 

 " of course not , " reply the farmer ; " I will bring you the cash to - morrow evening , Nell ; and the soon you buy your wedding - gown the well . there be nothing to wait for , you see . I have   get a good home to take you to . Mother Tadman will march , of course , between this and my wedding - day . I sha'n't   want she when I have   a wife to keep house for I . " 

 " of course not , " say the bailiff . " relation be always dangerous about a place ready to make mischief at every hand 's turn . " 

 " O , Mr. Whitelaw , you will not   turn she out , surely your own flesh and blood , and after so many year of service . she tell I how hard she have work for you . " 

 " ah , that be just like she , " growl the farmer . " I give she a comfortable home for all these year , and then she grumble about the work . " 

 " she do not   grumble , " say Ellen hastily . " she only tell I how faithfully she have serve you . " 

 " yes ; that come to the same thing . I should have think you would have like to be mistress of your house , Nell , without any one to interfere with you . " 

 " Mrs. Tadman be nothing to I , " answer Ellen , who have be by no mean prepossess by that worthy matron ; " but I should not   like she to be unfairly treat on my account . " 

 " well , we will think about it , Nell ; there be no hurry . she be worth her salt , I daresay . " 

 Mr. Whitelaw seem to derive a kind of satisfaction from the utterance of his newly - betroth 's christian name , which come as near the rapture of a lover as such a sluggish nature might be suppose capable of . to Ellen there be something hideous in the sound of her own name speak by those hateful lip ; but he have a sovereign right so to address she , now and for evermore . be she not his good , his chattel , buy with a price , as much as a horse at a fair ? 

 that nothing might be want to remind she of the sordid bargain , Mr. Whitelaw draw a small canvas bag from his pocket presently a bag which give forth that pleasant chink sound that be sweet to the ear of so many as the music of gold and hand it across the hearth to William Carley . 

 " I be as good as my word , you see , " he say with a complacent air of patronage . " there be the favour you ask I for ; I will take your iou for it presently , if it be all the same to you as a matter of form and to be give back to you upon my wedding - day . " 

 the bailiff nod assent , and drop the bag into his pocket with a sigh of relief . and then the two man go on smoke their pipe in the usual stolid way , drop out a few word now and then by way of social converse ; and there be nothing in Mr. Whitelaw 's manner to remind Ellen that she have bind herself to the awful apprenticeship of marriage without love . but when he take his leave that night he approach she with such an evident intention of kiss she as could not be mistake by the most inexperienced of maiden . poor Ellen indulge in no girlish resistance , no pretty little comedy of alarm and surprise , but surrender her pale lip to the hateful salute with the resignation of a martyr . it be well that she should suffer this than that her father should go to gaol . that thought be never absent from her mind . nor be this sacrifice to filial duty quite free from the leaven of selfishness . for her own sake , as much as for her father 's , Ellen Carley would have submit to any penalty rather than disgrace . to have he brand as a thief must need be bad suffering than any life - long penance she might endure in matrimony . to lose Frank Randall 's love be less than to let he learn her father 's guilt . 

 " the daughter of a thief ! " she say to herself . " how he would despise himself for have ever love I , if he know I to be that ! " 

 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 come ROUND 


 Possessed with a thorough distrust of Mr. Medler and only half satisfied as to the fact of Marian 's safety , Gilbert Fenton lose no time in seek professional aid in the work of investigate this perplexing social mystery . he go once more to the metropolitan detective who have be with he in Hampshire , and whose labour there have prove so futile . the task now to be perform seem easy enough . Mr. Proul   Proul be the name of the gentleman engage by Gilbert   have only to discover the whereabouts of Percival Nowell ; a matter of no great difficulty , Gilbert imagine , since it be most likely that Marian 's father have frequent personal communication with the lawyer ; nor be it improbable that he would have business with his agent or representative , Mr. Tulliver , in Queen Anne 's Court . provide with these two address , Gilbert fancy that Mr. Proul 's work must need be easy enough . 

 that gentleman , however , be not disposed to make light of the duty commit to he ; whether from a professional habit of exaggerate the importance of any mission undertake by he , or in perfect singleness of mind , it be not easy to say . 

 " it be a watching business , you see sir , " he tell Gilbert , " and be pretty sure to be tedious . I may put a man to hang about this Mr. Medler 's business all day and every day for a month at a stretch , and he may miss his customer at the last , especially as you can not   give I any kind of description of the man you want . " 

 " surely your agent could get some information out of Medler 's clerk ; it be in his trade to do that kind of thing , be not   it ? " 

 " well , yes , sir ; I do not   deny that I might put a man on to the clerk , and it might answer . on the other hand , such a gentleman 's clerk would be likely to be uncommon well trained and uncommon little trust . " 

 " but we want to know so little , " Gilbert exclaim impatiently ; " only where this man live , and who live with he . " 

 " yes , " murmur Mr. Proul , rub his chin thoughtfully ; " it be not   much , as you say , and it might be get out of the clerk , if the clerk know it ; but as to Mrs. Holbrook have get away from Hampshire and come to London , that be more than I can believe . I work that business hard and close than ever I work any business yet . you tell I to spare neither money nor time , and I do not   spare either ; though it be more a question of time than money , for my expense be light enough , as you know . I do not   believe Mrs. Holbrook could have get away from Malsham station up to the time when I leave Hampshire . I be pretty certain she could not   have leave the place any other way than by rail ; I be more than certain she could not   have be live anywhere in the neighbourhood when I be hunt for she . in short , it come to this I stick to my old opinion , that the poor lady be drown in Malsham river . " 

 this be just what Gilbert , happily for his own peace , could not bring himself to believe . he be ready to confide in Mr. Medler as a model of truth and honesty , rather than admit the possibility of Marian 's death . 

 " we have this man Medler 's positive assertion , that Mrs. Holbrook be with her father , you see , Mr. Proul , " he say doubtfully . 

 " that for Medler 's assertion ! " exclaim the detective contemptuously ; " there be lawyer in London who will assert anything for a consideration . let he produce the lady ; and if he do produce she , I give he leave to say that Thomas Henry Proul be incapable of his business ; or , put it in vulgar English , that T.H.P. be a duffer . of course I shall carry out any business you like to trust I with , Mr. Fenton , and carry it out thoroughly . I will set a watch upon Mr. Medler 's office , and I will circumvent he by mean of his clerk , if I can ; but it be my rooted conviction that Mrs. Holbrook never leave Hampshire . " 

 this be discourage ; and with that ready power to adapt itself to circumstance which be a distinguish characteristic of the human mind , Gilbert Fenton begin to entertain a very poor opinion of the worthy Proul 's judgment . but not know any well person whose aid he could enlist in this business , he be fain to confide his chance of success to that gentleman , and to wait with all patience for the issue of event . much of this dreary interval of perpetual doubt and suspense be spend beside John Saltram 's sick bed . there be strangely mingle feeling in the watcher 's breast ; a pitying regret that struggle continually with his natural anger ; a tender remembrance of past friendship , which he despise as a shameful weakness in his nature , but could not banish from his mind , as he sit in the stillness of the sick - room , watch the helpless creature who have once keep as faithful a vigil for he . 

 to John Saltram 's recovery he look also as to his good chance of restore Marian to her natural home . the influence that he himself be powerless to bring to bear upon Percival Nowell 's daughter might be easily exert by her husband . 

 " she be lure away from he , perhaps , by some specious lie of her father 's , some cruel slander of the husband . there have be bitter word between they . Saltram have betray as much in his wandering talk ; but to the last there be no feeling but love for he in her heart . Ellen Carley be my witness for that ; nothing less than some foul lie could have tempt she away from he . " 

 in the meantime , pende the sick man 's recovery , the grand point be to discover the whereabouts of Marian and her father ; and for this discovery Gilbert be compel to trust to the resource of the accomplished Proul . so eager be he for the result , that if he could have keep a watch upon Mr. Medler 's office with his own eye , he would have do so ; but this be out of the question , and the more prudent course a complete avoidance of the lawyer 's neighbourhood , he could only await the result of his pay agent 's research , in the hope that Mr. Nowell be still in London , and would have need of frequent communication with his late father 's solicitor . the first month of the year drag itself slowly to an end , and the great city undergo all those pleasing alternation , from snow to mud , from the slipperiness of a city pave with plate - glass to the sloppiness of a metropolis ankle - deep in a rich brown compound of about the consistency and colour of mock - turtle soup , which be common to great city at this season ; and still John Saltram linger on in the shabby solitude of his Temple chamber , slowly mend , Mr. Mew declare , towards the end of the month , and in a fair way towards recovery . the time come at last when the fevere mind begin to cease from its perpetual wandering ; when the weary brain , sorely enfeeble by its long interval of unnatural activity , drop suddenly into a state of calm that be akin to apathy . 

 the change come with an almost alarming suddenness . it be at the beginning of February , close upon the dead small hour of a bleak windy night , and Gilbert be keep watch alone in the sick - room , while the professional nurse sleep comfortably on the sofa in the sitting - room . it be his habit now to spend the early part of the night in such duty as this , and to go home to bed between four and five in the morning , at which time the nurse be ready to relieve guard . 

 he have be listen to the dismal howling of the wind , threaten damage to neighbouring chimney - pot of rickety constitution , and think idly of the man that have come and go amidst those old building , and how few amongst they all have leave any mark behind they ; incline to speculate too how many of they have be man capable of well work than they have do , only carelessly indifferent to the doing of it , like he who lie on that bed yonder , with one muscular arm , powerful even in its waste condition , throw wearily above his head , and an undefinable look , that seem half pain , half fatigue , upon his haggard face . 

 suddenly , while Gilbert Fenton be meditate in this idle desultory manner , the sleeper awaken , look full at he , and call he by his name . 

 " Gilbert , " he say very quietly , " be it really you ? " 

 it be the first time , in all his long watch by that bed , that John Saltram have recognise he . the sick man have talk of he often in his delirium ; but never before have he look his former friend in the face with one ray of recognition in his own . an indescribable thrill of pain go through Gilbert 's heart at the sound of that calm utterance of his name . how sweet it would have be to he , what a natural thing it would have seem , to have fall upon his old friend 's breast and weep aloud in the deep joy of this recovery ! but they be friend no long . he have to remember how base a traitor this man have be to he . 

 " yes , John , it be i. " 

 " and you have be here for a long time . o God , how many month have I be lie here ? the time seem endless ; and there have be so many people round I a crowd of strange face all enemy , all against I . and people in the next room that be the bad of all . I have never see they , but I have always know that they be there . they could not deceive I as to that hide behind that door , and watch I as I lie here . you might have turn they out , Gilbert , " he add peevishly ; " it seem a hard thing that you could let they stay there to torment I . " 

 " there have be no one in either of the room , John ; no one but myself and the hire nurse , the doctor , and Mrs. Pratt now and then . these people have no existence out of your sick fancy . you have be very ill , delirious , for a long time . I thank God that your reason have be restore to you ; yes , I thank God with all my heart for that . " 

 " have I be mad ? " the other ask . 

 " your mind have wander . but that have pass at last with the fever , as the doctor hop it might . you be calm now , and must try to keep yourself quiet ; there must be no more talk between we to - night . " 

 the sick man take no notice of this injunction ; but for the time be not disobedient , and lie for some minute star at the watcher 's face with a strange half - vacant smile upon his own . 

 " Gilbert , " he say at last , " what have they do with my wife ? why have she be keep away from I ? " 

 " your wife ? marian ? " 

 " yes Marian . you know her name , surely . do she know that I be ill , and yet stay away from I ? " 

 " be her place here , John Saltram ? that poor girl whom you marry under a false name , whom you try to hide from all the world . have you ever bring she here ? have you ever give she a wife 's license , or a wife 's place ? how many lie have you not tell to hide that which any honest man would have be proud to confess to all the world ? " 

 " yes , I have lie to you about she , I have hide my treasure . but it be for your sake , Gilbert ; it be for the sake of our old friendship . I could not bear to lose you ; I could not bear to stand reveal before you as the weak wretch who betray your trust and steal your promise wife . yes , Gilbert , I have be guilty beyond all measure . I have look you in the face and tell you lie . I want to keep you for my friend ; I could not stand the thought of a life - long breach between we . Gilbert , old friend , have pity on I . I be weak wicked , if you like but I love you very dearly . " 

 he stretch out his bony hand with an appealing gesture , but it be not take . Gilbert sit with his head turn away , his face hide from the sick man . 

 " anything would have be well than the course you choose , " he say at last in a very quiet voice . " if she love you well than I than I , who would have think it so small a thing to lay down my life for her happiness , or to stand aloof and keep the secret of my broken heart while I blest she as the cherished wife of another if you have certain reason to be sure she love you , you should have assert your right to claim her love like a man , and should have be prompt to tell I the bitter truth . I be a man , and would have bear the blow as a man should bear it . but to sneak into my place behind my back , to steal she away from I , to marry she under a false name a step that might go far to invalidate the marriage , by the way and then leave I to piece - out the break story , syllable by syllable , to suffer all the torture of a prolong suspense , all the waste passion of anger and revenge against an imaginary enemy , to find at last that the man I have love and trust , honour and admire beyond all other man throughout the good year of my life , be the man who have strike this secret blow it be the conduct of a villain and a coward , John Saltram . I have no word to speak my contempt for so base a betrayal . and when I remember your pretended sympathy , your friendly counsel o God ! it be the work of a social Judas ; nothing be want but the kiss . " 

 " yes , " the other answer with a faint bitter laugh ; " it be very bad . once have begin , you see , it be but to add one lie to another . anything seem well than to tell you the truth . I fancy your devotion for Marian would wear itself out much soon than it do that you would marry some one else ; and then I think , when you be happy , and have forget that old fancy , I would have confess the truth , and tell you it be your friend who be your rival . it might have seem easy to you to forgive I under those happy circumstance , and so our old friendship might never have be break . I wait for that , Gilbert . do not   suppose that it be not painful to I to act so base a part ; do not   suppose that I do not suffer . I do in a hundred way . you have see the trace of that slow torture in my face . in every way I have sin from my weak desire to win my love and yet keep my friend ; and God know the burden of my sin have be heavy upon I . I will tell you some day if ever I be strong enough for so many word , and if you will hear I out patiently the whole story of my temptation ; how I struggle against it , and only give way at last when life seem insupportable to I without the woman I love . " 

 after this he lie quiet again for some minute , exhaust by have speak so long . all the factitious strength , which have make he loud and violent in his delirium , be go ; he seem as weak as a sick child . 

 " where be she ? " he ask at last ; " why do not   she come to I ? you have not answer that question . " 

 " I have tell you that her place be not here , " Gilbert reply evasively . " you have no right to expect she here , never have give she the right to come . " 

 " no ; it be my own fault . she be in Hampshire still , I suppose . poor girl , I would give the world to see her dear face look down at I . I must get well and go back to she . when shall I be strong enough to travel ? to - morrow , or if not to - morrow , the next day ; surely the next day eh , Gilbert ? " 

 he raise himself in the bed in order to read the answer in Gilbert 's face , but fall back upon the pillow instantly , exhaust by the effort . memory have only return to he in part . it be clear that he have forget the fact of Marian 's disappearance , a fact of which he have seem half - conscious long ago in his delirium . 

 " how do you find out that Marian be my wife ? " he ask presently , with perfect calmness . " who betray my secret ? " 

 " your own lip , in your delirious talk of she , which have be incessant ; and if collateral evidence be need to confirm your word , this , which I find the other day mark a place in your Shakespeare . " 

 Gilbert take a scrap of ribbon from his breast , a ribbon with a blue ground and a rosebud on it , a ribbon which he have choose himself for Marian , in the brief happy day of their engagement . 

 John Saltram contemplate the scrap of colour with a smile that be half sombre , half ironical . 

 " yes , it be her , " he say ; ' she wear it round that slim swan 's throat of her ; and one morning , when I be leave she in a particularly weak frame of mind , I take it from her neck and bring it away in my bosom , for the sake of have something about I that she have wear ; and then I put it in the book , you see , and forget all about it . a fitting emblem of my love full of passion and fervour to - day , at the point of death to - morrow . there have be time when I would have give the world to undo what I have do , when my life seem blight by this foolish marriage ; and again , happy moment , when my wife be all the universe to I , and I have not a thought or a dream beyond she . God bless she ! you will let I go to she , Gilbert , the instant I be able to travel , as soon as I can drag myself anyhow from this bed to the railway ? you will not stand between I and my love ? " 

 " no , John Saltram ; God know , I have never think of that . " 

 " and you know I be a traitor you know it be my work that have destroy your scheme of happiness and yet have be beside I , watch I patiently through this wretched illness ? " 

 " that be a small thing to do you do as much , and a great deal more , for I , when I be ill in Egypt . it be a mere act of duty . " 

 " not of friendship . it be christian charity , eh , Gilbert ? if thine enemy hunger , feed he ; if he thirst , give he drink ; and so on . it be not the act of a friend ? " 

 " no , John Saltram , between you and I there can never again be any such word as friendship . what little I have do for you I think I would have do for a stranger , have I find a stranger as helpless and unfriende as I find you . I be quite sure that to have do less would have be to neglect a sacred duty . there be no question of obligation . till you be on your foot again , a strong man , I will stand by you ; when that time come , we part for ever . " 

 John Saltram sink back upon his pillow with a heavy sigh , but utter no protest against this sentence . and this be all that come of Gilbert 's vengeful passion against the man who have wrong he ; this be the end of a long - cherish anger . " a lame and impotent conclusion , " perhaps , but surely the only end possible under the circumstance . he could not wage war against a feeble creature , whose hold on life be still an uncertainty ; he could not forget his promise to Marian , that no harm should come to her husband through any act of his . so he sit quietly by the bedside of his prostrate foe , watch he silently as he fall into a brief restless slumber , and administer his medicine when he wake with a hand that be as gentle as a woman 's . 

 between four and five o'clock the nurse come in from the next room to take her place , refresh by a sleep of several hour ; and then Gilbert depart in the chill gloom of the winter 's morning , still as dark as night , depart with his mind lighten of a great load ; for it have be very terrible to he to think that the man who have once be his friend might go down to the grave without an interval of reason . 

 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 a full CONFESSION 


 Gilbert do not go to the Temple again till he have finish his day 's work at St. Helen 's , and have eat his modest dinner at a tavern in Fleet - street . he find that Mr. Mew have already pay his second visit to the sick - room , and have pronounce himself much relieve and delight by the favourable change . 

 " I have no fear now , " he have say to the nurse . " it be now only a question of get back the physical strength , which have certainly fall to a very low ebb . perfect repose and an entire freedom from care be what we have to look to . " 

 this the nurse tell Gilbert . " he have be very restless all day , " she add , " though I have   do what I could to keep he quiet . but he worry himself , now that his sens have come back , poor gentleman ; and it be not   easy to soothe he any way . he keep on wonder when he will be well enough to move , and so on , over and over again . once , when I leave the room for a minute and go back again , I find he attempt to get out of bed only to try his strength , he say . but he be no more strength than a new - bear baby , poor soul , and it will be week before he be able to stir . if he worry and fret , he will put himself back for a certainty ; but I daresay you will have more influence over he than I , sir , and that you may be able to keep he quiet . " 

 " I doubt that , " answer Gilbert ; " but I will do my good . have he be delirious to - day ? " 

 " no , sir , not once ; and of course that be a great thing gain . " 

 a feeble voice from the inner room call Gilbert by name presently , and he go in at its bidding . 

 " be that you , Gilbert ? come in , for pity 's sake . I be sure of the voice . so you have come on your errand of charity once more . I be very glad to see you , though you be not my friend . sit down , minister Christian , sit by my side ; I have some question to ask you . " 

 " you must not talk much , John . the doctor insist upon perfect tranquillity . " 

 " he might just as well insist upon my make myself Emperor of all the Russias ; one demand would be about as reasonable as the other . how long have I be lie here like a log a troublesome log , by the way ; for I find from some hint the nurse drop to - day as to the blessing of my recovery , that I have be somewhat give to violence ; how long have I be ill , Gilbert ? " 

 " a very long time . " 

 " give I a categorical answer . how many week and day ? " 

 " you be take ill about the middle of December , and we be now in the first week of February . " 

 " nearly two month ; and in all that time I have be idle ergo , no remittance from publisher . how have I live , Gilbert ? how have the current expense of my illness be pay ? and the child of Israel have they not be clamorous ? there be a bill due in January , I know . I be work for that when I get pull up . how be it that my vile carcass be not in their hand ? " 

 " you need give yourself no trouble ; the bill have be take up . " 

 " by you , of course ? yes ; you do not deny it . and you have be spend your money day by day to keep I alive . but then you would have do as much for a stranger . great heaven , what a mean hound I seem to myself , as I lie here and think what you have do for I , and how I have act towards you ! " he turn himself in his bed with a great effort , and lie with his face to the wall . " let I hide my face from you , " he say ; " I be a shameful creature . " 

 " believe I , once more , there be not the faint shadow of an obligation , " Gilbert respond eagerly ; " I can very well afford anything I have do ; shall never feel myself the poor for it by a sixpence . I can not bear that these thing should be speak of between we . you know how often I have beg you to let I help you in the past , and how wounded I have be by your refusal . " 

 " yes , when we be friend , before I have ever wrong you . if I have take your help then , I should hardly have feel the obligation . but , stay , I be not such a pauper as I seem . my wife will have money ; at least you tell I that the old man be rich . " 

 " yes , your wife will have money , plenty of money . you have no need to trouble yourself about financial matter . you have only to consider what the doctor have say . your recovery depend almost entirely upon your tranquillity of mind . if you want to get well speedily , you must remember this . " 

 " I do want to get well . I be in a fever to get well ; I want to see my wife . but my recovery will be evidently a tedious affair . I can not wait to see she till I be strong enough to travel . why should she not come to I here ? she can she must come . write to she , Gilbert ; tell she how I languish for her presence ; tell she how ill I have be . " 

 " yes ; I will write by and by . " 

 " by and by ! your tone tell I that you do not mean what you say . there be something you be keep from I . o , my God , what be that happen before I be ill ? my wife be missing . I be hunt for she without rest for nearly a week ; and then they tell I she be drown , that there be no hope of find she . be that real , Gilbert ? or only a part of my delirium ? speak to I , for pity 's sake . be it real ? " 

 " yes , John ; your perplexity and trouble be real , but unnecessary ; your wife be safe . " 

 " safe ? where ? " 

 " she be with her father . " 

 " she do not even know that her father be live . " 

 " no , not till very lately . he have come home from America , it seem , and Marian be now under his protection . " 

 " what ! she could desert I without a word of warning without the faint hint of her intention to go to a father of whom she know nothing , or nothing that be not eminently to his discredit ! " 

 " there may have be some strong influence bring to bear to induce she to take such a step . " 

 " what influence ? " 

 " do not worry yourself about that now ; make all haste to get well , and then it will be easy for you to win she back . " 

 " yes ; only place I face to face with she , and I do not think there would be much question as to that . but that she should forsake I of her own free will ! it be so unlike my marian my patient , long - suffer marian ; I can scarcely believe such a thing possible . but that question can soon be put at rest . write to she , Gilbert ; tell she that I have be at death 's door ; that my chance of recovery hang upon her will . Father or no father , that will bring she to my side . " 

 " I will do so , directly I know her address . " 

 " you do not know where she be ? " 

 " not yet . I be expect to obtain that information every day . I have take measure to ascertain where she be . " 

 " and how do you know that she be with her father ? " 

 " I have the lawyer 's authority for that ; a lawyer whom the old man , Jacob Nowell , trust , whom he leave sole executor to his will . " 

 it be necessary above all thing that John Saltram 's mind should be set at rest ; and in order to secure this result Gilbert be fain to affect a supreme faith in Mr. Medler . 

 " you believe this man , Gilbert ? " the invalid ask anxiously . 

 " of course . he have no reason for deceive I . " 

 " but why withhold the father 's address ? " 

 " it be easy enough to conjecture his reason for that ; a dread of your influence rob he of his daughter . her fortune have make she a prize worth dispute , you see . it be natural enough that the father should wish to hide she from you . " 

 " for the sake of the money ? yes , I suppose that be the beginning and end of his scheme . my poor girl ! no doubt he have tell she all manner of lie about I , and so contrive to estrange that faithful heart . will you insert an advertisement in the Times , Gilbert , under initial , tell she of my illness , and entreat she to come to I ? " 

 " I will do so if you like ; but I daresay Nowell will be cautious enough to keep the advertisement - sheet away from she , or to watch it pretty closely , and prevent she see anything we may insert . I be take mean to find they , John . I must entreat you to rest satisfied with that . " 

 " rest satisfied , when I be uncertain whether I shall ever see my wife again ! that be a hard thing to do . " 

 " if you harass yourself , you will not live to see she again . trust in I , John ; Marian 's safety be as dear to I as it can be to you . I be her swear friend and brother , her self - appoint guardian and defender . I have skilled agent at work ; we shall find she , rely upon it . " 

 it be a strange position into which Gilbert find himself drift ; the consoler of this man who have so basely rob he . they could never be friend again , these two ; he have tell himself that , not once , but many time during the weary hour of his watch beside John Saltram 's sick - bed . they could never more be friend ; and yet he find himself in a manner compel to perform the office of friendship . nor be it easy to preserve anything like the neutral standing which he have design for himself . the life of this sometime friend of his hang by so frail a link , he have such utter need of kindness ; so what could Gilbert do but console he for the loss of his wife , and endeavour to inspire he with a hopeful spirit about she ? what could he do less than friendship would have do , although his affection for this old friend of his youth have perish for evermore ? the task of consolation be not an easy one . once restore to his right mind , with a vivid sense of all that have happen to he before his illness , John Saltram be not to be beguile into a false security . the idea that his wife be in dangerous hand pursue he perpetually , and the consciousness of his own impotence to rescue she goad he to a kind of mental fever . 

 " to be chain here , Gilbert , lie on this odious bed like a dog , when she need my help ! how be I to bear it ? " 

 " like a man , " the other answer quietly . " be you as well as I be this moment , there be nothing you could do that I be not do . do you think I should sit idly here , if the good measure have not be take to find your wife ? " 

 " forgive I . yes ; I have no doubt you have do what be good . but if I be astir , I should have the sense of do something . I could urge on those people you employ , work with they even . " 

 " you would be more likely to hinder than to assist they . they know their work , and it be a slow drudge business at good , which require more patience than you possess . no , John , there be nothing to be do but to wait , and put our trust in Providence and in time . " 

 this be a sermon which Gilbert Fenton have occasion to preach very often in the slow weary day that follow John Saltram 's recovery of his right sens . the sick man , toss to and fro upon the bed he loathe with such an utter loathing , could not refrain from piteous bewailing of his helplessness . he be not a good subject for sickness , have never serve his apprenticeship to a sick - bed until now , and the ordeal seem to he a very long one . in all that period of his delirious wandering there have be an exaggerated sense of time in his mind . it seem to he that he have be lie there for year , lose in a labyrinth of demented fancy . look back at that time , now that his reason have be restore to he , he be able to recall his delusion one by one , and it be very difficult for he to understand , even now , that they be all utterly groundless , the mere vagabondage of a wandering brain ; that the people he have fancy close at hand , lurk in the next room he have rarely see they close about his bed , but have be possess with a vivid sense of their neighbourhood have be never near he ; that the old friend and associate of his boyhood , who have be amongst these fancied visitor , be for the great number dead and pass away long before this time ; that he have be , in every dream and every fancy of that weary interval , the abject slave of his own hallucination . little by little his strength come back to he by very slow degree so slowly , indeed , that the process of recovery might have sorely try the patience of any man less patient than Gilbert . there come a day at last when the convalescent be able to leave his bed for an hour or so , just strong enough to crawl into the sitting - room with the help of Gilbert 's arm , and to sit in an easy - chair , prop up by pillow , very feeble of aspect , and with a wan haggard countenance that plead mutely for pity . it be impossible to harbour revengeful feeling against a wretch so stricken . 

 Mr. Mew be much elated by this gradual improvement in his patient , and confess to Gilbert , in private , that he have never hop for so happy a result . " nothing but an iron constitution , and your admirable care , could have carry our friend through such an attack , sir , " he say decisively . " and now that we be get round a little , we must have change of air change of air and of scene ; that be imperatively necessary . Mr. Saltram talk of a loathing for these room ; very natural under the circumstance . we must take he away directly he can bear the removal . " 

 " I rather doubt his willingness to stir , " Gilbert answer , thoughtfully . " he have anxiety that be likely to chain he to London . " 

 " if there be any objection of that kind it must be conquer , " Mr. Mew say . " a change will do your friend more good than all the physic I can give he . " 

 " where would you advise I to take he ? " 

 " not very far . he could not   stand the fatigue of a long journey . I should take he to some quiet little place near town the more countrifie the well . it be not   a very pleasant season for the country ; but in spite of that , the change will do he good . " 

 Gilbert promise to effect this arrangement , as soon as the patient be well enough to be move . he would run down to Hampton or Kingston , he tell Mr. Mew , in a day or two , and look for suitable lodging . 

 " Hampton or Kingston by all mean , " reply the surgeon cheerily . " both very pleasant place in their way , and as mild as any neighbourhood within easy reach of town . do not   go too near the water , and be sure your room be dry and airy that be the main point . we might move he early next week , I fancy ; if we get he up for an hour or two every day in the interval . " 

 Gilbert have keep Mrs. Branston very well inform as to John Saltram 's progress , and that impetuous little woman have send a ponderous retainer of the footman specie to the Temple daily , laden now with hothouse grape , and anon with dainty jelly , clear turtle - soup , or delicate preparation of chicken , blancmange and iced drink ; the conveyance whereof be a sore grievance to the ponderous domestic , in spite of all the aid to be derive from a liberal employment of cab . Adela Branston have send these thing in defiance of her outraged kinswoman , Mrs. Pallinson , who be not slow to descant upon the impropriety of such a proceeding . 

 " I wonder you can talk in such a way , when you know how friendless this poor Mr. Saltram be , and how little trouble it cost I to do as much as this for he . but I daresay the good Samaritan have some one at home who object to the waste of that twopence he pay for the poor traveller . " 

 Mrs. Pallinson give a little shriek of horror on hear this allusion , and protest against so profane a use of the gospel . 

 " but the gospel be mean to be our guide in common thing , be not   it , Mrs. Pallinson ? however , there be not the least use in your be angry ; for I mean to do what I can for Mr. Saltram , and there be no one in the world could turn I from my intention . " 

 " indeed ! " cry the eld lady , indignantly ; " and when he recover you mean to marry he , I daresay . you will be weak enough to throw away your fortune upon a profligate and a spendthrift , a man who be certain to make any woman miserable . " 

 and hereupon there arise what Sheridan call " a very pretty quarrel " between the two lady , which go very near to end in Mrs. Pallinson 's total withdrawal from Cavendish - square . very nearly , but not quite , to that agreeable consummation do matter proceed ; for , on the very verge of the final word which could have speak the sentence of separation , Mrs. Pallinson be suddenly melt , and declare that nothing , no outrage of her feeling " and heaven know how they have be tread on this day , " the injured matron add in parenthesis should induce she to desert her dear Adela . and so there be a hollow peace patch up , and Mrs. Branston feel that the blessing of freedom , the delightful relief of an escape from pallinsonian influence , be not yet to be her . directly she hear from Gilbert that change of air have be order for the patient , she be eager to offer her villa near Maidenhead for his accommodation . " the house be always keep in apple - pie order , " she write to Gilbert ; " and I can send down more servant to make everything comfortable for the invalid . " 

 " I know he be fond of the place , " she add in conclusion , after set out all the merit of the villa with feminine minuteness ; " at least I know he use to like it , and I think it would please he to get well there . I can only say that it would make I very happy ; so do arrange it , dear Mr. Fenton , if possible , and oblige yours ever faithfully , ADELA BRANSTON . " 

 " poor little woman , " murmur Gilbert , as he finish the letter . " no ; we will not impose upon her kindness ; we will go somewhere else . well for she that she should see and hear but little of John Saltram for all time to come ; and then the foolish fancy will wear itself out perhaps , and she may live to be a happy wife yet ; unless she , too , be afflict with the fatal capability of constancy . be that such a common quality , I wonder ? be there many so luckless as to love once and once only , and who , set all their hope upon one cast , lose all if that be fatal ? " 

 Gilbert tell John Saltram of Mrs. Branston 's offer , which he be as prompt to decline as Gilbert himself have be . " it be like she to wish it , " he say ; " but no , I should feel myself a double traitor and impostor under her roof . I have do she wrong enough already . if I could have love she , Gilbert , all might have be well for you and I . God know I try to love she , poor little woman ; and she be just the kind of woman who might twine herself about any man 's heart graceful , pretty , gracious , tender , bright and intelligent enough for any man ; and not too clever . but my heart she never touch . from the hour I see that other , I be lose . I will tell you all about that some day . no ; we will not go to the villa . write and give Mrs. Branston my good thank for the generous offer , and invent some excuse for decline it ; that be a good fellow . " 

 by - and - by , when the letter be write , John Saltram say , " I do not want to go out of town at all , Gilbert . it be no use for the doctor to talk ; I can not   leave London till we have news of Marian . " 

 Gilbert have be prepare for this , and set himself to argue the point with admirable patience . Mr. Proul 's work would go on just as well , he urge , whether they be in London or at Hampton . a telegram would bring they any tiding as quickly in the one place as the other . " I be not ask you to go far , remember , " he add . " you will be within an hour 's journey of London , and the doctor declare this change be indispensable to your recovery . you have tell we what a horror you have of these room . " 

 " yes ; I doubt if any one but a sick man can understand his loathing of the scene of his illness . that room in there be fill with the shadow that haunt I in all those miserable night when the fever be at its bad , and I live amidst a crowd of phantom . yes , I do most profoundly hate that room . as for this matter of change of air , Gilbert , dispose of I as you please ; my worthless existence belong to you . " 

 Gilbert be quick to take advantage of this concession . he go down to Hampton next day , and explore the neighbourhood on both side of the Thames . his choice fall at last on a pretty little house within a stone 's throw of the Palace gate , the back window whereof look out upon the now leafless solitude of Bushy Park , and where there be a comfortable - look rosy - faced landlady , whose countenance be very pleasant to contemplate after the somewhat lachrymose visage of Mrs. Pratt . here he find he could have all the accommodation he require , and hither he promise to bring the invalid early in the following week . 

 there be as yet no tiding worth speak of from Mr. Proul . that distinguished member of the detective profession wait upon Gilbert Fenton with his budget twice a week , but the budget be a barren one . Mr. Proul 's agent pronounce Mr. Medler 's clerk the tough individual it have ever be his lot to deal with . no amount of treat at the public - house round the corner and the agent have ascend from the primitive simplicity of a pint of porter to the high flight in the art of compound liquor could exert a soften influence upon that rigid nature . either the clerk know nothing about Percival Nowell , or have be so well school as to disclose nothing of what he know . money have be employ by the agent , as well as drink , as a means of temptation ; but even every insidious hint of possible gain have fail to move the ill - pay underling to any revelation . 

 " it be my belief the man know nothing , or else I should have have it out of he by hook or by crook , " Mr. Proul 's agent tell he , and Mr. Proul repeat to his client . 

 this first agent have thus come to grief , and have perhaps make himself a suspect person in the eye of the Medler office by his manoeuvre , a second spy have be place to keep close watch upon the house , and to follow any person who at all correspond with the detective idea of Mr. Nowell . it could be no more than an idea , unfortunately , since Gilbert have be able to give the accomplished Proul no description of the man he want to trace . above all , the spy be to take special note of any lady who might be see to enter or leave the office , and to this end he be furnish with a close description of Marian . 

 Gilbert call upon Mrs. Branston before carry John Saltram out of town ; he fancy that her offer of the Maidenhead villa would be well acknowledge personally than by a letter . he find the pretty little widow sorely disappoint by Mr. Saltram 's refusal to occupy her house , and it be a little difficult to explain to she why they both prefer other quarter for the convalescent . 

 " why will he not accept the small favour from I ? " Adela Branston ask plaintively . " he ought to know that there be no arriere pensťe in any offer which I make he that I have no wish except for his welfare . why do he not trust I a little more ? " 

 " he will do so in future , I think , Mrs. Branston , " Gilbert answer gravely . " I fancy he have learn the folly and danger of all underhand policy , and that he will put more faith in his friend for the rest of his life . " 

 " and he be really much well , quite out of danger ? do the doctor say that ? " 

 " he be as much out of danger as a man can well be whose strength have all be waste in a perilous illness . he have that to regain yet , and the recovery will be slow work . of course in his condition a relapse would be fatal ; but there be no occasion to apprehend a relapse . " 

 " thank heaven for that ! and you will take care of he , Mr. Fenton , will you not ? " 

 " I will do my very well . he save my life once ; so you see that I owe he a life . " 

 the invalid be convey to Hampton on a bright February day , when there be an agreeable glimpse of spring sunshine . he go down by road in a hire brougham , and the journey seem a long one ; but it be an unspeakable relief to John Saltram to see the suburban road and green field after the long imprisonment of the Temple , a relief that move he almost to tear in his extreme weakness . 

 " could you believe that a man would be so childish , Gilbert ? " he say apologetically . " it might have be a good thing for I to have die in that dismal room , for heaven only know what heavy sorrow lie before I in the future . yet the sight of these common thing touch I more keenly than all the glory of the Jungfrau touch I ten year ago . what a gay bright - look world it be ! and yet how many people be happy in it ? how many take the right road ? I suppose there be a right road by which we all might travel , if we only know how to choose it . " 

 he feel the physical weariness of the journey acutely , but utter no complaint throughout the way ; though Gilbert could see the pale face grow paler , the sunken cheek more pinched of aspect , as they go on . to the last he pronounce himself delighted by that quiet progress through the familiar landscape ; and then have reach his destination , have barely strength to totter to a comfortable chintz - cover sofa in the bright - look parlour , where he faint away . the professional nurse have be dismiss before they leave London , and Gilbert be now the invalid 's only attendant . the woman have perform her office tolerably well , after the manner of her kind ; but the presence of a sick nurse be not a cheer influence , and John Saltram be infinitely relieve by her disappearance . 

 " how good you be to I , Gilbert ! " he say , that first evening of his sojourn at Hampton , after he have recover from his faint , and be lie on the sofa sip a cup of tea . " how good ! and yet you be my friend no long ; all friendship be at an end between we . well , God know I be as helpless as that man who fall among thief ; I can not choose but accept your bounty . " 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 an ILL - OMENED wedding 


 after that promise wring from she by such a cruel agony , that fatal bond make between she and Stephen Whitelaw , Ellen Carley 's life seem to travel past she as if by some enchantment . time lose its familiar sluggishness ; the long industrious day , that have be so slow of old , fly by the bailiff 's daughter like the shadow from a magic - lantern . at the first , after that desperate miserable day upon which the hateful word be utter that be to bind she for life to a detest master , the girl have tell herself that something must happen to prevent the carrying out of this abhorrent bargain . something would happen . she have a vague faith that Providence would interfere somehow to save she . day after day she look into her father 's face , think that from he , perhaps , might come some sign of wavering , some hint of possible release . vain hope . the bailiff have exact the sacrifice , pretend to think his daughter 's welfare secure by that very act . he do not hesitate to congratulate she on her good fortune , and to protest , with an accustomed oath , that there be not a sensible woman in England who would not envy she so excellent a match . once poor Ellen , always impetuous and plain - speak , lose all patience with he , and ask how he dare to say such thing . 

 " you know that I hate this man , father ! " she cry passionately ; " and that I hate myself for what I be go to do . you know that I have promise to be his wife for your sake , for your sake only ; and that if I could have save you from disgrace by give you my life , I should have do it gladly to escape this much great sacrifice . never speak to I about Stephen Whitelaw again , father , unless you want to drive I mad . let I forget what sin I be go to commit , if I can ; let I go on blindfold . " 

 it be to be observe that from the hour of her betrothal Ellen Carley as far as possible avoid her father 's companionship . she work more busily than ever about the big old house , be never tired of polish the little - use furniture and dust the tenantless bed - chamber ; she seem , indeed , to be infect with Mrs. Tadman 's passion for superhuman cleanliness . to her dairy duty also she devote much more time than of old ; anything to escape the parlour , where her father sit idle for a considerable portion of the day , smoke his pipe , and drink rather more than be good for he . nor do Mr. Carley , for his part , appear to dislike this tacit severance between his daughter and himself . as the foolish young woman choose to accept good fortune in a perverse spirit , it be well that they two should see as little of each other as possible . every evening find Mr. Whitelaw a punctual visitor in the snug panel parlour , and at such time the bailiff insist upon his daughter 's presence ; she be oblige to sit there night after night , stitch monotonously at some unknown calico garment which might well from the state of mind of the worker have be her winding - sheet ; or darn one of an inexhaustible basket of woollen stocking belong to her father . it be her irksome duty to be there , ready to receive any awkward compliment of her silent lover 's , ready to acquiesce meekly in his talk of their approach wedding . but at all other time Mr. Carley be more than content with her absence . 

 at first the bailiff have make a feeble attempt to reconcile his daughter to her position by the common bribe of fine clothe . he have extort a sum of money from Stephen Whitelaw for this purpose , and have give that sum , or a considerable part of it , to his daughter , bid she expend it upon her wedding finery . the girl take the money , and spend a few pound upon the furbishing - up of her wardrobe , which be by no mean an extensive one ; but the remain ten - pound note she lay by in a secret place , determine on no account to break in upon it . 

 " the time may come when all my life will depend upon the possession of a few pound , " she say to herself ; " when I may have some chance of set myself free from that man . " 

 she have begin to contemplate such a possibility already , before her wedding - day . it be for her father 's sake she be go to sell her liberty , to take upon herself a bondage most odious to she . the time might come when her father would be beyond the reach of shame and disgrace , when she might find some manner of escape from her slavery . 

 in the meantime the day hurry on , and Providence offer she no present mean of rescue . the day of doom come near and nearer ; for the bailiff take part with his future son - in - law , and would hear of no reason which Ellen could offer for delay . he be eager to squeeze the farmer 's well - fill purse a little tight , and he fancy he might do this when his daughter be Stephen Whitelaw 's wife . so suitor and father be alike pitiless , and the wedding be fix for the 10th of March . there be no preparation to be make at Wyncomb Farmhouse . Mr. Whitelaw do not mean to waste so much as a five - pound note upon the embellishment of those barely - furnish room in honour of his bright young bride ; although Mrs. Tadman urge upon he the necessity of new muslin curtain here , and new dimity there , a coat or so of paint and new whitewash in such and such room , and other small revival of the same character ; not sorry to be able to remind he in this indirect manner that marriage be an expensive thing . 

 " a young woman like that will expect to see thing bright and cheerful about she , " say Mrs. Tadman , in her most plausible tone , and rub her thin hand with an air of suppress enjoyment . " if you be go to marry a person of your own age , it would be different , of course ; but young woman have such extravagant notion . I could see Miss Carley do not think much of the furniture when I take she over the house on new - year's - day . she say the room look gloomy , and that some of they give she the horror , and so on . if you do not   have the place do up a bit at first , you will have to get it do at last , depend upon it ; a young wife like that will make the money spin , you may be sure . " 

 " will she ? " say Mr. Whitelaw , with a satisfied grin . " that be my look - out . I do not   think you have   have very much chance of make my money spin , eh , Mrs. Tadman ? " 

 the widow cast up her hand and eye towards the ceiling of the parlour where they be sit . 

 " goodness know I have   have precious little chance of do that , Stephen Whitelaw , " she reply . 

 " I should reckon not ; and my wife will have about as much . " 

 there be some cold comfort in this . Mrs. Tadman have once hop that if her cousin ever exalt any woman to the proud position of mistress of Wyncomb , she herself would be that favour individual ; and it be a hard thing to see a young person , who have nothing but a certain amount of good look to recommend she , raise to that post of honour in her stead . it be some consolation , therefore , to discover that the interloper be to reign with very limited power , and that none of the privilege or indulgence usually grant to youthful bride by elderly bridegroom be to be her . it be something , too , for Mrs. Tadman to be allow to remain beneath the familiar shelter of that gloomy old house , and this boon have be grant to she at Ellen 's express request . 

 " I suppose she be go to turn lazy as soon as she be married , or she would not   have want to keep you , " the farmer say in rather a sulky manner , after he have give Mrs. Tadman his gracious permission to remain in his service . " but if she be , we must find some way of cure she of that . I do not   want a fine lady about my place . there be the dairy , now ; we might do more in that way , I should think , and get more profit out of butter - making than we do by send part of the milk up to London . butter fetch a good price now - a - day from year 's end to year 's end , and Ellen be a rare hand at a dairy ; I know that for certain . " 

 thus do Mr. Whitelaw devote his pretty young wife to an endless prospect of butter - making . he have no intention that the alliance should be an unprofitable one , and he be already scheme how he might obtain some indirect kind of interest for that awful sum of two hundred pound advanced to William Carley . 

 Sir David Forster have not come to make that threaten investigation of thing at the Grange . careless always in the management of his affair , the receipt of a handsome sum of money from the bailiff have satisfy he , and he have suffer his suspicion to be lull to rest for the time being , not care to undertake the trouble of a journey to Hampshire , and an examination of dry business detail . 

 it be very lucky for Mr. Carley that his employer be so easy and indolent a master ; for there be many small matter at the Grange which would have hardly bear inspection , and it would have be difficult for Sir David to come there without make some discovery to his bailiff 's disadvantage . the evil day have be ward off , however , by mean of Stephen Whitelaw 's money , and William Carley mean to act more cautiously , more honestly even , in future . he would keep clear of race - course and gambling booth , he tell himself , and of the kind of man who have beguile he into dishonourable dealing . 

 " I have have an uncommon narrow squeak of it , " he mutter to himself occasionally , as he smoke a meditative pipe , " and have be as near see the inside of Portland prison as ever a man be . but it will be a warning to I in future . and yet who could have think that thing would have go against I as they do ? there be Sir Philip Christopher 's bay colt Pigskin , for instance ; that brute be bind to win . " 

 February come to an end ; and when March once begin , there seem no pause or breathing - time for Ellen Carley till the 10th . and yet she have little business to occupy she during those bleak day of early spring . it be the horror of that rapid flight of time , which seem independent of her own life in its hideous swiftness . idle or busy , it be all the same . the day would not linger for she ; the dreaded 10th be close at hand . 

 Frank Randall be still in London , in that solicitor 's office a firm of some standing in the City to which he have go on leave his father . he have write two or three time to Ellen since he leave Hampshire , and she have answer his letter secretly ; but pleasant though it be to she to hear from he , she beg he not to write , as her father 's anger would be extreme if a letter should by any evil chance fall into his hand . so within the last few month there have be no tiding of Ellen 's absent lover , and the girl be glad that it be so . what could she have say to he if she have be compel to tell he of her engagement to Stephen Whitelaw ? what excuse could she have make for marry a man about whom she have be will not to express herself to Frank Randall in most unequivocal term ? excuse there be none , since she could not betray her father . it be well , therefore , that young Randall should hear of her marriage in the common course of thing , and that he should think of she just as badly as he please . this be only one more poison drop in a cup that be all bitterness . 

 " he will believe that I be a hypocrite at heart always , " the unhappy girl say to herself , " and that I value Stephen Whitelaw 's money more than his true heart that I can marry a man I despise and dislike for the sake of be rich . what can he think bad of I than that ? and how can he help think that ? he know that I have a good spirit of my own , and that my father could not make I do anything against my will . he will never believe that this marriage have be all my father 's doing . " 

 the wedding morning come at last , bright and spring - like , with a sun that shine as gaily as if it have be light the happy union that be ever record in the hymeneal register . there be the first rare primrose gleam star - like amidst the early greenery of high grassy bank in solitary lane about Crosber , and here and there the tender blue of a violet . it would have seem a very fair morning upon which to begin the first page in the mystic volume of a new life , if Ellen Carley have be go to marry a man she love ; but no hapless condemn wretch who ever wake to see the sun shin upon the day of his execution could have be more profoundly wretched than the bailiff 's daughter , as she dress herself mechanically in her one smart silk gown , and stand in a kind of wake trance before the quaint old - fashioned look - glass which reflect her pale hopeless face . she have no girlish companion to assist in that dismal toilet . long ago there have be promise exchange between Ellen Carley and her choose friend , the daughter of a miller who live a little way on the other side of Crosber , to the effect that whichever be first to marry should call upon the other to perform the office of bridesmaid ; and Sarah Peters , the miller 's daughter , be still single and eligible for the function . but there be to be no bridesmaid at this blighted wedding . Ellen have plead urgently that thing might be arrange as quietly as possible ; and the master of Wyncomb , who hat spend money , and who apprehend that the expense of any festivity would in all probability fall upon his own shoulder , be very well pleased to assent to this request of his betrothed . 

 " quite right , Nell , " he say ; " we do not   want any foolish fuss , or a pack of people make themselves drunk at our expense . you and your father can come quietly to Crosber church , and Mrs. Tadman and I will meet you there , and the thing be do . the marriage would not   be any the tight if we have a hundred people look on , and the Bishop of Winchester to read the service . " 

 it be arrange in this manner , therefore ; and on that pleasant spring morning William Carley and his daughter walk to the quiet village where Gilbert Fenton have discover the secret of Marian 's retreat . the face under the bride 's little straw bonnet be deadly pale , and the feature have a rigid look that be new to they . the bailiff glance at his daughter in a furtive way every now and then , with an uneasy sense of this strange look in her face . even in his brute nature there be some faint twinge of compunction , now that the deed he have be so eager to compass be well - nigh do some vague consciousness that he have be a hard and cruel father . 

 " and yet it be all for her own good , " he tell himself , " quite as much as for mine . well to marry a rich man than a pauper any day ; and to take a dislike to a man 's age or a man 's look be nothing but a girl 's nonsense . the good husband be the one that can keep his wife well ; and if I have not   force on this business , she would have take up with lawyer Randall 's son , who be no well than a beggar , and a pretty life she would have have of it with he . " 

 by such reasoning as this William Carley contrive to set his conscience at rest during that silent walk along the rustic lane between the Grange and Crosber church . it be not a conscience very difficult to appease . and as for his daughter 's pallid look , those of course be only natural to the occasion . 

 Mr. Whitelaw and Mrs. Tadman be at the church when the bailiff and his daughter arrive . the farmer have make a scarecrow of himself in a new suit of clothe , which he have order in honour of this important event , after a great deal of vacillation , and more than one countermand to the Malsham tailor who make the garment . at the last he be not quite clear in his mind as to whether he want the clothe , and the outlay be a serious one . Mrs. Tadman have nee to hold his every - day coat up to the light to convince he that the collar be threadbare , and that the sleeve shine as if purposely polish by some ingenious process . 

 " marriage be an expensive thing , " she tell he again , with a sigh ; " and young girl expect to see a man dress ever so smart on his wedding - day . " 

 " I do not   care for her expectation , " Mr. Whitelaw mutter , in reply to this remark ; " and if I do not   want the clothe , I will not   have them . do you think I could get over next Christmas with they as I have   get ? " 

 Mrs. Tadman say " no " in a most decisive manner . perhaps she derive a malicious pleasure from the infliction of that tailor 's bill upon her cousin Whitelaw . so the new suit have be finally order ; and Stephen stand array therein before the altar - rail in the gray old church at Crosber , a far more grotesque and outrageous figure to contemplate than any knight templar , or bearded cavalier of the day of the first English James , whose effigy be to be see in the chancel . Mrs. Tadman stand a little way behind he , in a merino gown , and a new bonnet , extort somehow from the reluctant Stephen . she be full of smile and cordial greeting for the bride , who do not even see she . neither do Ellen Carley see the awkward figure of her bridegroom . a mist be before her eye , as if there have be an atmosphere of summer blight or fog in the village church . she knelt , or rise , as her prayer - book teach she , and go through the solemn service as placidly as if she have be a wondrous piece of mechanism construct to perform such movement ; and then , like a creature in a dream , she find herself walk out of the church presently , with her hand on Stephen Whitelaw 's arm . she have a faint consciousness of some ceremony in the vestry , where it have take Stephen a long time to sign his name in the register , and where the clergyman have congratulate he upon his good fortune in have win for himself such a pretty young wife ; but it be all more or less like a dreadful oppressive dream . Mr. Whitelaw 's chaise - cart be wait for they ; and they all four get in , and drive at once to Wyncomb ; where there be another ponderous dinner , very much like the banquet of new - year's - day , and where the bailiff drink freely , after his will not , and grow somewhat uproarious towards tea - time , though Mr. Whitelaw 's selection of port and sherry be not of a kind to tempt a connoisseur . 

 there be to be no honeymoon trip . Stephen Whitelaw do not understand the philosophy of run away from a comfortable home to spend money in furnish lodging ; and he have say as much , when the officious Tadman suggest a run to Weymouth , or Bournemouth , or a fortnight in the Isle of Wight . to Ellen it be all the same where the rest of her life should be spend . it could not be otherwise than wretched henceforward , and the scene of her misery matter nothing . so she utter no complaint because her husband bring she straight home to Wyncomb Farmhouse , and her wed life begin in that dreary dwelling - place . 

 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 A DOMESTIC mystery 


 it be near the end of March , but still bleak cold weather . Ellen Carley have be marry something less than a fortnight , and have come to look upon the dismal old farm - house by the river with a more accustomed eye than when Mrs. Tadman have take she from room to room on a journey of inspection . not that the place seem any less dreary and ugly to she to - day than it have seem at the very first . familiarity could not make it pleasant . she hat the house and everything about and around it , as she hat her husband , with a rooted aversion , not to be subdue by any endeavour which she might make now and then and she do honestly make such endeavour to arrive at a more christian - like frame of mind . 

 notwithstanding this deeply - seat instinctive dislike to all her surrounding , she endure her fate quietly , and do her duty with a patient spirit which might fairly be accept as an atonement for those inward rebellious feeling which she could not conquer . have submit to be the scapegoat of her father 's sin , she bear her burden very calmly , and fulfil the sacrifice without any outward mark of martyrdom . 

 she go about the work of the farm - house with a resolute active air that puzzle Mrs. Tadman , who have fully expect the young wife would play the fine lady , and leave all the drudgery of the household to she . but it really seem as if Ellen like hard work . she go from one task to another with an indefatigable industry , an energy that never give way . only when the day 's work in house and dairy be do do her depression of spirit become visible . then , indeed , when all be finish , and she sit down , neatly dress for the afternoon , in the parlour with Mrs. Tadman , it be easy to see how utterly hopeless and miserable this young wife be . the pale fix face , the listless hand clasp loosely in her lap , every attitude of the droop figure , betray the joyless spirit , the broken heart . at these time , when they be alone together , wait Stephen Whitelaw 's come home to tea , Mrs. Tadman 's heart , not entirely harden by long year of self - seeking , yearn towards her kinsman 's wife ; and the secret animosity with which she have at first regard she change to a silent pity , a compassion she would fain have express in some form or other , have she dare . 

 but she could not venture to do this . there be something in the girl , a quiet air of pride and self - reliance , in spite of her too evident sadness , which forbid any overt expression of sympathy ; so Mrs. Tadman could only show her friendly feeling in a very small way , by be especially active and brisk in assist all the household labour of the new mistress of Wyncomb , and by endeavour to cheer she with such petty gossip as she be able to pick up . Ellen feel that the woman be kindly disposed towards she , and she be not ungrateful ; but her heart be quite shut against sympathy , her sorrow be too profound to be lighten ever so little by human friendship . it be a dull despair , a settle conviction that for her life could never have again a single charm , that her day must go on in their slow progress to the grave unlightene by one ray of sunshine , her burden carry to the end of the dreary journey unrelieve by one hour of respite . it seem very hard for one so young , not quite three - and - twenty yet , to turn she back upon every hope of happiness , to be oblige to say to herself , " for I the sun can never shine again , the world I live in can never more seem beautiful , or beautiful only in bitter contrast to my broken heart . " but Ellen tell herself that this fate be her , and that she must need face it with a resolute spirit . 

 the household work employ her mind in some measure , and keep she , more or less , from thinking ; and it be for this reason she work with such unflinche industry , just as she have work in the last month or two at the Grange , try to shut her eye to that hateful future which lie so close before she . Mr. Whitelaw have no reason to retract what he have say in his pride of heart about Ellen Carley 's proficiency in the dairy . she prove herself all that he have boast , and the dairy flourish under the new management . there be more butter , and butter of a superior quality , send to market than under the reign of Mrs. Tadman ; and the master of Wyncomb make haste to increase his stock of milch cow , in order to make more money by this branch of his business . to have win for himself a pretty young wife , who , instead of squander his substance , would help he to grow rich , be indeed a triumph , upon which Mr. Whitelaw congratulate himself with many a suppress chuckle as he go about his daily labour , or jog slowly home from market in his chaise - cart . 

 as to his wife 's feeling towards himself , whether those be cold indifference or hidden dislike , that be an abstruse and remote question which Mr. Whitelaw never take the trouble to ask himself . she be his wife . he have win she , that be the grand point ; whatever disinclination she might have feel for the alliance , whatever love she might have cherish for another , have be trample down and subjugate , and he , Stephen Whitelaw , have obtain the desire of his heart . he have win she , against that penniless young jackanape , lawyer Randall 's son , who have treat he with mark contempt on more than one occasion when they happen to come across each other in Malsham Corn - exchange , which be hold in the great covered quadrangular courtyard of the chief inn at Malsham , and be a popular lounge for the inhabitant of that town . he have win she ; her own sentiment upon the subject of this marriage be of very little consequence . he have never expect to be love by his wife , his own idea of that passion call love being of the vague ; but he mean to be obey by she . she have begin well , have take her new duty upon herself in a manner that gladden his sordid soul ; and although they have be marry nearly a fortnight , she have give no hint of a desire to know the extent of his wealth , or where he keep any little hoard of ready money that he might have by he in the house . nor on market - day have she express any wish to go with he to Malsham to spend money on drapery ; and he have an idea , sedulously cultivate by Mrs. Tadman , that young woman be perpetually want to spend money at draper ' shop . altogether , that first fortnight of his married life have be most satisfactory , and Mr. Whitelaw be inclined to regard matrimony as a wise and profitable institution . 

 the day 's work be do , and Ellen be sit with Mrs. Tadman in the every - day parlour , wait for the return of her lord and master from Malsham . it be not a market - day , but Stephen Whitelaw have announce at dinner - time that he have an appointment at Malsham , and have set out immediately after dinner in the chaise - cart , much to the wonderment of Mrs. Tadman , who be an inveterate gossip , and never easy until she arrive at the bottom of any small household mystery . she wonder not a little also at Ellen 's supreme indifference to her husband 's proceeding . 

 " I can not   for the life of I think what be take he to Malsham to - day , " she say , as she ply her rapid knitting - needle in the manufacture of a gray - worst stocking . " I have not   know he go to Malsham , except of a market - day , not once in a twelvemonth . it must be a rare business to take he there in the middle of the week ; for he can not   abide to leave the farm in working - hour , except when he be right down oblige to it . nothing go on the same when his back 's turn , he say ; there be always something wrong . and if it be an appointment with any one belong to Malsham , why could not   it have stand over till Saturday ? it must be something out of the common that will not   keep a couple of day . " 

 Mrs. Tadman go on with her knitting , gaze at Ellen with an expectant countenance , wait for she to make some suggestion . but the girl be quite silent , and there be a blank expression in her eye , which look out across the level stretch of grass between the house and the river , a look that tell Mrs. Tadman very few of her word have be hear by her companion . it be quite disheartening to talk to such a person ; but the widow go on nevertheless , be so full of her subject that she must need talk to some one , even if that some one be little well than a stock or a stone . 

 " there be a letter that come for Stephen before dinner to - day ; he get it when he come in , but it be lie here for an hour first . perhaps it be that as take he to Malsham ; and yet that be strange , for it be a London letter and it do not   seem likely as any one could be come down from London to meet Steph at Malsham . I can not   make top nor tail of it . " 

 Mrs. Tadman lay down her knitting , and give the fire a vigorous stir . she want some vent for her vexation ; for it be really too provoking to see Ellen Whitelaw sit star out of the window like a lifeless statue , and not take the faint interest in the mystery of her husband 's conduct . she stir the fire , and then busy herself with the tea - table , give a touch here and there where no re - arrangement be want , for the sake of do something . 

 the room look comfortable enough in the cold light of the spring afternoon . it be the most occupied room in the house , and the least gloomy . the glow of a good fire brighten the scanty shabby furniture a little , and the table , with its white cloth , homely flower cup and saucer , bright metal teapot , and substantial fare in the way of ham and home - make bread , have a pleasant look enough in the eye of any one come in from a journey through the chill March atmosphere . Mr. Whitelaw 's notion of tea be a solid meal , which leave he independent of the chance of supper , and yet open to do something in that way ; in case any light kickshaw , such as liver and bacon , a boil sheep 's head , or a beef - steak pie , should present itself to his notice . 

 Ellen rouse herself from her long reverie at last . there be the sound of wheel upon the cart - track across the wide open field in front of the house . 

 " here come Mr. Whitelaw , " she say , look out into the gathering dusk ; " and there be some one with he . " 

 " some one with he ! " cry Mrs. Tadman . " why , my goodness , who can that be ? " 

 she run to the window and peer eagerly out . the cart have drive up to the door by this time , and Mr. Whitelaw and his companion be alight . the stranger be rather a handsome man , Mrs. Tadman see at the first glance , tall and broad - shoulder , clothe in dark - gray trouser , a short pilot - coat , and a wide - awake hat ; but with a certain style even in this rough apparel which be not the style of agricultural Malsham , an unmistakable air that belong to a dweller in great city . 

 " I never set eye upon he before , " exclaim Mrs. Tadman , aghast with wonder ; for visitor at Wyncomb be of the rare , and an unknown visitor above all thing marvellous . 

 Mr. Whitelaw open the house - door , which open straight into a little lobby between the two parlour . there be a large door and a spacious stone entrance - hall at one end of the house ; but that door have not be open within the memory of man , and the hall be only use as a storehouse now - a - day . there be some little mumbling talk in the lobby before the two man come in , and then Mrs. Tadman 's curiosity be relieve by a close view of the stranger . 

 yes , he be certainly handsome , remarkably handsome even , for a man whose youth be past ; but there be something in his face , a something sinister and secret , as it be , which do not strike Mrs. Tadman favourably . she could not by any mean have explain the nature of her sensation on look at he , but , as she say afterwards , she feel all in a moment that he be there for no good . and yet he be very civil - speak too , and address both the lady in a most conciliating tone , and with a kind of florid politeness . 

 Ellen look at he , interested for the moment in spite of her apathetic indifference to all thing . the advent of a stranger be something so rare as to awaken a faint interest in the mind most dead to impression . she do not like his manner ; there be something false and hollow in his extreme politeness . and his face what be it in his face that startle she with such a sudden sense of strangeness and yet of familiarity ? 

 have she ever see he before ? yes ; surely that be the impression which send such a sudden shock through her nerve , which startle she from her indifference into eager wonder and perplexity . where have she see he before ? where and when ? long ago , or only very lately ? she could not tell . yet it seem to she that she have look at eye like those , not once , but many time in her life . and yet the man be utterly strange to she . that she could have see he before appear impossible . it must have be some one like he she have see , then . yes , that be it . it be the shadow of another face in his that have startle she with so strange a feeling , almost as if she have be look upon some ghostly thing . another face , like and yet unlike . 

 but what face ? whose face ? 

 she could not answer that question , and her inability to solve the enigma torment she all tea - time , as the stranger sit opposite to she , make a pretence of eat heartily , in accordance with Mr. Whitelaw 's hospitable invitation , while that gentleman himself plough away with a steady persistence that make awful havoc with the ham , and reduce the loaf in a manner suggestive of Jack the Giant - killer . 

 the visitor presently venture to remark that tea - drinking be not much in his way , and that , if it be all the same to Mr. Whitelaw , he should prefer a glass of brandy - and - water ; whereupon the brandy - bottle be produce from a cupboard by the fire - place , of which Stephen himself keep the key , judiciously on his guard against a possible taste for ardent spirit develop itself in Mrs. Tadman . 

 after this the stranger sit for some time , drink cold brandy - and - water , and star moodily at the fire , without make the faint attempt at conversation , while Mr. Whitelaw finish his tea , and the table be clear ; and even after this , when the farmer have take his place upon the opposite side of the hearth , and seem to be wait for his guest to begin business . 

 he be not a lively stranger ; he seem , indeed , to have something on his mind , to be brood upon some trouble or difficulty , as Mrs. Tadman remark to her kinsman 's wife afterwards . both the woman watch he ; Ellen always perplex by that unknown likeness , which seem sometimes to grow strong , sometimes to fade away altogether , as she look at he ; Mrs. Tadman in a rabid state of curiosity , so profound be the mystery of his silent presence . 

 what be he there for ? what could Stephen want with he ? he be not one of Stephen 's sort , by any mean ; have no appearance of association with agricultural interest . and yet there he be , a silent inexplicable presence , a mysterious figure with a moody brow , which seem to grow dark as Mrs. Tadman watch he . 

 at last , about an hour after the tea - table have be clear , he rise suddenly , with an abrupt gesture , and say , 

 " Come , Whitelaw , if you mean to show I this house of your , you may as well show it to I at once . " 

 his voice have a harsh unpleasant sound as he say this . he stand with his back to the woman , star at the fire , while Stephen Whitelaw light a candle in his slow dawdling way . 

 " be quick , man alive , " the stranger cry impatiently , turn sharply round upon the farmer , who be trim an incorrigible wick with a pair of blunted snuffer . " remember , I have   get to go back to Malsham ; I have not   all the night to waste . " 

 " I do not   want to set my house afire , " Mr. Whitelaw answer sullenly ; " though , perhaps , you might like that . it might suit your book , you see . " 

 the stranger give a sudden shudder , and tell the farmer with an angry oath to " drop that sort of insolence . " 

 " and now show the way , and look sharp about it , " he say in an authoritative tone . 

 they go out of the room in the next moment . Mrs. Tadman gaze after they , or rather at the door which have close upon they , with a solemn awe - stricken stare . 

 " I do not   like the look of it , Ellen , " she say ; " I do not   at all like the look of it . " 

 " what do you mean ? " the girl ask indifferently . 

 " I do not   like the hold that man have get over Stephen , nor the way he speak to he almost as if Steph be a dog . do you hear he just now ? and what do he want to see the house for , I should like to know ? what can this house matter to he , unless he be go to buy it ? that be it , perhaps , Ellen . Stephen have be speculate , and have go and ruin himself , and that strange man be go to buy Wyncomb . he give I a kind of turn the minute I look at he . and , depend upon it , he be come to turn we all out of house and home . " 

 Ellen give a faint shudder . what if her father 's wicked scheming be to come to such an end as this ! what if she have be sell into bondage , and the master to whom she have be give have not even the wealth which have be hold before she as a bait in her misery ! for herself she care little whether she be rich or poor . it could make but a difference of detail in the fact of her unhappiness , whether she be mistress of Wyncomb or a homeless tramp upon the country road . the workhouse without Stephen Whitelaw must need be infinitely preferable to Wyncomb Farm with he . and for her father , it seem only a natural and justifiable thing that his guilt and his greed should be so punish . he have sell his daughter into life - long slavery for nothing but that one advance of two hundred pound . he have save himself from the penalty of his dishonesty , however , by that sacrifice ; and would , no doubt , hold his daughter 's misery lightly enough , even if poverty be add to the wretchedness of her position . 

 the two woman sit down on opposite side of the hearth ; Mrs. Tadman , too anxious to go on with her accustomed knitting , only able to wring her hand in a feeble way , and groan every now and then , or from time to time burst into some fragmentary speech . 

 " and Stephen be just the man to have such a thing on his mind and keep it from everybody till the last moment , " she cry piteously . " and so many speculation as there be now - a - day to tempt a man to his ruin railway and mine , and loan to Turks and Red Indians and such - like foreigner ; and Steph might so easy be tempt by the hope of large profit than he can make by farming . " 

 " but it be no use torture yourself like that with fear that may be quite groundless , " Ellen say at last , rouse herself a little in order to put a stop to the wail and lamentation of her companion . " there be no use in anticipate trouble . there may be nothing in this business after all . Mr. Whitelaw may have a fancy for show people his house . he want I to see it , if you remember , that new - year 's afternoon . " 

 " yes ; but that be different . he mean to marry you . why should he want to show the place to a stranger ? I can not   believe but what that strange man be here for something , and something bad . I see it in his face when he first come in . " 

 it be useless argue the matter ; Mrs. Tadman be evidently not to be shake ; so Ellen say no more ; and they sit on in silence , each occupy with her own thought . 

 Ellen 's be not about Stephen Whitelaw 's financial condition , but they be very sad one . she have receive a letter from Frank Randall since her marriage ; a most bitter letter , upbraid she for her falsehood and desertion , and accuse she of be actuate by mercenary motif in her marriage with Stephen Whitelaw . 

 " how often have I hear you express your detestation of that fellow ! " the young man write indignantly . " how often have I hear you declare that no earthly persuasion should ever induce you to marry he ! and yet before my back have be turn six month , I hear that you be his wife . without a word of warning , without a line of explanation to soften the blow if anything could soften it the news come to I , from a stranger who know nothing of my love for you . it be very hard , Ellen ; all the hard because I have so fully trust in your fidelity . " 

 " I will own that the prospect I have to offer you be a poor one ; involve long delay before I could give you such a home as I want to give you ; but o , Nelly , Nelly , I feel so sure that you would be true to I ! and if you find yourself in any difficulty , worry beyond your power of resistance by your father though I do not think you be the kind of girl to yield weakly to persuasion a line from you would have bring I to your side , ready to defend you from any persecution , and only too proud to claim you for my wife , and carry you away from your father 's unkindness . " 

 the letter go on for some time in the same upbraiding strain . Ellen shed many bitter tear over it in the quiet of her own room . it have be deliver to she secretly by her old friend Sarah Peters , the miller 's daughter , who have be the confidante of her love affair ; for even in his indignation Mr. Randall have be prudent enough to consider that such a missive , fall perchance into Stephen Whitelaw 's hand , might work serious mischief . 

 Cruel as the letter be , Ellen could not leave it quite unanswered ; some word in her own defence she must need write ; but her reply be of the brief . 

 " there be some thing that can never be explain , " she write , " and my marriage be one of those . no one could save I from it , you least of all . there be no help for I ; and I believe , with all my heart , that , in act as I do , I only do my duty . I have not the courage to write to you beforehand to tell you what be go to be . I think it be almost well you should hear it from a stranger . the more hardly you think of I , the easy it will be for you to forget I . there be some comfort in that . I daresay it will be very easy for you to forget . but if , in day to come , when you be happily married to some one else , you can teach yourself to think more kindly of I , and to believe that in what I do I act for the good , you will be perform an act of charity towards a poor unhappy girl , who have very little leave to hope for in this world . " 

 it be a hard thing for Ellen to think that , in the estimation of the man she love , she must for ever seem the base and most mercenary of womankind ; and yet how poor an excuse could she offer in the vague pleading of her letter ! she could not so much as hint at the truth ; she could not blacken her father 's character . that Frank Randall should despise she , only make her trial a little sharp , her daily burden a little heavy , she tell herself . 

 with her mind full of these thought , she have very little sympathy to bestow upon Mrs. Tadman , whose fragmentary lamentation only worry she , like the murmur of some troublesome not - to - be - pacify child ; whereby that doleful person , find her soul grow heavy and heavy , for lack of counsel or consolation , could at last endure this state of suspense no long in sheer inactivity , but be fain to bestir herself somehow , if even in the most useless manner . she get up from her seat therefore , go over to the door , and , softly open it , peer out into the darkness beyond . 

 there be nothing , no glimmer of Stephen 's candle , no sound of man 's footstep or of man 's voice ; the mere blankness , and no more . the two man have be away from the parlour something more than half an hour by this time . 

 for about five minute Mrs. Tadman stand at the open door , peer out and listen , and still without result . then , with a shrill sudden sound through the long empty passage , there come a shriek , a prolonged pierce cry of terror or of pain , which turn Mrs. Tadman 's blood to ice , and bring Ellen to her side , pale and breathless . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " what be that ? " 

 both utter the same question simultaneously , look at each other aghast , and then both flee in the direction from which that shrill cry have come . 

 a woman 's voice surely ; no masculine cry ever sound with such pierce treble . 

 they hurry off to discover the meaning of this startling sound , but be neither of they very clear as to whence it have come . from the upper story no doubt , but in that ramble habitation there be so much scope for uncertainty . they run together , up the staircase most use , to the corridor from which the principal room open . before they could reach the top of the stair , they hear a scuffling hurrying sound of heavy footstep on the floor above they , and on the landing meet Mr. Whitelaw and his unknown friend ; face to face . 

 " what be the matter ? " ask the farmer sharply , look angrily at the two scared face . 

 " that be just what we want to know , " his wife answer . " who be it that scream just now ? who be be hurt ? " 

 " my friend stumble against a step in the passage yonder , and knock his shin . he cry out a bit louder than he need have do , if that be what you mean , but not loud enough to cause all this fuss . get downstairs again , you two , and keep quiet . I have   no patience with such nonsense ; come fly upstairs as if you would both go mad . " 

 " it be not your friend 's voice we hear , " Ellen answer resolutely ; " it be a woman 's cry . you must have hear it surely , Stephen Whitelaw . " 

 " I hear nothing but what I tell you , " the farmer mutter sulkily . " get downstair , can not   you ? " 

 " not till I know what be the matter , " his wife say , undismaye by his anger . " give I your light , and let I go and see . " 

 " you can go where you like , wench , and see what you can ; and an uncommon deal wise you will be for your trouble . " 

 and yet , although Mr. Whitelaw give his wife the candlestick with an air of profound indifference , there be an uneasy look in his countenance which she could plainly see , and which perplex she not a little . 

 " Come , Mrs. Tadman , " she say decisively , " we have well see into this . it be a woman 's voice , and must have be one of the girl , I suppose . it may be nothing serious , after all , these country girl scream out for a very little , but we would well get to the bottom of it . " 

 Mr. Whitelaw burst into a laugh and he be a man whose laughter be as unpleasant as it be rare . 

 " ay , my wench , you would well get to the bottom of it , " he say , ' since you be so uncommon clever . I and my friend will go back to the parlour , and take a glass of grog . " 

 the gentleman whom Mr. Whitelaw honour with his friendship have stand a little way apart all this time , wipe his forehead with a big orange coloured silk handkerchief . that blow upon his shin must have be rather a sharp one , if it have bring that cold sweat out upon his ashen face . 

 " yes , " he mutter ; " come along , can not   you ? do not   stand caw here all night ; " and hurry downstairs before his host . 

 it have be all the business of a couple of minute . Ellen Whitelaw and Mrs. Tadman go down to the ground floor by another staircase lead directly to the kitchen . the room look comfortable enough , and the two servant - girl be sit at a table near the fire . one be a strapping rosy - cheeked country girl , who do all the household work ; the other an overgrown clumsy - look girl , hire straight from the workhouse by Mr. Whitelaw , from economical motif ; a stolid - look girl , whose intellect be of the low order ; a mere zoophyte girl , one would say something between the vegetable and animal creation . 

 this one , whose name be Sarah Batts , be chiefly employ in the poultry - yard and dairy . she have a broad brawny hand , which be useful for the milking of cow , and show some kind of intelligence in the management of young chicken and the treatment of refractory hen . 

 Martha Holden , the house - servant , be busy make herself a cap as her mistress come into the kitchen , drone some Hampshire ballad by way of accompaniment to her work . Sarah Batts be seat in an attitude of luxurious repose , with her arm fold , and her foot on the fender . 

 " be it either of you girl that scream just now ? " Ellen ask anxiously . 

 " Screamed , ma'am ! no , indeed , " Martha Holden answer , with an air of perfect good faith . " what should we scream for ? I have   be sit here at my work for the last hour , as quiet as could be . " 

 " and , Sarah , be it you , Sarah ? for goodness ' sake tell the truth . " 

 " Me , mum ! lor no , mum . I be up with master show he and the strange gentleman a light . " 

 " you be upstairs with your master ? and do you hear nothing ? a pierce shriek that ring through the house ; you must surely have hear it , both of you . " 

 Martha shake her head resolutely . 

 " not I , mum ; I do not   hear a sound . the kitchen - door be shut all the time Sarah be away , and I be busy at work , and think of nothing but my work . I be not   upon the listen , as you may say . " 

 the kitchen be at the extreme end of the house , remote from that direction whence the unexplainable cry seem to have come . 

 " it be most extraordinary , " Ellen say gravely , perplex beyond all measure . " but you , Sarah ; if you be upstairs with your master , you must surely have hear that shriek ; it seem to come from upstairs . " 

 " do master hear it ? " ask the girl deliberately . 

 " he say not . " 

 " then how should I , mum ? no , mum , I do not   hear nothink ; I can take my Bible oath of that . " 

 " I do not   want any oath ; I only want to know the meaning of this business . there would have be no harm in your screaming . you might just as well speak the truth about it . " 

 " Lor , mum , but it warn't   I , " answer Sarah Batts with an injure look . " whatever could go to put it in your head as it be I ? " 

 " it must have be one or other of you two girl . there be no other woman in the house ; and as you be upstairs , it seem more likely to have be you . however , there be no use talk any more about it . only we both hear the scream , do not   we , Mrs. Tadman ? " 

 " I should think we do , indeed , " respond the widow with a vehement shudder . " my flesh be all upon the creep at this very moment . I do not   think I ever have such a turn in my life . " 

 they go back to the parlour , leave the two servant still sit by the fire ; Sarah Batts with that look of injure innocence fix upon her wooden countenance , Martha Holden cheerfully employ in the construction of her Sunday cap . in the parlour the two man be both stand by the table , the stranger with his back to the woman as they enter , Stephen Whitelaw face he . the former seem to have be count something , but stop abruptly as the woman come into the room . 

 there be a little heap of bank - note lie on the table . Stephen snatch they up hastily , and thrust they in a bundle into his waistcoat - pocket ; while the stranger put a strap round a bulky red morocco pocket - book with a more deliberate air , as of one who have nothing to hide from the world . 

 that guilty furtive air of Stephen 's , and , above all , that passage of money between the two man , confirm Mrs. Tadman in her notion that Wyncomb Farm be go to change hand . she resume her seat by the fire with a groan , and accept Ellen 's offer of a glass of spirit - and - water with a doleful shake of her head . 

 " do not   I tell you so ? " she whisper , as Mrs. Whitelaw hand she the comfort beverage . 

 the stranger be evidently on the point of departure . there be a sound of wheel on the gravel outside the parlour window the familiar sound of Stephen Whitelaw 's chaise - cart ; and that gentleman be busy help his visitor on with his great - coat . 

 " I shall be late for the last train , " say the stranger , " unless your man drive like the very devil . " 

 " he will drive fast enough , I daresay , if you give he half - a - crown , " Mr. Whitelaw answer with a grin ; " but do not   let he go and do my horse any damage , or you will have to pay for it . " 

 " of course . you would like to get the price of a decent animal out of I for that break - kneed hard - mouthed brute of your , " reply the stranger with a scornful laugh . " I think there never be such a money - grub , grind , grasp beggar since the world begin . however , you have   see the last shilling you be ever likely to get out of I ; so make the good of it ; and remember , wherever I may be , there be friend of mine in this country who will keep a sharp look - out upon you , and let I know precious quick if you do not   stick to your part of our bargain like an honest man , or as nearly like one as nature will allow you to come . and now good - night , Mr. Whitelaw . lady , your humble servant . " 

 he be go before Ellen or Mrs. Tadman could reply to his parting salutation , have they be dispose to do so . Mr. Whitelaw go out with he , and give some final direction to the stable - lad who be to drive the chaise - cart , and presently come back to the parlour , look considerably relieve by his guest 's departure . 

 Mrs. Tadman rush at once to the expression of her fear . 

 " Stephen Whitelaw , " she exclaim solemnly , " tell we the bad at once . it be no good keep thing back from we . that man have come here to turn we out of house and home . you have   sell Wyncomb . " 

 " Sold Wyncomb ! have you go crazy , you old fool ? " cry Mr. Whitelaw , contemplate his kinswoman with a most evil expression of countenance . " what be put that stuff in your head ? " 

 " your own doing , Stephen , and that man 's . what do he come here for , with his masterful way , unless it be to turn we out of house and home ? what do you show he the house for ? Nigh upon an hour you be out of this room with he , if you be a minute . why do money pass from he to you ? I see you put it in your pocket a bundle of bank - note . " 

 " you be a pry old catemeran ! " cry Mr. Whitelaw savagely , " and a drunken old fool into the bargain . why do you let she muddle herself with the gin - bottle like that , Ellen ? you ought to have more respect for my property . you do not   call that take care of your husband 's house . as for you , mother Tadman , if you treat I to any more of this nonsense , you will find yourself turn out of house and home a precious deal soon than you bargain for ; but it will not   be because of my selling Wyncomb . Sell Wyncomb , indeed ! I have   about as much thought of go up in a balloon , as of part with a rood or a perch of my father 's land . " 

 this be a very long speech for Mr. Whitelaw ; and , have finish it , he sink into his chair , quite exhausted by the unusual effort , and refresh himself with copious libation of gin - and - water . 

 " what be that man here for , then , Stephen ? it be only natural I should want to know that , " say Mrs. Tadman , abash , but not strike dumb by her kinsman 's reproof . 

 " what be that to you ? business . yes , there have be money pass between we , and it be rather a profitable business for I . perhaps it be horse - racing , perhaps it be not . that be about all you have   any call to know . I have   make money by it , and not lose . and now , do not   let I be bother about it any more , if you and I be to keep friend . " 

 " I be sure , Stephen , " Mrs. Tadman remonstrate in a feebly plaintive tone , " I have   no wish to bother you ; there be nothing far from my thought ; but it be only natural that I should be anxious about a place where I have   live so many year . not but what I could get my living easy enough elsewhere , as you must know , Stephen , be able to turn my hand to almost anything . " 

 to this feeble protest Mr. Whitelaw vouchsafe no answer . he have light his pipe by this time , and be smoke and star at the fire with his usual stolid air meditative , it might be , or only ruminant , like one of his own cattle . 

 but all through that night Mr. Whitelaw , who be not commonly a seer of vision or dreamer of dream , have his slumber disturb by some unwonted perplexity of spirit . his wife lie broad awake , think of that prolonged and pierce cry , which seem to she , the more she meditate upon it , in have be a cry of anguish or of terror , and could not fail to notice this unusual disturbance of her husband 's sleep . More than once he mutter to himself in a troubled manner ; but his word , for the most part , be incoherent and disjoint word of which that perplexed listener could make nothing . 

 once she hear he say , " a bad job dangerous business . " 

 CHAPTER XL 

 in PURSUIT 


 John Saltram improve daily at Hampton Court . in spite of his fierce impatience to get well , in order to engage in the search for Marian an impatience which be in itself sufficient to militate against his well - be he do make considerable progress on the road to recovery . he be still very weak , and it must take time to complete his restoration ; but he be no long the pale ghost of his former self that Gilbert have bring down to the quiet suburb . 

 it would have be a cruel thing to leave he much alone at such a time , or it would have seem very cruel to Gilbert Fenton , who have ever present in his memory those old day in Egypt when this man have stand he in such good stead . he remember the day of his own sickness , and contrive to perform his business duty within the small time possible , and so spend the rest of his life in the comfortable sitting - room look out upon bushy - park on the one side , and on the other upon the pretty high road before the Palace ground . 

 nor be there any sign in the intercourse of those two that the bond of friendship between they be break . there be , it be true , a something deprecate in John Saltram 's manner that have not be common to he of old , and in Gilbert Fenton a deep gravity than be quite natural ; but that be all . it be difficult to believe that any latent spirit of animosity could lurk in the mind of either . in sober truth , Gilbert , in his heart of heart , have forgive his treacherous friend . again and again he have tell himself that the wrong he have suffer be an unpardonable offence , a thing not to be forgive upon any ground whatever . but , lo , when he look into his mind to discover the smoulder fire of that burn anger which he have feel at first against the traitor , he could find nothing but the gray ash of a long - expire flame . the wrong have be suffer , and he love his old friend still . yes , there be that in his heart for John Saltram which no ill - do could blot out . 

 so he tend the convalescent 's couch with a quiet devotion that touch the sinner very deeply , and there be a peace between those two which have in it something almost sacred . in the mind of the one there be a remorseful sense of guilt , in the heart of the other a pity tenderness too deep for word . 

 one night , as they be together on opposite side of the fire , John Saltram lie on a low sofa draw close to the hearth , Gilbert seat lazily in an easy - chair , the invalid break out suddenly into a kind of apology for his wrong - doing . 

 the conversation have flag between they after the tea - thing have be remove by the brisk little serve - maid of the lodging ; Gilbert gaze meditatively at the fire , John Saltram so quiet that his companion have think he asleep . 

 " I say once that I would tell you all about that business , " he begin at last , in a sudden spasmodic way ; " but , after all there be so little to tell . there be no excuse for what I do ; I know that well than you can know it . a man in my position , who have a spark of generosity or honour , would have strangle his miserable passion in its birth , would have go away directly he discover his folly , and never look upon Marian Nowell 's face again . I do try to do that , Gilbert . you remember that last night we ever spend together at Lidford what a feverishly - happy night it be ; only a cottage - parlour with a girl 's bright face shin in the lamplight , and a man over head and ear in love , but a glimpse of paradise to that man . I mean that it should be the last of my weakness , Gilbert . I have pledge myself to that by all the outspoken oath wherewith a man can bind himself to do his duty . and I do turn my back upon the scene of my temptation , as you know , heartily resolve never to approach the edge of the pit again . I think if you have stay in England , Gilbert , if you have be on the spot to defend your own right , all would have go well , I should have keep the promise I have make for myself . " 

 " it be so much the more sacred because of my absence , John , " Gilbert say . 

 " perhaps . after all , I suppose it be only a question of opportunity . that particular devil who tempt man to their dishonour contrive that the business should be make fatally easy for I . you be away , and the coast be clear , you know . I love you , Gilbert ; but there be a passion strong than the love which a man feel for his dear friend . I mean most steadfastly to keep my faith with you ; but you be away , and that fellow Forster plague I to come to he . I refuse at first yes , I hold out for a couple of month ; but the fever be strong upon I a restless demon not to be exorcise by hard work , or dissipation even , for I try both . and then before you be at the end of your journey , while you be still a wanderer across the desolate sea , happy in the thought of your dear love 's fidelity , my courage give way all at once , and I go down to Heatherly . and so I see she , and see that she love I all unworthy as I be ; and from that hour I be a lost man ; I think of nothing but win she . " 

 " if you have only be true to I , even then , John ; if you have write to I declare the truth , and give I fair warning that you be my rival , how much well it would have be ! think what a torture of suspense , what a world of waste anger , you might have save I . " 

 " yes , it would have be the manly course , no doubt , " the other answer ; " but I could not bring myself to that . I could not face the idea of your justifiable wrath . I want to win my wife and keep my friend . it be altogether a weak notion , that idea of secrecy , of course , and could not   hold water for any time , as the result have show ; but I think you would get over your disappointment quickly those wound be apt to heal so speedily and fall in love elsewhere ; and then it would have be easy for I to tell you the truth . so I persuade my dear love , who be easily induce to do anything I wish , to consent to our secret be keep from you religiously for the time being , and to that end we be marry under a false name not exactly a false name either . you remember my ask you if you have ever hear the name of Holbrook before your hunt after Marian 's husband ? you say no ; yet I think you must have see the name in some of my old college book . I be christen John Holbrook . my grandmother be one of the Holbrooks of Horley - place , Sussex , people of some importance in their day , and our family be rather proud of the name . but I have drop it ever since I be a lad . " 

 " no , I do not   think I can ever have see the name ; I must surely have remember it , if I have see it . " 

 " perhaps so . well , Gilbert , there be no more to be say . I love she , selfishly , after the manner of mankind . I could not bring myself to give she up , and pursue she with a passionate persistence which must plead her excuse . if her uncle have live , I doubt whether I should ever have succeed . but his death leave the tender womanly heart weaken by sorrow ; and so I win she , the dear , true wife that ever man be blest withal . yet , I confess to you , so wayward be my nature , that there have be moment in which I repent my triumph weak hour of doubt and foreboding , in which I fear that dear girl divine my thought . since our wretched separation I have fancy sometimes that a conviction of this kind on her part be at the root of the business , that she have alienate herself from I , believe in plain word that I be tired of she . " 

 " such an idea as that would scarcely agree with Ellen Carley 's account of Marian 's state of mind during that last day or two at the Grange . she be eagerly expect your return , look forward with delight to the pleasant surprise you be to experience when you hear of Jacob Nowell 's will . " 

 " yes , the girl tell I that . great heaven , why do I not return a few day early ! I be wait for money , not care to go back empty - handed ; write and work like a nigger . I dare not meet my poor girl at her grandfather 's , since in so do I must risk an encounter with you . " 

 after this they talk of Marian 's disappearance for some time , go over the same ground very often in their helplessness , and able , at last , to arrive at no satisfactory conclusion . if she be with her father , she be with a bad , unscrupulous man . that be a fact which Gilbert Fenton no long pretend to deny . they sit talk till late , and part for the night in very different spirit . 

 Gilbert have a good deal of hard work in the City on the following day ; a batch of foreign correspondence too important to be entrust to a clerk , and two or three rather particular interview . all this occupy he up to so late an hour , that he be oblige to sleep in London that night , and to defer his return to Hampton till the next day 's business be over . this time he get over his work by an early hour , and be able to catch a train that leave Waterloo at half - past five . he feel a little uneasy at have be away from the convalescent so long though he know that John Saltram be now strong enough to get on tolerably without he , and that the people of the house be careful and kindly , ready at any moment to give assistance if it be want . 

 " strange , " he think to himself , as the train approach the quiet , river - side village ' strange that I should be so fond of the fellow , in spite of all ; that I should care more for his society than that of any man live . it be the mere force of habit , I suppose . after all these year of liking , the link between we be not to be break , even by the deep wrong that one man can do another . " 

 the spring twilight be close in as he cross the bridge and walk briskly along an avenue of leafless tree at the side of the green . the place have a peaceful rustic look at this dusky hour . there be no trace of that modern spoiler the speculative builder just hereabouts ; and the quaint old house near the barrack , where light be twinkle feebly here and there , have a look of day that be go , a touch of that plaintive poetry which pervade all relic of the past . Gilbert feel the charm of the hour ; the air still and mild , the silence only break by the cawing of palatial rook ; and whatever tenderness towards John Saltram there be lurk in his breast seem to grow upon he as he draw near to their lodging ; so that his mood be of the softest when he open the little garden - gate and go in . 

 " I will make no further pretence of enmity , " he say to himself ; " I will not keep up this farce of estrangement . we two will be friend once more . life be not long enough for the rupture of such a friendship . " 

 there be no light shin in the parlour window , no pleasant home - glow streaming out upon the night . the blank create by this unwonted darkness chill he somehow , and there be a vague sense of dread in his mind as he open the door . there be no need to knock . the simple household be untrouble by the fear of burglariously - dispose intruder , and the door be rarely fasten until after dark . 

 Gilbert go into the parlour ; all be dark and silent in the two room , which communicate with fold door , and make one fair - sized apartment . there be no preparation for dinner ; he could see that in the deepening dusk . the fire have be evidently neglect , and be at an expiring point . 

 " John ! " he call , stir the fire with a vigorous hand , whereby he give it the coup - de - grace , and the last glimmer sink to darkness . " John , what be you do ? " 

 he fancy the convalescent have fall asleep upon the sofa in the inner room ; but when he go in search of he , he find nothing but emptiness . he ring the bell violently , and the brisk maid - servant come fly in . 

 " oh , dear , sir , you do give I and missus such a turn ! " she say , gasp , with her hand on her heart , as if that organ have be seriously affect . " we never hear you come in , and when the bell ring " 

 " be Mr. Saltram worse ? " Gilbert ask , eagerly . 

 " bad , poor dear gentleman ; no , sir , I should hope not , though he well may be , for there never be any one so imprudent , not of all the invalid I have   ever have to do with and Hampton be a rare place for invalid . and I feel sure if you have be here , sir , you would not   have let he do it . " 

 " let he do what ? be you crazy , girl ? what , in heaven 's name , be you talk of ? " 

 " you would not   have let he start off to London post - haste , as he do yesterday afternoon , and scarcely able to stand alone , in a manner of speak . " 

 " go to London ! do you mean to say that my friend Mr. Saltram go to London ? " 

 " yes , sir ; yesterday afternoon between four and five . " 

 " what utter madness ! and when do he come back ? " 

 " Lor ' bless you , sir , he be not   come back yet . he tell missus as his come back be quite uncertain , and she be not to worry herself about he . she do all she could , almost to go down on her knee , to hinder he go ; but it be no use . it be a matter of life and death as he be go upon , he say , and that there be no power on earth could keep he back , not if he be ten time bad than he be . the strange gentleman have not   be in the house much above a quarter of an hour , when they be both off together in a fly to the station . " 

 " what strange gentleman ? " 

 " a stout middle - aged man , sir , with gray whisker , that come from London , and ask for you first , and then for Mr. Saltram ; and those two have not   be together more than five minute , when Mr. Saltram ring the bell in a violent hurry , and tell my missus he be go to town immediate , on most particular business , and would she pack he a carpet - bag with a couple of shirt , and so on . and then she try all she could to turn he from go ; but it be no good , as I be tell you , sir , just now . go he would , and go he do ; look quite flushed and bright - like when he go out , so as you would have scarcely know how ill he have be . and he leave a bit of a note for you on the chimbley - piece , sir . " 

 Gilbert find the note ; a hurried scrawl upon half a sheet , of paper , twist up hastily , and unseal . 

 " she be find , Gilbert , " write John Saltram . " Proul have trace the father to his lair at last , and my darling be with he . they be lodge at 14 , Coleman - street , Tottenham - court - road . I be off this instant . do not   be angry with I , true and faithful friend ; I could not rest an hour away from she now that she be find . I have no plan of action , but leave all to the inspiration of the moment . you can follow I whenever you please . Marian must thank you for your goodness to I . Marian must persuade you to forgive my sin against you ever your , J.S. " 

 follow he ! yes , of course . Gilbert have no other thought . and she be find at last , after all their suspense , their torture anxiety . she be find ; and whatever danger there might be in her association with Percival Nowell , she be safe so far , and would be speedily extricate from the perilous alliance by her husband . it seem at first so happy a thing that Gilbert could scarcely realise it ; and yet , throughout the weary interval of ignorance as to her fate , he have always declare his belief in her safety . have he be really as confident as he have seem , as the day have go by , one after another , without bring he any tiding of she ? have there be no shapeless terror in his mind , no dark dread that when the knowledge come , it might be something bad than ignorance ? yes , now in the sudden fulness of his joy , he know how much he have fear , how very near he have be to despair . 

 but John Saltram , what of he ? be it not at the hazard of his life that he have go upon this sudden journey , reckless and excited , in a fever of hope and delight ? 

 " Providence will surely be good to he , " Gilbert think . 

 " he bear the journey from town when he be much bad than he be now . surely he will bear a somewhat rougher journey now , buoy up by hope . " 

 the landlady come in presently , and insist upon give Mr. Fenton her own version of the story which he have just hear from she maid ; and a very close and elaborate version it be , though not remarkable for any new fact . he be fain to listen to it with a show of patience , however , and to consent to eat a mutton chop which the good woman insist upon cook for he , after his confession that he have eat nothing since breakfast . he keep tell himself that there be no hurry ; that he be not want in Coleman - street ; that his presence there be a question of his own gratification and nothing else ; but the fever in his mind be not to be set at rest go easily . there be a sense of hurry upon he that he could not shake off , argue with himself as wisely as he would . 

 he take a hasty meal , and start off to the railway station directly afterwards , though there be no train to carry he back to London for nearly an hour . 

 it be weary work wait at the little station , while the keen March wind blow sharply across the unsheltered platform on which Gilbert pace to and fro in his restlessness ; weary work wait , with that sense of hurry and anxiety upon he , not to be shake off by any effort he could make to take a hopeful view of the future . he try to think of those two whom he love well on earth , whose union he have teach himself , by a marvellous effort of unselfishness , to contemplate with serenity , try to think of they in the supreme happiness of their restoration to each other ; but he could not bring his mind to the realisation of this picture . after all those torment of doubt and perplexity which he have undergo during the last three month , the simple fact of Marian 's safety seem too good a thing to be true . he be torture by a vague sense of the unreality of this relief that have come so suddenly to put an end to all perplexity . 

 " I feel as if I be the victim of some hoax , some miserable delusion , " he say to himself . " not till I see she , not till I clasp she by the hand , shall I believe that she be really give back to we . " 

 and in his eagerness to do this , to put an end to that slow torture of unreasonable doubt which have come upon he since the reading of John Saltram 's letter , the delay at the railway station be an almost intolerable ordeal ; but the hour come to an end at last , the place awake from its blank stillness to a faint show of life and motion , a door or two bang , a countrifie - look young woman with a good many bundle and a band - box come out of the waiting - room and arrange her possession in readiness for the come train , a porter emerge lazily from some unknown corner and look up the line then , after another five minute of blankness , there come a hoarse throb in the distance , a bell rang , and the up - train pant into the station . it be a slow train , unluckily for Gilbert 's impatience , which stop everywhere , and the journey to London take he over an hour . it be past nine when a hansom drive he into Coleman - street , a dull unfrequented - look thoroughfare between Tottenham - court - road and Gower - street , overshadow a little by the adjacent gloom of the University Hospital , and altogether a low - spirited street . 

 Gilbert look up eagerly at the window of number 14 , expect to see light shin , and some visible sign of rejoice , even upon the house front ; but there be nothing . either the shutter be shut , or there be no light within , for the window be blank and dark . it be a slight thing , but enough to intensify that shapeless foreboding against which he have be struggle throughout his journey . 

 " you must have come to the wrong house , " he say to the cabman as he get out . 

 " no , sir , this be 14 . " 

 yes , it be the right number . Gilbert read it on the door ; and yet it could scarcely be the right house ; for tie to the door - handle be a placard with " Apartments " engrave upon it , and this house would hardly be large enough to accommodate other lodger besides Mr. Nowell and his daughter . yet there be no know the capability of a London lodging - house in an obscure quarter , and there might be some vacant garret in the roof , or some dreary two - pair back , dignify by the name of " apartment . " Gilbert give a loud hurried knock . there be a delay which seem to he interminable , then a hasty shuffling of slipshod foot upon the basement stair , then the glimmer of a light through the keyhole , the removal of a chain , and at last the opening of the door . it be open by a young person with her hair dress in the prevail fashion , and an air of some gentility , which clash a little with a certain slatternliness that pervade her attire . she be rather a pretty girl , but have the fade London look of late hour , and precocious care , instead of the fresh bloom and girlish brightness which should have belong to she . 

 " do you please to wish to see the apartment , sir ? " she ask politely . 

 " no ; I want to see Mr. and Mrs. the lady and gentleman who be lodge here . " 

 he scarcely know under what name he ought to ask for Marian . it seem unnatural to he now to speak of she as Mrs. Holbrook . 

 " the lady and gentleman , sir ! " the girl exclaim with a surprised air . " there be no one lodge here now . Mr. Nowell and his daughter leave yesterday morning . " 

 " leave yesterday morning ? " 

 " yes , sir . they go away to Liverpool ; they be go to America to New York . " 

 " Mr. Nowell and his daughter , Mrs. Holbrook ? " 

 " yes , sir , that be the lady 's name . " 

 " it be impossible , " cry Gilbert ; " utterly impossible that Mrs. Holbrook would go to America ! she have tie that would keep she in England ; a husband whom she would never abandon in that manner . there must be some mistake here . " 

 " o no , indeed , sir , there be no mistake . I see all the luggage label with my own eye , and the direction be New York by steam - packet Oronoco ; and Mrs. Holbrook have lot of dress make , and all sort of thing . and as to her husband , sir , her father tell I that he have treat she very badly , and that she never mean to go back to he again to be make unhappy by he . she be go to New York to live with Mr. Nowell all the rest of her life . " 

 " there must have be some treachery , some underhand work , to bring this about . do she go of her own free will ? " 

 " o , dear I , yes , sir . Mr. Nowell be kindness itself to she , and she be very fond of he , and please to go to America , as far as I could make out . " 

 " and she never seem depressed or unhappy ? " 

 " I never notice she be so , sir . they be out a good deal , you see ; for Mr. Nowell be a gay gentleman , very fond of pleasure , and he would have Mrs. Holbrook always with he . they be away in Paris ever so long , in January and the beginning of February , but keep on the lodging all the same . they be very good lodger . " 

 " have they many visitor ? " 

 " no , sir ; scarcely any one except a gentleman who use to come sometimes of an evening , and sit drink spirit - and - water with Mr. Nowell ; he be his lawyer , I believe , but I never hear his name . " 

 " do no one come here yesterday to inquire for Mrs. Holbrook towards evening ? " 

 " yes , sir ; there be a gentleman come in a cab . he look very ill , as pale as death , and be in a dreadful way when he find they be go . he ask I a great many question , the same as you have   ask I , and I think I never see any one so cut - up as he seem . he do not   say much about that either , but it be easy to see it in his face . he want to look at the apartment , to see whether he could find anything , an old letter or such - like , that might be a help to he in go after his friend , and mother take he upstairs . " 

 " do he find anything ? " 

 " no , sir ; Mr. Nowell have not   leave so much as a scrap of paper about the place . so the gentleman thank mother , and go away in the same cab as have bring he . " 

 " do you know where he be go ? " 

 " I fancy he be go to Liverpool after Mr. Nowell and his daughter . he seem all in a fever , like a person that be ready to do anything desperate . but I hear he tell the cabman Cavendish - square . " 

 " Cavendish - square ! yes , I can guess where he be go . but what could he want there ? " Gilbert say to himself , while the girl star at he wonderingly , think that he , as well as the other gentleman , have go distraught on account of Mr. Nowell 's daughter . 

 " thank you for answer my question so patiently , and good - night , " say Gilbert , slip some silver into her hand ; for his quick eye have observe the fade condition of her finery , and a general air of poverty conspicuous in her aspect . " stay , " he add , take out his card - case ; " if you should hear anything far of these people , I should be much oblige by your send I word at that address . " 

 " I will not   forget , sir ; not that I think we be likely to hear any more of they , they be go straight off to America . " 

 " perhaps not . but if you do hear anything , let I know . " 

 he have dismiss his cab on alight in Coleman - street , believe that his journey be end ; but the walk to Cavendish - square be a short one , and he set out at a rapid pace . 

 the check that have befall he be a severe one . it seem a deathblow to all hope , a dreary realization of that vague dread which have pursue he from the first . if Marian have indeed start for America , what new difficulty must need attend every effort to bring she back ; since it be clear that her father 's interest be involve in keep she under his influence , and separate she entirely from her husband . the journey to New York be no doubt intend to secure this state of thing . in America , in that vast country , with which this man be familiar with long residence , how easy for he to hide she for ever from her friend ! how vain would all inquiry , all research be likely to prove ! 

 at the ultimate moment , in the hour of hope and rejoicing , she be lose to they irrevocably . 

 " yet criminal have be trace upon the other side of the Atlantic , where the police have be prompt to follow they , " Gilbert say to himself , glance for an instant at the more hopeful side of the question ; " but not often where they have   get anything like a start . do John Saltram really mean to follow those two to Liverpool , I wonder ? such a journey would seem like madness , in his state ; and yet what a triumph if he should have be in time to prevent their starting by the Oronoco ! " 

 and then , after a pause , he ask himself , 

 " what could he want with Mrs. Branston , at a time when every moment be precious ? money , perhaps . he could have have none with he . yes , money , no doubt ; but I shall discover that from she presently , and may learn something of his plan into the bargain . " 

 Gilbert go into a stationer 's shop and purchase a Bradshaw . there be a train leave Euston station for Liverpool at a quarter to eleven . he might be in time for that , after see Mrs. Branston . that lady happen fortunately to be at home , and receive Gilbert alone in her favourite back drawing - room , where he find she ensconce in that snug retreat make by the six - leave japanese screen , which form a kind of temple on one side of the fire - place . there have be a final rupture between Adela and Mrs. Pallinson a few day before , and that matron , have show her card a little too plainly , have be rout by an unwonted display of spirit on the part of the pretty little widow . she be go , carry all her belonging with she , and leave peace and liberty behind she . the flush of triumph be still upon Mrs. Branston ; and this unexpected victory , brief and sudden in its occurrence , like most great victory , be almost a consolation to she for that disappointment which have stricken she so heavily of late . 

 Adela Branston welcome her visitor very graciously ; but Gilbert have no time to waste upon small talk , and after a hasty apology for his untimely intrusion , dash at once into the question he have come to ask . 

 " John Saltram be with you yesterday evening , Mrs. Branston , " he say . " pray tell I the purpose that bring he here , and anything you know of his plan of action after leave you . " 

 " I can tell you very little about that . he be go upon a journey he tell I , that evening , immediately indeed ; a most important journey ; but he do not tell I where he be go . " 

 " I think I can guess that , " say Gilbert . " do he seem much agitated ? " 

 " no ; he be quite calm ; but he have a resolute air , like a man who have some great purpose to achieve . I think he look very white and weak , and tell he that I be sure he be too ill to start upon a long journey , or any journey . I beg he not to go , if it be possible to avoid go , and use every argument I could think of to persuade he to abandon the idea of such a thing . but it be all no use . ' if I have only a dozen hour to live , I must go , ' he say . " 

 " he come to ask you for money for his journey , do he not ? " 

 " he do . I suppose to so close a friend as you be to he , there can be no breach of confidence in my admitting that . he come to borrow any ready - money I might happen to have in the house . fortunately , I have a hundred and twenty pound by I in hard cash . " 

 " and he take that ? he want as much as that ? " ask Gilbert eagerly . 

 " yes , he say he be likely to require as much as that . " 

 " then he must have think of go to America . " 

 " to America ! travel to America in his weak state of health ? " cry Mrs. Branston , aghast . 

 " yes . it seem like madness , do it not ? but there be circumstance under which a man may be excuse for be almost mad . John Saltram have go in pursuit of some one very dear to he , some one who have be separate from he by treachery . " 

 " a woman ? " 

 Adela Branston 's fair face flush crimson as she ask the question . a woman ? yes , no doubt he be in pursuit of that woman whom he love well than she . 

 " I can not stop to answer a single question now , my dear Mrs. Branston , " Gilbert say gently . " you shall know all by - and - by , and I be sure your generous heart will forgive any wrong that have be do you in this business . good night . I have to catch a train at a quarter to eleven ; I be go to Liverpool . " 

 " after Mr. Saltram ? " 

 " yes ; I do not consider he in a fitting condition to travel alone . I hope to be in time to prevent his do anything rash . " 

 " but how will you find he ? " 

 " I must make a round of the hotel till I discover his head - quarter . good night . " 

 " let I order my carriage to take you to the station . " 

 " a thousand thank , but I shall be there before your carriage would be ready . I can pick up a cab close by and shall have time to call at my lodging for a carpet - bag . once more , good night . " 

 it be still dark when Gilbert Fenton arrive at Liverpool . he throw himself upon a sofa in the waiting - room , where he have an hour or so of uncomfortable , unrefreshing sleep , and then rouse himself and go out to begin his round of the hotel . 

 a surly fly - driver of unknown age and prodigious deafness carry he from house to house ; first to all the principal place of entertainment , aristocratic , family , and commercial ; then to more obscure tavern and boarding - house , until the sun be high and the commerce of Liverpool in full swing ; and at all these place Gilbert question night - porter , and chief waiter , and head chamber - maid , until his brain grow dizzy by mere repetition of his question ; but no positive tiding could he obtain of John Saltram . there be a coffee - house near the quay where it seem just possible that he have sleep ; but even here the description be of the vague , and the person describe might just as well have be John Smith as John Saltram . Gilbert dismiss the fly - man and his vehicle at last , thoroughly weary out with that morning 's work . 

 he go to one of the hotel , take a hasty breakfast , and then hurry off to the office belong to the owner of the Oronoco . 

 that vessel have start for New York at nine o'clock on the previous morning , and John Saltram have go with she . his name be the last on the list of passenger ; he have only take his passage an hour before the steamer leave Liverpool , but there his name be in black and white . the name of Percival Nowell , and of Mrs. Holbrook , his daughter , be also in the list . the whole business be clear enough , and there be nothing more that Gilbert could do . have John Saltram be strong and well , his friend would have feel nothing but satisfaction in the thought that he be go in the same vessel with Marian , and would without doubt bring she back in triumph . but the question of his health be a painful one to contemplate . could he , or could he not endure the strain that he have put upon himself within the last eight - and - forty hour ? in desperate strait man can do desperate thing there be always that fact to be remember ; but still John Saltram might break down under the burden he have take upon himself ; and when Gilbert go back to London that afternoon he be sorely anxious about this feeble traveller . 

 he find a letter from he at the lodging in Wigmore - street ; a hurried letter write at Liverpool the night before John Saltram 's departure . he have arrive there too late to get on board the Oronoco that night , and have ascertain that the vessel be to leave at nine next morning . 

 " I shall take my passage in she in case of the bad , " he write ; " and if I can not see Marian and persuade she to come on shore with I , I must go with she to New York . Heaven know what power her father may use against I in the brief opportunity I shall have for see she before the vessel start ; but he can not   prevent my be their fellow - passenger , and once afloat it shall go hard with I if I can not make my dear girl hear reason . do not be uneasy about my health , dear old friend ; you see how well I be keep up under all this strain upon body and mind . you will see I come back from America a new man , strong enough to prove my gratitude for your devotion , in some shape or other , I trust in God . " 

 CHAPTER XLI 

 OUTWARD BOUND 


 the bustle of departure be at its culminate point when John Saltram go on board the Oronoco , captain and officer scud hither and thither , give order and answer inquiry at every point , with a sharp , short , decisive air , as of command power in the last half - hour before a great battle ; steward and his underling ubiquitous ; passenger roam vaguely to and fro , in quest of nothing particular , and in a state of semi - distraction . 

 in this scene of confusion there be no one to answer Mr. Saltram 's eager inquire about those traveller whom he have pursue to this point . he do contrive , just about ten minute before the vessel sail , to capture the ubiquitous steward by the button - hole , and to ask for tiding of Mr. Nowell , before that excited functionary could wrench himself away . 

 " Mr. Nowell , sir ; upon my word , sir , I can not   say . yes , there be a gentleman of that name on board ; state - room number 5 and 7 ; get a daughter with he tall dark gentleman , with a moustache and beard . yes , sir , he be on deck just now , on the bridge ; but I do not   see he , I suppose he be go below . well look for he in the saloon , sir . " 

 the ten minute be over before John Saltram have see half the face on board the crowded vessel ; but in his hurried wandering to and fro , eager to see that one face which he so ardently desire to behold once wear , he have meet nothing but stranger . there be no help for it : the vessel would steam out seaward presently , and he must need go with she . at the good , he have expect this . it be not likely that , even if he could have obtain speech with his wife , she could have be prevail upon immediately to desert the father whose fortune she have elect to follow , and return to shore with the husband she have abandon . her mind must have be poison , her judgment pervert , before she could have leave he thus of her own free will ; and it would need the light of calm reason to set thing right again . no ; John Saltram could scarcely hope to carry she off by a coup - de - main , in the face of the artful schemer who have evidently obtain so strong an influence over she . that she could for a moment contemplate this voyage to America with her father , be enough to demonstrate the revolution that must have take place in her feeling towards her husband . 

 " Slander and lie be very strong , " John Saltram say to himself ; " but I do not think , when my dear love and I be once face to face , any power on earth can prevail against I . she must be change indeed , if it can ; she must be change indeed , if anything but a lie can part we . " 

 he have come on board the Oronoco prepare for the bad , and furnish with a slender outfit for the voyage , hurriedly purchase at a Liverpool clothier 's . he have plenty of money in his pocket enough to pay for his own and his wife 's return passage ; and the thought of this useless journey across the Atlantic trouble he very little . what do it matter where he be , if she be with he ? the mental torture he have undergo during all this time , in which he have seem in danger of lose she altogether , have teach he how dear she be how precious and perfect a treasure he have hold so lightly . 

 the vessel steamed put of the Mersey , and John Saltram , indifferent to the last glimpse of his native land , be still roam hither and thither , in quest of the familiar face he long with such a passionate yearn to see ; but up to this point he seek for his wife in vain . Mrs. Holbrook have evidently retire at once to her cabin . there be nothing for he to do but to establish a channel of communication with she by mean of the stewardess . 

 he find this official with some trouble , and so desperately busy that it be no easy matter to obtain speech with she , pursue as she be by forlorn and distracted female passenger , clamorously eager to know where she have put that " waterproof cloak , " or " Maud , " or " travel - bag , " or " dressing - case . " he do at last contrive to enlist her service in his behalf , and extort some answer to his question . 

 " yes , " she tell he , " Mrs. Holbrook be on board state - room number 7 . she have go to her room at once , but would appear at dinner - time , no doubt , if she be not   ill . " 

 John Saltram tear a blank leaf from his pocket - book , and write one hasty line : 

 " I be here , Marian ; let I see you for God 's sake . 

 " JOHN HOLBROOK . " 

 " if you will take that to the lady in number 7 , I shall be exceedingly oblige , " he say to the stewardess , slip half - a - crown into her willing hand at the same time . 

 " yes , sir , this very minute , sir . " 

 John Saltram sit down upon a bench outside the lady ' cabin , in a sort of antechamber between the steward 's pantry and store - room , strongly perfume with the odour of grocery , and wait for Marian 's come . he have no shadow of doubt that she would come to he instantly , in defiance of any other guardian or counsell . whatever lie might have be tell she however she might have be teach to doubt he he have a perfect faith in the power of his immediate presence . they have but to meet face to face , and all would be well . 

 indeed , there be need that thing should be well for John Saltram very speedily . he have set nature at defiance so far , act as if physical weakness be unknown to he . there be period in a man 's life in which nothing seem impossible to he ; in which by the mere force of will he triumph over impossibility . but such conquest be apt to be of the brief . John Saltram feel that he must very soon break down . the heavily throb heart , the ache limb , the dizzy sight , and parch throat , tell he how much this desperate chase have cost he . if he have strength enough to clasp his wife 's hand , to give her love greeting and tell she that he be true , it would be about as much as he could hope to achieve ; and then he feel that he would be glad to crawl into any corner of the vessel where he might find rest . 

 the stewardess come back to he presently , with rather a discomfited air . 

 " the lady say she be too ill to see any one , sir , " she tell John Saltram ; " but under any circumstance she must decline to see you . " 

 " she say that my wife tell you that ? " 

 " your wife , sir ! good gracious I , be the lady in number 7 your wife ? she come on board with her father , and I understand they be only two in party . " 

 " yes ; she come with her father . her father 's treachery have separate she from I ; but a few word would explain everything , if I could only see she . " 

 he think it well to tell the woman the truth , strange as it might seem to she . her sympathy be more likely to be enlist in his favour if she know the actual state of the case . 

 " do Mrs. Holbrook positively decline to see I ? " he ask again , scarcely able to believe that Marian could have resist even that brief appeal scrawl upon a scrap of paper . 

 " she do indeed , sir , " answer the stewardess . " nothing could be more positive than her manner . I tell she how anxious you seem for I could see it in your face , you see , sir , when you give I the paper and I really do not   like to bring you such a message ; but it be no use . ' I decline to see he , ' the lady say , ' and be sure you bring I no more message from this gentleman ; ' and with that , sir , she tear up the bit of paper , as cool as could be . but , dear I , sir , how ill you do look , to be sure ! " 

 " I have be very ill . I come from a sick - room to follow my wife . " 

 " had not   you well go and lie down a little , sir ? you look as if you could scarcely stand . shall I fetch the steward for you ? " 

 " no , thank . I can find my way to my berth , I daresay . yes , I suppose I have well go and lie down . I can do no more yet awhile . " 

 he could do no more , and have indeed barely strength to stagger to his sleeping - quarter , which he discover at last with some difficulty . here he fling himself down , dress as he be , and lie like a log , for hour , not sleep , but powerless to move hand or foot , and with his brain rack by torture thought . " as soon as I be able to stand again , I will see her father , and exact a reckoning from he , " he say to himself again and again , during those long dreary hour of prostration ; but when the next day come , he be too weak to raise himself from his narrow bed , and on the next day after that he be no well . the steward be much concerned by his feeble condition , especially as it be no common case of sea - sickness ; for John Saltram have tell he that he be never sea - sick . he bring the prostrate traveller soda - water and brandy , and try to tempt he to eat rich soup of a nutritious character ; but the sick man would take nothing except an occasional draught of soda - water . 

 on the third day of the voyage the steward be very anxious to bring the ship 's surgeon to look at Mr. Saltram ; but against this John Saltram resolutely set his face . 

 " for pity 's sake , do not   bore I with any more doctor ! " he cry fretfully . " I have have enough of that kind of thing . the man can do nothing for I . I be knock up with over exertion and excitement that be all ; my strength will come back to I soon or later if I lie quietly here . " 

 the steward give way , for the time be , upon this appeal , and the surgeon be not summon ; but Mr. Saltram 's strength seem very slow to return to he . he could not sleep ; he could only lie there listen to all the noise of the ship , the perpetual creaking and rattling , and tramping of footstep above his head , and torture by his impatience to be astir again . he would not stand upon punctilio this time , he tell himself ; he would go straight to the door of Marian 's cabin , and stand there until she come out to he . be she not his wife his very own powerless to hold he at bay in this manner ? his strength do not come back to he ; that wakeful prostration in which the brain be always busy , while the ache body lie still , do not appear to be a curative process . in the course of that third night of the voyage John Saltram be delirious , much to the alarm of his fellow - passenger , the single sharer of his cabin , a nervous elderly gentleman , who object to his illness altogether as an outrage upon himself , and be indignantly desirous to know whether it be contagious . 

 so the doctor be bring to the sick man early next morning whether he would or not , and go through the usual investigation , and promise to administer the usual sedative , and assure the anxious passenger that Mr. Saltram 's complaint be in nowise infectious . 

 " he have evidently be suffer from serious illness lately , and have be over - exert himself , " say the doctor ; " that seem very clear . we shall contrive to bring he round in a few day , I daresay , though he certainly have get into a very low state . " 

 the doctor say this rather gravely , on which the passenger again become disturbed of aspect . a death on board ship must need be such an unpleasant business , and he really have not bargain for anything of that kind . what be the use of pay first - class fare on board a first - class vessel , if one be subject to annoyance of this sort ? in the steerage of an overcrowded emigrant ship such a thing might be a matter of course a mere natural incident of the voyage but on board the Oronoco it be most unlooked for . 

 " he be not go to die , be he ? " ask the passenger , with an injure air . 

 " o dear , no , I should hope not . I have no apprehension of that sort , " reply the surgeon promptly . 

 he would no doubt have say the same thing up to within an hour or so of the patient 's decease . 

 " there be an extreme debility , that be all , " he go on quite cheerfully ; " and if we can induce he to take plenty of nourishment , we shall get on very well , I daresay . " 

 after this the nervous passenger be profoundly interested in the amount of refreshment consume by the patient , and question the steward about he with a most sympathetic air . 

 John Saltram , otherwise John Holbrook , be not destine to die upon this outward voyage . he be very eager to be well , or at least to be at liberty to move about again ; and perhaps this impatient desire of his help in some measure to bring about his recovery . the will , physiologist tell we , have a great deal to do with these thing . 

 the voyage be a prosperous one . the good ship steam gaily across the Atlantic through the bleak spring weather ; and there be plenty of eat and drink , and joviality and flirtation on board she , while John Saltram lie upon his back , very helpless , languish to be astir once more . 

 during these long dreary day and night he have contrive to send several message to the lady in the state - cabin , feeble pencil scrawl , implore she to come to he , tell she that he be very ill , at death 's door almost , and desire nothing so much as to see she , if only for a moment . but the answer by word of mouth of the steward or stewardess always be unfailingly to the same effect : the lady in number 7 refuse to hold any communication with the sick gentleman . 

 " she be a hard one ! " the steward remark to the stewardess , when they talk the matter over in a comfortable manner during the progress of a snug little supper in the steward 's cabin , ' she must be an out - and - out hard - hearted one to stand out against he like that , if he be her husband , and I suppose he be . I tell she to - day when I take his message how bad he be , and that it be a chance if he ever go ashore alive ; but she be walk up and down deck with her father ten minute afterwards , laugh and talk like anything . I suppose he be be a bad lot , Mrs. Peterson , and deserve no well from she ; but still it do seem hard to see he lie there , and his wife so near he , and yet refuse to go and see he . " 

 " I have   no common patience with she , " say the stewardess with acrimony ; " the cold - hearted creature ! flaunt about like that , with a sick husband within a stone 's throw of she . suppose he be to blame , Mr. Martin ; whatever his fault may have be , it be not   the time for a wife to remember they . " 

 to this Mr. Martin respond dubiously , remark that there be some carrying on upon the part of husband which it be difficult for a wife not to remember . 

 the good ship speed on , unhindered by adverse wind or foul weather , and be within twenty - four hour of her destination when John Saltram be at last able to crawl out of the cabin , where he have lain for some eight or nine day crippled and helpless . 

 the first purpose which he set himself to accomplish be an interview with Marian 's father . he want to grapple his enemy somehow to ascertain the nature of the game that be be play against he . he have keep himself very quiet for this purpose , wish to take Percival Nowell by surprise ; and on this last day but one of the voyage , when he be able for the first time to rise from his berth , no one but the steward and the surgeon know that he intend so to rise . 

 he have take the steward in some measure into his confidence ; and that official , after help he to dress , leave he seat in the cabin , while he go to ascertain the whereabouts of Mr. Nowell . Mr. Martin , the steward , come back after about five minute . 

 " he be in the saloon , sir , reading , quite alone . you could not   have a well opportunity of speak to he . " 

 " that be a good fellow . then I will go at once . " 

 " you would well take my arm , sir ; you be as weak as a baby , and the ship lurch a good deal to - day . " 

 " I be not very strong , certainly . I begin to think I never shall be strong again . do you know , Martin , I be once stroke in a university eight . not much vigour in my bicep now , eh ? " 

 it be only a few pace from one cabin to the other ; but Mr. Saltram could scarcely have go so far without the steward 's support arm . he be a feeble - look figure , with a white wan face , as he totter along the narrow passage between the table , make his way to that end of the saloon where Percival Nowell lounge luxuriously , with his leg stretch at full length upon the sofa , and a book in his hand . 

 " Mr. Nowell , I believe , " say the sick man , as the other look up at he with consummate coolness . whatever his feeling might be with regard to his daughter 's husband , he have have ample time to prepare himself for an encounter with he . 

 " yes , my name be Nowell . but I have really not the honour to " 

 " you do not know I , " answer John Saltram . " no , but it be time you do so . I be your daughter 's husband , John Holbrook . " 

 " indeed . I have hear that she have be persecute by the message of some person call himself her husband . you be that person , I presume . " 

 " I have try to persuade my wife to see I . yes ; and I mean to see she before this vessel arrive in port . " 

 " but if the lady in question refuse to have anything to say to you ? " 

 " we shall soon put that to the test . I have be too ill to stir ever since I come on board , or you would have hear of I before this , Mr. Nowell . now that I can move about once more , I shall find a way to assert my claim , you may be sure . but in the first place , I want to know by what right you stole my wife away from her home by what right you bring she on this voyage ? " 

 " before I answer that question , Mr. Mr. Holbrook , as you choose to call yourself , I will ask you another . by what right do you call yourself my daughter 's husband ? what evidence have you to produce to prove that you be not a bare - faced impostor ? you do not   carry your marriage - certificate about with you , I daresay ; and in the absence of some kind of documentary evidence , what be to convince I that you be what you pretend to be my daughter 's husband ? " 

 " the evidence of your daughter 's own sens . place I face to face with she ; she will not deny my identity . " 

 " but how , if my daughter decline to see you , as she do most positively ? she have suffer enough at your hand , and be only too glad to be release from you . " 

 " she have suffer she be glad to be release ! why , you most consummate scoundrel ! " cry John Saltram , " there never be an unkind word speak between my wife and I ! she be the good , most devoted of woman ; and nothing but the vile treachery could have separate we . I know not what villanous slander you have make she believe , or by what mean you lure she away from I ; but I know that a few word between we would let in the light upon your plot . you have well make the good of a bad position , Mr. Nowell . as my wife 's father , you know , you be pretty sure to escape . whatever my inclination might be , my regard for she would make I indulgent to you . you will find candour avail you well in this case , depend upon it . your daughter have inherit a fortune , and you want to put your hand upon it altogether . it would be wise to moderate your desire , and be content with a fair share of the inheritance . your daughter be not the woman to treat you ungenerously , nor be I the man to create any hindrance to her generosity . " 

 " I can make no bargain with you , sir , " reply Mr. Nowell , with the same cool audacity of manner that have distinguish he throughout the interview ; " nor be I prepared to admit your claim to the position you assume . but if my daughter be your wife , she leave you of her own free will , under no coercion of mine ; and she must return to you in the same manner , or you must put the machinery of the law in force to compel she . and that , I flatter myself , in a free country like America , will be rather a difficult business . " 

 it be hard for John Saltram to hear any man talk like this , and not be able to knock he down . but in his present condition Marian 's husband could not have grapple a child , and he know it . 

 " you be an outrageous scoundrel ! " he say between his set tooth , torture by that most ardent desire to dash his clench fist into Mr. Nowell 's handsome dissolute - look face . " you be a most consummate villain , and you know it ! " 

 " hard word mean so little , " return Mr. Nowell coolly , " and go for so little . that kind of language before witness would be actionable ; but , upon my word , it would be mere child 's play on my part to notice it , especially to a man in your condition . you would well claim your wife from the captain , and see what he will say to you . I have tell he that there be some semi - lunatic on board , who pretend to be Mrs. Holbrook 's husband ; so he will be quite prepared to hear your statement . " 

 John Saltram leave the saloon in silence . it be bad than useless talk to this man , who presume upon his helpless state , and openly defy he . his next effort must be to see Marian . 

 this he find impossible , for the time be at any rate . the state - room number 7 be an apartment a little big than a rabbit - hutch , open out of a large cabin , and in that cabin there repose a ponderous matron who have suffer from sea - sickness throughout the voyage , and who could in no wise permit a masculine intruder to invade the scene of her retirement . 

 the idea of any blockade of Marian 's door be therefore futile . he must need wait as patiently as he might , till she appear of her own free will . he could not have to wait very long ; something less than a day and a night , the steward have tell he , would bring they to the end of the voyage . 

 Mr. Saltram go on deck , still assist by the friendly steward , and seat himself in a sheltered corner of the vessel , hop that the sea - breeze might bring he back some remnant of his lost strength . the ship 's surgeon have advise he to get a little fresh air as soon as he feel himself able to bear it ; so he sit in his obscure nook , very helpless and very feeble , meditate upon what he should do when the final moment come and he have to claim his wife . 

 he have no idea of make his wrong know to the captain , unless as a last desperate resource . he could not bring himself to make Marian the subject of a vulgar squabble . no , it be to herself alone he would appeal ; it be in the natural instinct of her own heart that he would trust . 

 very long and weary seem the remain hour of that joyless voyage . Mr. Saltram be fain to go back to his cabin after an hour on deck , there to lie and await the morrow . he have need to husband his strength for the come encounter . the steward tell he in the evening that Mrs. Holbrook have not din in the saloon that day , as usual . she have keep her cabin closely , and complain of illness . 

 the morning dawn at last , after what have seem an endless night to John Saltram , lie awake in his narrow berth a bleak blusterous morning , with the cold gray light star in at the port - hole , like an unfriendly face . there be no promise in such a daybreak ; it be only light , and nothing more . 

 Mr. Saltram , have duly deliberate the matter during the long hour of that weary night , have decide that his wise course be to lie perdu until the last moment , the very moment of landing , and then to come boldly forward and make his claim . it be useless to waste his strength in any futile endeavour to baffle so hardy a scoundrel as Percival Nowell . at the last , when Marian be leave the ship , it would be time for he to assert his right as her husband , and to defy the wretch who have beguile she away from he . 

 have once arrive at this decision , he be able to await the issue of event with some degree of tranquility . he have no doubt , even now , of his wife 's affection for he , no fear as to the ultimate triumph of her love over all the lie and artifice of that scheme scoundrel , her father . 

 it be nearly three o'clock in the afternoon when the steward come to tell he that they be on the point of arrive at their destination . the wharf where they be to land be within sight . the man have promise to give he due warning of this event , and John Saltram have therefore contrive to keep himself quiet amidst all the feverish impatience and confusion of mind prevail amongst the other passenger . he be reward for his prudence ; for when he rise to go on deck , he find himself strong than he have feel yet . he go up the companion - ladder , take his place close to the spot at which the passenger must all leave the vessel , and wait . 

 New York be very near . the day have be cold and showery , but the sun be shin now , and the whole scene look bright and gay . every one seem in high spirit , as if the new world they be about to touch contain for they a certainty of Elysium . it be such a delicious relief to arrive at the great lively Yankee city , after the tedium of a ten - day 's voyage , pleasant and easy as the transit have be . 

 John Saltram look eagerly among the face of the crowd , but neither Percival Nowell nor his daughter be to be see amongst they . presently the vessel touch the wharf , and the traveller begin to move towards the gangway . he watch they , one by one , breathlessly . at the very last , Mr. Nowell step quickly forward , with a veiled figure on his arm . 

 she be closely veil , her face quite hide by thick black lace , and she be cling with something of a frightened air to her companion 's arm . 

 John Saltram spring up from his post of observation , and confront the two before they could leave the vessel . 

 " Marian , " he say , in slow decide tone , " let go that man 's arm . you will leave this vessel with I , and with no one else . " 

 " stand out of the way , fellow , " cry Percival Nowell ; " my daughter can have nothing to say to you . " 

 " Marian , for God 's sake , obey I ! there be the vile treachery in this man 's conduct . let go his arm . my love , my darling , come with I ! " 

 there be a passionate appeal in his tone , but it produce no answer . 

 " Marian ! " he cry , still interpose himself between these two and the passage to the landing wharf . " Marian , I will have some answer ! " 

 " you have have your answer , sir , " say Percival Nowell , try to push he aside . " this lady do not know you . do you want to make a scene , and render yourself ridiculous to every one here ? there be plenty of lunatic asylum in New York that will accommodate you , if you be determined to make yourself eligible for they . " 

 " marian ! " repeat John Saltram , without vouchsafe the faint notice of this speech . " Marian , speak to I ! " 

 and then , as there come no answer from that shrink clinging figure , with a sudden spring forward , that bring he quite close to she , John Saltram tear the veil away from the hidden face . 

 " this must be some impostor , " he say ; " this be not my wife . " 

 he be right . the creature cling to Percival Nowell 's arm be a pretty woman enough , with rather red hair , and a common face . she be about Marian 's height ; and that be the only likeness between they . 

 the spectator of this brief fracas crowd round the actor in it , see nothing but the insult offer to a lady , and highly indignant with John Saltram ; and amidst their murmur Percival Nowell push his way to the shore , with the woman still cling to his arm . 

 CHAPTER XLII 

 the PLEASURES of WYNCOMB 


 that shrill anguish - stricken cry which Ellen Whitelaw have hear on the night of the stranger 's visit to Wyncomb Farm haunt she afterwards with a wearisome persistence . she could not forget that wild unearthly sound ; she could not help continually try to find some solution for the mystery , until her brain be tired with the perpetual effort . 

 ponder upon this matter as she might , she could find no reasonable explanation of the enigma ; and in spite of her common sense a quality of which she possess a very fair share she be fain to believe at last that this grim bare - look old house be haunt , and that the agonised shriek she and Mrs. Tadman have hear that night be only the ghostly sound of some cry wrung from a bleed heart in day go by , the echo of an anguish that have be in the far past . 

 she even go so far as to ask her husband one day if he have ever hear that the house be haunt , and whether there be any record of crime or wrong that have be do in it in the past . Mr. Whitelaw seem scarcely to relish the question ; but after one of his meditative pause laugh his wife 's inquiry to scorn , and tell she that there be no ghost at Wyncomb except the ghost of dead rat that have ravage the granary and certainly they seem to rise from their graf in spite of poison and trap , cat and ferret and that , as to anything that have be do in the house in day go by , he have never hear tell that his ancestor have ever do anything but eat and drink and sleep , and save money from year 's end to year 's end ; and a hard time they have have of it to pay their way and put something by , in the face of all the difficulty that surround the path of a farmer . 

 if Ellen Whitelaw 's life have be as the life of happy woman , full of small daily care and all - engross domestic interest , the memory of that unearthly scream would no doubt have fade out of her mind ere long , instead of remain , as it do , a source of constant perplexity to she . but there be no interest , no single charm in her life . there be nothing in the world leave for she to care for . the fertile flat around Wyncomb Farmhouse bound her universe . day by day she rise to perform the same monotonous duty , sustain by no lofty aim , cheer by neither friendship nor affection ; for she could not teach herself to feel anything warm than toleration for her daily companion , Mrs. Tadman only work laboriously because existence be more endurable to she when she be busy than when she be idle . it be scarcely strange , then , that she brood upon the memory of that night when the nameless stranger have come to Wyncomb , and that she try to put the fact of his come and that other incident of the cry together , and to make something out of the two event by that mean ; but put they together as she might , she be no near any solution of the mystery . that her husband and the stranger could have fail to hear that pierce shriek seem almost impossible : yet both have deny hear it . the story of the stranger have knock his shin and cry out on do so , appear like a feeble attempt to account for that wild cry . vain and hopeless be all her endeavour to arrive at any reasonable explanation , and her attempt to get anything like an opinion out of Mrs. Tadman be utterly useless . Mr. Whitelaw 's cousin be still inclined to take a gloomy view of the stranger 's visit , in spite of her kinsman 's assurance that the transaction between himself and the unknown be a profitable one . horse - racing if not part with a farm Mrs. Tadman opine be at the bottom of the business ; and when do horse - racing ever fail to lead to ruin soon or later ? it be only a question of time . Ellen sigh , remember how her father have squander his employer 's money on the race - course , and how , for that folly of his , she have be doom to become Stephen Whitelaw 's wife . but there do not seem to she to be anything of the horsey element in her husband 's composition . he be never away from home , except to attend to his business at market ; and she have never see he spell over the sporting - paper , as her father have be will not to do , night after night , with a perplexed brow and an anxious face , make calculation upon the margin of the print every now and then with a stump of lead pencil , and chew the end of it meditatively in the interval of his lection . 

 although Mrs. Whitelaw do not , like Mrs. Tadman , associate the idea of the stranger 's visit with any apprehension of her husband 's impending ruin , she could not deny that some kind of change have arise in he since that event . he have always drink a good deal , in his slow quiet manner , which impress people unacquainted with his habit with a notion of his sobriety , even when he be steadily empty the bottle before he ; but he drink more now , and sit long over his drink , and there be an aspect of trouble and uneasiness about he at time which fairly puzzle his wife . of course the most natural solution for all this be the one offer by the dismally prophetic Tadman . Stephen Whitelaw have be speculate or gambling , and his affair be in disorder . he be not a man to be affect by anything but the most sordid consideration , one would suppose . say that he have lose money , and there you have a key to the whole . 

 he get into a habit of sit up at night , after the rest of the household have go to bed . he have do this more or less from the time of his marriage ; and Mrs. Tadman have tell Ellen that the habit be one which have arise within the last few month . 

 " he would always see to the fastening of the house with his own eye , " Mrs. Tadman say ; " but up to last autumn he use to go upstairs with I and the servant . it be a new thing for he to sit up drink his glass of grog in the parlour by himself . " 

 the new habit seem to grow upon Mr. Whitelaw more rapidly after that visit of the stranger 's . he take to sit up till midnight an awful hour in a farm - house ; and Ellen generally find the spirit - bottle empty in the morning . night after night , he go to bed soddene with drink . once , when his kinswoman make some feeble remonstrance with he about this change in his habit , he tell she savagely to hold her tongue he could afford to drink as much as he please he be not   likely to come upon she to pay for what he take . as for his wife , she unhappily care nothing what he do . he could not become more obnoxious to she than he have be from the first hour of her acquaintance with he , let he do what he would . 

 little by little , find no other explanation possible , Mrs. Whitelaw grow to believe quite firmly in the supernatural nature of that unforgotten cry . she remember the unexplainable footstep which she have hear in the padlock room in the early dusk of that new - year's - day , when Mrs. Tadman and she explore the old house ; and she associate these two sound in her mind as of a like ghostly character . from this time forward she shrink with a nervous terror from that darksome passage lead to the padlock door at the end of the house . she have never any occasion to go in this direction . the room in this wing be low , dark , and small , and have be unused for year . it be scarcely any wonder if rat have congregate behind the worm - eat wainscot , to scare nervous listener with their weird scratching and scrambling . but no one could convince Ellen Whitelaw that the sound she have hear on new - year's - day be produce by anything so earthly as a rat . with that willingness to believe in a romantic impossibility , rather than in a commonplace improbability so natural to the human mind , she be more ready to conceive the existence of a ghost than that her own sense of hearing might have be less powerful than her fancy . about the footstep she be quite as positive as she be about the scream ; and in the last instance she have the evidence of Mrs. Tadman 's sens to support she . 

 she be surprised to find one day , when the household drudge , Martha Holden , have be clean the passage and room in that deserted wing a task very seldom perform that the girl have the same aversion to that part of the house which she feel herself , but of which she have never speak in the presence of the servant . 

 " if it be not   for Mrs. Tadman drive and worry after I all the time I be at work , I do not   think I could stay there , mum , " Martha tell her mistress . " it be not   often I like to be fidgette and follow ; but anything be well than be alone in that unked place . " 

 " it be rather dark and dreary , certainly , Martha , " Ellen answer with an admirable assumption of indifference ; " but , as we have not   any of we get to live there , that do not   much matter . " 

 " it be not   that , mum . I would not   mind the darkness and the dreariness and I be sure such a place for spider I never do see in my life ; there be one as I take down with my broom to - day , and scrunch , as big as a small crab but it be bad than that : the place be haunt . " 

 " who tell you that ? " 

 " Sarah Batts . " 

 " Sarah Batts ! why , how should she know anything about it ? she have not   be here so long as you ; and she come straight from the workhouse . " 

 " I think master must have tell she , mum . " 

 " your master would never have say anything so foolish . I know that he do not   believe in ghost ; and he keep all his garden - seed in the locked room at the end of the passage ; so he must go there sometimes himself . " 

 " o yes , mum ; I know that master go there . I have   see he go that way at night with a candle . " 

 " well , you silly girl , he would not   use the room if he think it be haunt , would he ? there be plenty more empty room in the house . " 

 " I do not   know about that , I be sure , mum ; but anyhow I know Sarah Batts tell I that passage be haunt . ' do not   you never go there , Martha , ' she say , ' unless you want to have your blood froze . I have   hear thing there that have freeze mine . ' and I never should go , mum , if it be not   for moth Mrs. Tadman 's worrying and drive , about the place be clean once in a way . and Sarah Batts be right , mum , however she may have get to know it ; for I have hear thing . " 

 " what thing ? " 

 " moan and groan like , as if it be some one in pain ; but all very low ; and I never could make out where it come from . but as to the place be haunt , I have   no more doubt about it than about my catechism . " 

 " but , Martha , you ought to know it be very silly and wicked to believe in such thing , " Ellen Whitelaw say , feel it her duty to lecture the girl a little , and yet half inclined to believe she . " the moaning and groaning , as you call they , be only sound make by the wind , I daresay . " 

 " o dear no , mum , " Martha answer , shake her head in a decided manner ; " the wind never make such noise as I hear . but I do not   want to make you nervous , mum ; only I would soon lose a month 's wage than stay for an hour alone in the west wing . " 

 it be strange , certainly ; a matter of no importance , perhaps , this idle belief of a servant 's , these sound which harm no one ; and yet all these circumstance worry and perplexed Ellen Whitelaw . have so little else to think of , she brood upon they incessantly , and be gradually get into a low nervous way . if she complain , which she do very rarely , there be no one to sympathise with she . Mrs. Tadman have so many ailment of her own , such complicated malady , such deeply - root disorder , that she could be scarcely expect to give much attention to the trivial suffering of another person . 

 " ah , my dear , " she would exclaim with a groan , if Ellen venture to complain of a rack headache , " when you have   live as long as I have , and go through what I have   go through , and have get such a liver as I have   get , you will know what bad health mean . but at your age , and with your constitution , it be nothing more than fancy . " 

 and then Mrs. Tadman would branch off into a graphic description of her own malady , to which Ellen be fain to listen patiently , wonder vaguely as she listen whether the lapse of year would render she as wearisome a person as Mrs. Tadman . 

 she have no sympathy from anyone . her father come to Wyncomb Farm once a week or so , and sit drinking and smoke with Mr. Whitelaw ; but Ellen never see he alone . he seem carefully to avoid the chance of be alone with she , guiltily conscious of his part in the contriving of her marriage , and fear to hear some complaint about her lot . he pretend to take it for grant that her fate be entirely happy , congratulate she frequently upon her prosperity , and remind she continually that it be a fine thing to be the sole mistress of the house she live in , instead of a mere servant as he himself be , and as she have be at the Grange labour for the profit of other people . 

 up to this time Mr. Carley have have some reason to be disappoint with the result of his daughter 's marriage , so far as his own prosperity be affect thereby . not a sixpence beyond that one advance of the two hundred pound have the bailiff be able to extort from his son - in - law . it be the price that Mr. Whitelaw have pay for his wife , and he mean to pay no more . he tell William Carley as much one day when the question of money matter be push rather too far tell he in the plainest language . 

 this be hard ; but that two hundred pound have save the bailiff from imminent destruction . he be oblige to be satisfied with this advantage , and to bide his time . 

 " I will have it out of the mean hound soon or later , " he mutter to himself as he walk homeward , after a social evening with the master of Wyncomb . 

 one evening Mr. Carley bring his daughter a letter . it be from Gilbert Fenton , who be quite unaware of Ellen 's marriage , and have write to she at the Grange . this letter afford she the only pleasure she have know since fate have unite she to Stephen Whitelaw . it tell she that Marian Holbrook be live , and in all probability safe though by no mean in good hand . she have sail for America with her father ; but her husband be in hot pursuit of she , and her husband be faithful . 

 " I have school myself to forgive he , " Gilbert go on to say , " for I know that he love she and that must need condone my wrong . I look forward anxiously to their return from America , and hope for a happy reunion amongst we all when your warm friendship shall not be forget . I be wait impatiently for news from New York , and will write to you again directly I hear anything definite . we have suffer the torment of suspense for a long weary time , but I trust and believe that the sky be clear . " 

 this be not much , but it be more than enough to relieve Ellen Carley 's mind of a heavy load . her dear young lady , as she call Marian , be not dead not lie at the bottom of that cruel river , at which Ellen have often look with a shudder horror , of late , think of what might be . she be safe , and would no doubt be happy . this be something . amid the wreck of her own fortune , Ellen Whitelaw be unselfish enough to rejoice in this . 

 her husband ask to see Mr. Fenton 's letter , which he spelt over with his usual deliberate air , and which seem to interest he more than Ellen would have suppose likely know as she do how deeply he have resent Marian 's encouragement of Frank Randall 's courtship . 

 " so she be go to America with her father , have she ? " he say , when he have peruse the document twice . " I should not   have think anybody could have persuade she to leave that precious husband of her . and she be go off to America , and he after she ! that be rather a queer start , be not   it , Nell ? " Mrs. Whitelaw do not care to discuss the business with her husband . there be something in his tone , a kind of veil malice , which make she angry . 

 " I do not   suppose you care whether she be alive or dead , " she say impatiently ; ' so you need not   trouble yourself to talk about she . " 

 " need not   I ? o , she be too grand a person to be talk of by such as I , be she ? never mind , Nell ; do not   be cross . and when Mrs. Holbrook come back to England , you shall go and see she . " 

 " I will , " answer Ellen ; " if I have to walk to London to do it . " 

 " o , but you sha'n't   walk . you shall go by rail . I will spare you the money for that , for once in a way , though I be not over fond of waste money . " 

 day by day Mr. Whitelaw 's habit grow more secluded and morose . it be not to be suppose that he be trouble by those fine feeling which might have make the misery of a well man ; but even in his dull nature there may have be some dim sense that his marriage be a failure and mistake ; that in have his own way in this matter he have in nowise secure his own happiness . he could not complain of his wife 's conduct in any one respect . she be obedient to his will in all thing , provide for his comfort with scrupulous regularity , industrious , indefatigable even . as a housekeeper and partner of his fortune , no man could have desire a well wife . yet dimly , in that sluggish soul , there be the consciousness that he have marry a woman who hat he , that he have buy she with a price ; and , be a man prone to think the bad of his fellow - creature , Mr. Whitelaw believe that , soon or later , his wife mean to have her revenge upon he somehow . she be wait for his death perhaps ; calculate that , be so much her senior , and a hard - work man , he would die soon enough to leave she a young widow . and then , of course , she would marry Frank Randall ; and all the money which he , Stephen , have amass , by the sacrifice of every pleasure in life , would enrich that supercilious young coxcomb . 

 it be a hard thing to think of , and Stephen ponder upon the expediency of let off Wyncomb Farm , and sink all his saving in the purchase of an annuity . he could not bring himself to contemplate sell the house and land that have belong to his race for so many generation . he cling to the estate , not from any romantic reverence for the past , not from any sentimental association connect with those who have go before he , but from the mere force of habit , which render this grim ugly old house and these flat shelterless field dearer to he than all the rest of the universe . he be a man to whom to part with anything be agony ; and if he love anything in the world , he love Wyncomb . the possession of the place have give he importance for twenty year past . he could not fancy himself unconnected with Wyncomb . his labour have improve the estate too ; and he could not endure to think how some lucky purchaser might profit by his prudence and sagacity . there have be some fine old oak on the land when he inherit it , all mercilessly stub - up at the beginning of his reign ; there have be tall straggling hedgerow , all of a tangle with blackberry bush , fern , and dog - rose , hazel and sloe tree , all do away with by his order . no , he could never bring himself to sell Wyncomb . nor be the purchase of an annuity a transaction which he be inclined to accomplish . it be a pleasing notion certainly , that idea of concentrate all his hoard money upon the remain year of his life retire from the toil of agriculture , and give himself up for the rest of his day to an existence of luxurious idleness . but , on the other hand , it would be a bitter thing to surrender his fondly - love money for the poor return of an income , to deprive himself of all opportunity of speculate and increase his store . 

 so the annuity scheme lie dormant in his brain , as it be , for the time be . it be something to have in reserve , and to carry out any day that his wife give he fair cause to doubt her fidelity . 

 in the mean time he go on live his lonely sulky kind of life , drink a great deal more than be good for he in his own churlish manner , and laugh to scorn any attempt at remonstrance from his wife or Mrs. Tadman . some few time Ellen have endeavour to awaken he to the evil consequence that must need ensue from his intemperate habit , feel that it would be a sin on her part to suffer he to go on without some effort to check he ; but her gently - speak warning have be bad than useless . 

 CHAPTER XLIII 

 MR . WHITELAW make an END of the MYSTERY 


 Mrs. Whitelaw have be marry about two month . it be bright May weather , bright but not yet warm ; and whatever prettiness Wyncomb Farm be capable of assume have be put on with the fresh spring green of the field and the young leaf of the poplar . there be even a few hardy flower in the vegetable - garden behind the house , humble perennial plant by dead and go Whitelaws , which have bloom year after year in spite of Stephen 's utilitarian principle . it be a market - day , the household work be finish , and Ellen be sit with Mrs. Tadman in the parlour , where those two spend so many weary hour of their life , the tedium whereof be relieve only by woman 's homely resource , needlework . even if Mrs. Whitelaw have be fond of reading , and she only care moderately for that form of occupation , she could hardly have find intellectual diversion of that kind at Wyncomb , where a family Bible , a few volume of the Annual Register , which have belong to some half - dozen different owner before they come from a stall in Malsham market to the house of Whitelaw , a grim - look old quarto upon domestic medicine , and a cookery - book , form the entire library . when the duty of the day be do , and the local weekly newspaper have be read an intellectual refreshment which might be fairly exhausted in ten minute there remain nothing to beguile the hour but the perpetual stitch stitch stitch of an industriously - dispose sempstress ; and the two woman use to sit throughout the long afternoon with their work - basket before they , talk a little now and then of the most commonplace matter , but for the great part of their time silent . sometimes , when the heavy burden of Mrs. Tadman 's society , and the clicking of needle and snipping of scissor , grow almost unendurable , Ellen would run out of the house for a brief airing in the garden , and walk briskly to and fro along the narrow pathway between the potato and cabbage , think of her dismal life , and of the old day at the Grange when she have be full of gaiety and hope . there be not perhaps much outward difference in the two life . in her father 's house she have work as hard as she work now ; but she have be free in those day , and the unknown future all before she , with its chance of happiness . now , she feel like some captive who pace the narrow bound of his prison - yard , without hope of release or respite , except in death . 

 this particular spring day have begin brightly , the morning have be sunny and even warm ; but now , as the afternoon wear away , there be dark cloud , with a rise wind and a sharp gusty shower every now and then . Ellen take a solitary turn in the garden between the shower . it be market - day ; Stephen Whitelaw be not expect home till tea - time , and the meal be to be eat at a later hour than usual . 

 the rain increase as the time for the farmer 's return draw nearer . he have go out in the morning without his overcoat , Mrs. Tadman remember , and be likely to get wet through on his way home , unless he should have borrow some extra covering at Malsham . his temper , which of late have be generally at its bad , would hardly be improve by this annoyance . 

 there be a very substantial meal wait for he : a ponderous joint of cold roast beef , a dish of ham and egg prepare in the kitchen , with an agreeable frizzling sound , a pile of hot butter cake keep hot upon the oven top ; but there be no fire in the parlour , and the room look a little cheerless in spite of the well - spread table . they have discontinue fire for about a fortnight , at Mr. Whitelaw 's command . he do not   want to be ruin by his coal - merchant 's bill if it be a chilly spring , he tell his household ; and at his own bidding the fire - place have be polish and garnish for the summer . but this evening be cold than any evening lately , by reason of that blusterous rise wind , which blow the rain - drop against the window - pane with as sharp a rattle as if they have be hailstone ; and Mr. Whitelaw come in presently , disconsolate and dripping , be by no mean incline to abide by his own decision about the fire . 

 " why the have not   you get a fire here ? " he demand savagely . 

 " it be your own wish , Stephen , " answer Mrs. Tadman . 

 " my own fiddlestick ! of course I do not   care to see my wood and coal burn to waste when the sun be shin enough to melt any one . but when a man come home wet to the skin , he do not   want to come into a room like an ice - house . call the girl , and tell she to light a blaze fire while I go and change my clothe . let she bring plenty of wood , and put a couple of log on top of the coal . I be frozen to the very bone drive home in the rain . " 

 Mrs. Tadman give a plaintive sigh as she depart to obey her kinsman . 

 " that be just like Stephen , " she say ; " if it be you or I that want a fire , we might die of cold before we get leave to light one ; but he never grudge anything for his own comfort ! " 

 Martha come and light a fire under Mrs. Tadman 's direction . that lady be inclined to look somewhat uneasily upon the operation ; for the grate have be use constantly throughout a long winter , and the chimney have not be sweep since last spring , whereby Mrs. Tadman be conscious of a great accumulation of soot about the massive old brickwork and ponderous beam that span the wide chimney . she have send for the Malsham sweep some week ago ; but that necessary individual have not be able to come on the particular day she wish , and the matter have be since then neglect . she remember this now with a guilty feeling , more especially as Stephen have demand a blaze fire , with flare pine - log pile half - way up the chimney . he come back to the parlour presently , array in an old suit of clothe which he keep for such occasion an old green coat with basket button , and a pair of plaid trouser of an exploded shape and pattern and look more like a pinched and pallid scarecrow than a well - to - do farmer . Mrs. Tadman have only carry out his command in a modify degree , and he immediately order the servant to put a couple of log on the fire , and then draw the table close up to the hearth , and sit down to his tea with some appearance of satisfaction . he have have rather a good day at market , he condescend to tell his wife during the progress of the meal ; price be rise , his old hay be sell at a rate which promise well for the new crop , turnip be in brisk demand , mangold enquire for altogether Mr. Whitelaw confess himself very well satisfied with the aspect of affair . 

 after tea he spend his evening luxuriantly , sit close to the fire , with his slippere foot upon the fender , and drink hot rum - and - water as a preventive of impending , or cure of incipient , cold . the rum - and - water be a novelty , something out of the usual order of his drink , appear to have an enliven effect upon he . he talk more than usual , and even propose a game at cribbage with Mrs. Tadman ; a condescension which move that matron to tear , remind she , she say , of old time , when they have be so comfortable together , before he have take to spend his evening at the Grange . 

 " not that I mean any unkindness to you , Ellen , " the doleful Tadman add apologetically , " for you have   be a good friend to I , and if there be one merit I can lay claim to , it be a grateful heart ; but of course , when a man marry , he never be the same to his relation as when he be single . it be not   in human nature that he should be . " 

 here Mrs. Tadman 's amiable kinsman request she to hold her jaw , and to bring the board if she be go to play , or to say as much if she be not . urge by this gentle reminder , Mrs. Tadman immediately produce a somewhat dingy - look pack of card and a queer little old - fashioned cribbage - board . 

 the game last for about an hour or so , at the end of which time the farmer throw himself back in his chair with a yawn , and pronounce that he have have enough of it . the old eight - day clock in the lobby strike ten soon after this , and the two woman rise to retire , leave Stephen to his night 's libation , and not sorry to escape out of the room , which he have convert into a kind of oven or turkish bath by mean of the roar fire he have insist upon keep up all the evening . he be leave , therefore , with his bottle of rum about half empty , to finish his night 's entertainment after his own fashion . 

 Mrs. Tadman venture a mild warning about the fire when she wish he good night ; but as she do not dare to hint that there have be any neglect in the chimney - sweep , her counsel go for very little . Mr. Whitelaw throw on another pine - log directly the two woman have leave he , and address himself to the consumption of a fresh glass of rum - and - water . 

 " there be nothing like be on the safe side , " he mutter to himself with an air of profound wisdom . " I do not   want to be lay up with the rheumatic , if I can help it . " 

 he finish the content of his glass , and go softly out of the room , carry a candle with he . he be absent about ten minute , and then come back to resume his comfortable seat by the fire , and mix himself another glass of grog with the air of a man who be likely to finish the bottle . 

 while he sit drink in his slow sensual way , his young wife sleep peacefully enough in one of the room above he . early rise and industrious habit will bring sleep , even when the heart be hopeless and the mind be weary . Mrs. Whitelaw sleep a tranquil dreamless sleep to - night , while Mrs. Tadman snore with a healthy regularity in a room on the opposite side of the passage . 

 there be a faint glimmer of dawn in the sky , a cold wet dawn , when Ellen be awaken suddenly by a sound that bewilder and alarm she . it be almost like the report of a pistol , she think , as she spring out of bed , pale and trembling . it be not a pistol shot , however , only a handful of gravel throw sharply against her window . 

 " Stephen , " she cry , half awake and very much , frighten , " what be that ? " but , to her surprise , she find that her husband be not in the room . 

 while she sit on the edge of her bed hurry some of her clothe on , half mechanically , and wonder what that startling sound could have be , a sudden glow of red light shine in at her window , and at the same moment her sens , which have be only half awaken before , tell she that there be an atmosphere of smoke in the room . 

 she rush to the door , forget that to open it be perhaps to admit death , and fling it open . yes , the passage be full of smoke , and there be a strange crackling sound below . 

 there could be little doubt as to what have happen the house be on fire . she remember how repeatedly Mrs. Tadman have declare that Stephen would inevitably set the place on fire some night or other , and how little weight she have attach to the dismal prophecy . but the matron 's fear have not be groundless , it seem . the threatened calamity have come . 

 " Stephen ! " she cry , with all her might , and then fly to Mrs. Tadman 's door and knock violently . she wait for no answer , but rush on to the room where the two woman - servant sleep together , and call to they loudly to get up for their life , the house be on fire . 

 there be still the man in the story above to be awaken , and the smoke be every moment grow thick . she mount a few step of the staircase , and call with all her strength . it be very near their time for stir . they must hear she , surely . suddenly she remember an old disuse alarm - bell which hang in the roof . she have see the frayed rope belong to it hang in an angle of the passage . she fly to this , and pull it vigorously till a shrill peal ring out above ; and once have accomplish this , she go on , reckless of her own safety , think only how many there be to be save in that house . 

 all this time there be no sign of her husband , and a dull horror come over she with the thought that he might be perish miserably below . there could be no doubt that the fire come from downstair . that crackling noise have increase , and every now and then there come a sound like the breaking of glass . the red glow shin in at the front window grow deep and bright . the fire have begin in the parlour , of course , where they have leave Stephen Whitelaw bask in the warmth of his resinous pine - log . 

 Ellen be still ring the bell , when she hear a man 's footstep come along the passage towards she . it be not her husband , but one of the farm - servant from the upper story , an honest broad - shoulder fellow , as strong as Hercules . 

 " Lord a mercy , mum , be that you ? " he cry , as he recognise the white half - dress figure cling to the bell - rope " let I get ' ee out o ' this ; the old place'll burn like so much tinder ; " and before she could object , he have take she up in his arm as easily as if she have be a child , and be carry she towards the principal staircase . 

 here they be stop . the flame and smoke be mount from the lobby below ; the man turn immediately , waste no time by indecision , and run to the stair lead down to the kitchen . in this direction all be safe . there be smoke , but in a very modify degree . 

 " Robert , " Ellen cry eagerly , when they have reach the kitchen , where all be quiet , " for God 's sake , go and see what have become of your master . we leave he drink in the parlour last night . I have   call to he again and again , but there be be no answer . " 

 " do not   you take on , mum ; master 's all right , I daresay . here be the gal and Mrs. Tadman come downstairs ; they will take care o ' you , while I go and look arter he . you have   no call to be frightened . if the fire should come this way , you have   only get to open yon door and get out into the yard . you be safe here . " 

 the woman be all huddle together in the kitchen by this time , half dress , shiver , and frighten out of their wit . Ellen Whitelaw be the only one among they who display anything like calmness . 

 the man be all astir . one have run across the field to Malsham to summon the fire - engine , another be go to remove some animal stable near the house . 

 the noise of burn wood be rapidly increase , the smoke come creep under the kitchen - door presently , and , five minute after he have leave they , the farm - servant come back to say that he could find no trace of his master . the parlor be in flame . if he have be surprise by the fire in his sleep , it must need be all over with he . the man urge his mistress to get out of the house at once ; the fire be gain ground rapidly , and it be not likely that anything he or the other man could do would stop its progress . 

 the woman leave the kitchen immediately upon this warning , by a door lead into the yard . it be broad daylight by this time ; a chilly sunless morning , and a high wind sweep across the field and fan the flame , which now lick the front wall of Wyncomb Farmhouse . the total destruction of the place seem inevitable , unless help from Malsham come very quickly . the farm servant be run to and fro with bucket of water from the yard , and fling their content in at the shattered window of the front room ; but this be a small mean of check the destruction . the house be old , build for the most part of wood , and there seem little hope for it . 

 Ellen and the other woman go round to the front of the house , and stand there , dismal figure in their scanty raiment , with woollen petticoat pin across their shoulder , and disorder hair blow about their face by the damp wind . they stand group together in utter helplessness , look at the work of ruin with a half - stupid air ; almost like the animal who have be hustle from one place of shelter to another , and be evidently lose in wonder as to the cause of their removal . 

 but presently , as the awful scene before they grow more familiar , the instinct of self - interest arise in each breast . Mrs. Tadman piteously bewail the loss of her entire wardrobe , and some mysterious pocket - book which she describe plaintively as her " little all . " she dwelt dolefully upon the merit of each particular article , most especially upon a french - merino dress she have buy for Stephen 's wedding , which would have last she a lifetime , and a Paisley shawl , the gift of her deceased husband , which have be in her possession twenty year , and have not so much as a thin place in it . 

 nor be the disconsolate matron the only one who lament her loss . Sarah Batts , with clasped hand and distracted aspect , weep for the destruction of her " box . " 

 " there be money in it , " she cry , " money ! oh , do not   you think the man could get to my room and save it ? " 

 " money ! " exclaim Mrs. Tadman , sharply , arouse from the contemplation of her own woe by this avowal ; " you must be clever than I take you for , Sarah Batts , to be able to save money , and yet be always bedizen with some new bit of finery , as you have   be . " 

 " it be give to I , " Sarah answer indignantly , " by they as have a right to give it . " 

 " for no good , I should think , " reply Mrs. Tadman ; " what should anybody give you money for ? " 

 " never you mind ; it be mine . o dear , o dear ! if one of the man would only get my box for I . " 

 she run to intercept one of the farm - labourer , arm with his bucket , and try to bribe he by the promise of five shilling as a reward for the rescue of her treasure . but the man only threaten to heave the bucket of water at she if she get in his way ; and Miss Batts be oblige to abandon this hope . 

 the fire make rapid progress meanwhile , unchecke by that ineffectual splashing of water . it have begin at the eastern end of the building , the end most remote from those disuse room in the ivy - cover west wing ; but the wind be blow from the north - east , and the flame be spread rapidly towards that western angle . there be little chance that any part of the house could be save . 

 while Ellen Whitelaw be look on at the work of ruin , with a sense of utter helplessness , hear the selfish lamentation of Mrs. Tadman and Sarah Batts like voice in a dream , she be suddenly arouse from this state of torpor by a loud groan , which sound from not very far off . it come from behind she , from the direction of the poplar . she fly to the spot , and on the ground beneath one of they she find a helpless figure lie prostrate , with an awful smoke - blacken face a figure and face which for some moment she do not recognize as her husband 's . 

 she know he at last , however , and kneel down beside he . he be groan in an agonize manner , and have evidently be fearfully burn before he make his escape . 

 " Stephen ! " she cry . " o , thank God you be here ! I think you be shut up in that burn house . I call with all my might , and the man search for you . " 

 " it be not   much to be thankful for , " gasp the farmer . " I do not   suppose there be an hour 's life in I ; I be scorch from head to foot , and one arm 's helpless . I wake up all of a sudden , and find the room in a blaze . the flame have burst out of the great beam that go across the chimney - piece . the place be all on fire , so that I could not   reach the door anyhow ; and before I could get out of the window , I be burn like this . you would have be burn alive in your bed but for I . I throw up a handful of gravel at your window . it must have wake you , do not   it ? " 

 " yes , yes , that be the sound that wake I ; it seem like a pistol go off . you save my life , Stephen . it be very good of you to remember I . " 

 " yes ; there be man in my place who would not   have think of anybody but themselves . " 

 " can I do anything to ease you , Stephen ? " ask his wife . 

 she have seat herself on the grass beside he , and have take his head on her lap , support he gently . she be shocked to see the change the fire have make in his face , which be all blister and distort . 

 " no , nothing ; till they come to carry I away somewhere . I be all one burn pain . " 

 his eye close , and he seem to sink into a kind of stupor . Ellen call to one of the man . they might carry he to some place of shelter surely , at once , where a doctor could be summon , and something do for his relief . there be a humble practitioner resident at Crosber , that be to say , about two mile from Wyncomb . one of the farm - servant might take a horse and gallop across the field to fetch this man . 

 Robert Dunn , the bailiff , hear her cry presently and come to she . he be very much shock by his master 's condition , and at once agree to the necessity of summon a surgeon . he propose that they should carry Stephen Whitelaw to some stable , which lie at a safe distance from the burn house , and make up some kind of bed for he there . he run back to dispatch one of the man to Crosber , and return immediately with another to remove his master . 

 but when they try to raise the injured man between they , he cry out to they to let he alone , they be murder he . let he lie where he be ; he would not be move . so he be allow to lie there , with his head on his wife 's lap , and his tortured body cover by a coat , which one of the man bring he . his eye close again , and for some time he lie without the slight motion . 

 the fire be gain ground every instant , and there be yet no sign of the engine from Malsham ; but Ellen Whitelaw scarcely heed the work of destruction . she be think only of the helpless stricken creature lie with his head upon her lap ; thinking of he perhaps in this hour of his extremity with all the more compassion , because he have always be obnoxious to she . she pray for the rapid arrival of the surgeon , who must surely be able to give some relief to her husband 's suffering , she think . it seem dreadful for he to be lie like this , with no attempt make to lessen his agony . after a long interval he lift his scorch eyelid slowly , and look at she with a strange dim gaze . 

 " the west wing , " he mutter ; " be that burn ? " 

 " no , Stephen , not yet ; but there be little hope they will save any part of the house . " 

 " they must save that ; the rest do not   matter I be insure heavily ; but they must save the west wing . " 

 his wife conclude from this that he have keep some of his money in one of those western room . the seed - room perhaps , that mysterious padlock chamber , where she have hear the footstep . and yet she have hear he say again and again that he never keep an unnecessary shilling in the house , and that every pound he have be out at interest . but such falsehood and contradiction be common enough amongst man of miserly habit ; and Stephen Whitelaw would hardly be so anxious about those western room unless something of value be hide away there . he close his eye again , and lie groan faintly for some time ; then open they suddenly with a frightened look and ask , in the same tone , 

 " the west wing be the west wing afire yet ? " 

 " the wind blow that way , Stephen , and the flame be spread . I do not   think they could save it not if the engine be to come this minute . " 

 " but I tell you they must ! " cry Stephen Whitelaw . " if they do not , it will be murder cold - blooded murder . o , my God , I never think there be much harm in the business and it pay I well but it be weigh I down like a load of lead , and make I drink more to drown thought . but if it should come to this do not   you understand ? do not   sit star at I like that . if the fire get to the west wing , it will be murder . there be some one there some one lock up that will not   be able to stir unless they get she out . " 

 " some one lock up in the west wing ! be you mad , Stephen ? " 

 " it be the truth . I would not   do it again no , not for twice the money . let they get she out somehow . they can do it , if they look sharp . " 

 that unforgotten footstep and equally unforgotten scream flash into Mrs. Whitelaw 's mind with these word of her husband 's . some one shut up there ; yes , that be the solution of the mystery that have puzzle and torment she so long . that cry of anguish be no supernatural echo of past suffering , but the despairing shriek of some victim of modern cruelty . a poor relation of Stephen 's perhaps a helpless , mindless creature , whose infirmity have be thus hide from the world . such thing have be too cruelly common in our fair free country . 

 Ellen lay her husband 's head gently down upon the grass and spring to her foot . 

 " in which room ? " she cry . but there be no answer . the man lie with closed eye die perhaps but she could do nothing for he till medical help come . the rescue of that unknown captive be a more urgent duty . 

 she be run towards the burn house , when she hear a horse gallop on the road lead from the gate . she stop , hop that this be the arrival of the doctor ; but a familiar voice call to she , and in another minute her father have dismount and be close at her side . 

 " thank God you be safe , lass ! " he exclaim , with some warm touch of paternal feeling than he be accustom to exhibit . " our man see the fire when they be go to their work , and I come across directly . where 's steph ? " 

 " under the tree yonder , very much hurt ; I be afraid fatally . but there be nothing we can do for he till the doctor come . there be someone in still great danger , father . for God 's sake , help we to save she some one shut up yonder , in a room at that end of the house . " 

 " some one shut up ! one of the servant , do you mean ? " 

 " no , no , no . some one who have be keep shut up there hide ever so long . Stephen tell I just now . o , father , for pity 's sake , try to save she ! " 

 " Nonsense , lass . your husband 's brain must have be wander . who should be shut up there , and you live in the house and not know it ? why should Stephen hide any one in his house ? what motive could he have for such a thing ? it be not   possible . " 

 " I tell you , father , it be true . there be no mistaking Stephen 's word just now , and , besides that , I have   hear noise that might have tell I as much , only I think the house be haunt . I tell you there be some one some one who will be burn alive if we be not quick and every moment 's precious . will not   you try to save she ? " 

 " of course I will . only I do not   want to risk my life for a fancy . be there a ladder anywhere ? " 

 " yes , yes . the man have ladder . " 

 " and where be this room where you say the woman be shut up ? " 

 " at that corner of the house , " answer Ellen , point . 

 " there be a door at the end of the passage , but no window look this way . there be only one , and that be over the wood - yard . " 

 " then it would be easy to get in that way ? " 

 " no , no , father . the wood 's all pile up above the window . it would take such a time to move it . " 

 " never mind that . anything be well than the risk of go into yonder house . besides , the room 's locked , you say . have you get the key ? " 

 " no ; but I could get it from Stephen , I daresay . " 

 " we will not   wait for you to try . we will begin at the wood - yard . " 

 " take Robert Dunn with you , father . he be a good brave fellow . " 

 " yes , I will take Dunn . " 

 the bailiff hurry away to the wood - yard , accompany by Dunn and another man carry a tall ladder . the farm - servant have cease from their futile effort at quench the fire by this time . it be a labour too hopeless to continue . the flame have spread to the west wing . the ivy be already crackle , as the blaze creep over it . happily that shut - up room be at the extreme end of the building , the point to which the flame must come last . and here , just at the moment when the work of devastation be almost accomplish , come the Malsham fire - engine rattle along gaily through the dewy morning , and the Malsham amateur fire - brigade , a very juvenile corp as yet , eager to cover itself with laurel , but more careful in the adjustment of its costume than be quite consistent with the desperate nature of its duty . here come the brigade , in time to do something at any rate , and the engine soon begin to play briskly upon the western wing . 

 Ellen Whitelaw be in the wood - yard , watch the work go on there with intense anxiety . the removal of the wood pile seem a slow business , well as the three man perform their work , fling down great crush pile of wood one after another without a moment 's pause . they be now join by the Malsham fire - escape man , who have get wind of some one to be rescue from this part of the house , and be eager to exhibit the capability of a new fire - escape , start with much hubbub and glorification , after an awful fire have ravage Malsham high - street , and half - a - dozen life have be waste because the old fire - escape be out of order and useless . 

 " we do not   want the fire - escape , " cry Mr. Carley as the tall machine be wheel into the yard . " the room we want to get at be not   ten foot from the ground . you can give we a hand with this wood if you like . that be all we want . " 

 the man clamber on to the wood - pile . it be get visibly low by this time , and the top of the window be to be see . Ellen watch with breathless anxiety , forget that her husband might be die under the poplar . he be not alone there ; she have send Mrs. Tadman to watch he . 

 only a few minute more and the window be clear . a pale face could be dimly see peer out through the dusty glass . William Carley try to open the lattice , but it be secure tightly within . one of the fireman leapt forward upon his failure , and shatter every pane of glass and every inch of the leaden frame with a couple of blow from his axe , and then the bailiff clamber into the room . 

 he be hide from those below about five minute , and then emerge from the window , somehow or other , carry a burden , and come struggle across the wood to the ladder by which he and the rest have mount . the burden which he carry be a woman 's figure , with the face hide by his large woollen neckerchief . Ellen give a cry of horror . the woman must surely be dead , or why should he have take such pain to cover her face ? 

 he bring his burden down the ladder very carefully , and give the lifeless figure into Ellen 's arm . 

 " help I to carry she away yonder , while Robert get the cart ready , " he say to his daughter ; ' she be faint . " and then he add in a whisper , " for God 's sake , do not   let any one see her face ! it be Mrs. Holbrook . " 

 CHAPTER XLIV 

 after the FIRE 


 yes , it be marian . she whom Gilbert Fenton have seek so long and patiently , with doubt and anguish in his heart ; she whose double John Saltram have follow across the Atlantic , have be within easy reach of they all the time , hide away in that dreary old farm - house , the innocent victim of Percival Nowell 's treachery , and Stephen Whitelaw 's greed of gain . the whole story be tell by - and - by , when the master of Wyncomb Farm lie die . 

 William Carley and his daughter take she to the Grange as soon as the farmer 's spring cart be ready to convey her thither . it be all do very quickly , and none of the farm - servant see her face . even if they have do so , it be more than doubtful that they would have recognise she , so pale a shadow of her former self have she become during that long dreary imprisonment ; the face wan and waste , with a strange sharpen look about the feature which be like the aspect of death ; all the brightness and colour vanish out of the soft brown hair ; an ashen pallor upon her beauty , that make she seem like a creature rise from the grave . 

 they lift she into the cart , still insensible , and seat she there , wrap in an old horse - cloth , with her head rest on Mrs. Whitelaw 's shoulder ; and so they drive slowly away . it be only when they have go some little distance from the farm , that the fresh morning air revive she , and she open her eye and look about she , wildly at first , and with a faint shuddering sigh . 

 then , after a few moment , full consciousness come back to she , and a sudden cry of rapture break from the pale lip . " o God ! " she exclaim , " be I set free ? " 

 " yes , dear Mrs. Holbrook , you be free , never again to go back to that cruel place . o , to think that you should be use so , and I so near ! " 

 Marian lift her head from Ellen 's shoulder , and recognise she with a second cry of delight . 

 " Ellen , be it you ? then I be safe ; I must be safe with you . " 

 " safe ! yes , dear . I would die soon than any harm should come to you again . who could have bring this cruelty about ? who could have shut you up in that room ? " 

 " my father , " Marian answer with a shudder . " he want my money , I suppose ; and instead of kill I , he shut I up in that place . " 

 she say no more just then , be too weak to say much ; and Ellen , who be employ in soothe and comfort she , do not want she to talk . it be afterwards , when she have be establish in her old room at the Grange , and have take a little breakfast , that she tell Ellen something more about her captivity . 

 " o , Ellen , if I be to tell you what I have suffer ! but no , there be no word can tell that . it be not that they ill - use I . the girl who wait on I bring I good food , and even try to make I comfortable in her rough way ; but to sit there day after day , Ellen , alone , with only a dim light from the top of the window above the wood - stack ; to sit there wonder about my husband , whether he be search for I still , and would ever find I , or whether , as be more likely , he have give I up for dead . think of I , Ellen , if you can , sit there for week and month in my despair , try to reckon the day sometimes by the aid of some old newspaper which the girl bring I now and then , at other time lose count of they altogether . " 

 " Dear Mrs. Holbrook , I can not   understand it even yet . tell I how it all come about how they ever lure you into that place . " 

 " it be easy enough , Ellen ; I be not   conscious when they take I there . the story be very short . you remember that day when you leave the Grange , how happy I be , look forward to my husband 's return , and think of the good news I have to tell he . we be to be rich , and our life free and peaceful henceforward ; and I have see he suffer so much for the want of money . it be the morning after you leave when the post bring I a letter from my father a letter with the Malsham post - mark . I have see he in town , as you know , and be scarcely surprised that he should write to I . but I be surprised to find he so near I , and the content of the letter be very perplexing . my father entreat I to meet he on the river - side pathway , between Malsham station and this house . he have be inform of my habit , he say , and that I be accustom to walk there . that be curious , when , so far as I know , he have never be near this place ; but I hardly think about the strangeness of it then . he beg I so earnestly to see he ; it be a matter of life or death , he say . what could I do , nelly ? he be my father , and I feel that I owe he some duty . I could not refuse to see he ; and if he have some personal objection to come here , it seem a small thing for I to take the trouble to go and meet he . I could but hear what he have to say . " 

 " I wish to heaven I have be here ! " exclaim Ellen ; " you should not   have go alone , if I have know anything about it . " 

 " I think , if you have be here , I should have tell you about the letter , for it puzzle I a good deal , and I know how well I could trust you . but you be away ; and my father 's request be so urgent the hour be name I could do nothing but accede to it . so I go , leave no message for you or for my husband , feel so sure of my return within an hour or two . " 

 " and you find your father wait for you ? " 

 " yes , on the river - bank , within a short distance of Mr. Whitelaw 's house . he begin by congratulate I on the change in my prospect , I be a rich woman , he say . and then he go on to vilify my husband in such hateful word , Ellen ; tell I that I have marry a notorious scoundrel and profligate , and that he could produce ample evidence of what he affirm ; and all this with a pretended pity for my weakness and ignorance of the world . I laugh his shameful slander to scorn , and tell he that I know my husband too thoroughly to be alarm even for a moment by such groundless charge . he still affect to compassionate I as the weak and most credulous of woman , and then come to a proposal which he say he have travel to Hampshire on purpose to make to I . it be , that I should leave my husband , and place myself under his protection ; that I should go to America with he when he return there , and so preserve my fortune from the clutch of a villain . ' my fortune ? ' I say ; ' yes , I see that it be that alone you be think of . how can you suppose I so blind as not to understand that ? you have well be candid with I , and say frankly what you want . I have no doubt my husband will allow I to make any reasonable sacrifice in your favour . ' " 

 " what do he say to that ? " 

 " he laugh bitterly at my offer . ' your husband ! ' he say ' I be not likely to see the colour of my father 's money , if you be to be govern by he . ' ' you do he a great wrong , ' I answer . ' I be sure that he will act generously , and I shall be govern by he . ' " 

 " he be very angry , I suppose ? " 

 " no doubt of it ; but for some time he contrive to suppress all appearance of anger , and urge I to believe his statement about my husband , and to accept his offer of a home and protection with he . I can not tell you how plausible his word be what an appearance of affection and interest in my welfare he put on . then , find I firm , he change his tone , and there be hide threat mix with his entreaty . it would be a bad thing for I if I refuse to go with he , he say ; I would have cause to repent my folly for the rest of my life . he say a great deal , use every argument it be possible to imagine ; and there be always the same threaten under - tone . he could not move I in the least , as you may fancy , Nell . I tell he that nothing upon earth would induce I to leave my husband , or to think ill of he . and in this manner we walk up and down for nearly two hour , till I begin to feel very tired and faint . my father see this , and when we come within sight of Wyncomb Farmhouse , propose that I should go in and rest , and take a glass of milk or some kind of refreshment . I be surprised at this proposal , and ask he if he know the people of the house . he say yes , he know something of Mr. Whitelaw ; he have meet he the night before in the coffee - room of the inn at Malsham . " 

 " then your father have sleep at Malsham the night before ? " 

 " evidently . his letter to I have be post at Malsham , you know . I ask he how long he have be in this part of the country , and he rather evade the question . not long , he say ; and he have come down here only to see I . at first I refuse to go into Mr. Whitelaw 's house , be only anxious to get home as quickly as possible . but my father seem offend by this . I want to get rid of he , he say , although this be likely to be our last interview the very last time in his life that he would ever see I , perhaps . I could not surely grudge he half an hour more of my company . I could scarcely go on refuse after this ; and I really feel so tired and faint , that I doubt my capability of walk back to this house without rest . so I say yes , and we go into Wyncomb Farmhouse . the door be open by a girl when my father knock . there be no one at home , she tell he ; but we be quite welcome to sit down in the parlour , and she would bring I a glass of fresh milk and a slice of bread - and - butter . 

 " the house have a strange empty look , I think . there be none of the life or bustle one expect to see at a farm ; all be silent as the grave . the gloom and quietness of the place chill I somehow . there be a fire burn in the parlour , and my father make I sit down very close to it , and I think the heat increase that faintness which I have feel when I come into the house . 

 " again and again he urge his first demand , seem as if he would wear down all opposition by persistence . I be quite firm ; but the effect of all this argument be very wearisome , and I begin to feel really ill . 

 " I think I must have be on the point of fainting , when the door be open suddenly , and Mr. Whitelaw come in . in the next moment , while the room be spin round before my eye , and that dreadful giddiness that come before a dead faint be grow bad , my father snatch I up in his arm , and throw a handkerchief over my face . I have just sense enough to know that there be chloroform upon it , and that be all . when I open my eye again , I be lie on a narrow bed , in a dimly - light room , with a small fire burn in a rusty grate in one corner , and some tea - thing , with a plate of cold meat , on a table near it . there be a scrap of paper on this table , with a few line scrawl upon it in pencil , in my father 's hand : ' you have have your choice , either to share a prosperous life with I , or to be shut up like a mad woman . you have well make yourself as comfortable as you can , since you have no hope of escape till it suit my purpose to have you set free . good care will be take of you . you must have be a fool to suppose that I would submit to the injustice of J.N. 's will . ' 

 " for a long time I sit like some stupid bewildered creature , go over these word again and again , as if I have no power to understand they . it be very long before I could believe that my father mean to shut I up in that room for an indefinite time for the rest of my life , perhaps . but , little by little , I come to believe this , and to feel nothing but a blank despair . o , Nelly , I dare not dwell upon that time ! I suffer too much . God have be very merciful to I in spar I my mind ; for there be time when I believe I be quite mad . I could pray sometimes , but not always . I have spend whole day in prayer , almost as if I fancy that I could weary out my God with supplication . " 

 " and Stephen ; do you see he ? " 

 " yes , now and then once in several day , in a week perhaps . he use to come , like the master of a madhouse visit his patient , to see that I be comfortable , he say . at first I use to appeal to he to set I free kneeling at his foot , promise any sacrifice of my fortune for he or for my father , if they would release I . but it be no use . he be as hard as a rock ; and at last I feel that it be useless , and use to see he come and go with hopeless apathy . no , Ellen , there be no word can describe what I suffer . I appeal to the girl who wait on I daily , but who come only once a - day , and always after dark . I might as well have appeal to the four wall of my room ; the girl be utterly stolid . she bring I everything I be likely to want from day to day , and give I ample mean of replenish my fire , and tell I that I ought to make myself comfortable . I have a much well life than any one in the workhouse , she say ; and I must be very wicked if I complain . I believe she really think I be a harmless madwoman , and that her master have a right to shut I up in that room . one night , after I have be there for a time that seem like eternity , my father come " 

 " what ! " cry Ellen Whitelaw , " the stranger ! I understand . that man be your father ; he come to see you that night ; and as he be leave you , you give that dreadful shriek we hear downstair . o , if I have know the truth if I have only know ! " 

 " you hear I , Ellen ? you be there ? " Marian exclaim , surprised . she be , as yet , entirely ignorant of Ellen 's marriage , and have be too much bewilder by the suddenness of her escape to wonder how the bailiff 's daughter have happen to be so near at hand in that hour of deadly peril . 

 " yes , yes , dear Mrs. Holbrook ; I be there , and I do not help you . but never mind that now ; tell I the rest of your story ; tell I how your father act that night . " 

 " he be with I alone for about ten minute ; he come to give I a last chance , he say . if I like to leave my husband for ever , and go to America with he , I might do so ; but before he let I out of that place , he must have my solemn oath that I would make no attempt to see my husband ; that I would never again communicate with any one I have know up to that time ; that I would begin a new life , with he , my father , for my sole protector . I have have some experience of the result of oppose he , he say , and he now expect to find I reasonable . 

 " you can imagine my answer , Ellen . I would do anything , sacrifice anything , except my fidelity to my husband . Heaven know I would have give twenty year of my life to escape from that dismal place , with the mere chance of be able to get back to my husband ; but I would not take a false oath ; I could not perjure myself , as that man would have make I perjure myself , in order to win my release . I kneel at his foot and clung about he , beseech he with all the power I have to set I free ; but he be hard than iron . just at the end , when he have the door open , and be leave I , tell I that I have lose my last chance , and would never see he again , I clung about he with one wild desperate cry . he fling I back into the room violently , and shut the door in my face . I fancy afterwards that that cry must have be hear , and that , if there have be any creature in the house incline to help I , there would have come an end to my suffering . but the time pass , and there be no change ; only the long dreary day , the wretched sleepless night . " 

 this be all . there be detail of her suffering which Marian tell her faithful friend by - and - by , when her mind be calm , and they have leisure for tranquil talk ; but the story be all tell ; and Marian lie down to rest in the familiar room , unspeakably grateful to God for her rescue , and only eager that her husband should be inform of her safety . she have not yet be tell that he have cross the Atlantic in search of she , delude by a false scent . Ellen fear to tell she this at first ; and she have take it for grant that John Saltram be still in London . it be easy to defer any explanation just yet , on account of Marian 's weakness . the exertion of tell the brief story of her suffering have leave her prostrate ; and she be fain to obey her friendly nurse . 

 " we will talk about everything , and arrange everything , by - and - by , dear Mrs. Holbrook , " Ellen say resolutely ; " but for the present you must rest , and you must take everything that I bring you , and be very good . " 

 and with that she kiss and leave she , to perform another and less agreeable duty the duty of attendance by her husband 's sick - bed . 

 CHAPTER XLV 

 MR . WHITELAW make his will 


 they have carry Stephen Whitelaw to the Grange ; and he lie a helpless creature , beyond hope of recovery , in one of the roomy old - fashioned bed - chamber . 

 the humble Crosber surgeon have do his good , and have do it skilfully , be a man of large experience amongst a lowly class of sufferer ; and to the aid of the Crosber surgeon have come a more prosperous practitioner from Malsham , who have drive over in his own phaeton ; but between they both they could make nothing of Stephen Whitelaw . his race be run . he have be severely burn ; and if his actual injury be not enough to kill he , there be little chance that he could survive the shock which his system have receive . he might linger a little ; might hold out long than they expect ; but his life be a question of hour . 

 the doomed man have seem from the first to have a conviction of the truth , and appear in no manner surprised when , in answer to his question , the Malsham doctor admit that his case be fatal , and suggest that , if he have anything to do in the adjustment of his affair , he could scarcely do it too soon . at this Mr. Whitelaw groan aloud . if he could in any manner have adjust his affair so as to take his money with he , the suggestion might have seem sensible enough ; but , that be impracticable , it be the mere futility . he have never make a will ; it cost he too much anguish to give away his money even on paper . and now it be virtually necessary that he should do so , or else , perhaps , his wealth would , by some occult process , be seize upon by the crown a power which he have be accustom to regard in the abstract with an antagonistic feeling , as be the root of queen 's taxis . to leave all to his wife , with some slight pension to Mrs. Tadman , seem the most obvious course . he have marry for love , and the wife of his choice have be very dutiful and submissive . what more could he have demand from she ? and why should he grudge she the inheritance of his wealth ? well , he would not have grudge it to she , perhaps , since some one must have it , if it have not be for that aggravating conviction that she would marry again , and that the man she prefer to he would riot in the possession of his hardly - earn rich . she would marry Frank Randall ; and between they they would mismanage , and ultimately ruin , the farm . he remember the cost of the manure he have put upon his field that year , and regret that useless outlay . it be a hard thing to have enrich his land only that other might profit by the produce . 

 " and if I have   lay down a yard of drain - pipe since last year , I have   lay down a dozen mile . there be not a bit of swampy ground or a patch of sour grass on the farm , " he think bitterly . 

 he lie for some hour deliberate as to what he should do . death be near , but not so very close to he just yet . he have time to think . no , come what might , he would not leave the bulk of his property to fall into the keeping of Frank Randall . 

 he remember that there be charitable institution , to which a man , not wish to enrich an ungrateful race , might bequeath his money , and obtain some credit for himself thereby , which no man could expect from his own relation . there be an infirmary at Malsham , rather a juvenile institution as yet , in aid whereof Mr. Whitelaw have often be plague for subscription , reluctantly dole out half - a - guinea now and then , more often refuse to contribute anything . he have never think of this place in his life before ; but the image of it come into his mind now , as he have see it on market - day for the last four year a bran new red - brick building in Malsham high - street . he think how his name would look , cut in large letter on a stone tablet on the face of that edifice . it would be something to get for his money ; a very poor and paltry something , compare with the delight of possession , but just a little well than nothing . 

 he lie for some time ponder upon this , with that image of the stone tablet before his eye , set forth that the new wing of this institution have be erect at the desire of the late Stephen Whitelaw , Esq . , of Wyncomb Farm , who have bequeath a sum of money to the infirmary for that purpose , whereby two new ward have , in memory of that respected benefactor , be entitle the Whitelaw ward or something to the like effect . he compose a great many version of the inscription as he lie there , tolerably easy as to his bodily feeling , and chiefly anxious concern the disposal of the money ; but , be unaccustomed to the task of composition , he find it more difficult than he could have suppose to set forth his own glory in a concise form of word . but the tablet would be there , of course , the very centre and keystone of the building , as it be ; indeed , Mr. Whitelaw resolve to make his bequ contingent upon the fulfilment of this desire . later in the evening he tell William Carley that he have make up his mind about his will , and would be glad to see Mr. Pivott , of Malsham , rival solicitor to Mr. Randall , of the same town , as soon as that gentleman could be summon to his bedside . 

 the bailiff seem surprised at this request . 

 " why , surely , Steph , you can not   want a lawyer mix up in the business ! " he say . " those sort of chap only live by make work for one another . you know how to make your will well enough , old fellow , without any attorney 's aforesaid and hereinafter . half a sheet of paper and a couple of sentence would do it , I should think ; the few word the well . " 

 " I would rather have Pivott , and do it in a regular manner , " Mr. Whitelaw answer quietly . " I remember , in a forgery case that be in the paper the other day , how the judge say of the deceased testator , that , be a lawyer , he be too wise to make his own will . yes , I would rather see Pivott , if you will send for he , Carley . it be always good to be on the safe side . I do not   want my money waste in a chancery suit when I be lie in my grave . " 

 William Carley try to argue the matter with his son - in - law ; but the attempt be quite useless . Mr. Whitelaw have always be the most obstinate of man and lie on his bed , maim and helpless , be no more to be move from his resolve than if he have be a roman gladiator who have just train himself for an encounter with lion . so the bailiff be compel to obey he , unwillingly enough , and dispatch one of the man to Malsham in quest of Mr. Pivott the attorney . 

 the practitioner come to the Grange as fast as his horse could carry he . every one in Malsham know by this time that Stephen Whitelaw be a doomed man ; and Mr. Pivott feel that this be a matter of life and death . he be an eminently respectable man , plump and dapper , with a rosy smooth - shaven face , and an air of honesty that make the law seem quite a pleasant thing . he be speedily seat by Mr. Whitelaw 's bed , with a pair of candle and write material upon a little table before he , ready to obey his client 's behest , and with the self - possess aspect of a man to whom a last will and testament involve the disposal of a million or so would have be only an every - day piece of practice . 

 William Carley have show himself very civil and oblige in provide for the lawyer 's comfort , and have do so , now take up his stand by the fire - place , evidently intend to remain as a spectator of the business . but an uneasy glance which the patient cast from time to time in the direction of his father - in - law convince Mr. Pivott that he want that gentleman to be get rid of before business begin . 

 " I think , Mr. Carley , it would be as well for our poor friend and I to be alone , " he say in his most courteous accent . 

 " fiddlestick ! " exclaim the bailiff contemptuously . " it be not   likely that Stephen can have any secret from his wife 's father . I be in nobody 's way , I be sure , and I be not go to put my spoke in the wheel , let he leave his money how he may . " 

 " very likely not , my dear sir . indeed , I be sure you would respect our poor friend 's wish , even if they be to take a form unpleasing to yourself , which be far from likely . but still it may be as well for Mr. Whitelaw and myself to be alone . in case of this kind the patient be apt to be nervous , and the business be do more expeditiously if there be no third party present . so , my dear Mr. Carley , if you have no objection " 

 " Steph , " say the bailiff abruptly , " do you want I out of the room ? say the word , if you do . " 

 the patient writhe , hesitate , and then reply with some confusion , 

 " if it be all the same to you , William Carley , I think I would soon be alone with Mr. Pivott . " 

 and here the polite attorney , have open the door with his own hand , bow the bailiff out ; and , to his extreme mortification , William Carley find himself on the outside of his son - in - law 's room , before he have time to make any farth remonstrance . 

 he go downstairs , and pace the wainscote parlour in a very savage frame of mind . 

 " there be some kind of devil 's work hatch up there , " he mutter to himself . " why should he want I out of the room ? he would not , if he be go to leave all his money to Ellen , as he ought to leave it . who else be there to get it ? not that old mother Tadman , surely . she be an artful old harridan ; and if my girl have not be a fool , she would have get rid of she out of hand when she marry . sure to goodness she can never stand between Stephen and his wife . and who else be there ? no one that I know of ; no one . Stephen would not   have keep any secret all these year from the folk he be live amongst . it be not   likely . he must leave it all to his wife , except a hundred or so , perhaps , to mother Tadman ; and it be nothing but his natural closeness that make he want I out of the way . " 

 and at this stage of his reflection , Mr. Carley open a cupboard near the fire - place and bring therefrom a case - bottle , from the content of which he find farth solace . it be about half - an - hour after this that he be summon by a call from the lawyer , who be stand on the broad landing - place at the top of the stair with a candle in his hand , when the bailiff emerge from the parlour . 

 " if you will step up here , and bring one of your man with you , I shall be oblige , Mr. Carley , " the attorney say , look over the banister ; " I want you to witness your son - in - law 's will . " Mr. Carley 's spirit rise a little at this . he be not much verse in the way of lawyer , and have a notion that Mr. Pivott would read the will to he , perhaps , before he sign it . it flash upon he presently that a legatee could not benefit by a will which he have witness . it be obvious , therefore , that Stephen do not mean he to have anything . well , he have scarcely expect anything . if his daughter inherit all , it would be pretty much the same thing ; she would act generously of course . 

 he go into the kitchen , where the head man , who have be retain on the premise to act as special messenger in this time of need , be sit in the chimney - corner smoke a comfortable pipe after his walk to and from Malsham . 

 " you be want upstairs a minute , Joe , " he say ; and the two go clumping up the wide old oaken staircase . 

 the witnessing of the will be a very brief business . Mr. Pivott do not offer to throw any light upon its content , nor be the bailiff , sharpsighte as he might be , able to seize upon so much as one paragraph or line of the document during the process of attach his signature thereto . 

 when the ceremony be conclude , Stephen Whitelaw sink back upon his pillow with an air of satisfaction . 

 " I do not   think I could have do any well , " he murmur . " it be a hard thing for a man of my age to leave everything behind he ; but I do not   see that I could have do well . " 

 " you have do that , my dear sir , which might afford comfort to any death - bed , " say the lawyer solemnly . 

 he fold the will , and put it into his pocket . 

 " our friend desire I to take charge of this document , " he say to William Carley . " you will have no reason to complain , on your daughter 's account , when you become familiar with its content . she have be fairly treat I may say very fairly treat . " 

 the bailiff do not much relish the tone of this assurance . fair treatment might mean very little . 

 " I hope she have be well treat , " he answer in a surly manner . " she be be a good wife to Stephen Whitelaw , and would continue so to be if he be to live twenty year long . when a pretty young woman marry a man twice her age , she be a right to expect handsome treatment , Mr. Pivott . it can not   be too handsome for justice , in my opinion . " 

 the solicitor give a little gentle sigh . 

 " as an interested party , Mr. Carley , " he say , " your opinion be not as valuable as it might be under other circumstance . however , I do not   think your daughter will complain , and I be sure the world will applaud what our poor friend have do of his own accord , mind , Mr. Carley , wholly and solely of his own spontaneous desire . it be a thing that I should only have be too proud to suggest ; but the responsibility of such a suggestion be one which I could never have take upon myself . it would have be out of my province , indeed . you will be kind enough to remember this by - and - by , my dear sir . " 

 the bailiff be puzzle , and show Mr. Pivott to the door with a moody countenance . 

 " I think there be some devil 's work , " he mutter to himself , as he watch the lawyer mount his stiff brown cob and ride away into the night ; " but what do it all mean ? and what have Stephen Whitelaw do with his money ? we shall know that pretty soon , anyhow . he can not   last long . " 

 CHAPTER XLVI 

 ellen regain her liberty 


 Stephen Whitelaw linger for two day and two night , and at the expiration of that time depart this life , make a very decent end of it , and trouble by no thought that his existence have be an unworthy one . 

 before he die , he tell his wife something of how he have be tempt into the doing of that foul deed whereof Marian Saltram have be the victim . those two be alone together the day before he die , when Stephen , of his own free will , make the follow statement : 

 " it be Mrs. Holbrook 's father , you see , " he say , in a plausible tone , " that put it to I , how he might want his daughter take care of for a time it might be a short time , or it might be rather a longish time , accord to how circumstance should work out . we have meet once before at the King 's arm at Malsham , where Mr. Nowell be stay , and where I go in of an evening , once in a way , after market ; and he would make pretty free with I , and ask I a good many question about myself , and tell I a good bit about himself , in a friendly way . he tell I how his daughter have go against he , and be likely to go against he , and how some property that ought in common justice to have be leave to he , have be leave to she . he be go to give she a fair chance , he say , if she like to leave her husband , who be a scheming scoundrel , and obey he . she might have a happy home with he , if she be reasonable . if not , he should use his authority as a father . 

 " he come to see I at Wyncomb next day drop in unaware like , when mother Tadman be out of the way not that I have ask he , you see . he seem to be quite take with the place , and make I show he all over the house ; and then he take a glass of something , and sit and talk a bit , and go away , without have say a word about his daughter . but before he go he make I promise that I would go and see he at the King 's arm that night . 

 " well , you see , Nell , as he seem to have take a fancy to I , as you may say , and have tell I he could put I up to make more of my money , and have altogether be uncommonly pleasant , I do not   care to say no , and I go . I be rather take aback at the King 's arm when they show I to a private room , because I have meet Mr. Nowell before in the Commercial ; however , there he be , sit in front of a blaze fire , and with a couple of decanter of wine upon the table . 

 " he be very civil , could not   have be more friendly , and we talk and talk ; he be always harp on his daughter ; till at last he come out with what he want . would I give her house - room for a bit , just to keep she out of the way of her husband and such - like design people , suppose she should turn obstinate and refuse to go abroad with he ? ' you have   a rare old roomy place , ' he say . ' I see some room upstairs at the end of a long passage which do not   seem to have be use for year . you might keep my lady in one of those ; and that fine husband of hers would be as puzzle where to find she as if she be in the centre of Africa . it would be a very easy thing to do , ' he say ; ' and it would be only friendly in you to do it . ' " 

 " o , Stephen ! " cry his wife reproachfully , " how could you ever consent to such a wicked thing ? " 

 " I do not   know about the wickedness of it , " Mr. Whitelaw respond , with rather a sullen air ; " a daughter be bind to obey her father , be not   she ? and if she do not , I should think he have the power to do what he like with she . that be how I should look at it , if I be a father . it be all very well to talk , you see , Nell , but you do not   know the argument such a man as that can bring to bear . I do not   want to do it ; I be against it from the first . it be a dangerous business , and might bring I into trouble . but that man bear down upon I to that extent that he make I promise anything ; and when I go home that night , it be with the understanding that I be to fit up a room there be a double door to be put up to shut out sound , and a deal more ready for Mrs. Holbrook , in case her father want to get she out of the way for a bit . " 

 " he promise to pay you , of course ? " Ellen say , not quite able to conceal the contempt and aversion which this confession of her husband 's inspire . 

 " well , yes , a man do not   put himself in jeopardy like that for nothing . he be to give I a certain sum of money down the first night that Mrs. Holbrook sleep in my house ; and another sum of money before he go to America , and an annual sum for continue to take care of she , if he want to keep she quiet permanently , as he might . altogether it would be a very profitable business , he tell I , and I ought to consider myself uncommonly lucky to get such a chance . as to the kindness or unkindness of the matter , it be well than shut she up in a lunatic asylum , he say ; and he might have to do that , if I refuse to take she . she be very weak in her head , he say , and the doctor would throw no difficulty in his way , if he want to put she into a madhouse . " 

 " but you must have know that be a lie ! " exclaim Ellen indignantly . " you have see and talk to she ; you must have know that Mrs. Holbrook be as sane as you or i. " 

 " I could not   be suppose to know well than her own father , " answer Mr. Whitelaw , in an injure tone ; " he have a right to know well . however , it be no use argue about it now . he have such a power over I that I could not   go against he ; so I give in , and Mrs. Holbrook come to Wyncomb . she be to be treat kindly and make comfortable , her father say ; that be agree between we ; and she have be treat kindly and make comfortable . I have to trust some one to wait upon she , and when Mr. Nowell see the two girl he choose Sarah Batts . ' that girl will do anything for money , ' he say ; ' she be stupid , but she be wise enough to know her own interest , and she will hold her tongue . ' so I trust Sarah Batts , and I have to pay she pretty stiffly to keep the secret ; but she be a rare one to do the work , and she go about it as quiet as a mouse . not even mother Tadman ever suspect she . " 

 " it be a wicked piece of business wicke from first to last , " say Ellen . " I can not   bear to hear about it . " 

 and then , remember that the sinner be so near his end , and that this voluntary confession of his be in some manner a sign of repentance , she feel some compunction , and speak to he in a soft tone . 

 " still I be grateful to you for tell I the truth at last , Stephen , " she say ; " and , thank God , there be no harm do that need last for ever . thank God that dear young lady do not lose her life , shut up a prisoner in that miserable room , as she might have do . " 

 " she have her victual regular , " observe Mr. Whitelaw , " and the good . " 

 " eat and drinking will not   keep any one alive , if their heart 's breaking , " say Ellen ; " but , thank heaven , her suffering have come to an end now , and I trust God will forgive your share in they , Stephen . " 

 and then , sit by his bedside through the long hour of that night , she try in very simple word to awaken he to a sense of his condition . it be not an easy business to let any glimmer of spiritual light in upon the darkness of that sordid mind . there do arise perhaps in this last extremity some dim sense of remorse in the breast of Mr. Whitelaw , some vague consciousness that in that one act of his life , and in the whole tenor of his life , he have not exactly shape his conduct accord to that model which the parson have hold up for his imitation in certain rather prosy sermon , indifferently hear , on the rare occasion of his attendance at the parish church . but whatever terror the world to come might hold for he seem very faint and shapeless , compare with the thing from which he be to be take . he think of his untimely death as a hardship , an injustice almost . when his wife entreat he to see the vicar of Crosber before he die , he refuse at first , ask what good the vicar 's talk could do he . 

 " if he could keep I alive as long as till next July , to see how those turnip answer with the new dressing , I would see he fast enough , " he say peevishly ; " but he can not ; and I do not   want to hear his preaching . " 

 " but it would be a comfort to you , surely , Stephen , to have he talk to you a little about the goodness and mercy of God . he will not   tell you hard thing , I be sure of that . " 

 " no , I suppose he will try and make believe that death 's uncommon pleasant , " answer Mr. Whitelaw with a bitter laugh ; " as if it could be pleasant to any man to leave such a place as Wyncomb , after do as much for the land , and spending as much labour and money upon it , as I have do . it be like nurse tell child that a dose of physic 's pleasant ; they would not   like to have to take it themselves . " 

 and then by - and - by , when his last day have dawn , and he feel himself grow weak , Mr. Whitelaw express himself willing to comply with his wife 's request . 

 " if it be any satisfaction to you , Nell , I will see the parson , " he say . " his talk can not   do I much harm , anyhow . " whereupon the rector of Crosber and Hallibury be send for , and come swiftly to perform his duty to the die man . he be closet with Mr. Whitelaw for some time , and do his good to awaken christian feeling in the farmer 's breast ; but it be doubtful if his pious effort result in much . the soul of Stephen Whitelaw be in his barn and granary , with his pig and cattle . he could not so much as conceive the idea of a world in which there should be no such thing as sale and profit . 

 his end come quietly enough at last , and Ellen be free . her time of bondage have be very brief , yet she feel herself twenty year old than she have seem before that interval of misery begin . 

 when the will be read by Mr. Pivott on the day of Stephen Whitelaw 's funeral , it be find that the farmer have leave his wife two hundred a year , derivable from real estate . to Mrs. Rebecca Tadman , his cousin , he bequeath an annuity of forty pound , the say annuity to revert to Ellen upon Mrs. Tadman 's death should Ellen survive . the remain portion of his real estate he bequeath to one John James Harris , a distant cousin , who own a farm in Wiltshire , with whom Stephen Whitelaw have spend some year of his boyhood , and from whom he have learn the science of agriculture . it be less from any love the testator bear John James Harris than from a morbid jealousy of his probable successor Frank Randall , that the Wiltshire farmer have be name as residuary legatee . if Stephen Whitelaw could have leave his real estate to the Infirmary , he would have so leave it . his personal estate , consist of diver investment in railway share and other kind of stock , all of a very safe kind , be to be realize , and the entire proceed devote to the erection of an additional wing for the extension of Malsham Infirmary , and his gift be to be record on a stone tablet in a conspicuous position on the front of that building . this , which be an absolute condition attach to the bequest , have be set forth with great minuteness by the lawyer , at the special desire of his client . 

 Mr. Carley 's expression of opinion after hear this will read need not be record here . it be forcible , to say the least of it ; and Mr. Pivott , the Malsham solicitor , protest against such language as an outrage upon the fine feeling of our nature . 

 " some degree of disappointment be perhaps excusable upon your part , my dear sir , " say the lawyer , who wish to keep the widow for his client , and have therefore no desire to offend her father ; " but I be sure that in your calm moment you will admit that the work to which your son - in - law have devote the bulk of his accumulation be a noble one . for age to come the sick and the suffering among our townsfolk will bless the name of Whitelaw . there be a touching reflection for you , Mr. Carley ! and really now , your amiable daughter , with an income of two hundred per annum to say nothing of that reversion which must fall in to she by - and - by on Mrs. Tadman 's decease be leave in a very fair position . I should not have consent to draw up that will , sir , if I have consider it an unjust one . " 

 " then there be a wide difference between your notion of justice and mine , " growl the bailiff ; who thereupon relapse into grim silence , feel that complaint be useless . he could no more alter the condition of Mr. Whitelaw 's will than he could bring Mr. Whitelaw back to life and that last operation be one which he be by no mean eager to perform . 

 Ellen herself feel no disappointment ; she fancy , indeed , that her husband , whom she have never deceive by any pretence of affection , have behave with sufficient generosity towards she . two hundred a year seem a large income to she . it would give her perfect independence , and the power to help other , if need be . 

 CHAPTER XLVII 

 CLOSING SCENES 


 it be not until the day of her husband 's funeral that Ellen Whitelaw write to Mr. Fenton to tell he what have happen . she know that her letter be likely to bring he post - haste to the Grange , and she wish his come to be defer until that last dismal day be over . nor be she sorry that there should be some little pause a brief interval of ignorance and tranquillity in Marian 's life before she hear of her husband 's useless voyage across the Atlantic . she be in sad need of rest of mind and body , and even in those few day gain considerable strength , by the aid of Mrs. Whitelaw 's tender nursing . she have not leave her room during the time that death be in the darken house , and it be only on the morning after the funeral that she come downstairs for the first time . her appearance have improve wonderfully in that interval of little more than a week . her eye have lose their dim weary look , the deathly pallor of her complexion have give place to a faint bloom . but grateful as she be for her own deliverance , she be full of anxiety about her husband . Ellen Whitelaw 's vague assurance that all would be well , that he would soon be restore to she , be not enough to set her mind at ease . 

 Ellen have not the courage to tell she the truth . it be well that Gilbert Fenton should do that , she think . he who know all the circumstance of Mr. Holbrook 's journey , and the probability as to his return , would be so much well able to comfort and reassure his wife . 

 " he will come to - day , I have no doubt , " Ellen say to herself on the morning after her husband 's funeral . 

 she tell Marian how she have write to Mr. Fenton on the day before , in order to avoid the agitation of a surprise , should he appear at the Grange without wait to announce his coming . nor be she mistake as to the probability of his speedy arrival . it be not long after noon when there come a loud peal of the bell that ring so rarely . Ellen run herself to the gate to admit the visitor . she have tell he of her husband 's death in her last letter , and her widow 's weed be no surprise to he . he be pale , but very calm . 

 " she be well ? " he ask eagerly . 

 " yes , sir , she be as well as one could look for she to be , poor dear , after what she have go through . but she be much change since last you see she . you must prepare yourself for that , sir . and she be very anxious about her husband . I do not   know how she will take it , when she hear that he have go to America . " 

 " yes , that be a bad business , Mrs. Whitelaw , " Gilbert answer gravely . " he be not in a fit state to travel , unfortunately . he be only just recover from a severe illness , and be as weak as a child . " 

 " o dear , o dear ! but you will not   tell Mrs. Holbrook that , sir ? " 

 " I will not   tell she more than I can help ; of course I do not   want to alarm she ; but I be bind to tell she some portion of the truth . you do her husband a great wrong , you see , Mrs. Whitelaw , when you suspect he of some share in this vile business . he have show himself really devoted to she . I thank God that it have prove so . and now tell I more about this affair ; your letter explain so little . " 

 " I will tell you all , sir . " 

 they walk in the garden for about a quarter of an hour before Gilbert go into the house . Eager as he be to see Marian , he be still more anxious to hear full particular of that foul plot of which she have be make the victim . Ellen Whitelaw tell he the story very plainly , make no attempt to conceal her husband 's guilty part in the business ; and the story be finish , she take he straight to the parlour where he have see Marian for the first time after her marriage . 

 it be a warm bright day , and all three window be open . Marian be sit by one of they , with some scrap of work lie forget in her lap . she start up from her seat as Gilbert go into the room , and hasten forward to meet he . 

 " how good of you to come ! " she cry . " and you have bring I news of my husband ? I be sure of that . " 

 " yes , dear Mrs. Holbrook Mrs. Saltram ; may I not call you by that name now ? I know all ; and have forgive all . " 

 " then you know how deeply he sin against you , and how much he value your friendship ? he would never have play so false a part but for that . he could not bear to think of be estranged from you . " 

 " we be not estranged . I have try to be angry with he ; but there be some old tie that a man can not break . he have use I very ill , Marian ; but he be still my friend . " 

 his voice break a little as he utter the old familiar name . yes , she be change , cruelly change , by that ordeal of six month ' suffering . the brightness of her beauty have quite fade ; but there be something in the altered face that touch he more deeply than the old magic . she be dearer to he , perhaps , in this hour than she have ever be yet . Dearer to he , and yet divide from he utterly , now that he profess himself her husband 's friend as well as her own . 

 friendship , brotherly affection , those chasten sentiment which he have fancy have supersede all warm feeling where be they now ? by the passionate beating of his heart , by his eager longing to clasp that fade form to his breast , he know that he love she as dearly as on the day when she promise to be his wife ; that he must love she with the same measure till the end of his existence . 

 " thank God for that , " Marian say gently ; " thank God that you be still friend . but why do he not come with you to - day ? you have tell he about I , I suppose ? " 

 " not yet , Marian ; I have not be able to do that . nor could he come with I to - day . he have leave England on a false scent . " 

 and then he tell she , in a few word , the story of John Saltram 's voyage to New York ; make very light of the matter , and speak cheerily of his early return . 

 " he will come back at once , of course , when he find how he have be deceive , " Gilbert say . 

 Marian be cruelly distress by this disappointment . she try to bear the blow bravely , and listen with a gentle patience to Gilbert 's reassure argument ; but it be a hard thing to bear . 

 " he will be back soon , you say , " she say ; " but soon be such a vague word ; and you have not tell I when he go . " 

 Gilbert tell she the date of John Saltram 's departure . she begin immediately to question he as to the usual length of the voyage , and to calculate the time he have have for his going and return . take the average length of the voyage as ten day , and allow ten day for delay in New York , a month would give ample time for the two journey ; and John Saltram have be away more than a month . 

 Gilbert could see that Marian be quick to take alarm on discover this . 

 " my dear Mrs. Saltram , be reasonable , " he say gently . " find such a cheat put upon he , your husband would naturally be anxious to bring your father to some kind of reckoning , to extort from he the real secret of your fate . he would no doubt stay in New York to do this ; and we can not tell how difficult the business might prove , or how long it would occupy he . " 

 " but if he have be detain like that , he would surely have write to you , " say Marian ; " and you have hear nothing from he since he leave England . " 

 " unhappily nothing . but he be not the good correspondent in the world , you know . " 

 " yes , yes , I know that . yet , in such a case as this , he would surely have write , if he be well . " her eye meet Gilbert 's as she say this . she stop abruptly , dismay by something in his face . 

 " you be hide some misfortune from I , " she cry ; " I can see it in your face . you have have bad news of he . " 

 " upon my honour , no . he be not in very strong health when he leave England , that be all ; and , like yourself , I be naturally anxious . " 

 he have not mean to admit even as much as this just yet ; but have say this , he find himself compel to say more . Marian question he so closely , that she finally extort from he the whole history of John Saltram 's illness . after that it be quite in vain to attempt consolation . she be very gentle , very patient , trouble he with no vain wailing and lamentation ; but he could see that her heart be almost broken . 

 he leave she at the end of a few hour to return to London , promise to go on to Liverpool next day , in order to be on the spot to await her husband 's return , and to send she the early possible tiding of it . 

 " your friendship for we have give you nothing but trouble and pain , " she say ; " but if you will do this for I , I shall be grateful to you for the rest of my life . " 

 there be no occasion for that journey to Liverpool . when he arrive in London that night , Gilbert Fenton find a letter wait for he at his Wigmore - street lodging a letter with the New York post - mark , but not address in his friend 's hand . he tear it open hurriedly , just a little alarmed by this fact . 

 his first feeling be one of relief . there be three separate sheet of paper in the envelope , and the first which he take up be in John Saltram 's hand a hurried eager letter , date some week before . 

 " my dear Gilbert , " he write , " I have be dupe . this man Nowell be a most consummate scoundrel . the woman with he be not marian , but some girl whom he have pick up to represent she his wife perhaps , or something bad . I be very ill on the passage out , and only discover the trick at the last . since then I have trace the scoundrel to his quarter , and have have an interview with he rather a stormy one , as you may suppose . but the long and short of it be that he defy I . he tell I that my wife be in England , and safe , but will admit no more . I have consult a lawyer here , but it seem I can do nothing against he or nothing that will not involve a more complicated and protract business than I have time or patience for . I do not   want this wretch to go scot - free . it be evident that he have hatch this plot in order to get possession of his daughter 's money , and I have little doubt the lawyer Medler be in it . but of course my first duty , as well as my most ardent desire , be to find Marian ; and for this purpose I shall come back to England by the first steamer that will convey I , leave Mr. Nowell 's punishment to the chance of the future . my dear girl 's property , as well as herself , will be well protect by my presence in England . " 

 there be a pause here , and the next paragraph be date two day after . 

 " if I have strength to come , I shall return by the next steamer ; but the fact be , my dear Gilbert , I be very ill have be completely prostrate since write the above and a doctor here tell I I must not think of the voyage yet awhile . but I shall not   allow his opinion to govern I . if I can crawl to the steamer , which start three day hence , I shall come . " 

 then there be another break , and again the writer go on in a weak and more straggling hand , without any date this time . 

 " my dear Gil , it be nearly a week since I write the last line , and I have   be in bed ever since . I be afraid there be no hope for I ; in plain word , I believe I be die . to you I leave the duty I be not allow to perform . Marian be live , and in England . I believe that scoundrelly father of hers tell I the truth when he declare that . you will not rest till you find she , I know ; and you will protect her fortune from that wretch . God bless you , faithful old friend ! Heaven know how I yearn for the sight of your honest face , lie here among stranger , to be bury in a foreign land . see that my wife pay Mrs. Branston the money I borrow to come here ; and tell she that I be grateful to she , and think of she on my die bed . to my wife I send no message . she know that I love she ; but how dear she have be to I in this bitter time of separation , she can never know . 

 " you will find a bulky MS . at my chamber , in the bottom drawer on the right side of my desk . it be my life of Swift unfinishe as my own life . if , after read it , you should think it worth publish , as a fragment , with my name to it , I should wish you to arrange its publication . I should be glad to leave my name upon something . " 

 in a stranger 's hand , and upon another sheet of paper , Gilbert read the end of his friend 's history . 

 " Sir , I regret to inform you that your friend Mr. Saltram expire at eleven o'clock last night   Wednesday , May 2nd , after an illness of a fortnight 's duration , throughout which I give he my good attention as his medical adviser . he will be bury in the Cypress - hill Cemetery , on Long Island , at his own request ; and he have leave sufficient fund for the necessary expense , and the payment of his hotel bill , as well as my own small claim against he . any surplus which may be leave I shall forward to you , when these payment have be make . I enclose a detailed account of the case for your satisfaction , and have the honour to be , sir , 

 " your very obediently , 

 " SILAS WARREN , M.D. 

 " 113 sixteenth - street , New York , 

 " May 3 , 186 . " 

 this be all . 

 and Gilbert have to carry these tiding to Marian . for a time he be almost paralyze by the blow . he have love this man as a brother ; if he have ever doubt the strength of his attachment to John Saltram , he know it now . but the bad of all be , that one bitter fact Marian must be tell , and by he . 

 he go back to the Grange next day . again and again upon that miserable journey he act over the scene which be to take place when he come to the end of it in spite of himself , as it be go over the word he be to say , while Marian 's face rise before he like a picture . how be he to tell she ? would not the very fact of this desolation come to she from his lip be sufficient to make he hateful to she in all the day to come ? More than once upon that journey he be tempt to turn back , and to leave his dismal news to be tell in a letter . 

 but when the fatal moment do at last arrive , the event in no manner realize the picture of his imagination . time be not give to he to speak those solemn preliminary word by which he have intend to prepare the victim for her deathblow . his presence there , and his presence alone , be all sufficient to prepare she for some calamity . 

 " you have come back to I , and without he ! " she exclaim . " tell I what have happen ; tell I at once . " 

 he have no time to defer the stroke . his face tell she so much . in a few moment before his broken word could shape themselves into coherence she know all . 

 there be some thing that can never be forget . never , to his die day , can Gilbert Fenton forget the quiet agony he have to witness then . 

 she be very ill for a long time after that day in danger of death . all that she have suffer during her confinement at Wyncomb seem to fall upon she now with a double weight . only the supreme devotion of those who care for she could have carry she through that weary time ; but the day do at last come when the peril be pronounce a thing of the past , and the feeble submissive patient might be carry away from the Grange from the scene of her brief married life and of her bitter widowhood . 

 she go with Ellen Whitelaw to Ventnor . it be late in August before she be able to bear this journey ; and in this mild refuge for invalid she remain throughout the winter . 

 even during that trying time , when it seem more than doubtful whether she could live to profit by her grandfather 's bequest , her interest have be carefully watch by Gilbert Fenton . it be tolerably evident to his mind that Mr. Medler have be a tacit accomplice in Percival Nowell 's fraud ; or , at any rate , that he have enable the pretended Mrs. Holbrook to obtain a large sum of ready money with great ease than she could have do have he , as executor , be scrupulously careful to obtain her identification from some more trustworthy person than he know Percival Nowell to be . 

 whether these suspicion of Gilbert 's be correct , whether the lawyer have be actually deceive , or have willingly lend himself to the furtherance of Nowell 's design , must remain unascertained ; as well as the amount of profit which Mr. Medler may have secure to himself by the transaction . the law hold he liable for the whole of the money thus pay over in fraud or error ; but the law could do very little against a man whose sole earthly possession appear to be comprise by the worm - eat desk and shabby chair and table in his dingy office . the poor consolation remain of make an attempt to get he strike off " the Rolls ; " but when the City firm of solicitor in whose hand Gilbert have place Mrs. Saltram 's affair suggest this , Marian herself entreat that the man might have the benefit of the doubt as to his complicity with her father , and that no effort should be make to bring legal ruin upon he . 

 " there have be enough misery cause by this money already , " she say . " let the matter rest . I be rich than I care to be , as it be . " 

 of course Mr. Medler be not allow to retain his position as executor . the Court of Chancery be appeal to in the usual manner , and intervene for the future protection of Mrs. Saltram 's interest . 

 about Nowell 's conduct there be , of course , no doubt ; but after waste a good deal of money and trouble in his pursuit , Gilbert be fain to abandon all hope of catch he in the wide region of the new world . it be ascertain that the woman who have accompany he in the Orinoco as his daughter be actually his wife a girl whom he have meet at some low London dancing - room , and marry within a fortnight of his introduction to she . it be possible that prudence as well as attachment may have have something to do with this alliance . Mr. Nowell know that , once unite to he in the bond of holy matrimony , the accomplice of his fraud would have no power to give evidence against he . the amount which he have contrive to secure to himself by this plot amount in all to something under four thousand pound ; and out of this it may fairly be suppose that Mr. Medler claim a considerable percentage . the only information that Gilbert Fenton could ever obtain from America be , of a shabby swindler arrest in a gambling - house in one of the more remote western city , whose description correspond pretty closely with that of Marian 's father . 

 there come a time for the healing of all grief . the cruel wound close at last , though the scar , and the bitter memory of the stroke , may remain for ever . there come a time some year after John Saltram 's death when Gilbert Fenton have his reward . and if the woman he win for his wife in these latter day be not quite the fresh young beauty he have woo under the walnut - tree in Captain Sedgewick 's garden , she be still infinitely more beautiful than all other woman in his eye ; she be still the dearest and good and bright and purest of all earthly creature for he . in that happy time that perfect summer and harvest of his life all his fond dream have be realize . he have the home he so often picture , the child whose airy voice sound in his dream , the dear face always near he , and , sweet than all , the knowledge that he be love almost as he love . the bitter apprenticeship have be serve , and the full reward have be grant . 

 for Ellen Whitelaw too have come the period of compensation , and the farmer 's bad fear have be realize as to Frank Randall 's participation in that money he love so well . the income grudgingly leave to his wife by Stephen have enable Mr. Randall to begin business as a solicitor upon his own account , in a small town near London , with every apparent prospect of success . Ellen 's home be within easy reach of the river - side villa occupy by Mr. and Mrs. Fenton ; so she be able to see her dear Marian as often as she like ; nor be there any guest at the villa more welcome than this faithful friend . 

 the half - write memoir of Jonathan Swift be publish ; and reviewer , who have no compunction in praise the dead , be quick to recognize the touch of a master hand , the trenchant style of a powerful thinker . for the public the book be of no great value ; it be merely a curiosity of literature ; but it be the only monument of his own rugged genius which bear the name of John Saltram . 

 poor little Mrs. Branston have not sacrifice all the joy of life to the mane of her faithless lover . she be now the happy wife of a dash naval officer , and give pleasant party which bring life and light into the great house in Cavendish - square ; party to which Theobald Pallinson come , and where he shin as a small feeble star when great light be absent sing his last little song , or recite his last little poem , for the delight of some small coterie of single lady not in the first bloom of youth ; but party from which Mrs. Pallinson keep aloof in a stern spirit of condemnation , inform she choose familiar that she be never more cruelly deceive than in that misguided ungrateful young woman , Adela Branston . 
