a Little Princess 


 1 

 Sara 

 once on a dark winter 's day , when the yellow fog hang so thick and heavy in the street of London that the lamp be light and the shop window blaze with gas as they do at night , an odd - looking little girl sit in a cab with her father and be drive rather slowly through the big thoroughfare . 

 she sit with her foot tuck under she , and lean against her father , who hold she in his arm , as she star out of the window at the pass people with a queer old - fashioned thoughtfulness in her big eye . 

 she be such a little girl that one do not expect to see such a look on her small face . it would have be an old look for a child of twelve , and Sara Crewe be only seven . the fact be , however , that she be always dream and think odd thing and could not herself remember any time when she have not be think thing about grow - up people and the world they belong to . she feel as if she have live a long , long time . 

 at this moment she be remember the voyage she have just make from Bombay with her father , Captain Crewe . she be think of the big ship , of the Lascars pass silently to and fro on it , of the child play about on the hot deck , and of some young officer ' wife who use to try to make her talk to they and laugh at the thing she say . 

 principally , she be think of what a queer thing it be that at one time one be in India in the blaze sun , and then in the middle of the ocean , and then drive in a strange vehicle through strange street where the day be as dark as the night . she find this so puzzle that she move close to her father . 

 " Papa , " she say in a low , mysterious little voice which be almost a whisper , " papa . " 

 " what be it , darling ? " Captain Crewe answer , hold she close and look down into her face . " what be Sara thinking of ? " 

 " be this the place ? " Sara whisper , cuddle still close to he . " be it , papa ? " 

 " yes , little Sara , it be . we have reach it at last . " and though she be only seven year old , she know that he feel sad when he say it . 

 it seem to she many year since he have begin to prepare her mind for " the place , " as she always call it . her mother have die when she be bear , so she have never know or miss she . her young , handsome , rich , pet father seem to be the only relation she have in the world . they have always play together and be fond of each other . she only know he be rich because she have hear people say so when they think she be not listen , and she have also hear they say that when she grow up she would be rich , too . she do not know all that be rich meant . she have always live in a beautiful bungalow , and have be use to see many servant who make salaam to she and call she " Missee Sahib , " and give she her own way in everything . she have have toy and pet and an ayah who worship she , and she have gradually learn that people who be rich have these thing . that , however , be all she know about it . 

 during her short life only one thing have trouble she , and that thing be " the place " she be to be take to some day . the climate of India be very bad for child , and as soon as possible they be send away from it generally to England and to school . she have see other child go away , and have hear their father and mother talk about the letter they receive from they . she have know that she would be oblige to go also , and though sometimes her father 's story of the voyage and the new country have attract she , she have be trouble by the thought that he could not stay with she . 

 " could not   you go to that place with I , papa ? " she have ask when she be five year old . " could not   you go to school , too ? I would help you with your lesson . " 

 " but you will not have to stay for a very long time , little Sara , " he have always say . " you will go to a nice house where there will be a lot of little girl , and you will play together , and I will send you plenty of book , and you will grow so fast that it will seem scarcely a year before you be big enough and clever enough to come back and take care of papa . " 

 she have like to think of that . to keep the house for her father ; to ride with he , and sit at the head of his table when he have dinner party ; to talk to he and read his book that would be what she would like most in the world , and if one must go away to " the place " in England to attain it , she must make up her mind to go . she do not care very much for other little girl , but if she have plenty of book she could console herself . she like book more than anything else , and be , in fact , always invent story of beautiful thing and tell they to herself . sometimes she have tell they to her father , and he have like they as much as she do . 

 " well , papa , " she say softly , " if we be here I suppose we must be resign . " 

 he laugh at her old - fashioned speech and kiss she . he be really not at all resign himself , though he know he must keep that a secret . his quaint little Sara have be a great companion to he , and he feel he should be a lonely fellow when , on his return to India , he go into his bungalow knowing he need not expect to see the small figure in its white frock come forward to meet he . so he hold she very closely in his arm as the cab roll into the big , dull square in which stand the house which be their destination . 

 it be a big , dull , brick house , exactly like all the other in its row , but that on the front door there shine a brass plate on which be engrave in black letter : 

 MISS MINCHIN , 
 select Seminary for Young Ladies . 


 " here we be , Sara , " say Captain Crewe , make his voice sound as cheerful as possible . then he lift she out of the cab and they mount the step and ring the bell . Sara often think afterward that the house be somehow exactly like Miss Minchin . it be respectable and well furnish , but everything in it be ugly ; and the very armchair seem to have hard bone in they . in the hall everything be hard and polish even the red cheek of the moon face on the tall clock in the corner have a severe varnished look . the drawing room into which they be usher be cover by a carpet with a square pattern upon it , the chair be square , and a heavy marble timepiece stand upon the heavy marble mantel . 

 as she sit down in one of the stiff mahogany chair , Sara cast one of her quick look about she . 

 " I do not   like it , papa , " she say . " but then I dare say soldier even brave one do not   really like go into battle . " 

 Captain Crewe laugh outright at this . he be young and full of fun , and he never tired of hear Sara 's queer speech . 

 " oh , little Sara , " he say . " what shall I do when I have no one to say solemn thing to I ? no one else be as solemn as you be . " 

 " but why do solemn thing make you laugh so ? " inquire Sara . 

 " because you be such fun when you say they , " he answer , laugh still more . and then suddenly he sweep she into his arm and kiss she very hard , stop laugh all at once and look almost as if tear have come into his eye . 

 it be just then that Miss Minchin enter the room . she be very like her house , Sara feel : tall and dull , and respectable and ugly . she have large , cold , fishy eye , and a large , cold , fishy smile . it spread itself into a very large smile when she see Sara and Captain Crewe . she have hear a great many desirable thing of the young soldier from the lady who have recommend her school to he . among other thing , she have hear that he be a rich father who be willing to spend a great deal of money on his little daughter . 

 " it will be a great privilege to have charge of such a beautiful and promising child , Captain Crewe , " she say , take Sara 's hand and stroke it . " Lady Meredith have tell I of her unusual cleverness . a clever child be a great treasure in an establishment like mine . " 

 Sara stand quietly , with her eye fix upon Miss Minchin 's face . she be think something odd , as usual . 

 " why do she say I be a beautiful child ? " she be think . " I be not beautiful at all . Colonel Grange 's little girl , Isobel , be beautiful . she have dimple and rose - color cheek , and long hair the color of gold . I have short black hair and green eye ; besides which , I be a thin child and not fair in the least . I be one of the ugly child I ever see . she be begin by tell a story . " 

 she be mistaken , however , in think she be an ugly child . she be not in the least like Isobel Grange , who have be the beauty of the regiment , but she have an odd charm of her own . she be a slim , supple creature , rather tall for her age , and have an intense , attractive little face . her hair be heavy and quite black and only curl at the tip ; her eye be greenish gray , it be true , but they be big , wonderful eye with long , black lash , and though she herself do not like the color of they , many other people do . still she be very firm in her belief that she be an ugly little girl , and she be not at all elated by Miss Minchin 's flattery . 

 " I should be tell a story if I say she be beautiful , " she think ; " and I should know I be tell a story . I believe I be as ugly as she be in my way . what do she say that for ? " 

 after she have know Miss Minchin long she learn why she have say it . she discover that she say the same thing to each papa and mamma who bring a child to her school . 

 Sara stand near her father and listen while he and Miss Minchin talk . she have be bring to the seminary because Lady Meredith 's two little girl have be educate there , and Captain Crewe have a great respect for Lady Meredith 's experience . Sara be to be what be know as " a parlor boarder , " and she be to enjoy even great privilege than parlor boarder usually do . she be to have a pretty bedroom and sit room of her own ; she be to have a pony and a carriage , and a maid to take the place of the ayah who have be her nurse in India . 

 " I be not in the least anxious about her education , " Captain Crewe say , with his gay laugh , as he hold Sara 's hand and pat it . " the difficulty will be to keep she from learn too fast and too much . she be always sit with her little nose burrow into book . she do not   read they , Miss Minchin ; she gobble they up as if she be a little wolf instead of a little girl . she be always starve for new book to gobble , and she want grown - up book great , big , fat one french and german as well as english history and biography and poet , and all sort of thing . drag she away from her book when she read too much . make she ride her pony in the row or go out and buy a new doll . she ought to play more with doll . " 

 " Papa , " say Sara , " you see , if I go out and buy a new doll every few day I should have more than I could be fond of . doll ought to be intimate friend . Emily be go to be my intimate friend . " 

 Captain Crewe look at Miss Minchin and Miss Minchin look at Captain Crewe . 

 " who be Emily ? " she inquire . 

 " tell she , Sara , " Captain Crewe say , smile . 

 Sara 's green - gray eye look very solemn and quite soft as she answer . 

 " she be a doll I have not   get yet , " she say . " she be a doll papa be go to buy for I . we be go out together to find she . I have call she Emily . she be go to be my friend when papa be go . I want she to talk to about he . " 

 Miss Minchin 's large , fishy smile become very flattering indeed . 

 " what an original child ! " she say . " what a darling little creature ! " 

 " yes , " say Captain Crewe , draw Sara close . " she be a darling little creature . take great care of she for I , Miss Minchin . " 

 Sara stay with her father at his hotel for several day ; in fact , she remain with he until he sail away again to India . they go out and visit many big shop together , and buy a great many thing . they buy , indeed , a great many more thing than Sara need ; but Captain Crewe be a rash , innocent young man and want his little girl to have everything she admire and everything he admire himself , so between they they collect a wardrobe much too grand for a child of seven . there be velvet dress trim with costly fur , and lace dress , and embroider one , and hat with great , soft ostrich feather , and ermine coat and muff , and box of tiny glove and handkerchief and silk stocking in such abundant supply that the polite young woman behind the counter whisper to each other that the odd little girl with the big , solemn eye must be at least some foreign princess perhaps the little daughter of an indian rajah . 

 and at last they find Emily , but they go to a number of toy shop and look at a great many doll before they discover she . 

 " I want she to look as if she be not   a doll really , " Sara say . " I want she to look as if she listen when I talk to she . the trouble with doll , papa " and she put her head on one side and reflect as she say it " the trouble with doll be that they never seem to hear . " so they look at big one and little one at doll with black eye and doll with blue at doll with brown curl and doll with golden braid , doll dress and doll undressed . 

 " you see , " Sara say when they be examine one who have no clothe . " if , when I find she , she have no frock , we can take she to a dressmaker and have her thing make to fit . they will fit well if they be try on . " 

 after a number of disappointment they decide to walk and look in at the shop window and let the cab follow they . they have pass two or three place without even go in , when , as they be approach a shop which be really not a very large one , Sara suddenly start and clutch her father 's arm . 

 " oh , papa ! " she cry . " there be Emily ! " 

 a flush have rise to her face and there be an expression in her green - gray eye as if she have just recognize someone she be intimate with and fond of . 

 " she be actually wait there for we ! " she say . " let we go in to she . " 

 " dear I , " say Captain Crewe , " I feel as if we ought to have someone to introduce we . " 

 " you must introduce I and I will introduce you , " say Sara . " but I know she the minute I see she so perhaps she know I , too . " 

 perhaps she have know she . she have certainly a very intelligent expression in her eye when Sara take she in her arm . she be a large doll , but not too large to carry about easily ; she have naturally curl golden - brown hair , which hang like a mantle about she , and her eye be a deep , clear , gray - blue , with soft , thick eyelash which be real eyelash and not mere paint line . 

 " of course , " say Sara , look into her face as she hold she on her knee , " of course papa , this be Emily . " 

 so Emily be buy and actually take to a child 's outfitter 's shop and measure for a wardrobe as grand as Sara 's own . she have lace frock , too , and velvet and muslin one , and hat and coat and beautiful lace - trim underclothe , and glove and handkerchief and fur . 

 " I should like she always to look as if she be a child with a good mother , " say Sara . " I be her mother , though I be go to make a companion of she . " 

 Captain Crewe would really have enjoy the shopping tremendously , but that a sad thought keep tug at his heart . this all mean that he be go to be separate from his beloved , quaint little comrade . 

 he get out of his bed in the middle of that night and go and stand look down at Sara , who lie asleep with Emily in her arm . her black hair be spread out on the pillow and Emily 's golden - brown hair mingle with it , both of they have lace - ruffle nightgown , and both have long eyelash which lie and curl up on their cheek . Emily look so like a real child that Captain Crewe feel glad she be there . he draw a big sigh and pull his mustache with a boyish expression . 

 " Heigh - ho , little Sara ! " he say to himself " I do not   believe you know how much your daddy will miss you . " 

 the next day he take she to Miss Minchin 's and leave she there . he be to sail away the next morning . he explain to Miss Minchin that his solicitor , Messrs. Barrow    Skipworth , have charge of his affair in England and would give she any advice she want , and that they would pay the bill she send in for Sara 's expense . he would write to Sara twice a week , and she be to be give every pleasure she ask for . 

 " she be a sensible little thing , and she never want anything it be not   safe to give she , " he say . 

 then he go with Sara into her little sit room and they bid each other good - by . Sara sit on his knee and hold the lapel of his coat in her small hand , and look long and hard at his face . 

 " be you learn I by heart , little Sara ? " he say , stroke her hair . 

 " no , " she answer . " I know you by heart . you be inside my heart . " and they put their arm round each other and kiss as if they would never let each other go . 

 when the cab drive away from the door , Sara be sit on the floor of her sit room , with her hand under her chin and her eye follow it until it have turn the corner of the square . Emily be sit by she , and she look after it , too . when Miss Minchin send her sister , Miss Amelia , to see what the child be do , she find she could not open the door . 

 " I have lock it , " say a queer , polite little voice from inside . " I want to be quite by myself , if you please . " 

 Miss Amelia be fat and dumpy , and stand very much in awe of her sister . she be really the well - natured person of the two , but she never disobey Miss Minchin . she go downstairs again , look almost alarmed . 

 " I never see such a funny , old - fashioned child , sister , " she say . " she have lock herself in , and she be not make the least particle of noise . " 

 " it be much well than if she kick and scream , as some of they do , " Miss Minchin answer . " I expect that a child as much spoil as she be would set the whole house in an uproar . if ever a child be give her own way in everything , she be . " 

 " I have   be open her trunk and put her thing away , " say Miss Amelia . " I never see anything like they sable and ermine on her coat , and real Valenciennes lace on her underclothing . you have see some of her clothe . what do you think of they ? " 

 " I think they be perfectly ridiculous , " reply Miss Minchin , sharply ; " but they will look very well at the head of the line when we take the schoolchildren to church on Sunday . she have be provide for as if she be a little princess . " 

 and upstairs in the locked room Sara and Emily sit on the floor and star at the corner round which the cab have disappear , while Captain Crewe look backward , wave and kiss his hand as if he could not bear to stop . 




 2 

 a french Lesson 

 when Sara enter the schoolroom the next morning everybody look at she with wide , interested eye . by that time every pupil from Lavinia Herbert , who be nearly thirteen and feel quite grow up , to Lottie Legh , who be only just four and the baby of the school have hear a great deal about she . they know very certainly that she be Miss Minchin 's show pupil and be consider a credit to the establishment . one or two of they have even catch a glimpse of her french maid , Mariette , who have arrive the evening before . Lavinia have manage to pass Sara 's room when the door be open , and have see Mariette open a box which have arrive late from some shop . 

 " it be full of petticoat with lace frill on they frill and frill , " she whisper to her friend Jessie as she bent over her geography . " I see she shake they out . I hear Miss Minchin say to Miss Amelia that her clothe be so grand that they be ridiculous for a child . my mamma say that child should be dress simply . she have get one of those petticoat on now . I see it when she sit down . " 

 " she have silk stocking on ! " whisper Jessie , bend over her geography also . " and what little foot ! I never see such little foot . " 

 " oh , " sniff Lavinia , spitefully , " that be the way her slipper be make . my mamma say that even big foot can be make to look small if you have a clever shoemaker . I do not   think she be pretty at all . her eye be such a queer color . " 

 " she be not   pretty as other pretty people be , " say Jessie , steal a glance across the room ; " but she make you want to look at she again . she have tremendously long eyelash , but her eye be almost green . " 

 Sara be sit quietly in her seat , wait to be tell what to do . she have be place near Miss Minchin 's desk . she be not abash at all by the many pair of eye watch she . she be interested and look back quietly at the child who look at she . she wonder what they be think of , and if they like Miss Minchin , and if they care for their lesson , and if any of they have a papa at all like her own . she have have a long talk with Emily about her papa that morning . 

 " he be on the sea now , Emily , " she have say . " we must be very great friend to each other and tell each other thing . emily , look at I . you have the nice eye I ever see but I wish you could speak . " 

 she be a child full of imagining and whimsical thought , and one of her fancy be that there would be a great deal of comfort in even pretend that Emily be alive and really hear and understand . after Mariette have dress she in her dark - blue schoolroom frock and tie her hair with a dark - blue ribbon , she go to Emily , who sit in a chair of her own , and give she a book . 

 " you can read that while I be downstairs , " she say ; and , see Mariette look at her curiously , she speak to she with a serious little face . 

 " what I believe about doll , " she say , " be that they can do thing they will not let we know about . perhaps , really , Emily can read and talk and walk , but she will only do it when people be out of the room . that be her secret . you see , if people know that doll could do thing , they would make they work . so , perhaps , they have promise each other to keep it a secret . if you stay in the room , Emily will just sit there and stare ; but if you go out , she will begin to read , perhaps , or go and look out of the window . then if she hear either of we come , she would just run back and jump into her chair and pretend she have be there all the time . " 

 " comme elle est drole ! " Mariette say to herself , and when she go downstairs she tell the head housemaid about it . but she have already begin to like this odd little girl who have such an intelligent small face and such perfect manner . she have take care of child before who be not so polite . Sara be a very fine little person , and have a gentle , appreciative way of say , " if you please , Mariette , " " thank you , Mariette , " which be very charming . Mariette tell the head housemaid that she thank she as if she be thank a lady . 

 " Elle a l'air d'une princesse , cette petite , " she say . indeed , she be very much pleased with her new little mistress and like her place greatly . 

 after Sara have sit in her seat in the schoolroom for a few minute , be look at by the pupil , Miss Minchin rap in a dignified manner upon her desk . 

 " young lady , " she say , " I wish to introduce you to your new companion . " all the little girl rise in their place , and Sara rise also . " I shall expect you all to be very agreeable to Miss Crewe ; she have just come to we from a great distance in fact , from India . as soon as lesson be over you must make each other 's acquaintance . " 

 the pupil bow ceremoniously , and Sara make a little curtsy , and then they sit down and look at each other again . 

 " Sara , " say Miss Minchin in her schoolroom manner , " come here to I . " 

 she have take a book from the desk and be turn over its leaf . Sara go to she politely . 

 " as your papa have engage a french maid for you , " she begin , " I conclude that he wish you to make a special study of the french language . " 

 Sara feel a little awkward . 

 " I think he engage she , " she say , " because he he think I would like she , Miss Minchin . " 

 " I be afraid , " say Miss Minchin , with a slightly sour smile , " that you have be a very spoiled little girl and always imagine that thing be do because you like they . my impression be that your papa wish you to learn French . " 

 if Sara have be old or less punctilious about be quite polite to people , she could have explain herself in a very few word . but , as it be , she feel a flush rise on her cheek . Miss Minchin be a very severe and impose person , and she seem so absolutely sure that Sara know nothing whatever of French that she feel as if it would be almost rude to correct she . the truth be that Sara could not remember the time when she have not seem to know French . her father have often speak it to she when she have be a baby . her mother have be a french woman , and Captain Crewe have love her language , so it happen that Sara have always hear and be familiar with it . 

 " I I have never really learn French , but but " she begin , try shyly to make herself clear . 

 one of Miss Minchin 's chief secret annoyance be that she do not speak French herself , and be desirous of conceal the irritate fact . she , therefore , have no intention of discuss the matter and lay herself open to innocent questioning by a new little pupil . 

 " that be enough , " she say with polite tartness . " if you have not learn , you must begin at once . the french master , Monsieur Dufarge , will be here in a few minute . take this book and look at it until he arrive . " 

 Sara 's cheek feel warm . she go back to her seat and open the book . she look at the first page with a grave face . she know it would be rude to smile , and she be very determined not to be rude . but it be very odd to find herself expect to study a page which tell she that " le pere " mean " the father , " and " la mere " mean " the mother . " 

 Miss Minchin glance toward her scrutinizingly . 

 " you look rather cross , Sara , " she say . " I be sorry you do not like the idea of learn French . " 

 " I be very fond of it , " answer Sara , think she would try again ; " but " 

 " you must not say ' but ' when you be tell to do thing , " say Miss Minchin . " look at your book again . " 

 and Sara do so , and do not smile , even when she find that " le fils " mean " the son , " and " le frere " mean " the brother . " 

 " when Monsieur Dufarge come , " she think , " I can make he understand . " 

 Monsieur Dufarge arrive very shortly afterward . he be a very nice , intelligent , middle - aged Frenchman , and he look interested when his eye fall upon Sara try politely to seem absorb in her little book of phrase . 

 " be this a new pupil for I , madame ? " he say to Miss Minchin . " I hope that be my good fortune . " 

 " her papa Captain Crewe be very anxious that she should begin the language . but I be afraid she have a childish prejudice against it . she do not seem to wish to learn , " say Miss Minchin . 

 " I be sorry of that , mademoiselle , " he say kindly to Sara . " perhaps , when we begin to study together , I may show you that it be a charming tongue . " 

 little Sara rise in her seat . she be begin to feel rather desperate , as if she be almost in disgrace . she look up into Monsieur Dufarge 's face with her big , green - gray eye , and they be quite innocently appealing . she know that he would understand as soon as she speak . she begin to explain quite simply in pretty and fluent French . Madame have not understand . she have not learn French exactly not out of book but her papa and other people have always speak it to she , and she have read it and write it as she have read and write English . her papa love it , and she love it because he do . her dear mamma , who have die when she be bear , have be french . she would be glad to learn anything monsieur would teach she , but what she have try to explain to madame be that she already know the word in this book and she hold out the little book of phrase . 

 when she begin to speak Miss Minchin start quite violently and sit star at she over her eyeglass , almost indignantly , until she have finish . Monsieur Dufarge begin to smile , and his smile be one of great pleasure . to hear this pretty childish voice speak his own language so simply and charmingly make he feel almost as if he be in his native land which in dark , foggy day in London sometimes seem world away . when she have finish , he take the phrase book from she , with a look almost affectionate . but he speak to Miss Minchin . 

 " ah , madame , " he say , " there be not much I can teach she . she have not LEARNED French ; she be french . her accent be exquisite . " 

 " you ought to have tell I , " exclaim Miss Minchin , much mortified , turn to Sara . 

 " I I try , " say Sara . " I I suppose I do not begin right . " 

 Miss Minchin know she have try , and that it have not be her fault that she be not allow to explain . and when she see that the pupil have be listen and that Lavinia and Jessie be giggle behind their french grammar , she feel infuriate . 

 " Silence , young lady ! " she say severely , rap upon the desk . " silence at once ! " 

 and she begin from that minute to feel rather a grudge against her show pupil . 




 3 

 Ermengarde 

 on that first morning , when Sara sit at Miss Minchin 's side , aware that the whole schoolroom be devote itself to observe she , she have notice very soon one little girl , about her own age , who look at her very hard with a pair of light , rather dull , blue eye . she be a fat child who do not look as if she be in the least clever , but she have a good - naturedly pouting mouth . her flaxen hair be braid in a tight pigtail , tie with a ribbon , and she have pull this pigtail around her neck , and be bite the end of the ribbon , rest her elbow on the desk , as she star wonderingly at the new pupil . when Monsieur Dufarge begin to speak to Sara , she look a little frightened ; and when Sara step forward and , look at he with the innocent , appeal eye , answer he , without any warning , in French , the fat little girl give a startled jump , and grow quite red in her awed amazement . have weep hopeless tear for week in her effort to remember that " la mere " mean " the mother , " and " le pere , " " the father , " when one speak sensible English it be almost too much for she suddenly to find herself listen to a child her own age who seem not only quite familiar with these word , but apparently know any number of other , and could mix they up with verb as if they be mere trifle . 

 she star so hard and bit the ribbon on her pigtail so fast that she attract the attention of Miss Minchin , who , feel extremely cross at the moment , immediately pounce upon she . 

 " Miss St. John ! " she exclaim severely . " what do you mean by such conduct ? remove your elbow ! take your ribbon out of your mouth ! sit up at once ! " 

 upon which Miss St. John give another jump , and when Lavinia and Jessie titter she become red than ever so red , indeed , that she almost look as if tear be come into her poor , dull , childish eye ; and Sara see she and be so sorry for she that she begin rather to like she and want to be her friend . it be a way of hers always to want to spring into any fray in which someone be make uncomfortable or unhappy . 

 " if Sara have be a boy and live a few century ago , " her father use to say , ' she would have go about the country with her sword draw , rescue and defend everyone in distress . she always want to fight when she see people in trouble . " 

 so she take rather a fancy to fat , slow , little Miss St. John , and keep glance toward she through the morning . she see that lesson be no easy matter to she , and that there be no danger of she ever be spoil by be treat as a show pupil . her french lesson be a pathetic thing . her pronunciation make even Monsieur Dufarge smile in spite of himself , and Lavinia and Jessie and the more fortunate girl either giggle or look at she in wonder disdain . but Sara do not laugh . she try to look as if she do not hear when Miss St. John call " le bon pain , " " lee bong pang . " she have a fine , hot little temper of her own , and it make she feel rather savage when she hear the titter and see the poor , stupid , distressed child 's face . 

 " it be not   funny , really , " she say between her tooth , as she bent over her book . " they ought not to laugh . " 

 when lesson be over and the pupil gather together in group to talk , Sara look for Miss St. John , and find she bundle rather disconsolately in a window - seat , she walk over to she and speak . she only say the kind of thing little girl always say to each other by way of begin an acquaintance , but there be something friendly about Sara , and people always feel it . 

 " what be your name ? " she say . 

 to explain Miss St. John 's amazement one must recall that a new pupil be , for a short time , a somewhat uncertain thing ; and of this new pupil the entire school have talk the night before until it fall asleep quite exhausted by excitement and contradictory story . a new pupil with a carriage and a pony and a maid , and a voyage from India to discuss , be not an ordinary acquaintance . 

 " my name 's Ermengarde St. John , " she answer . 

 " mine be Sara Crewe , " say Sara . " your be very pretty . it sound like a story book . " 

 " do you like it ? " flutter Ermengarde . " I I like your . " 

 Miss St. John 's chief trouble in life be that she have a clever father . sometimes this seem to she a dreadful calamity . if you have a father who know everything , who speak seven or eight language , and have thousand of volume which he have apparently learn by heart , he frequently expect you to be familiar with the content of your lesson book at least ; and it be not improbable that he will feel you ought to be able to remember a few incident of history and to write a french exercise . Ermengarde be a severe trial to Mr. St. John . he could not understand how a child of his could be a notably and unmistakably dull creature who never shine in anything . 

 " good heaven ! " he have say more than once , as he star at she , " there be time when I think she be as stupid as her Aunt Eliza ! " 

 if her Aunt Eliza have be slow to learn and quick to forget a thing entirely when she have learn it , Ermengarde be strikingly like she . she be the monumental dunce of the school , and it could not be deny . 

 " she must be make to learn , " her father say to Miss Minchin . 

 consequently Ermengarde spend the great part of her life in disgrace or in tear . she learn thing and forget they ; or , if she remember they , she do not understand they . so it be natural that , have make Sara 's acquaintance , she should sit and stare at she with profound admiration . 

 " you can speak French , can not   you ? " she say respectfully . 

 Sara get on to the window - seat , which be a big , deep one , and , tuck up her foot , sit with her hand clasp round her knee . 

 " I can speak it because I have hear it all my life , " she answer . " you could speak it if you have always hear it . " 

 " oh , no , I could not , " say Ermengarde . " I never could speak it ! " 

 " why ? " inquire Sara , curiously . 

 Ermengarde shake her head so that the pigtail wobble . 

 " you hear I just now , " she say . " I be always like that . I can not   say the word . they be so queer . " 

 she pause a moment , and then add with a touch of awe in her voice , " you be clever , be not   you ? " 

 Sara look out of the window into the dingy square , where the sparrow be hop and twitter on the wet , iron railing and the sooty branch of the tree . she reflect a few moment . she have hear it say very often that she be " clever , " and she wonder if she be and if she be , how it have happen . 

 " I do not   know , " she say . " I can not   tell . " then , see a mournful look on the round , chubby face , she give a little laugh and change the subject . 

 " would you like to see Emily ? " she inquire . 

 " who be Emily ? " Ermengarde ask , just as Miss Minchin have do . 

 " come up to my room and see , " say Sara , hold out her hand . 

 they jump down from the window - seat together , and go upstairs . 

 " be it true , " Ermengarde whisper , as they go through the hall " be it true that you have a playroom all to yourself ? " 

 " yes , " Sara answer . " Papa ask Miss Minchin to let I have one , because well , it be because when I play I make up story and tell they to myself , and I do not   like people to hear I . it spoil it if I think people listen . " 

 they have reach the passage lead to Sara 's room by this time , and Ermengarde stop short , star , and quite lose her breath . 

 " you make up story ! " she gasp . " can you do that as well as speak French ? can you ? " 

 Sara look at she in simple surprise . 

 " why , anyone can make up thing , " she say . " have you never try ? " 

 she put her hand warningly on Ermengarde 's . 

 " let we go very quietly to the door , " she whisper , " and then I will open it quite suddenly ; perhaps we may catch she . " 

 she be half laugh , but there be a touch of mysterious hope in her eye which fascinate Ermengarde , though she have not the remotest idea what it mean , or whom it be she want to " catch , " or why she want to catch she . Whatsoever she mean , Ermengarde be sure it be something delightfully exciting . so , quite thrilled with expectation , she follow she on tiptoe along the passage . they make not the least noise until they reach the door . then Sara suddenly turn the handle , and throw it wide open . its opening reveal the room quite neat and quiet , a fire gently burn in the grate , and a wonderful doll sit in a chair by it , apparently read a book . 

 " oh , she get back to her seat before we could see she ! " Sara explain . " of course they always do . they be as quick as lightning . " 

 Ermengarde look from she to the doll and back again . 

 " can she walk ? " she ask breathlessly . 

 " yes , " answer Sara . " at least I believe she can . at least I PRETEND I believe she can . and that make it seem as if it be true . have you never pretend thing ? " 

 " no , " say Ermengarde . " never . I tell I about it . " 

 she be so bewitch by this odd , new companion that she actually star at Sara instead of at Emily notwithstanding that Emily be the most attractive doll person she have ever see . 

 " let we sit down , " say Sara , " and I will tell you . it be so easy that when you begin you can not   stop . you just go on and on do it always . and it be beautiful . emily , you must listen . this be Ermengarde St. John , Emily . Ermengarde , this be Emily . would you like to hold she ? " 

 " oh , may I ? " say Ermengarde . " may I , really ? she be beautiful ! " and Emily be put into her arm . 

 never in her dull , short life have Miss St. John dream of such an hour as the one she spend with the queer new pupil before they hear the lunch - bell ring and be oblige to go downstairs . 

 Sara sit upon the hearth - rug and tell her strange thing . she sit rather huddle up , and her green eye shine and her cheek flush . she tell story of the voyage , and story of India ; but what fascinate Ermengarde the most be her fancy about the doll who walk and talk , and who could do anything they choose when the human being be out of the room , but who must keep their power a secret and so fly back to their place " like lightning " when people return to the room . 

 " we could not   do it , " say Sara , seriously . " you see , it be a kind of magic . " 

 once , when she be relate the story of the search for Emily , Ermengarde see her face suddenly change . a cloud seem to pass over it and put out the light in her shin eye . she draw her breath in so sharply that it make a funny , sad little sound , and then she shut her lip and hold they tightly closed , as if she be determine either to do or not to do something . Ermengarde have an idea that if she have be like any other little girl , she might have suddenly burst out sob and cry . but she do not . 

 " have you a a pain ? " Ermengarde venture . 

 " yes , " Sara answer , after a moment 's silence . " but it be not in my body . " then she add something in a low voice which she try to keep quite steady , and it be this : " do you love your father more than anything else in all the whole world ? " 

 Ermengarde 's mouth fall open a little . she know that it would be far from behave like a respectable child at a select seminary to say that it have never occur to you that you could love your father , that you would do anything desperate to avoid be leave alone in his society for ten minute . she be , indeed , greatly embarrassed . 

 " I I scarcely ever see he , " she stammer . " he be always in the library read thing . " 

 " I love mine more than all the world ten time over , " Sara say . " that be what my pain be . he have go away . " 

 she put her head quietly down on her little , huddle - up knee , and sit very still for a few minute . 

 " she be go to cry out loud , " think Ermengarde , fearfully . 

 but she do not . her short , black lock tumble about her ear , and she sit still . then she speak without lift her head . 

 " I promise he I would bear it , " she say . " and I will . you have to bear thing . think what soldier bear ! Papa be a soldier . if there be a war he would have to bear marching and thirstiness and , perhaps , deep wound . and he would never say a word not one word . " 

 Ermengarde could only gaze at she , but she feel that she be begin to adore she . she be so wonderful and different from anyone else . 

 presently , she lift her face and shake back her black lock , with a queer little smile . 

 " if I go on talk and talk , " she say , " and tell you thing about pretend , I shall bear it well . you do not   forget , but you bear it well . " 

 Ermengarde do not know why a lump come into her throat and her eye feel as if tear be in they . 

 " Lavinia and Jessie be ' good friend , ' " she say rather huskily . " I wish we could be ' good friend . ' would you have I for your ? you be clever , and I be the stupid child in the school , but I oh , I do so like you ! " 

 " I be glad of that , " say Sara . " it make you thankful when you be like . yes . we will be friend . and I will tell you what " a sudden gleam light her face " I can help you with your french lesson . " 




 4 

 Lottie 

 if Sara have be a different kind of child , the life she lead at Miss Minchin 's Select Seminary for the next few year would not have be at all good for she . she be treat more as if she be a distinguished guest at the establishment than as if she be a mere little girl . if she have be a self - opinionate , domineering child , she might have become disagreeable enough to be unbearable through be so much indulged and flattered . if she have be an indolent child , she would have learn nothing . privately Miss Minchin dislike she , but she be far too worldly a woman to do or say anything which might make such a desirable pupil wish to leave her school . she know quite well that if Sara write to her papa to tell he she be uncomfortable or unhappy , Captain Crewe would remove she at once . Miss Minchin 's opinion be that if a child be continually praise and never forbid to do what she like , she would be sure to be fond of the place where she be so treat . accordingly , Sara be praise for her quickness at her lesson , for her good manner , for her amiability to her fellow pupil , for her generosity if she give sixpence to a beggar out of her full little purse ; the simple thing she do be treat as if it be a virtue , and if she have not have a disposition and a clever little brain , she might have be a very self - satisfied young person . but the clever little brain tell she a great many sensible and true thing about herself and her circumstance , and now and then she talk these thing over to Ermengarde as time go on . 

 " thing happen to people by accident , " she use to say . " a lot of nice accident have happen to I . it just happen that I always like lesson and book , and could remember thing when I learn they . it just happen that I be bear with a father who be beautiful and nice and clever , and could give I everything I like . perhaps I have not really a good temper at all , but if you have everything you want and everyone be kind to you , how can you help but be good - temper ? I do not   know " look quite serious " how I shall ever find out whether I be really a nice child or a horrid one . perhaps I be a hideous child , and no one will ever know , just because I never have any trial . " 

 " Lavinia have no trial , " say Ermengarde , stolidly , " and she be horrid enough . " 

 Sara rub the end of her little nose reflectively , as she think the matter over . 

 " well , " she say at last , " perhaps perhaps that be because Lavinia be grow . " this be the result of a charitable recollection of have hear Miss Amelia say that Lavinia be grow so fast that she believe it affect her health and temper . 

 Lavinia , in fact , be spiteful . she be inordinately jealous of Sara . until the new pupil 's arrival , she have feel herself the leader in the school . she have lead because she be capable of make herself extremely disagreeable if the other do not follow she . she domineer over the little child , and assume grand air with those big enough to be her companion . she be rather pretty , and have be the well - dress pupil in the procession when the Select Seminary walk out two by two , until Sara 's velvet coat and sable muff appear , combine with droop ostrich feather , and be lead by Miss Minchin at the head of the line . this , at the beginning , have be bitter enough ; but as time go on it become apparent that Sara be a leader , too , and not because she could make herself disagreeable , but because she never do . 

 " there be one thing about Sara Crewe , " Jessie have enrage her " good friend " by say honestly , ' she be never ' grand ' about herself the least bit , and you know she might be , Lavvie . I believe I could not   help be just a little if I have so many fine thing and be make such a fuss over . it be disgusting , the way Miss Minchin show she off when parent come . " 

 " ' dear Sara must come into the drawing room and talk to Mrs. Musgrave about India , ' " mimicked Lavinia , in she most highly flavor imitation of Miss Minchin . " ' dear Sara must speak French to Lady Pitkin . her accent be so perfect . ' she do not   learn she French at the Seminary , at any rate . and there be nothing so clever in she know it . she say herself she do not   learn it at all . she just pick it up , because she always hear her papa speak it . and , as to her papa , there be nothing so grand in be an indian officer . " 

 " well , " say Jessie , slowly , " he be kill tiger . he kill the one in the skin Sara have in her room . that be why she like it so . she lie on it and stroke its head , and talk to it as if it be a cat . " 

 " she be always do something silly , " snap Lavinia . " my mamma say that way of her of pretend thing be silly . she say she will grow up eccentric . " 

 it be quite true that Sara be never " grand . " she be a friendly little soul , and share her privilege and belonging with a free hand . the little one , who be accustomed to be disdain and order out of the way by mature lady age ten and twelve , be never make to cry by this most envy of they all . she be a motherly young person , and when people fall down and scrap their knee , she run and help they up and pat they , or find in her pocket a bonbon or some other article of a soothing nature . she never push they out of her way or allude to their year as a humiliation and a blot upon their small character . 

 " if you be four you be four , " she say severely to Lavinia on an occasion of she have it must be confess slap Lottie and call she " a brat ; " " but you will be five next year , and six the year after that . and , " open large , convict eye , " it take sixteen year to make you twenty . " 

 " dear I , " say Lavinia , " how we can calculate ! " in fact , it be not to be deny that sixteen and four make twenty and twenty be an age the most daring be scarcely bold enough to dream of . 

 so the young child adore Sara . More than once she have be know to have a tea party , make up of these despise one , in her own room . and Emily have be play with , and Emily 's own tea service use the one with cup which hold quite a lot of much - sweeten weak tea and have blue flower on they . no one have see such a very real doll 's tea set before . from that afternoon Sara be regard as a goddess and a queen by the entire alphabet class . 

 Lottie Legh worship she to such an extent that if Sara have not be a motherly person , she would have find her tiresome . Lottie have be send to school by a rather flighty young papa who could not imagine what else to do with she . her young mother have die , and as the child have be treat like a favorite doll or a very spoiled pet monkey or lap dog ever since the first hour of her life , she be a very appalling little creature . when she want anything or do not want anything she weep and howl ; and , as she always want the thing she could not have , and do not want the thing that be good for she , her shrill little voice be usually to be hear uplifted in wail in one part of the house or another . 

 her strong weapon be that in some mysterious way she have find out that a very small girl who have lose her mother be a person who ought to be pity and make much of . she have probably hear some grow - up people talk she over in the early day , after her mother 's death . so it become her habit to make great use of this knowledge . 

 the first time Sara take she in charge be one morning when , on pass a sitting room , she hear both Miss Minchin and Miss Amelia try to suppress the angry wail of some child who , evidently , refuse to be silence . she refuse so strenuously indeed that Miss Minchin be oblige to almost shout in a stately and severe manner to make herself hear . 

 " what be she cry for ? " she almost yell . 

 " oh oh oh ! " Sara hear ; " I have not   get any mam ma - a ! " 

 " oh , Lottie ! " scream Miss Amelia . " do stop , darling ! do not   cry ! please do not ! " 

 " oh ! oh ! oh ! oh ! oh ! " Lottie howl tempestuously . " have not   get any mam ma - a ! " 

 " she ought to be whip , " Miss Minchin proclaim . " you shall be whip , you naughty child ! " 

 Lottie wail more loudly than ever . Miss Amelia begin to cry . Miss Minchin 's voice rise until it almost thunder , then suddenly she spring up from her chair in impotent indignation and flounce out of the room , leave Miss Amelia to arrange the matter . 

 Sara have pause in the hall , wonder if she ought to go into the room , because she have recently begin a friendly acquaintance with Lottie and might be able to quiet she . when Miss Minchin come out and see she , she look rather annoyed . she realize that her voice , as hear from inside the room , could not have sound either dignified or amiable . 

 " oh , Sara ! " she exclaim , endeavor to produce a suitable smile . 

 " I stop , " explain Sara , " because I know it be Lottie and I think , perhaps just perhaps , I could make she be quiet . may I try , Miss Minchin ? " 

 " if you can , you be a clever child , " answer Miss Minchin , draw in her mouth sharply . then , see that Sara look slightly chill by her asperity , she change her manner . " but you be clever in everything , " she say in her approving way . " I dare say you can manage she . go in . " and she leave she . 

 when Sara enter the room , Lottie be lie upon the floor , scream and kick her small fat leg violently , and Miss Amelia be bend over she in consternation and despair , look quite red and damp with heat . Lottie have always find , when in her own nursery at home , that kicking and screaming would always be quiet by any mean she insist on . poor plump Miss Amelia be try first one method , and then another . 

 " poor darling , " she say one moment , " I know you have not   any mamma , poor " then in quite another tone , " if you do not   stop , Lottie , I will shake you . poor little angel ! there ! you wicked , bad , detestable child , I will smack you ! I will ! " 

 Sara go to they quietly . she do not know at all what she be go to do , but she have a vague inward conviction that it would be well not to say such different kind of thing quite so helplessly and excitedly . 

 " Miss Amelia , " she say in a low voice , " Miss Minchin say I may try to make her stop may I ? " 

 Miss Amelia turn and look at she hopelessly . " oh , do you think you can ? " she gasp . 

 " I do not   know whether I can " , answer Sara , still in her half - whisper ; " but I will try . " 

 Miss Amelia stumble up from her knee with a heavy sigh , and Lottie 's fat little leg kick as hard as ever . 

 " if you will steal out of the room , " say Sara , " I will stay with she . " 

 " oh , Sara ! " almost whimper Miss Amelia . " we never have such a dreadful child before . I do not   believe we can keep she . " 

 but she creep out of the room , and be very much relieved to find an excuse for do it . 

 Sara stand by the howl furious child for a few moment , and look down at she without say anything . then she sit down flat on the floor beside she and wait . except for Lottie 's angry scream , the room be quite quiet . this be a new state of affair for little Miss Legh , who be accustom , when she scream , to hear other people protest and implore and command and coax by turn . to lie and kick and shriek , and find the only person near you not seem to mind in the least , attract her attention . she open her tight - shut stream eye to see who this person be . and it be only another little girl . but it be the one who own Emily and all the nice thing . and she be look at she steadily and as if she be merely think . have pause for a few second to find this out , Lottie think she must begin again , but the quiet of the room and of Sara 's odd , interested face make her first howl rather half - hearted . 

 " I have not   any ma ma ma - a ! " she announce ; but her voice be not so strong . 

 Sara look at she still more steadily , but with a sort of understanding in her eye . 

 " neither have I , " she say . 

 this be so unexpected that it be astounding . Lottie actually drop her leg , give a wriggle , and lie and star . a new idea will stop a cry child when nothing else will . also it be true that while Lottie dislike Miss Minchin , who be cross , and Miss Amelia , who be foolishly indulgent , she rather like Sara , little as she know she . she do not want to give up her grievance , but her thought be distract from it , so she wriggle again , and , after a sulky sob , say , " where be she ? " 

 Sara pause a moment . because she have be tell that her mamma be in heaven , she have think a great deal about the matter , and her thought have not be quite like those of other people . 

 " she go to heaven , " she say . " but I be sure she come out sometimes to see I though I do not   see she . so do your . perhaps they can both see we now . perhaps they be both in this room . " 

 Lottie sit bolt upright , and look about she . she be a pretty , little , curly - head creature , and her round eye be like wet forget - I - not . if her mamma have see she during the last half - hour , she might not have think she the kind of child who ought to be relate to an angel . 

 Sara go on talk . perhaps some people might think that what she say be rather like a fairy story , but it be all so real to her own imagination that Lottie begin to listen in spite of herself . she have be tell that her mamma have wing and a crown , and she have be show picture of lady in beautiful white nightgown , who be say to be angel . but Sara seem to be tell a real story about a lovely country where real people be . 

 " there be field and field of flower , " she say , forget herself , as usual , when she begin , and talk rather as if she be in a dream , " field and field of lily and when the soft wind blow over they it waft the scent of they into the air and everybody always breathe it , because the soft wind be always blow . and little child run about in the lily field and gather armful of they , and laugh and make little wreath . and the street be shin . and people be never tired , however far they walk . they can float anywhere they like . and there be wall make of pearl and gold all round the city , but they be low enough for the people to go and lean on they , and look down onto the earth and smile , and send beautiful message . " 

 Whatsoever story she have begin to tell , Lottie would , no doubt , have stop cry , and be fascinate into listening ; but there be no deny that this story be pretty than most other . she drag herself close to Sara , and drink in every word until the end come far too soon . when it do come , she be so sorry that she put up her lip ominously . 

 " I want to go there , " she cry . " I have not   any mamma in this school . " 

 Sara see the danger signal , and come out of her dream . she take hold of the chubby hand and pull she close to her side with a coax little laugh . 

 " I will be your mamma , " she say . " we will play that you be my little girl . and Emily shall be your sister . " 

 Lottie 's dimple all begin to show themselves . 

 " shall she ? " she say . 

 " yes , " answer Sara , jump to her foot . " let we go and tell she . and then I will wash your face and brush your hair . " 

 to which Lottie agree quite cheerfully , and trot out of the room and upstairs with she , without seem even to remember that the whole of the last hour 's tragedy have be cause by the fact that she have refuse to be wash and brush for lunch and Miss Minchin have be call in to use her majestic authority . 

 and from that time Sara be an adopt mother . 




 5 

 Becky 

 of course the great power Sara possess and the one which gain she even more follower than her luxury and the fact that she be " the show pupil , " the power that Lavinia and certain other girl be most envious of , and at the same time most fascinate by in spite of themselves , be her power of tell story and of make everything she talk about seem like a story , whether it be one or not . 

 anyone who have be at school with a teller of story know what the wonder mean how he or she be follow about and besought in a whisper to relate romance ; how group gather round and hang on the outskirt of the favored party in the hope of be allow to join in and listen . Sara not only could tell story , but she adore tell they . when she sit or stand in the midst of a circle and begin to invent wonderful thing , her green eye grow big and shining , her cheek flush , and , without know that she be do it , she begin to act and make what she tell lovely or alarming by the raising or dropping of her voice , the bend and sway of her slim body , and the dramatic movement of her hand . she forget that she be talk to listen child ; she see and live with the fairy folk , or the king and queen and beautiful lady , whose adventure she be narrate . sometimes when she have finish her story , she be quite out of breath with excitement , and would lay her hand on her thin , little , quick - rise chest , and half laugh as if at herself . 

 " when I be tell it , " she would say , " it do not   seem as if it be only make up . it seem more real than you be more real than the schoolroom . I feel as if I be all the people in the story one after the other . it be queer . " 

 she have be at Miss Minchin 's school about two year when , one foggy winter 's afternoon , as she be get out of her carriage , comfortably wrap up in her warm velvet and fur and look very much grander than she know , she catch sight , as she cross the pavement , of a dingy little figure stand on the area step , and stretch its neck so that its wide - open eye might peer at she through the railing . something in the eagerness and timidity of the smudgy face make she look at it , and when she look she smile because it be her way to smile at people . 

 but the owner of the smudgy face and the wide - open eye evidently be afraid that she ought not to have be catch look at pupil of importance . she dodge out of sight like a jack - in - the - box and scurry back into the kitchen , disappear so suddenly that if she have not be such a poor little forlorn thing , Sara would have laugh in spite of herself . that very evening , as Sara be sit in the midst of a group of listener in a corner of the schoolroom tell one of her story , the very same figure timidly enter the room , carry a coal box much too heavy for she , and kneel down upon the hearth rug to replenish the fire and sweep up the ash . 

 she be clean than she have be when she peep through the area railing , but she look just as frightened . she be evidently afraid to look at the child or seem to be listen . she put on piece of coal cautiously with her finger so that she might make no disturbing noise , and she sweep about the fire iron very softly . but Sara see in two minute that she be deeply interested in what be go on , and that she be do her work slowly in the hope of catch a word here and there . and realize this , she raise her voice and speak more clearly . 

 " the Mermaids swam softly about in the crystal - green water , and drag after they a fishing - net weave of deep - sea pearl , " she say . " the Princess sit on the white rock and watch they . " 

 it be a wonderful story about a princess who be love by a Prince Merman , and go to live with he in shin cave under the sea . 

 the small drudge before the grate sweep the hearth once and then sweep it again . have do it twice , she do it three time ; and , as she be do it the third time , the sound of the story so lure she to listen that she fall under the spell and actually forget that she have no right to listen at all , and also forget everything else . she sit down upon her heel as she kneel on the hearth rug , and the brush hang idly in her finger . the voice of the storyteller go on and draw she with it into wind grottos under the sea , glow with soft , clear blue light , and pave with pure golden sand . strange sea flower and grass wave about she , and far away faint singing and music echo . 

 the hearth brush fall from the work - roughen hand , and Lavinia Herbert look round . 

 " that girl have be listen , " she say . 

 the culprit snatch up her brush , and scramble to her foot . she catch at the coal box and simply scuttle out of the room like a frightened rabbit . 

 Sara feel rather hot - temper . 

 " I know she be listen , " she say . " why should not   she ? " 

 Lavinia toss her head with great elegance . 

 " well , " she remark , " I do not know whether your mamma would like you to tell story to servant girl , but I know MY mamma would not   like I to do it . " 

 " my mamma ! " say Sara , look odd . " I do not   believe she would mind in the least . she know that story belong to everybody . " 

 " I think , " retort Lavinia , in severe recollection , " that your mamma be dead . how can she know thing ? " 

 " do you think she DOESN'T know thing ? " say Sara , in her stern little voice . sometimes she have a rather stern little voice . 

 " Sara 's mamma know everything , " pip in Lottie . " so do my mamma ' cept Sara be my mamma at Miss Minchin 's my other one know everything . the street be shin , and there be field and field of lily , and everybody gather they . Sara tell I when she put I to bed . " 

 " you wicked thing , " say Lavinia , turn on Sara ; " make fairy story about heaven . " 

 " there be much more splendid story in Revelation , " return Sara . " just look and see ! how do you know mine be fairy story ? but I can tell you " with a fine bit of unheavenly temper " you will never find out whether they be or not if you be not kind to people than you be now . come along , Lottie . " and she march out of the room , rather hop that she might see the little servant again somewhere , but she find no trace of she when she get into the hall . 

 " who be that little girl who make the fire ? " she ask Mariette that night . 

 Mariette break forth into a flow of description . 

 ah , indeed , Mademoiselle Sara might well ask . she be a forlorn little thing who have just take the place of scullery maid though , as to be scullery maid , she be everything else besides . she black boot and grate , and carry heavy coal - scuttle up and down stair , and scrub floor and clean window , and be order about by everybody . she be fourteen year old , but be so stunt in growth that she look about twelve . in truth , Mariette be sorry for she . she be so timid that if one chance to speak to she it appear as if her poor , frightened eye would jump out of her head . 

 " what be her name ? " ask Sara , who have sit by the table , with her chin on her hand , as she listen absorbedly to the recital . 

 her name be Becky . Mariette hear everyone below - stair call , " Becky , do this , " and " Becky , do that , " every five minute in the day . 

 Sara sit and look into the fire , reflect on Becky for some time after Mariette leave she . she make up a story of which Becky be the ill - use heroine . she think she look as if she have never have quite enough to eat . her very eye be hungry . she hop she should see she again , but though she catch sight of she carry thing up or down stair on several occasion , she always seem in such a hurry and so afraid of be see that it be impossible to speak to she . 

 but a few week later , on another foggy afternoon , when she enter her sitting room she find herself confront a rather pathetic picture . in her own special and pet easy - chair before the bright fire , Becky with a coal smudge on her nose and several on her apron , with her poor little cap hang half off her head , and an empty coal box on the floor near she sit fast asleep , tired out beyond even the endurance of her hard - work young body . she have be send up to put the bedroom in order for the evening . there be a great many of they , and she have be run about all day . Sara 's room she have save until the last . they be not like the other room , which be plain and bare . ordinary pupil be expect to be satisfied with mere necessary . Sara 's comfortable sitting room seem a bower of luxury to the scullery maid , though it be , in fact , merely a nice , bright little room . but there be picture and book in it , and curious thing from India ; there be a sofa and the low , soft chair ; Emily sit in a chair of her own , with the air of a preside goddess , and there be always a glow fire and a polished grate . Becky save it until the end of her afternoon 's work , because it rest she to go into it , and she always hop to snatch a few minute to sit down in the soft chair and look about she , and think about the wonderful good fortune of the child who own such surrounding and who go out on the cold day in beautiful hat and coat one try to catch a glimpse of through the area rail . 

 on this afternoon , when she have sit down , the sensation of relief to her short , ache leg have be so wonderful and delightful that it have seem to soothe her whole body , and the glow of warmth and comfort from the fire have creep over she like a spell , until , as she look at the red coal , a tired , slow smile steal over her smudged face , her head nod forward without she be aware of it , her eye droop , and she fall fast asleep . she have really be only about ten minute in the room when Sara enter , but she be in as deep a sleep as if she have be , like the Sleeping Beauty , slumber for a hundred year . but she do not look poor Becky like a sleep Beauty at all . she look only like an ugly , stunt , wear - out little scullery drudge . 

 Sara seem as much unlike she as if she be a creature from another world . 

 on this particular afternoon she have be take her dancing lesson , and the afternoon on which the dancing master appear be rather a grand occasion at the seminary , though it occur every week . the pupil be attire in their prettiest frock , and as Sara dance particularly well , she be very much bring forward , and Mariette be request to make she as diaphanous and fine as possible . 

 today a frock the color of a rose have be put on she , and Mariette have buy some real bud and make she a wreath to wear on her black lock . she have be learn a new , delightful dance in which she have be skim and fly about the room , like a large rose - colored butterfly , and the enjoyment and exercise have bring a brilliant , happy glow into her face . 

 when she enter the room , she float in with a few of the butterfly step and there sit Becky , nod her cap sideways off her head . 

 " oh ! " cry Sara , softly , when she see she . " that poor thing ! " 

 it do not occur to she to feel cross at find her pet chair occupy by the small , dingy figure . to tell the truth , she be quite glad to find it there . when the ill - use heroine of her story waken , she could talk to she . she creep toward she quietly , and stand look at she . Becky give a little snore . 

 " I wish she would waken herself , " Sara say . " I do not   like to waken she . but Miss Minchin would be cross if she find out . I will just wait a few minute . " 

 she take a seat on the edge of the table , and sit swing her slim , rose - color leg , and wonder what it would be good to do . Miss Amelia might come in at any moment , and if she do , Becky would be sure to be scold . 

 " but she be so tired , " she think . " she be so tired ! " 

 a piece of flame coal end her perplexity for she that very moment . it break off from a large lump and fall on to the fender . Becky start , and open her eye with a frightened gasp . she do not know she have fall asleep . she have only sit down for one moment and feel the beautiful glow and here she find herself star in wild alarm at the wonderful pupil , who sit perch quite near she , like a rose - color fairy , with interested eye . 

 she spring up and clutch at her cap . she feel it dangle over her ear , and try wildly to put it straight . oh , she have get herself into trouble now with a vengeance ! to have impudently fall asleep on such a young lady 's chair ! she would be turn out of door without wage . 

 she make a sound like a big breathless sob . 

 " oh , miss ! oh , miss ! " she stutter . " I arst yer pardon , miss ! oh , I do , miss ! " 

 Sara jump down , and come quite close to she . 

 " do not   be frightened , " she say , quite as if she have be speak to a little girl like herself . " it do not   matter the least bit . " 

 " I do not   go to do it , miss , " protest Becky . " it be the warm fire an ' me bein ' so tired . it it wasn't impertience ! " 

 Sara break into a friendly little laugh , and put her hand on her shoulder . 

 " you be tired , " she say ; " you could not help it . you be not really awake yet . " 

 how poor Becky star at she ! in fact , she have never hear such a nice , friendly sound in anyone 's voice before . she be use to be order about and scold , and have her ear box . and this one in her rose - color dancing afternoon splendor be look at she as if she be not a culprit at all as if she have a right to be tired even to fall asleep ! the touch of the soft , slim little paw on her shoulder be the most amazing thing she have ever know . 

 " be not   be not   yer angry , miss ? " she gasp . " ai not   yer go to tell the missus ? " 

 " no , " cry out Sara . " of course I be not . " 

 the woeful fright in the coal - smut face make she suddenly so sorry that she could scarcely bear it . one of her queer thought rush into her mind . she put her hand against Becky 's cheek . 

 " why , " she say , " we be just the same I be only a little girl like you . it be just an accident that I be not you , and you be not I ! " 

 Becky do not understand in the least . her mind could not grasp such amazing thought , and " an accident " mean to she a calamity in which some one be run over or fall off a ladder and be carry to " the ' orspital . " 

 " a ' accident , miss , " she flutter respectfully . " be it ? " 

 " yes , " Sara answer , and she look at her dreamily for a moment . but the next she speak in a different tone . she realize that Becky do not know what she mean . 

 " have you do your work ? " she ask . " dare you stay here a few minute ? " 

 Becky lose her breath again . 

 " here , miss ? I ? " 

 Sara run to the door , open it , and look out and listen . 

 " no one be anywhere about , " she explain . " if your bedroom be finish , perhaps you might stay a tiny while . I think perhaps you might like a piece of cake . " 

 the next ten minute seem to Becky like a sort of delirium . Sara open a cupboard , and give she a thick slice of cake . she seem to rejoice when it be devour in hungry bite . she talk and ask question , and laugh until Becky 's fear actually begin to calm themselves , and she once or twice gather boldness enough to ask a question or so herself , dare as she feel it to be . 

 " be that " she venture , look longingly at the rose - color frock . and she ask it almost in a whisper . " be that there your good ? " 

 " it be one of my dancing - frock , " answer Sara . " I like it , do not   you ? " 

 for a few second Becky be almost speechless with admiration . then she say in an awed voice , " Onct I see a princess . I be standin ' in the street with the crowd outside Covin ' Garden , watchin ' the swell go inter the operer . an ' there be one everyone star at most . they se to each other , ' that be the princess . ' she be a grow - up young lady , but she be pink all over gownd an ' cloak , an ' flower an ' all . I call she to mind the minnit I see you , sittin ' there on the table , miss . you look like she . " 

 " I have   often think , " say Sara , in her reflect voice , " that I should like to be a princess ; I wonder what it feel like . I believe I will begin pretend I be one . " 

 Becky star at she admiringly , and , as before , do not understand she in the least . she watch she with a sort of adoration . very soon Sara leave her reflection and turn to she with a new question . 

 " Becky , " she say , " be not   you listen to that story ? " 

 " yes , miss , " confess Becky , a little alarmed again . " I know I have not   orter , but it be that beautiful I I could not   help it . " 

 " I like you to listen to it , " say Sara . " if you tell story , you like nothing so much as to tell they to people who want to listen . I do not   know why it be . would you like to hear the rest ? " 

 Becky lose her breath again . 

 " I hear it ? " she cry . " like as if I be a pupil , miss ! all about the Prince and the little white mer - baby swim about laugh with star in their hair ? " 

 Sara nod . 

 " you have not   time to hear it now , I be afraid , " she say ; " but if you will tell I just what time you come to do my room , I will try to be here and tell you a bit of it every day until it be finish . it be a lovely long one and I be always put new bit to it . " 

 " then , " breathe Becky , devoutly , " I would not   mind how heavy the coal box be or what the cook do to I , if if I might have that to think of . " 

 " you may , " say Sara . " I will tell it all to you . " 

 when Becky go downstairs , she be not the same Becky who have stagger up , load down by the weight of the coal scuttle . she have an extra piece of cake in her pocket , and she have be feed and warm , but not only by cake and fire . something else have warm and feed she , and the something else be Sara . 

 when she be go Sara sit on her favorite perch on the end of her table . her foot be on a chair , her elbow on her knee , and her chin in her hand . 

 " if I be a princess a real princess , " she murmur , " I could scatter largess to the populace . but even if I be only a pretend princess , I can invent little thing to do for people . thing like this . she be just as happy as if it be largess . I will pretend that to do thing people like be scatter largess . I have   scatter largess . " 




 6 

 the Diamond Mines 

 not very long after this a very exciting thing happen . not only Sara , but the entire school , find it exciting , and make it the chief subject of conversation for week after it occur . in one of his letter Captain Crewe tell a most interesting story . a friend who have be at school with he when he be a boy have unexpectedly come to see he in India . he be the owner of a large tract of land upon which diamond have be find , and he be engage in develop the mine . if all go as be confidently expect , he would become possess of such wealth as it make one dizzy to think of ; and because he be fond of the friend of his school day , he have give he an opportunity to share in this enormous fortune by become a partner in his scheme . this , at least , be what Sara gather from his letter . it be true that any other business scheme , however magnificent , would have have but small attraction for she or for the schoolroom ; but " diamond mine " sound so like the Arabian Nights that no one could be indifferent . Sara think they enchant , and paint picture , for Ermengarde and Lottie , of labyrinthine passage in the bowel of the earth , where sparkling stone stud the wall and roof and ceiling , and strange , dark man dig they out with heavy pick . Ermengarde delight in the story , and Lottie insist on its being retell to she every evening . Lavinia be very spiteful about it , and tell Jessie that she do not   believe such thing as diamond mine exist . 

 " my mamma have a diamond ring which cost forty pound , " she say . " and it be not a big one , either . if there be mine full of diamond , people would be so rich it would be ridiculous . " 

 " perhaps Sara will be so rich that she will be ridiculous , " giggle Jessie . 

 " she be ridiculous without be rich , " Lavinia sniff . 

 " I believe you hate she , " say Jessie . 

 " no , I do not , " snap Lavinia . " but I do not   believe in mine full of diamond . " 

 " well , people have to get they from somewhere , " say Jessie . " Lavinia , " with a new giggle , " what do you think Gertrude say ? " 

 " I do not   know , I be sure ; and I do not   care if it be something more about that everlaste Sara . " 

 " well , it be . one of she ' pretend ' be that she be a princess . she play it all the time even in school . she say it make she learn her lesson well . she want Ermengarde to be one , too , but Ermengarde say she be too fat . " 

 " she be too fat , " say Lavinia . " and Sara be too thin . " 

 naturally , Jessie giggle again . 

 " she say it have nothing to do with what you look like , or what you have . it have only to do with what you think of , and what you do . " 

 " I suppose she think she could be a princess if she be a beggar , " say Lavinia . " let we begin to call she your Royal Highness . " 

 lesson for the day be over , and they be sit before the schoolroom fire , enjoy the time they like well . it be the time when Miss Minchin and Miss Amelia be take their tea in the sit room sacred to themselves . at this hour a great deal of talk be do , and a great many secret change hand , particularly if the young pupil behave themselves well , and do not squabble or run about noisily , which it must be confess they usually do . when they make an uproar the old girl usually interfere with scolding and shake . they be expect to keep order , and there be danger that if they do not , Miss Minchin or Miss Amelia would appear and put an end to festivity . even as Lavinia speak the door open and Sara enter with Lottie , whose habit be to trot everywhere after she like a little dog . 

 " there she be , with that horrid child ! " exclaim Lavinia in a whisper . " if she be so fond of she , why do not   she keep she in her own room ? she will begin howl about something in five minute . " 

 it happen that Lottie have be seize with a sudden desire to play in the schoolroom , and have beg her adopt parent to come with she . she join a group of little one who be play in a corner . Sara curl herself up in the window - seat , open a book , and begin to read . it be a book about the French Revolution , and she be soon lose in a harrowing picture of the prisoner in the Bastille man who have spend so many year in dungeon that when they be drag out by those who rescue they , their long , gray hair and beard almost hide their face , and they have forget that an outside world exist at all , and be like being in a dream . 

 she be so far away from the schoolroom that it be not agreeable to be drag back suddenly by a howl from Lottie . never do she find anything so difficult as to keep herself from lose her temper when she be suddenly disturb while absorb in a book . People who be fond of book know the feeling of irritation which sweep over they at such a moment . the temptation to be unreasonable and snappish be one not easy to manage . 

 " it make I feel as if someone have hit I , " Sara have tell Ermengarde once in confidence . " and as if I want to hit back . I have to remember thing quickly to keep from say something ill - temper . " 

 she have to remember thing quickly when she lay her book on the window - seat and jump down from her comfortable corner . 

 Lottie have be slide across the schoolroom floor , and , have first irritate Lavinia and Jessie by make a noise , have end by fall down and hurt her fat knee . she be scream and dance up and down in the midst of a group of friend and enemy , who be alternately coax and scold she . 

 " stop this minute , you cry - baby ! stop this minute ! " Lavinia command . 

 " I be not a cry - baby ... I be not ! " wail Lottie . " Sara , Sa ra ! " 

 " if she do not   stop , Miss Minchin will hear she , " cry Jessie . " lottie darling , I will give you a penny ! " 

 " I do not   want your penny , " sob Lottie ; and she look down at the fat knee , and , see a drop of blood on it , burst forth again . 

 Sara fly across the room and , kneel down , put her arm round she . 

 " now , Lottie , " she say . " now , Lottie , you promise Sara . " 

 " she say I be a cry - baby , " weep Lottie . 

 Sara pat she , but speak in the steady voice Lottie know . 

 " but if you cry , you will be one , lottie pet . you promise . " Lottie remember that she have promise , but she prefer to lift up her voice . 

 " I have not   any mamma , " she proclaim . " I have not   a bit of mamma . " 

 " yes , you have , " say Sara , cheerfully . " have you forget ? do not   you know that Sara be your mamma ? do not   you want Sara for your mamma ? " 

 Lottie cuddle up to she with a consoled sniff . 

 " come and sit in the window - seat with I , " Sara go on , " and I will whisper a story to you . " 

 " will you ? " whimper Lottie . " will you tell I about the diamond mine ? " 

 " the diamond mine ? " break out Lavinia . " Nasty , little spoiled thing , I should like to slap she ! " 

 Sara get up quickly on her foot . it must be remember that she have be very deeply absorb in the book about the Bastille , and she have have to recall several thing rapidly when she realize that she must go and take care of her adopt child . she be not an angel , and she be not fond of Lavinia . 

 " well , " she say , with some fire , " I should like to slap you but I do not   want to slap you ! " restrain herself . " at least I both want to slap you and I should like to slap you but I won't slap you . we be not little gutter child . we be both old enough to know well . " 

 here be Lavinia 's opportunity . 

 " ah , yes , your royal highness , " she say . " we be princess , I believe . at least one of we be . the school ought to be very fashionable now Miss Minchin have a princess for a pupil . " 

 Sara start toward she . she look as if she be go to box her ear . perhaps she be . her trick of pretend thing be the joy of her life . she never speak of it to girl she be not fond of . her new " pretend " about be a princess be very near to her heart , and she be shy and sensitive about it . she have mean it to be rather a secret , and here be Lavinia deride it before nearly all the school . she feel the blood rush up into her face and tingle in her ear . she only just save herself . if you be a princess , you do not fly into rage . her hand drop , and she stand quite still a moment . when she speak it be in a quiet , steady voice ; she hold her head up , and everybody listen to she . 

 " it be true , " she say . " sometimes I do pretend I be a princess . I pretend I be a princess , so that I can try and behave like one . " 

 Lavinia could not think of exactly the right thing to say . several time she have find that she could not think of a satisfactory reply when she be deal with Sara . the reason for this be that , somehow , the rest always seem to be vaguely in sympathy with her opponent . she see now that they be prick up their ear interestedly . the truth be , they like princess , and they all hop they might hear something more definite about this one , and draw near Sara accordingly . 

 Lavinia could only invent one remark , and it fall rather flat . 

 " dear I , " she say , " I hope , when you ascend the throne , you will not   forget we ! " 

 " I will not , " say Sara , and she do not utter another word , but stand quite still , and star at she steadily as she see she take Jessie 's arm and turn away . 

 after this , the girl who be jealous of she use to speak of she as " Princess Sara " whenever they wish to be particularly disdainful , and those who be fond of she give she the name among themselves as a term of affection . no one call she " princess " instead of " Sara , " but her adorer be much pleased with the picturesqueness and grandeur of the title , and Miss Minchin , hear of it , mention it more than once to visit parent , feel that it rather suggest a sort of royal boarding school . 

 to Becky it seem the most appropriate thing in the world . the acquaintance begin on the foggy afternoon when she have jump up terrified from her sleep in the comfortable chair , have ripen and grow , though it must be confess that Miss Minchin and Miss Amelia know very little about it . they be aware that Sara be " kind " to the scullery maid , but they know nothing of certain delightful moment snatch perilously when , the upstairs room be set in order with lightning rapidity , Sara 's sitting room be reach , and the heavy coal box set down with a sigh of joy . at such time story be tell by installment , thing of a satisfying nature be either produce and eat or hastily tuck into pocket to be dispose of at night , when Becky go upstairs to her attic to bed . 

 " but I have to eat them careful , miss , " she say once ; " 'cos if I leave crumb the rat come out to get them . " 

 " rat ! " exclaim Sara , in horror . " be there rat there ? " 

 " lot of them , miss , " Becky answer in quite a matter - of - fact manner . " there mostly be rat an ' mouse in attic . you get use to the noise they make scuttle about . I have   get so I do not   mind them s ' long as they do not   run over my piller . " 

 " Ugh ! " say Sara . 

 " you get use to anythin ' after a bit , " say Becky . " you have to , miss , if you be bear a scullery maid . I would rather have rat than cockroach . " 

 " so would I , " say Sara ; " I suppose you might make friend with a rat in time , but I do not   believe I should like to make friend with a cockroach . " 

 sometimes Becky do not dare to spend more than a few minute in the bright , warm room , and when this be the case perhaps only a few word could be exchange , and a small purchase slip into the old - fashioned pocket Becky carry under her dress skirt , tie round her waist with a band of tape . the search for and discovery of satisfy thing to eat which could be pack into small compass , add a new interest to Sara 's existence . when she drive or walk out , she use to look into shop window eagerly . the first time it occur to she to bring home two or three little meat pie , she feel that she have hit upon a discovery . when she exhibit they , Becky 's eye quite sparkle . 

 " oh , miss ! " she murmur . " they will be nice an ' fillin . ' it be fillin'ness that be good . Sponge cake 's a ' evenly thing , but it melt away like if you understand , miss . these will just stay in yer stummick . " 

 " well , " hesitate Sara , " I do not   think it would be good if they stay always , but I do believe they will be satisfy . " 

 they be satisfy and so be beef sandwich , buy at a cook - shop and so be roll and Bologna sausage . in time , Becky begin to lose her hungry , tired feeling , and the coal box do not seem so unbearably heavy . 

 however heavy it be , and whatsoever the temper of the cook , and the hardness of the work heap upon her shoulder , she have always the chance of the afternoon to look forward to the chance that Miss Sara would be able to be in her sitting room . in fact , the mere seeing of Miss Sara would have be enough without meat pie . if there be time only for a few word , they be always friendly , merry word that put heart into one ; and if there be time for more , then there be an installment of a story to be tell , or some other thing one remember afterward and sometimes lie awake in one 's bed in the attic to think over . Sara who be only do what she unconsciously like well than anything else , Nature have make she for a giver have not the least idea what she mean to poor Becky , and how wonderful a benefactor she seem . if Nature have make you for a giver , your hand be bear open , and so be your heart ; and though there may be time when your hand be empty , your heart be always full , and you can give thing out of that warm thing , kind thing , sweet thing help and comfort and laughter and sometimes gay , kind laughter be the good help of all . 

 Becky have scarcely know what laughter be through all her poor , little hard - drive life . Sara make her laugh , and laugh with she ; and , though neither of they quite know it , the laughter be as " fillin ' " as the meat pie . 

 a few week before Sara 's eleventh birthday a letter come to she from her father , which do not seem to be write in such boyish high spirit as usual . he be not very well , and be evidently overweighte by the business connect with the diamond mine . 

 " you see , little Sara , " he write , " your daddy be not a businessman at all , and figure and document bother he . he do not really understand they , and all this seem so enormous . perhaps , if I be not feverish I should not be awake , toss about , one half of the night and spend the other half in troublesome dream . if my little missus be here , I dare say she would give I some solemn , good advice . you would , would not   you , Little Missus ? " 

 one of his many joke have be to call she his " little missus " because she have such an old - fashioned air . 

 he have make wonderful preparation for her birthday . among other thing , a new doll have be order in Paris , and her wardrobe be to be , indeed , a marvel of splendid perfection . when she have reply to the letter ask she if the doll would be an acceptable present , Sara have be very quaint . 

 " I be get very old , " she write ; " you see , I shall never live to have another doll give I . this will be my last doll . there be something solemn about it . if I could write poetry , I be sure a poem about ' a last doll ' would be very nice . but I can not write poetry . I have try , and it make I laugh . it do not sound like Watts or Coleridge or Shakespeare at all . no one could ever take Emily 's place , but I should respect the last doll very much ; and I be sure the school would love it . they all like doll , though some of the big one the almost fifteen one pretend they be too grow up . " 

 Captain Crewe have a splitting headache when he read this letter in his bungalow in India . the table before he be heap with paper and letter which be alarm he and fill he with anxious dread , but he laugh as he have not laugh for week . 

 " oh , " he say , ' she be well fun every year she live . God grant this business may right itself and leave I free to run home and see she . what would not   I give to have her little arm round my neck this minute ! what WOULDN'T I give ! " 

 the birthday be to be celebrate by great festivity . the schoolroom be to be decorate , and there be to be a party . the box contain the present be to be open with great ceremony , and there be to be a glitter feast spread in Miss Minchin 's sacred room . when the day arrive the whole house be in a whirl of excitement . how the morning pass nobody quite know , because there seem such preparation to be make . the schoolroom be be deck with garland of holly ; the desk have be move away , and red cover have be put on the form which be array round the room against the wall . 

 when Sara go into her sitting room in the morning , she find on the table a small , dumpy package , tie up in a piece of brown paper . she know it be a present , and she think she could guess whom it come from . she open it quite tenderly . it be a square pincushion , make of not quite clean red flannel , and black pin have be stick carefully into it to form the word , " Menny hapy return . " 

 " oh ! " cry Sara , with a warm feeling in her heart . " what pain she have take ! I like it so , it it make I feel sorrowful . " 

 but the next moment she be mystify . on the under side of the pincushion be secure a card , bear in neat letter the name " Miss Amelia Minchin . " 

 Sara turn it over and over . 

 " Miss Amelia ! " she say to herself " how can it be ! " 

 and just at that very moment she hear the door be cautiously push open and see Becky peep round it . 

 there be an affectionate , happy grin on her face , and she shuffle forward and stand nervously pull at her finger . 

 " do yer like it , Miss Sara ? " she say . " do yer ? " 

 " like it ? " cry Sara . " you darle Becky , you make it all yourself . " 

 Becky give a hysteric but joyful sniff , and her eye look quite moist with delight . 

 " it be not   nothing but flannin , an ' the flannin be not   new ; but I want to give yer something an ' I make it of night . I know yer could PRETEND it be satin with diamond pin in . I try to when I be makin ' it . the card , miss , " rather doubtfully ; " ' t warn't   wrong of I to pick it up out o ' the dust - bin , be it ? Miss ' Meliar have throw it away . I have not   no card o ' my own , an ' I know it would not   be a proper presink if I do not   pin a card on so I pin Miss ' Meliar 's . " 

 Sara fly at she and hug she . she could not have tell herself or anyone else why there be a lump in her throat . 

 " oh , Becky ! " she cry out , with a queer little laugh , " I love you , Becky I do , I do ! " 

 " oh , miss ! " breathe Becky . " thank yer , miss , kindly ; it be not   good enough for that . the the flannin be not   new . " 




 7 

 the Diamond Mines again 

 when Sara enter the holly - hang schoolroom in the afternoon , she do so as the head of a sort of procession . Miss Minchin , in her grand silk dress , lead she by the hand . a manservant follow , carry the box contain the last Doll , a housemaid carry a second box , and Becky bring up the rear , carry a third and wear a clean apron and a new cap . Sara would have much prefer to enter in the usual way , but Miss Minchin have send for she , and , after an interview in her private sitting room , have express her wish . 

 " this be not an ordinary occasion , " she say . " I do not desire that it should be treat as one . " 

 so Sara be lead grandly in and feel shy when , on her entry , the big girl star at she and touch each other 's elbow , and the little one begin to squirm joyously in their seat . 

 " Silence , young lady ! " say Miss Minchin , at the murmur which arise . " James , place the box on the table and remove the lid . Emma , put yours upon a chair . Becky ! " suddenly and severely . 

 Becky have quite forget herself in her excitement , and be grin at Lottie , who be wriggle with rapturous expectation . she almost drop her box , the disapprove voice so startle she , and her frighten , bob curtsy of apology be so funny that Lavinia and Jessie tittered . 

 " it be not your place to look at the young lady , " say Miss Minchin . " you forget yourself . put your box down . " 

 Becky obey with alarmed haste and hastily back toward the door . 

 " you may leave we , " Miss Minchin announce to the servant with a wave of her hand . 

 Becky step aside respectfully to allow the superior servant to pass out first . she could not help cast a longing glance at the box on the table . something make of blue satin be peep from between the fold of tissue paper . 

 " if you please , Miss Minchin , " say Sara , suddenly , " may not   Becky stay ? " 

 it be a bold thing to do . Miss Minchin be betray into something like a slight jump . then she put she eyeglass up , and gaze at her show pupil disturbedly . 

 " Becky ! " she exclaim . " my dearest Sara ! " 

 Sara advance a step toward she . 

 " I want she because I know she will like to see the present , " she explain . " she be a little girl , too , you know . " 

 Miss Minchin be scandalize . she glance from one figure to the other . 

 " my dear Sara , " she say , " Becky be the scullery maid . scullery maid er be not little girl . " 

 it really have not occur to she to think of they in that light . scullery maid be machine who carry coal scuttle and make fire . 

 " but Becky be , " say Sara . " and I know she would enjoy herself . please let she stay because it be my birthday . " 

 Miss Minchin reply with much dignity : 

 " as you ask it as a birthday favor she may stay . rebecca , thank Miss Sara for her great kindness . " 

 Becky have be back into the corner , twist the hem of her apron in delighted suspense . she come forward , bob curtsy , but between Sara 's eye and her own there pass a gleam of friendly understanding , while her word tumble over each other . 

 " oh , if you please , miss ! I be that grateful , miss ! I do want to see the doll , miss , that I do . thank you , miss . and thank you , ma'am , " turn and make an alarmed bob to Miss Minchin " for let I take the liberty . " 

 Miss Minchin wave her hand again this time it be in the direction of the corner near the door . 

 " go and stand there , " she command . " not too near the young lady . " 

 Becky go to her place , grin . she do not care where she be send , so that she might have the luck of be inside the room , instead of be downstairs in the scullery , while these delight be go on . she do not even mind when Miss Minchin clear her throat ominously and speak again . 

 " now , young lady , I have a few word to say to you , " she announce . 

 " she be go to make a speech , " whisper one of the girl . " I wish it be over . " 

 Sara feel rather uncomfortable . as this be her party , it be probable that the speech be about she . it be not agreeable to stand in a schoolroom and have a speech make about you . 

 " you be aware , young lady , " the speech begin for it be a speech " that dear Sara be eleven year old today . " 

 " DEAR Sara ! " murmur Lavinia . 

 " several of you here have also be eleven year old , but Sara 's birthday be rather different from other little girl ' birthday . when she be old she will be heiress to a large fortune , which it will be her duty to spend in a meritorious manner . " 

 " the diamond mine , " giggle Jessie , in a whisper . 

 Sara do not hear she ; but as she stand with her green - gray eye fix steadily on Miss Minchin , she feel herself grow rather hot . when Miss Minchin talk about money , she feel somehow that she always hat she and , of course , it be disrespectful to hate grow - up people . 

 " when her dear papa , Captain Crewe , bring she from India and give she into my care , " the speech proceed , " he say to I , in a jesting way , ' I be afraid she will be very rich , Miss Minchin . ' my reply be , ' her education at my seminary , Captain Crewe , shall be such as will adorn the large fortune . ' Sara have become my most accomplished pupil . her French and her dancing be a credit to the seminary . her manner which have cause you to call she Princess Sara be perfect . her amiability she exhibit by give you this afternoon 's party . I hope you appreciate her generosity . I wish you to express your appreciation of it by say aloud all together , ' thank you , Sara ! ' " 

 the entire schoolroom rise to its foot as it have do the morning Sara remember so well . 

 " thank you , Sara ! " it say , and it must be confess that Lottie jump up and down . Sara look rather shy for a moment . she make a curtsy and it be a very nice one . 

 " thank you , " she say , " for come to my party . " 

 " very pretty , indeed , Sara , " approve Miss Minchin . " that be what a real princess do when the populace applaud she . lavinia " scathingly " the sound you just make be extremely like a snort . if you be jealous of your fellow - pupil , I beg you will express your feeling in some more lady - like manner . now I will leave you to enjoy yourself . " 

 the instant she have sweep out of the room the spell her presence always have upon they be break . the door have scarcely close before every seat be empty . the little girl jump or tumble out of theirs ; the old one waste no time in desert theirs . there be a rush toward the box . Sara have bend over one of they with a delighted face . 

 " these be book , I know , " she say . 

 the little child break into a rueful murmur , and Ermengarde look aghast . 

 " do your papa send you book for a birthday present ? " she exclaim . " why , he be as bad as mine . do not   open they , Sara . " 

 " I like they , " Sara laugh , but she turn to the big box . when she take out the last Doll it be so magnificent that the child utter delighted groan of joy , and actually draw back to gaze at it in breathless rapture . 

 " she be almost as big as Lottie , " someone gasp . 

 Lottie clap her hand and dance about , giggle . 

 " she be dress for the theater , " say Lavinia . " her cloak be line with ermine . " 

 " oh , " cry Ermengarde , dart forward , ' she have an opera - glass in her hand a blue - and - gold one ! " 

 " here be her trunk , " say Sara . " let we open it and look at her thing . " 

 she sit down upon the floor and turn the key . the child crowd clamor around she , as she lift tray after tray and reveal their content . never have the schoolroom be in such an uproar . there be lace collar and silk stocking and handkerchief ; there be a jewel case contain a necklace and a tiara which look quite as if they be make of real diamond ; there be a long sealskin and muff , there be ball dress and walk dress and visit dress ; there be hat and tea gown and fan . even Lavinia and Jessie forget that they be too elderly to care for doll , and utter exclamation of delight and catch up thing to look at they . 

 " suppose , " Sara say , as she stand by the table , put a large , black - velvet hat on the impassively smile owner of all these splendor ' suppose she understand human talk and feel proud of be admire . " 

 " you be always suppose thing , " say Lavinia , and her air be very superior . 

 " I know I be , " answer Sara , undisturbedly . " I like it . there be nothing so nice as suppose . it be almost like be a fairy . if you suppose anything hard enough it seem as if it be real . " 

 " it be all very well to suppose thing if you have everything , " say Lavinia . " could you suppose and pretend if you be a beggar and live in a garret ? " 

 Sara stop arrange the last Doll 's ostrich plume , and look thoughtful . 

 " I believe I could , " she say . " if one be a beggar , one would have to suppose and pretend all the time . but it might not   be easy . " 

 she often think afterward how strange it be that just as she have finish say this just at that very moment Miss Amelia come into the room . 

 " Sara , " she say , " your papa 's solicitor , Mr. Barrow , have call to see Miss Minchin , and , as she must talk to he alone and the refreshment be lay in her parlor , you have all well come and have your feast now , so that my sister can have her interview here in the schoolroom . " 

 Refreshments be not likely to be disdain at any hour , and many pair of eye gleam . Miss Amelia arrange the procession into decorum , and then , with Sara at her side head it , she lead it away , leave the last Doll sit upon a chair with the glory of her wardrobe scatter about she ; dress and coat hang upon chair back , pile of lace - frille petticoat lie upon their seat . 

 Becky , who be not expect to partake of refreshment , have the indiscretion to linger a moment to look at these beauty it really be an indiscretion . 

 " go back to your work , Becky , " Miss Amelia have say ; but she have stop to pick up reverently first a muff and then a coat , and while she stand look at they adoringly , she hear Miss Minchin upon the threshold , and , be smite with terror at the thought of be accuse of take liberty , she rashly dart under the table , which hide she by its tablecloth . 

 Miss Minchin come into the room , accompany by a sharp - feature , dry little gentleman , who look rather disturbed . Miss Minchin herself also look rather disturbed , it must be admit , and she gaze at the dry little gentleman with an irritated and puzzled expression . 

 she sit down with stiff dignity , and wave he to a chair . 

 " pray , be seat , Mr. Barrow , " she say . 

 Mr. Barrow do not sit down at once . his attention seem attract by the last Doll and the thing which surround she . he settle his eyeglass and look at they in nervous disapproval . the last Doll herself do not seem to mind this in the least . she merely sit upright and return his gaze indifferently . 

 " a hundred pound , " Mr. Barrow remark succinctly . " all expensive material , and make at a parisian modiste 's . he spend money lavishly enough , that young man . " 

 Miss Minchin feel offended . this seem to be a disparagement of her good patron and be a liberty . 

 even solicitor have no right to take liberty . 

 " I beg your pardon , Mr. Barrow , " she say stiffly . " I do not understand . " 

 " birthday present , " say Mr. Barrow in the same critical manner , " to a child eleven year old ! mad extravagance , I call it . " 

 Miss Minchin draw herself up still more rigidly . 

 " Captain Crewe be a man of fortune , " she say . " the diamond mine alone " 

 Mr. Barrow wheel round upon she . " diamond mine ! " he break out . " there be none ! never be ! " 

 Miss Minchin actually get up from her chair . 

 " what ! " she cry . " what do you mean ? " 

 " at any rate , " answer Mr. Barrow , quite snappishly , " it would have be much well if there never have be any . " 

 " any diamond mine ? " ejaculate Miss Minchin , catch at the back of a chair and feeling as if a splendid dream be fade away from she . 

 " Diamond mine spell ruin oftener than they spell wealth , " say Mr. Barrow . " when a man be in the hand of a very dear friend and be not a businessman himself , he have well steer clear of the dear friend 's diamond mine , or gold mine , or any other kind of mine dear friend want his money to put into . the late Captain Crewe " 

 here Miss Minchin stop he with a gasp . 

 " the late Captain Crewe ! " she cry out . " the late ! you do not   come to tell I that Captain Crewe be " 

 " he be dead , ma'am , " Mr. Barrow answer with jerky brusqueness . " die of jungle fever and business trouble combine . the jungle fever might not have kill he if he have not be drive mad by the business trouble , and the business trouble might not have put an end to he if the jungle fever have not assist . Captain Crewe be dead ! " 

 Miss Minchin drop into her chair again . the word he have speak fill she with alarm . 

 " what be his business trouble ? " she say . " what be they ? " 

 " diamond mine , " answer Mr. Barrow , " and dear friend and ruin . " 

 Miss Minchin lose her breath . 

 " Ruin ! " she gasp out . 

 " lose every penny . that young man have too much money . the dear friend be mad on the subject of the diamond mine . he put all his own money into it , and all Captain Crewe 's . then the dear friend run away Captain Crewe be already stricken with fever when the news come . the shock be too much for he . he die delirious , rave about his little girl and do not   leave a penny . " 

 now Miss Minchin understand , and never have she receive such a blow in her life . her show pupil , her show patron , sweep away from the Select Seminary at one blow . she feel as if she have be outrage and rob , and that Captain Crewe and Sara and Mr. Barrow be equally to blame . 

 " do you mean to tell I , " she cry out , " that he leave nothing ! that Sara will have no fortune ! that the child be a beggar ! that she be leave on my hand a little pauper instead of an heiress ? " 

 Mr. Barrow be a shrewd businessman , and feel it as well to make his own freedom from responsibility quite clear without any delay . 

 " she be certainly leave a beggar , " he reply . " and she be certainly leave on your hand , ma'am as she have not   a relation in the world that we know of . " 

 Miss Minchin start forward . she look as if she be go to open the door and rush out of the room to stop the festivity go on joyfully and rather noisily that moment over the refreshment . 

 " it be monstrous ! " she say . " she be in my sitting room at this moment , dress in silk gauze and lace petticoat , give a party at my expense . " 

 " she be give it at your expense , madam , if she be give it , " say Mr. Barrow , calmly . " Barrow    Skipworth be not responsible for anything . there never be a clean sweep make of a man 's fortune . Captain Crewe die without pay our last bill and it be a big one . " 

 Miss Minchin turn back from the door in increase indignation . this be bad than anyone could have dream of its being . 

 " that be what have happen to I ! " she cry . " I be always so sure of his payment that I go to all sort of ridiculous expense for the child . I pay the bill for that ridiculous doll and her ridiculous fantastic wardrobe . the child be to have anything she want . she have a carriage and a pony and a maid , and I have   pay for all of they since the last cheque come . " 

 Mr. Barrow evidently do not intend to remain to listen to the story of Miss Minchin 's grievance after he have make the position of his firm clear and relate the mere dry fact . he do not feel any particular sympathy for irate keeper of boarding school . 

 " you have well not pay for anything more , ma'am , " he remark , " unless you want to make present to the young lady . no one will remember you . she have not   a brass farthe to call she own . " 

 " but what be I to do ? " demand Miss Minchin , as if she feel it entirely his duty to make the matter right . " what be I to do ? " 

 " there be not   anything to do , " say Mr. Barrow , fold up his eyeglass and slip they into his pocket . " Captain Crewe be dead . the child be leave a pauper . nobody be responsible for she but you . " 

 " I be not responsible for she , and I refuse to be make responsible ! " 

 Miss Minchin become quite white with rage . 

 Mr. Barrow turn to go . 

 " I have nothing to do with that , madam , " he say uninterestedly . " Barrow    Skipworth be not responsible . very sorry the thing have happen , of course . " 

 " if you think she be to be foist off on I , you be greatly mistaken , " Miss Minchin gasp . " I have be rob and cheat ; I will turn she into the street ! " 

 if she have not be so furious , she would have be too discreet to say quite so much . she see herself burden with an extravagantly bring - up child whom she have always resent , and she lose all self - control . 

 Mr. Barrow undisturbedly move toward the door . 

 " I would not   do that , madam , " he comment ; " it would not   look well . unpleasant story to get about in connection with the establishment . Pupil bundle out penniless and without friend . " 

 he be a clever business man , and he know what he be say . he also know that Miss Minchin be a business woman , and would be shrewd enough to see the truth . she could not afford to do a thing which would make people speak of she as cruel and hard - hearted . 

 " well keep she and make use of she , " he add . " she be a clever child , I believe . you can get a good deal out of she as she grow old . " 

 " I will get a good deal out of she before she grow old ! " exclaim Miss Minchin . 

 " I be sure you will , ma'am , " say Mr. Barrow , with a little sinister smile . " I be sure you will . good morning ! " 

 he bow himself out and close the door , and it must be confess that Miss Minchin stand for a few moment and glare at it . what he have say be quite true . she know it . she have absolutely no redress . her show pupil have melt into nothingness , leave only a friendless , beggar little girl . such money as she herself have advance be lose and could not be regain . 

 and as she stand there breathless under her sense of injury , there fall upon her ear a burst of gay voice from her own sacred room , which have actually be give up to the feast . she could at least stop this . 

 but as she start toward the door it be open by Miss Amelia , who , when she catch sight of the change , angry face , fall back a step in alarm . 

 " what be the matter , sister ? " she ejaculate . 

 Miss Minchin 's voice be almost fierce when she answer : 

 " where be Sara Crewe ? " 

 Miss Amelia be bewilder . 

 " Sara ! " she stammer . " why , she be with the child in your room , of course . " 

 " have she a black frock in her sumptuous wardrobe ? " in bitter irony . 

 " a black frock ? " Miss Amelia stammer again . " a black one ? " 

 " she have frock of every other color . have she a black one ? " 

 Miss Amelia begin to turn pale . 

 " no ye - es ! " she say . " but it be too short for she . she have only the old black velvet , and she have outgrow it . " 

 " go and tell she to take off that preposterous pink silk gauze , and put the black one on , whether it be too short or not . she have do with finery ! " 

 then Miss Amelia begin to wring her fat hand and cry . 

 " oh , sister ! " she sniff . " oh , sister ! what can have happen ? " 

 Miss Minchin waste no word . 

 " Captain Crewe be dead , " she say . " he have die without a penny . that spoil , pamper , fanciful child be leave a pauper on my hand . " 

 Miss Amelia sit down quite heavily in the near chair . 

 " hundred of pound have I spend on nonsense for she . and I shall never see a penny of it . put a stop to this ridiculous party of her . go and make she change her frock at once . " 

 " I ? " pant Miss Amelia . " M - must I go and tell she now ? " 

 " this moment ! " be the fierce answer . " do not   sit star like a goose . go ! " 

 Poor Miss Amelia be accustom to be call a goose . she know , in fact , that she be rather a goose , and that it be leave to geese to do a great many disagreeable thing . it be a somewhat embarrassing thing to go into the midst of a room full of delighted child , and tell the giver of the feast that she have suddenly be transform into a little beggar , and must go upstairs and put on an old black frock which be too small for she . but the thing must be do . this be evidently not the time when question might be ask . 

 she rub her eye with her handkerchief until they look quite red . after which she get up and go out of the room , without venture to say another word . when her old sister look and speak as she have do just now , the wise course to pursue be to obey order without any comment . Miss Minchin walk across the room . she speak to herself aloud without know that she be do it . during the last year the story of the diamond mine have suggest all sort of possibility to she . even proprietor of seminary might make fortune in stock , with the aid of owner of mine . and now , instead of look forward to gain , she be leave to look back upon loss . 

 " the Princess Sara , indeed ! " she say . " the child have be pamper as if she be a queen . " she be sweep angrily past the corner table as she say it , and the next moment she start at the sound of a loud , sob sniff which issue from under the cover . 

 " what be that ! " she exclaim angrily . the loud , sob sniff be hear again , and she stoop and raise the hang fold of the table cover . 

 " how dare you ! " she cry out . " how dare you ! come out immediately ! " 

 it be poor Becky who crawl out , and her cap be knock on one side , and her face be red with repressed crying . 

 " if you please , ' m it be I , mum , " she explain . " I know I have not   ought to . but I be lookin ' at the doll , mum an ' I be frighten when you come in an ' slip under the table . " 

 " you have be there all the time , listen , " say Miss Minchin . 

 " no , mum , " Becky protest , bob curtsy . " not listenin ' I think I could slip out without your noticin ' , but I could not   an ' I have to stay . but I do not   listen , mum I would not   for nothing . but I could not   help hearin ' . " 

 suddenly it seem almost as if she lose all fear of the awful lady before she . she burst into fresh tear . 

 " oh , please , ' m , " she say ; " I dare say you will give I warnin ' , mum but I be so sorry for poor Miss Sara I be so sorry ! " 

 " leave the room ! " order Miss Minchin . 

 Becky curtsy again , the tear openly stream down her cheek . 

 " yes , ' m ; I will , ' m , " she say , tremble ; " but oh , I just want to arst you : Miss Sara she be be such a rich young lady , an ' she be be wait on , ' and and foot ; an ' what will she do now , mum , without no maid ? if if , oh please , would you let I wait on she after I have   do my pot an ' kettle ? I would do them that quick if you would let I wait on she now she be poor . oh , " break out afresh , " poor little Miss Sara , mum that be call a princess . " 

 somehow , she make Miss Minchin feel more angry than ever . that the very scullery maid should range herself on the side of this child whom she realize more fully than ever that she have never like be too much . she actually stamp her foot . 

 " no certainly not , " she say . " she will wait on herself , and on other people , too . leave the room this instant , or you will leave your place . " 

 Becky throw her apron over her head and flee . she run out of the room and down the step into the scullery , and there she sit down among her pot and kettle , and weep as if her heart would break . 

 " it be exactly like the one in the story , " she wail . " they pore princess one that be drive into the world . " 

 Miss Minchin have never look quite so still and hard as she do when Sara come to she , a few hour later , in response to a message she have send she . 

 even by that time it seem to Sara as if the birthday party have either be a dream or a thing which have happen year ago , and have happen in the life of quite another little girl . 

 every sign of the festivity have be sweep away ; the holly have be remove from the schoolroom wall , and the form and desk put back into their place . Miss Minchin 's sit room look as it always do all trace of the feast be go , and Miss Minchin have resume her usual dress . the pupil have be order to lay aside their party frock ; and this have be do , they have return to the schoolroom and huddle together in group , whispering and talk excitedly . 

 " tell Sara to come to my room , " Miss Minchin have say to her sister . " and explain to she clearly that I will have no crying or unpleasant scene . " 

 " Sister , " reply Miss Amelia , ' she be the strange child I ever see . she have actually make no fuss at all . you remember she make none when Captain Crewe go back to India . when I tell she what have happen , she just stand quite still and look at I without make a sound . her eye seem to get big and big , and she go quite pale . when I have finish , she still stand star for a few second , and then her chin begin to shake , and she turn round and run out of the room and upstairs . several of the other child begin to cry , but she do not seem to hear they or to be alive to anything but just what I be say . it make I feel quite queer not to be answer ; and when you tell anything sudden and strange , you expect people will say something whatever it be . " 

 nobody but Sara herself ever know what have happen in her room after she have run upstairs and lock her door . in fact , she herself scarcely remember anything but that she walk up and down , say over and over again to herself in a voice which do not seem she own , " my papa be dead ! my papa be dead ! " 

 once she stop before Emily , who sit watch she from her chair , and cry out wildly , " emily ! do you hear ? do you hear papa be dead ? he be dead in India thousand of mile away . " 

 when she come into Miss Minchin 's sit room in answer to her summon , her face be white and her eye have dark ring around they . her mouth be set as if she do not wish it to reveal what she have suffer and be suffer . she do not look in the least like the rose - color butterfly child who have fly about from one of her treasure to the other in the decorate schoolroom . she look instead a strange , desolate , almost grotesque little figure . 

 she have put on , without Mariette 's help , the cast - aside black - velvet frock . it be too short and tight , and her slender leg look long and thin , show themselves from beneath the brief skirt . as she have not find a piece of black ribbon , her short , thick , black hair tumble loosely about her face and contrast strongly with its pallor . she hold Emily tightly in one arm , and Emily be swathe in a piece of black material . 

 " put down your doll , " say Miss Minchin . " what do you mean by bring she here ? " 

 " no , " Sara answer . " I will not put she down . she be all I have . my papa give she to I . " 

 she have always make Miss Minchin feel secretly uncomfortable , and she do so now . she do not speak with rudeness so much as with a cold steadiness with which Miss Minchin feel it difficult to cope perhaps because she know she be do a heartless and inhuman thing . 

 " you will have no time for doll in future , " she say . " you will have to work and improve yourself and make yourself useful . " 

 Sara keep she big , strange eye fix on she , and say not a word . 

 " everything will be very different now , " Miss Minchin go on . " I suppose Miss Amelia have explain matter to you . " 

 " yes , " answer Sara . " my papa be dead . he leave I no money . I be quite poor . " 

 " you be a beggar , " say Miss Minchin , her temper rise at the recollection of what all this mean . " it appear that you have no relation and no home , and no one to take care of you . " 

 for a moment the thin , pale little face twitch , but Sara again say nothing . 

 " what be you star at ? " demand Miss Minchin , sharply . " be you so stupid that you can not understand ? I tell you that you be quite alone in the world , and have no one to do anything for you , unless I choose to keep you here out of charity . " 

 " I understand , " answer Sara , in a low tone ; and there be a sound as if she have gulp down something which rise in her throat . " I understand . " 

 " that doll , " cry Miss Minchin , point to the splendid birthday gift seat near " that ridiculous doll , with all her nonsensical , extravagant thing I actually pay the bill for she ! " 

 Sara turn her head toward the chair . 

 " the last doll , " she say . " the last doll . " and her little mournful voice have an odd sound . 

 " the last Doll , indeed ! " say Miss Minchin . " and she be mine , not your . everything you own be mine . " 

 " please take it away from I , then , " say Sara . " I do not want it . " 

 if she have cry and sob and seem frightened , Miss Minchin might almost have have more patience with she . she be a woman who like to domineer and feel her power , and as she look at Sara 's pale little steadfast face and hear her proud little voice , she quite feel as if she might be be set at naught . 

 " do not   put on grand air , " she say . " the time for that sort of thing be past . you be not a princess any long . your carriage and your pony will be send away your maid will be dismiss . you will wear your old and plainest clothe your extravagant one be no long suit to your station . you be like Becky you must work for your living . " 

 to her surprise , a faint gleam of light come into the child 's eye a shade of relief . 

 " can I work ? " she say . " if I can work it will not matter so much . what can I do ? " 

 " you can do anything you be tell , " be the answer . " you be a sharp child , and pick up thing readily . if you make yourself useful I may let you stay here . you speak French well , and you can help with the young child . " 

 " May I ? " exclaim Sara . " oh , please let I ! I know I can teach they . I like they , and they like I . " 

 " do not   talk nonsense about people like you , " say Miss Minchin . " you will have to do more than teach the little one . you will run errand and help in the kitchen as well as in the schoolroom . if you do not   please I , you will be send away . remember that . now go . " 

 Sara stand still just a moment , look at she . in her young soul , she be think deep and strange thing . then she turn to leave the room . 

 " stop ! " say Miss Minchin . " do not   you intend to thank I ? " 

 Sara pause , and all the deep , strange thought surge up in her breast . 

 " what for ? " she say . 

 " for my kindness to you , " reply Miss Minchin . " for my kindness in give you a home . " 

 Sara make two or three step toward she . her thin little chest heave up and down , and she speak in a strange un - childishly fierce way . 

 " you be not kind , " she say . " you be not kind , and it be not a home . " and she have turn and run out of the room before Miss Minchin could stop she or do anything but stare after she with stony anger . 

 she go up the stair slowly , but pant for breath and she hold Emily tightly against her side . 

 " I wish she could talk , " she say to herself . " if she could speak if she could speak ! " 

 she mean to go to her room and lie down on the tiger - skin , with her cheek upon the great cat 's head , and look into the fire and think and think and think . but just before she reach the landing Miss Amelia come out of the door and close it behind she , and stand before it , look nervous and awkward . the truth be that she feel secretly ashamed of the thing she have be order to do . 

 " you you be not to go in there , " she say . 

 " not go in ? " exclaim Sara , and she fall back a pace . 

 " that be not your room now , " Miss Amelia answer , redden a little . 

 somehow , all at once , Sara understand . she realize that this be the beginning of the change Miss Minchin have speak of . 

 " where be my room ? " she ask , hop very much that her voice do not shake . 

 " you be to sleep in the attic next to Becky . " 

 Sara know where it be . Becky have tell she about it . she turn , and mount up two flight of stair . the last one be narrow , and cover with shabby strip of old carpet . she feel as if she be walk away and leave far behind she the world in which that other child , who no long seem herself , have live . this child , in her short , tight old frock , climb the stair to the attic , be quite a different creature . 

 when she reach the attic door and open it , her heart give a dreary little thump . then she shut the door and stand against it and look about she . 

 yes , this be another world . the room have a slanting roof and be whitewash . the whitewash be dingy and have fall off in place . there be a rusty grate , an old iron bedstead , and a hard bed cover with a faded coverlet . some piece of furniture too much worn to be use downstair have be send up . under the skylight in the roof , which show nothing but an oblong piece of dull gray sky , there stand an old battered red footstool . Sara go to it and sit down . she seldom cry . she do not cry now . she lay Emily across her knee and put she face down upon she and her arm around she , and sit there , her little black head rest on the black drapery , not say one word , not make one sound . 

 and as she sit in this silence there come a low tap at the door such a low , humble one that she do not at first hear it , and , indeed , be not rouse until the door be timidly push open and a poor tear - smeared face appear peep round it . it be Becky 's face , and Becky have be cry furtively for hour and rub her eye with her kitchen apron until she look strange indeed . 

 " oh , miss , " she say under her breath . " might I would you allow I jest to come in ? " 

 Sara lift her head and look at she . she try to begin a smile , and somehow she could not . suddenly and it be all through the love mournfulness of Becky 's stream eye her face look more like a child be not so much too old for her year . she hold out her hand and give a little sob . 

 " oh , Becky , " she say . " I tell you we be just the same only two little girl just two little girl . you see how true it be . there be no difference now . I be not a princess anymore . " 

 Becky run to she and catch her hand , and hug it to her breast , kneel beside she and sob with love and pain . 

 " yes , miss , you be , " she cry , and her word be all break . " whats'ever ' appen to you whats'ever you would be a princess all the same an ' nothing could not   make you nothing different . " 




 8 

 in the Attic 

 the first night she spend in her attic be a thing Sara never forget . during its passing she live through a wild , unchildlike woe of which she never speak to anyone about she . there be no one who would have understand . it be , indeed , well for she that as she lie awake in the darkness her mind be forcibly distract , now and then , by the strangeness of her surrounding . it be , perhaps , well for she that she be remind by her small body of material thing . if this have not be so , the anguish of her young mind might have be too great for a child to bear . but , really , while the night be pass she scarcely know that she have a body at all or remember any other thing than one . 

 " my papa be dead ! " she keep whisper to herself . " my papa be dead ! " 

 it be not until long afterward that she realize that her bed have be so hard that she turn over and over in it to find a place to rest , that the darkness seem more intense than any she have ever know , and that the wind howl over the roof among the chimney like something which wail aloud . then there be something bad . this be certain scuffling and scratching and squeaking in the wall and behind the skirting board . she know what they mean , because Becky have describe they . they mean rat and mouse who be either fight with each other or play together . once or twice she even hear sharp - toed foot scurry across the floor , and she remember in those after day , when she recall thing , that when first she hear they she start up in bed and sit trembling , and when she lie down again cover her head with the bedclothe . 

 the change in her life do not come about gradually , but be make all at once . 

 " she must begin as she be to go on , " Miss Minchin say to Miss Amelia . " she must be teach at once what she be to expect . " 

 Mariette have leave the house the next morning . the glimpse Sara catch of her sitting room , as she pass its open door , show she that everything have be change . her ornament and luxury have be remove , and a bed have be place in a corner to transform it into a new pupil 's bedroom . 

 when she go down to breakfast she see that her seat at Miss Minchin 's side be occupy by Lavinia , and Miss Minchin speak to she coldly . 

 " you will begin your new duty , Sara , " she say , " by take your seat with the young child at a small table . you must keep they quiet , and see that they behave well and do not waste their food . you ought to have be down early . Lottie have already upset her tea . " 

 that be the beginning , and from day to day the duty give to she be add to . she teach the young child french and hear their other lesson , and these be the least of her labor . it be find that she could be make use of in numberless direction . she could be send on errand at any time and in all weather . she could be tell to do thing other people neglect . the cook and the housemaid take their tone from Miss Minchin , and rather enjoy order about the " young one " who have be make so much fuss over for so long . they be not servant of the good class , and have neither good manner nor good temper , and it be frequently convenient to have at hand someone on whom blame could be lay . 

 during the first month or two , Sara think that her willingness to do thing as well as she could , and her silence under reproof , might soften those who drive she so hard . in her proud little heart she want they to see that she be try to earn her living and not accept charity . but the time come when she see that no one be soften at all ; and the more willing she be to do as she be tell , the more domineering and exact careless housemaid become , and the more ready a scold cook be to blame she . 

 if she have be old , Miss Minchin would have give she the big girl to teach and save money by dismiss an instructress ; but while she remain and look like a child , she could be make more useful as a sort of little superior errand girl and maid of all work . an ordinary errand boy would not have be so clever and reliable . Sara could be trust with difficult commission and complicated message . she could even go and pay bill , and she combine with this the ability to dust a room well and to set thing in order . 

 her own lesson become thing of the past . she be teach nothing , and only after long and busy day spend in run here and there at everybody 's order be she grudgingly allow to go into the deserted schoolroom , with a pile of old book , and study alone at night . 

 " if I do not remind myself of the thing I have learn , perhaps I may forget they , " she say to herself . " I be almost a scullery maid , and if I be a scullery maid who know nothing , I shall be like poor Becky . I wonder if I could quite forget and begin to drop my h 'S and not remember that Henry the Eighth have six wife . " 

 one of the most curious thing in her new existence be her change position among the pupil . instead of be a sort of small royal personage among they , she no long seem to be one of their number at all . she be keep so constantly at work that she scarcely ever have an opportunity of speak to any of they , and she could not avoid see that Miss Minchin prefer that she should live a life apart from that of the occupant of the schoolroom . 

 " I will not have her form intimacy and talk to the other child , " that lady say . " girl like a grievance , and if she begin to tell romantic story about herself , she will become an ill - use heroine , and parent will be give a wrong impression . it be well that she should live a separate life one suit to her circumstance . I be give she a home , and that be more than she have any right to expect from I . " 

 Sara do not expect much , and be far too proud to try to continue to be intimate with girl who evidently feel rather awkward and uncertain about she . the fact be that Miss Minchin 's pupil be a set of dull , matter - of - fact young people . they be accustom to be rich and comfortable , and as Sara 's frock grow short and shabby and queerer - look , and it become an establish fact that she wear shoe with hole in they and be send out to buy grocery and carry they through the street in a basket on her arm when the cook want they in a hurry , they feel rather as if , when they speak to she , they be address an under servant . 

 " to think that she be the girl with the diamond mine , " Lavinia comment . " she do look an object . and she be queer than ever . I never like she much , but I can not   bear that way she have now of look at people without speak just as if she be find they out . " 

 " I be , " say Sara , promptly , when she hear of this . " that be what I look at some people for . I like to know about they . I think they over afterward . " 

 the truth be that she have save herself annoyance several time by keep her eye on Lavinia , who be quite ready to make mischief , and would have be rather pleased to have make it for the ex - show pupil . 

 Sara never make any mischief herself , or interfere with anyone . she work like a drudge ; she tramp through the wet street , carry parcel and basket ; she labor with the childish inattention of the little one ' french lesson ; as she become shabby and more forlorn - look , she be tell that she have well take her meal downstairs ; she be treat as if she be nobody 's concern , and her heart grow proud and sore , but she never tell anyone what she feel . 

 " soldier do not   complain , " she would say between her small , shut tooth , " I be not go to do it ; I will pretend this be part of a war . " 

 but there be hour when her child heart might almost have break with loneliness but for three people . 

 the first , it must be own , be Becky just Becky . throughout all that first night spend in the garret , she have feel a vague comfort in know that on the other side of the wall in which the rat scuffle and squeak there be another young human creature . and during the night that follow the sense of comfort grow . they have little chance to speak to each other during the day . each have her own task to perform , and any attempt at conversation would have be regard as a tendency to loiter and lose time . " do not   mind I , miss , " Becky whisper during the first morning , " if I do not   say nothing polite . some un'd be down on we if I do . I mean ' please ' an ' ' thank you ' an ' ' beg pardon , ' but I dassn't   to take time to say it . " 

 but before daybreak she use to slip into Sara 's attic and button her dress and give she such help as she require before she go downstairs to light the kitchen fire . and when night come Sara always hear the humble knock at her door which mean that her handmaid be ready to help she again if she be need . during the first week of her grief Sara feel as if she be too stupefied to talk , so it happen that some time pass before they see each other much or exchange visit . Becky 's heart tell she that it be good that people in trouble should be leave alone . 

 the second of the trio of comforter be Ermengarde , but odd thing happen before Ermengarde find her place . 

 when Sara 's mind seem to awaken again to the life about she , she realize that she have forget that an Ermengarde live in the world . the two have always be friend , but Sara have feel as if she be year the old . it could not be contest that Ermengarde be as dull as she be affectionate . she cling to Sara in a simple , helpless way ; she bring her lesson to she that she might be help ; she listen to she every word and besiege she with request for story . but she have nothing interesting to say herself , and she loathe book of every description . she be , in fact , not a person one would remember when one be catch in the storm of a great trouble , and Sara forget she . 

 it have be all the easy to forget she because she have be suddenly call home for a few week . when she come back she do not see Sara for a day or two , and when she meet she for the first time she encounter she come down a corridor with her arm full of garment which be to be take downstairs to be mend . Sara herself have already be teach to mend they . she look pale and unlike herself , and she be attire in the queer , outgrow frock whose shortness show so much thin black leg . 

 Ermengarde be too slow a girl to be equal to such a situation . she could not think of anything to say . she know what have happen , but , somehow , she have never imagine Sara could look like this so odd and poor and almost like a servant . it make she quite miserable , and she could do nothing but break into a short hysterical laugh and exclaim aimlessly and as if without any meaning , " oh , Sara , be that you ? " 

 " yes , " answer Sara , and suddenly a strange thought pass through her mind and make her face flush . she hold the pile of garment in her arm , and her chin rest upon the top of it to keep it steady . something in the look of her straight - gaze eye make Ermengarde lose her wit still more . she feel as if Sara have change into a new kind of girl , and she have never know she before . perhaps it be because she have suddenly grow poor and have to mend thing and work like Becky . 

 " oh , " she stammer . " how how be you ? " 

 " I do not   know , " Sara reply . " how be you ? " 

 " I be I be quite well , " say Ermengarde , overwhelm with shyness . then spasmodically she think of something to say which seem more intimate . " be you be you very unhappy ? " she say in a rush . 

 then Sara be guilty of an injustice . just at that moment her tear heart swell within she , and she feel that if anyone be as stupid as that , one have well get away from she . 

 " what do you think ? " she say . " do you think I be very happy ? " and she march past she without another word . 

 in course of time she realize that if her wretchedness have not make her forget thing , she would have know that poor , dull Ermengarde be not to be blame for her unready , awkward way . she be always awkward , and the more she feel , the more stupid she be give to be . 

 but the sudden thought which have flash upon she have make she over - sensitive . 

 " she be like the other , " she have think . " she do not really want to talk to I . she know no one do . " 

 so for several week a barrier stand between they . when they meet by chance Sara look the other way , and Ermengarde feel too stiff and embarrassed to speak . sometimes they nod to each other in pass , but there be time when they do not even exchange a greeting . 

 " if she would rather not talk to I , " Sara thought , " I will keep out of her way . Miss Minchin make that easy enough . " 

 Miss Minchin make it so easy that at last they scarcely see each other at all . at that time it be notice that Ermengarde be more stupid than ever , and that she look listless and unhappy . she use to sit in the window - seat , huddle in a heap , and stare out of the window without speak . once Jessie , who be pass , stop to look at her curiously . 

 " what be you cry for , Ermengarde ? " she ask . 

 " I be not cry , " answer Ermengarde , in a muffle , unsteady voice . 

 " you be , " say Jessie . " a great big tear just roll down the bridge of your nose and drop off at the end of it . and there go another . " 

 " well , " say Ermengarde , " I be miserable and no one need interfere . " and she turn her plump back and take out her handkerchief and boldly hide her face in it . 

 that night , when Sara go to her attic , she be later than usual . she have be keep at work until after the hour at which the pupil go to bed , and after that she have go to her lesson in the lonely schoolroom . when she reach the top of the stair , she be surprised to see a glimmer of light come from under the attic door . 

 " nobody go there but myself , " she think quickly , " but someone have light a candle . " 

 someone have , indeed , light a candle , and it be not burn in the kitchen candlestick she be expect to use , but in one of those belong to the pupil ' bedroom . the someone be sit upon the battered footstool , and be dress in her nightgown and wrap up in a red shawl . it be Ermengarde . 

 " Ermengarde ! " cry Sara . she be so startled that she be almost frightened . " you will get into trouble . " 

 Ermengarde stumble up from her footstool . she shuffle across the attic in her bedroom slipper , which be too large for she . her eye and nose be pink with crying . 

 " I know I shall if I be find out . " she say . " but I do not   care I do not   care a bit . oh , Sara , please tell I . what be the matter ? why do not   you like I any more ? " 

 something in her voice make the familiar lump rise in Sara 's throat . it be so affectionate and simple so like the old Ermengarde who have ask she to be " good friend . " it sound as if she have not mean what she have seem to mean during these past week . 

 " I do like you , " Sara answer . " I think you see , everything be different now . I think you be different . " 

 Ermengarde open her wet eye wide . 

 " why , it be you who be different ! " she cry . " you do not   want to talk to I . I do not   know what to do . it be you who be different after I come back . " 

 Sara think a moment . she see she have make a mistake . 

 " I be different , " she explain , " though not in the way you think . Miss Minchin do not want I to talk to the girl . Most of they do not   want to talk to I . I think perhaps you do not . so I try to keep out of your way . " 

 " oh , Sara , " Ermengarde almost wail in her reproachful dismay . and then after one more look they rush into each other 's arm . it must be confess that Sara 's small black head lie for some minute on the shoulder cover by the red shawl . when Ermengarde have seem to desert she , she have feel horribly lonely . 

 afterward they sit down upon the floor together , Sara clasp her knee with her arm , and Ermengarde roll up in her shawl . Ermengarde look at the odd , big - eyed little face adoringly . 

 " I could not   bear it any more , " she say . " I dare say you could live without I , Sara ; but I could not   live without you . I be nearly dead . so tonight , when I be cry under the bedclothe , I think all at once of creep up here and just beg you to let we be friend again . " 

 " you be nice than I be , " say Sara . " I be too proud to try and make friend . you see , now that trial have come , they have show that I be not a nice child . I be afraid they would . perhaps " wrinkle her forehead wisely " that be what they be send for . " 

 " I do not   see any good in they , " say Ermengarde stoutly . 

 " neither do I to speak the truth , " admit Sara , frankly . " but I suppose there might be good in thing , even if we do not   see it . there might " doubtfully " be good in Miss Minchin . " 

 Ermengarde look round the attic with a rather fearsome curiosity . 

 " Sara , " she say , " do you think you can bear live here ? " 

 Sara look round also . 

 " if I pretend it be quite different , I can , " she answer ; " or if I pretend it be a place in a story . " 

 she speak slowly . her imagination be begin to work for she . it have not work for she at all since her trouble have come upon she . she have feel as if it have be stun . 

 " other people have live in bad place . think of the Count of Monte Cristo in the dungeon of the Chateau d'If . and think of the people in the Bastille ! " 

 " the Bastille , " half whisper Ermengarde , watch she and begin to be fascinate . she remember story of the French Revolution which Sara have be able to fix in her mind by her dramatic relation of they . no one but Sara could have do it . 

 a well - know glow come into Sara 's eye . 

 " yes , " she say , hug her knee , " that will be a good place to pretend about . I be a prisoner in the Bastille . I have be here for year and year and year ; and everybody have forget about I . Miss Minchin be the jailer and Becky " a sudden light add itself to the glow in her eye " Becky be the prisoner in the next cell . " 

 she turn to Ermengarde , look quite like the old Sara . 

 " I shall pretend that , " she say ; " and it will be a great comfort . " 

 Ermengarde be at once enrapture and awed . 

 " and will you tell I all about it ? " she say . " may I creep up here at night , whenever it be safe , and hear the thing you have make up in the day ? it will seem as if we be more ' good friend ' than ever . " 

 " yes , " answer Sara , nod . " adversity try people , and mine have try you and prove how nice you be . " 




 9 

 Melchisedec 

 the third person in the trio be Lottie . she be a small thing and do not know what adversity mean , and be much bewilder by the alteration she see in her young adopt mother . she have hear it rumor that strange thing have happen to Sara , but she could not understand why she look different why she wear an old black frock and come into the schoolroom only to teach instead of to sit in her place of honor and learn lesson herself . there have be much whispering among the little one when it have be discover that Sara no long live in the room in which Emily have so long sit in state . Lottie 's chief difficulty be that Sara say so little when one ask her question . at seven mystery must be make very clear if one be to understand they . 

 " be you very poor now , Sara ? " she have ask confidentially the first morning her friend take charge of the small french class . " be you as poor as a beggar ? " she thrust a fat hand into the slim one and open round , tearful eye . " I do not   want you to be as poor as a beggar . " 

 she look as if she be go to cry . and Sara hurriedly console she . 

 " beggar have nowhere to live , " she say courageously . " I have a place to live in . " 

 " where do you live ? " persist Lottie . " the new girl sleep in your room , and it be not   pretty any more . " 

 " I live in another room , " say Sara . 

 " be it a nice one ? " inquire Lottie . " I want to go and see it . " 

 " you must not talk , " say Sara . " Miss Minchin be look at we . she will be angry with I for let you whisper . " 

 she have find out already that she be to be hold accountable for everything which be object to . if the child be not attentive , if they talk , if they be restless , it be she who would be reprove . 

 but Lottie be a determined little person . if Sara would not tell she where she live , she would find out in some other way . she talk to her small companion and hang about the eld girl and listen when they be gossip ; and act upon certain information they have unconsciously let drop , she start late one afternoon on a voyage of discovery , climb stair she have never know the existence of , until she reach the attic floor . there she find two door near each other , and open one , she see she beloved Sara stand upon an old table and look out of a window . 

 " Sara ! " she cry , aghast . " Mamma Sara ! " she be aghast because the attic be so bare and ugly and seem so far away from all the world . her short leg have seem to have be mount hundred of stair . 

 Sara turn round at the sound of her voice . it be her turn to be aghast . what would happen now ? if Lottie begin to cry and any one chance to hear , they be both lose . she jump down from her table and run to the child . 

 " do not   cry and make a noise , " she implore . " I shall be scold if you do , and I have be scold all day . it be it be not such a bad room , Lottie . " 

 " be not   it ? " gasp Lottie , and as she look round it she bite her lip . she be a spoiled child yet , but she be fond enough of her adopt parent to make an effort to control herself for her sake . then , somehow , it be quite possible that any place in which Sara live might turn out to be nice . " why be not   it , Sara ? " she almost whisper . 

 Sara hug her close and try to laugh . there be a sort of comfort in the warmth of the plump , childish body . she have have a hard day and have be star out of the window with hot eye . 

 " you can see all sort of thing you can not   see downstair , " she say . 

 " what sort of thing ? " demand Lottie , with that curiosity Sara could always awaken even in big girl . 

 " chimney quite close to we with smoke curl up in wreath and cloud and go up into the sky and sparrow hop about and talk to each other just as if they be people and other attic window where head may pop out any minute and you can wonder who they belong to . and it all feel as high up as if it be another world . " 

 " oh , let I see it ! " cry Lottie . " lift I up ! " 

 Sara lift she up , and they stand on the old table together and lean on the edge of the flat window in the roof , and look out . 

 anyone who have not do this do not know what a different world they see . the slate spread out on either side of they and slant down into the rain gutter - pipe . the sparrow , be at home there , twitter and hop about quite without fear . two of they perch on the chimney top near and quarrel with each other fiercely until one peck the other and drive he away . the garret window next to theirs be shut because the house next door be empty . 

 " I wish someone live there , " Sara say . " it be so close that if there be a little girl in the attic , we could talk to each other through the window and climb over to see each other , if we be not afraid of fall . " 

 the sky seem so much near than when one see it from the street , that Lottie be enchant . from the attic window , among the chimney pot , the thing which be happen in the world below seem almost unreal . one scarcely believe in the existence of Miss Minchin and Miss Amelia and the schoolroom , and the roll of wheel in the square seem a sound belong to another existence . 

 " oh , Sara ! " cry Lottie , cuddle in her guard arm . " I like this attic I like it ! it be nice than downstairs ! " 

 " look at that sparrow , " whisper Sara . " I wish I have some crumb to throw to he . " 

 " I have some ! " come in a little shriek from Lottie . " I have part of a bun in my pocket ; I buy it with my penny yesterday , and I save a bit . " 

 when they throw out a few crumb the sparrow jump and fly away to an adjacent chimney top . he be evidently not accustomed to intimate in attic , and unexpected crumb startle he . but when Lottie remain quite still and Sara chirp very softly almost as if she be a sparrow herself he see that the thing which have alarm he represent hospitality , after all . he put his head on one side , and from his perch on the chimney look down at the crumb with twinkle eye . Lottie could scarcely keep still . 

 " will he come ? will he come ? " she whisper . 

 " his eye look as if he would , " Sara whisper back . " he be think and think whether he dare . yes , he will ! yes , he be come ! " 

 he fly down and hop toward the crumb , but stop a few inch away from they , put his head on one side again , as if reflect on the chance that Sara and Lottie might turn out to be big cat and jump on he . at last his heart tell he they be really nice than they look , and he hop near and nearer , dart at the big crumb with a lightning peck , seize it , and carry it away to the other side of his chimney . 

 " now he knows " , say Sara . " and he will come back for the other . " 

 he do come back , and even bring a friend , and the friend go away and bring a relative , and among they they make a hearty meal over which they twitter and chatter and exclaim , stop every now and then to put their head on one side and examine Lottie and Sara . Lottie be so delighted that she quite forget her first shock impression of the attic . in fact , when she be lift down from the table and return to earthly thing , as it be , Sara be able to point out to her many beauty in the room which she herself would not have suspect the existence of . 

 " it be so little and so high above everything , " she say , " that it be almost like a nest in a tree . the slanting ceiling be so funny . see , you can scarcely stand up at this end of the room ; and when the morning begin to come I can lie in bed and look right up into the sky through that flat window in the roof . it be like a square patch of light . if the sun be go to shine , little pink cloud float about , and I feel as if I could touch they . and if it rain , the drop patter and patter as if they be say something nice . then if there be star , you can lie and try to count how many go into the patch . it take such a lot . and just look at that tiny , rusty grate in the corner . if it be polished and there be a fire in it , just think how nice it would be . you see , it be really a beautiful little room . " 

 she be walk round the small place , hold Lottie 's hand and make gesture which describe all the beauty she be make herself see . she quite make Lottie see they , too . Lottie could always believe in the thing Sara make picture of . 

 " you see , " she say , " there could be a thick , soft blue indian rug on the floor ; and in that corner there could be a soft little sofa , with cushion to curl up on ; and just over it could be a shelf full of book so that one could reach they easily ; and there could be a fur rug before the fire , and hanging on the wall to cover up the whitewash , and picture . they would have to be little one , but they could be beautiful ; and there could be a lamp with a deep rose - color shade ; and a table in the middle , with thing to have tea with ; and a little fat copper kettle sing on the hob ; and the bed could be quite different . it could be make soft and cover with a lovely silk coverlet . it could be beautiful . and perhaps we could coax the sparrow until we make such friend with they that they would come and peck at the window and ask to be let in . " 

 " oh , Sara ! " cry Lottie . " I should like to live here ! " 

 when Sara have persuade she to go downstairs again , and , after set she on her way , have come back to her attic , she stand in the middle of it and look about she . the enchantment of her imagining for Lottie have die away . the bed be hard and cover with its dingy quilt . the whitewash wall show its break patch , the floor be cold and bare , the grate be break and rusty , and the battered footstool , tilt sideways on its injure leg , the only seat in the room . she sit down on it for a few minute and let her head drop in her hand . the mere fact that Lottie have come and go away again make thing seem a little bad just as perhaps prisoner feel a little more desolate after visitor come and go , leave they behind . 

 " it be a lonely place , " she say . " sometimes it be the loneliest place in the world . " 

 she be sit in this way when her attention be attract by a slight sound near she . she lift her head to see where it come from , and if she have be a nervous child she would have leave her seat on the battered footstool in a great hurry . a large rat be sit up on his hind quarter and sniff the air in an interested manner . some of Lottie 's crumb have drop upon the floor and their scent have draw he out of his hole . 

 he look so queer and so like a gray - whisker dwarf or gnome that Sara be rather fascinated . he look at she with his bright eye , as if he be ask a question . he be evidently so doubtful that one of the child 's queer thought come into her mind . 

 " I dare say it be rather hard to be a rat , " she muse . " nobody like you . People jump and run away and scream out , ' oh , a horrid rat ! ' I should not   like people to scream and jump and say , ' oh , a horrid Sara ! ' the moment they see I . and set trap for I , and pretend they be dinner . it be so different to be a sparrow . but nobody ask this rat if he want to be a rat when he be make . nobody say , ' would not   you rather be a sparrow ? ' " 

 she have sit so quietly that the rat have begin to take courage . he be very much afraid of she , but perhaps he have a heart like the sparrow and it tell he that she be not a thing which pounce . he be very hungry . he have a wife and a large family in the wall , and they have have frightfully bad luck for several day . he have leave the child cry bitterly , and feel he would risk a good deal for a few crumb , so he cautiously drop upon his foot . 

 " come on , " say Sara ; " I be not a trap . you can have they , poor thing ! prisoner in the Bastille use to make friend with rat . suppose I make friend with you . " 

 how it be that animal understand thing I do not know , but it be certain that they do understand . perhaps there be a language which be not make of word and everything in the world understand it . perhaps there be a soul hide in everything and it can always speak , without even make a sound , to another soul . but whatsoever be the reason , the rat know from that moment that he be safe even though he be a rat . he know that this young human be sit on the red footstool would not jump up and terrify he with wild , sharp noise or throw heavy object at he which , if they do not fall and crush he , would send he limp in his scurry back to his hole . he be really a very nice rat , and do not mean the least harm . when he have stand on his hind leg and sniff the air , with his bright eye fix on Sara , he have hop that she would understand this , and would not begin by hat he as an enemy . when the mysterious thing which speak without say any word tell he that she would not , he go softly toward the crumb and begin to eat they . as he do it he glance every now and then at Sara , just as the sparrow have do , and his expression be so very apologetic that it touch her heart . 

 she sit and watch he without make any movement . one crumb be very much large than the other in fact , it could scarcely be call a crumb . it be evident that he want that piece very much , but it lie quite near the footstool and he be still rather timid . 

 " I believe he want it to carry to his family in the wall , " Sara think . " if I do not stir at all , perhaps he will come and get it . " 

 she scarcely allow herself to breathe , she be so deeply interested . the rat shuffle a little nearer and eat a few more crumb , then he stop and sniff delicately , give a side glance at the occupant of the footstool ; then he dart at the piece of bun with something very like the sudden boldness of the sparrow , and the instant he have possession of it flee back to the wall , slip down a crack in the skirting board , and be go . 

 " I know he want it for his child , " say Sara . " I do believe I could make friend with he . " 

 a week or so afterward , on one of the rare night when Ermengarde find it safe to steal up to the attic , when she tap on the door with the tip of her finger Sara do not come to she for two or three minute . there be , indeed , such a silence in the room at first that Ermengarde wonder if she could have fall asleep . then , to her surprise , she hear she utter a little , low laugh and speak coaxingly to someone . 

 " there ! " Ermengarde hear she say . " take it and go home , Melchisedec ! go home to your wife ! " 

 almost immediately Sara open the door , and when she do so she find Ermengarde stand with alarmed eye upon the threshold . 

 " who who be you talk to , Sara ? " she gasp out . 

 Sara draw she in cautiously , but she look as if something please and amuse she . 

 " you must promise not to be frightened not to scream the least bit , or I can not   tell you , " she answer . 

 Ermengarde feel almost inclined to scream on the spot , but manage to control herself . she look all round the attic and see no one . and yet Sara have certainly be speak to someone . she think of ghost . 

 " be it something that will frighten I ? " she ask timorously . 

 " some people be afraid of they , " say Sara . " I be at first but I be not now . " 

 " be it a ghost ? " quake Ermengarde . 

 " no , " say Sara , laugh . " it be my rat . " 

 Ermengarde make one bind , and land in the middle of the little dingy bed . she tuck her foot under her nightgown and the red shawl . she do not scream , but she gasp with fright . 

 " oh ! oh ! " she cry under her breath . " a rat ! a rat ! " 

 " I be afraid you would be frightened , " say Sara . " but you need not   be . I be make he tame . he actually know I and come out when I call he . be you too frightened to want to see he ? " 

 the truth be that , as the day have go on and , with the aid of scrap bring up from the kitchen , her curious friendship have develop , she have gradually forget that the timid creature she be become familiar with be a mere rat . 

 at first Ermengarde be too much alarmed to do anything but huddle in a heap upon the bed and tuck up her foot , but the sight of Sara 's compose little countenance and the story of Melchisedec 's first appearance begin at last to rouse her curiosity , and she lean forward over the edge of the bed and watch Sara go and kneel down by the hole in the skirting board . 

 " he he will not   run out quickly and jump on the bed , will he ? " she say . 

 " no , " answer Sara . " he be as polite as we be . he be just like a person . now watch ! " 

 she begin to make a low , whistle sound so low and coax that it could only have be hear in entire stillness . she do it several time , look entirely absorb in it . Ermengarde think she look as if she be work a spell . and at last , evidently in response to it , a gray - whisker , bright - eyed head peep out of the hole . Sara have some crumb in her hand . she drop they , and Melchisedec come quietly forth and eat they . a piece of large size than the rest he take and carry in the most businesslike manner back to his home . 

 " you see , " say Sara , " that be for his wife and child . he be very nice . he only eat the little bit . after he go back I can always hear his family squeak for joy . there be three kind of squeak . one kind be the child 's , and one be Mrs. Melchisedec 's , and one be Melchisedec 's own . " 

 Ermengarde begin to laugh . 

 " oh , Sara ! " she say . " you be queer but you be nice . " 

 " I know I be queer , " admit Sara , cheerfully ; " and I try to be nice . " she rub her forehead with her little brown paw , and a puzzle , tender look come into her face . " papa always laugh at I , " she say ; " but I like it . he think I be queer , but he like I to make up thing . I I can not   help make up thing . if I do not , I do not   believe I could live . " she pause and glance around the attic . " I be sure I could not   live here , " she add in a low voice . 

 Ermengarde be interested , as she always be . " when you talk about thing , " she say , " they seem as if they grow real . you talk about Melchisedec as if he be a person . " 

 " he be a person , " say Sara . " he get hungry and frighten , just as we do ; and he be married and have child . how do we know he do not   think thing , just as we do ? his eye look as if he be a person . that be why I give he a name . " 

 she sit down on the floor in her favorite attitude , hold her knee . 

 " besides , " she say , " he be a Bastille rat send to be my friend . I can always get a bit of bread the cook have throw away , and it be quite enough to support he . " 

 " be it the Bastille yet ? " ask Ermengarde , eagerly . " do you always pretend it be the Bastille ? " 

 " nearly always , " answer Sara . " sometimes I try to pretend it be another kind of place ; but the Bastille be generally easy particularly when it be cold . " 

 just at that moment Ermengarde almost jump off the bed , she be so startled by a sound she hear . it be like two distinct knock on the wall . 

 " what be that ? " she exclaim . 

 Sara get up from the floor and answer quite dramatically : 

 " it be the prisoner in the next cell . " 

 " Becky ! " cry Ermengarde , enrapture . 

 " yes , " say Sara . " listen ; the two knock mean , ' Prisoner , be you there ? ' " 

 she knock three time on the wall herself , as if in answer . 

 " that mean , ' yes , I be here , and all be well . ' " 

 four knock come from Becky 's side of the wall . 

 " that mean , " explain Sara , " ' then , fellow - sufferer , we will sleep in peace . good night . ' " 

 Ermengarde quite beam with delight . 

 " oh , Sara ! " she whisper joyfully . " it be like a story ! " 

 " it be a story , " say Sara . " everything be a story . you be a story I be a story . Miss Minchin be a story . " 

 and she sit down again and talk until Ermengarde forget that she be a sort of escape prisoner herself , and have to be remind by Sara that she could not remain in the Bastille all night , but must steal noiselessly downstairs again and creep back into her deserted bed . 




 10 

 the Indian Gentleman 

 but it be a perilous thing for Ermengarde and Lottie to make pilgrimage to the attic . they could never be quite sure when Sara would be there , and they could scarcely ever be certain that Miss Amelia would not make a tour of inspection through the bedroom after the pupil be suppose to be asleep . so their visit be rare one , and Sara live a strange and lonely life . it be a lonely life when she be downstairs than when she be in her attic . she have no one to talk to ; and when she be send out on errand and walk through the street , a forlorn little figure carry a basket or a parcel , try to hold her hat on when the wind be blow , and feel the water soak through her shoe when it be rain , she feel as if the crowd hurry past she make her loneliness great . when she have be the Princess Sara , drive through the street in her brougham , or walk , attend by Mariette , the sight of her bright , eager little face and picturesque coat and hat have often cause people to look after she . a happy , beautifully care for little girl naturally attract attention . Shabby , poorly dress child be not rare enough and pretty enough to make people turn around to look at they and smile . no one look at Sara in these day , and no one seem to see she as she hurry along the crowded pavement . she have begin to grow very fast , and , as she be dress only in such clothe as the plainer remnant of her wardrobe would supply , she know she look very queer , indeed . all her valuable garment have be dispose of , and such as have be leave for her use she be expect to wear so long as she could put they on at all . sometimes , when she pass a shop window with a mirror in it , she almost laugh outright on catch a glimpse of herself , and sometimes her face go red and she bite her lip and turn away . 

 in the evening , when she pass house whose window be light up , she use to look into the warm room and amuse herself by imagine thing about the people she see sit before the fire or about the table . it always interest she to catch glimpse of room before the shutter be closed . there be several family in the square in which Miss Minchin live , with which she have become quite familiar in a way of her own . the one she like good she call the Large Family . she call it the Large Family not because the member of it be big for , indeed , most of they be little but because there be so many of they . there be eight child in the Large Family , and a stout , rosy mother , and a stout , rosy father , and a stout , rosy grandmother , and any number of servant . the eight child be always either be take out to walk or to ride in perambulator by comfortable nurse , or they be go to drive with their mamma , or they be fly to the door in the evening to meet their papa and kiss he and dance around he and drag off his overcoat and look in the pocket for package , or they be crowd about the nursery window and look out and push each other and laugh in fact , they be always do something enjoyable and suit to the taste of a large family . Sara be quite fond of they , and have give they name out of book quite romantic name . she call they the Montmorencys when she do not call they the Large Family . the fat , fair baby with the lace cap be Ethelberta Beauchamp Montmorency ; the next baby be Violet Cholmondeley Montmorency ; the little boy who could just stagger and who have such round leg be Sydney Cecil Vivian Montmorency ; and then come Lilian Evangeline Maud Marion , Rosalind Gladys , Guy Clarence , Veronica Eustacia , and Claude Harold Hector . 

 one evening a very funny thing happen though , perhaps , in one sense it be not a funny thing at all . 

 several of the Montmorencys be evidently go to a child 's party , and just as Sara be about to pass the door they be cross the pavement to get into the carriage which be wait for they . Veronica Eustacia and Rosalind Gladys , in white - lace frock and lovely sash , have just get in , and Guy Clarence , aged five , be follow they . he be such a pretty fellow and have such rosy cheek and blue eye , and such a darling little round head cover with curl , that Sara forget her basket and shabby cloak altogether in fact , forget everything but that she want to look at he for a moment . so she pause and look . 

 it be Christmas time , and the Large Family have be hear many story about child who be poor and have no mamma and papa to fill their stocking and take they to the pantomime child who be , in fact , cold and thinly clad and hungry . in the story , kind people sometimes little boy and girl with tender heart invariably see the poor child and give they money or rich gift , or take they home to beautiful dinner . Guy Clarence have be affect to tear that very afternoon by the reading of such a story , and he have burn with a desire to find such a poor child and give she a certain sixpence he possess , and thus provide for she for life . an entire sixpence , he be sure , would mean affluence for evermore . as he cross the strip of red carpet lay across the pavement from the door to the carriage , he have this very sixpence in the pocket of his very short man - o - war trouser ; and just as Rosalind Gladys get into the vehicle and jump on the seat in order to feel the cushion spring under she , he see Sara stand on the wet pavement in her shabby frock and hat , with her old basket on her arm , look at he hungrily . 

 he think that her eye look hungry because she have perhaps have nothing to eat for a long time . he do not know that they look so because she be hungry for the warm , merry life his home hold and his rosy face speak of , and that she have a hungry wish to snatch he in her arm and kiss he . he only know that she have big eye and a thin face and thin leg and a common basket and poor clothe . so he put his hand in his pocket and find his sixpence and walk up to she benignly . 

 " here , poor little girl , " he say . " here be a sixpence . I will give it to you . " 

 Sara start , and all at once realize that she look exactly like poor child she have see , in her well day , wait on the pavement to watch she as she get out of her brougham . and she have give they penny many a time . her face go red and then it go pale , and for a second she feel as if she could not take the dear little sixpence . 

 " oh , no ! " she say . " oh , no , thank you ; I must not   take it , indeed ! " 

 her voice be so unlike an ordinary street child 's voice and her manner be so like the manner of a well - breed little person that Veronica Eustacia   whose real name be Janet   and Rosalind Gladys   who be really call Nora   lean forward to listen . 

 but Guy Clarence be not to be thwart in his benevolence . he thrust the sixpence into her hand . 

 " yes , you must take it , poor little girl ! " he insist stoutly . " you can buy thing to eat with it . it be a whole sixpence ! " 

 there be something so honest and kind in his face , and he look so likely to be heartbrokenly disappointed if she do not take it , that Sara know she must not refuse he . to be as proud as that would be a cruel thing . so she actually put her pride in her pocket , though it must be admit her cheek burn . 

 " thank you , " she say . " you be a kind , kind little darling thing . " and as he scramble joyfully into the carriage she go away , try to smile , though she catch her breath quickly and her eye be shin through a mist . she have know that she look odd and shabby , but until now she have not know that she might be take for a beggar . 

 as the Large Family 's carriage drive away , the child inside it be talk with interested excitement . 

 " oh , Donald , "   this be Guy Clarence 's name , Janet exclaim alarmedly , " why do you offer that little girl your sixpence ? I be sure she be not a beggar ! " 

 " she do not   speak like a beggar ! " cry Nora . " and her face do not   really look like a beggar 's face ! " 

 " besides , she do not   beg , " say Janet . " I be so afraid she might be angry with you . you know , it make people angry to be take for beggar when they be not beggar . " 

 " she be not   angry , " say Donald , a trifle dismayed , but still firm . " she laugh a little , and she say I be a kind , kind little darling thing . and I be ! " stoutly . " it be my whole sixpence . " 

 Janet and Nora exchange glance . 

 " a beggar girl would never have say that , " decide Janet . " she would have say , ' thank yer kindly , little gentleman thank yer , sir ; ' and perhaps she would have bob a curtsy . " 

 Sara know nothing about the fact , but from that time the Large Family be as profoundly interested in she as she be in it . face use to appear at the nursery window when she pass , and many discussion concern she be hold round the fire . 

 " she be a kind of servant at the seminary , " Janet say . " I do not   believe she belong to anybody . I believe she be an orphan . but she be not a beggar , however shabby she look . " 

 and afterward she be call by all of they , " the - little - girl - who - be - not - a - beggar , " which be , of course , rather a long name , and sound very funny sometimes when the young one say it in a hurry . 

 Sara manage to bore a hole in the sixpence and hang it on an old bit of narrow ribbon round her neck . her affection for the Large Family increase as , indeed , her affection for everything she could love increase . she grow fonder and fonder of Becky , and she use to look forward to the two morning a week when she go into the schoolroom to give the little one their french lesson . her small pupil love she , and strove with each other for the privilege of stand close to she and insinuate their small hand into her . it feed her hungry heart to feel they nestle up to she . she make such friend with the sparrow that when she stand upon the table , put her head and shoulder out of the attic window , and chirp , she hear almost immediately a flutter of wing and answer twitter , and a little flock of dingy town bird appear and alight on the slate to talk to she and make much of the crumb she scatter . with Melchisedec she have become so intimate that he actually bring Mrs. Melchisedec with he sometimes , and now and then one or two of his child . she use to talk to he , and , somehow , he look quite as if he understand . 

 there have grow in her mind rather a strange feeling about Emily , who always sit and look on at everything . it arise in one of her moment of great desolateness . she would have like to believe or pretend to believe that Emily understand and sympathize with she . she do not like to own to herself that her only companion could feel and hear nothing . she use to put she in a chair sometimes and sit opposite to she on the old red footstool , and stare and pretend about she until her own eye would grow large with something which be almost like fear particularly at night when everything be so still , when the only sound in the attic be the occasional sudden scurry and squeak of Melchisedec 's family in the wall . one of her " pretend " be that Emily be a kind of good witch who could protect she . sometimes , after she have star at she until she be work up to the high pitch of fancifulness , she would ask her question and find herself almost feel as if she would presently answer . but she never do . 

 " as to answer , though , " say Sara , try to console herself , " I do not   answer very often . I never answer when I can help it . when people be insult you , there be nothing so good for they as not to say a word just to look at they and think . Miss Minchin turn pale with rage when I do it , Miss Amelia look frightened , and so do the girl . when you will not fly into a passion people know you be strong than they be , because you be strong enough to hold in your rage , and they be not , and they say stupid thing they wish they have not   say afterward . there be nothing so strong as rage , except what make you hold it in that be strong . it be a good thing not to answer your enemy . I scarcely ever do . perhaps Emily be more like I than I be like myself . perhaps she would rather not answer her friend , even . she keep it all in her heart . " 

 but though she try to satisfy herself with these argument , she do not find it easy . when , after a long , hard day , in which she have be send here and there , sometimes on long errand through wind and cold and rain , she come in wet and hungry , and be send out again because nobody choose to remember that she be only a child , and that her slim leg might be tired and her small body might be chill ; when she have be give only harsh word and cold , slighting look for thank ; when the cook have be vulgar and insolent ; when Miss Minchin have be in her bad mood , and when she have see the girl sneer among themselves at her shabbiness then she be not always able to comfort her sore , proud , desolate heart with fancy when Emily merely sit upright in her old chair and star . 

 one of these night , when she come up to the attic cold and hungry , with a temp rag in her young breast , Emily 's stare seem so vacant , her sawdust leg and arm so inexpressive , that Sara lose all control over herself . there be nobody but emily no one in the world . and there she sit . 

 " I shall die presently , " she say at first . 

 Emily simply star . 

 " I can not   bear this , " say the poor child , tremble . " I know I shall die . I be cold ; I be wet ; I be starve to death . I have   walk a thousand mile today , and they have do nothing but scold I from morning until night . and because I could not find that last thing the cook send I for , they would not give I any supper . some man laugh at I because my old shoe make I slip down in the mud . I be cover with mud now . and they laugh . do you hear ? " 

 she look at the star glass eye and complacent face , and suddenly a sort of heartbroken rage seize she . she lift she little savage hand and knock Emily off the chair , burst into a passion of sob Sara who never cry . 

 " you be nothing but a DOLL ! " she cry . " nothing but a doll doll doll ! you care for nothing . you be stuff with sawdust . you never have a heart . nothing could ever make you feel . you be a DOLL ! " Emily lie on the floor , with her leg ignominiously double up over her head , and a new flat place on the end of her nose ; but she be calm , even dignified . Sara hide her face in her arm . the rat in the wall begin to fight and bite each other and squeak and scramble . Melchisedec be chastise some of his family . 

 Sara 's sob gradually quiet themselves . it be so unlike she to break down that she be surprised at herself . after a while she raise her face and look at Emily , who seem to be gaze at her round the side of one angle , and , somehow , by this time actually with a kind of glassy - eyed sympathy . Sara bent and pick she up . remorse overtake she . she even smile at herself a very little smile . 

 " you can not   help be a doll , " she say with a resign sigh , " any more than Lavinia and Jessie can help not have any sense . we be not all make alike . perhaps you do your sawdust well . " and she kiss she and shake her clothe straight , and put she back upon her chair . 

 she have wish very much that some one would take the empty house next door . she wish it because of the attic window which be so near her . it seem as if it would be so nice to see it prop open someday and a head and shoulder rise out of the square aperture . 

 " if it look a nice head , " she think , " I might begin by say , ' good morning , ' and all sort of thing might happen . but , of course , it be not really likely that anyone but under servant would sleep there . " 

 one morning , on turn the corner of the square after a visit to the grocer 's , the butcher 's , and the baker 's , she see , to her great delight , that during her rather prolonged absence , a van full of furniture have stop before the next house , the front door be throw open , and man in shirt sleeve be go in and out carry heavy package and piece of furniture . 

 " it be take ! " she say . " it really be take ! oh , I do hope a nice head will look out of the attic window ! " 

 she would almost have like to join the group of loiterer who have stop on the pavement to watch the thing carry in . she have an idea that if she could see some of the furniture she could guess something about the people it belong to . 

 " Miss Minchin 's table and chair be just like she , " she think ; " I remember think that the first minute I see she , even though I be so little . I tell papa afterward , and he laugh and say it be true . I be sure the Large Family have fat , comfortable armchair and sofa , and I can see that their red - flowery wallpaper be exactly like they . it be warm and cheerful and kind - looking and happy . " 

 she be send out for parsley to the greengrocer 's later in the day , and when she come up the area step her heart give quite a quick beat of recognition . several piece of furniture have be set out of the van upon the pavement . there be a beautiful table of elaborately work teakwood , and some chair , and a screen cover with rich oriental embroidery . the sight of they give she a weird , homesick feeling . she have see thing so like they in India . one of the thing Miss Minchin have take from she be a carved teakwood desk her father have send she . 

 " they be beautiful thing , " she say ; " they look as if they ought to belong to a nice person . all the thing look rather grand . I suppose it be a rich family . " 

 the van of furniture come and be unload and give place to other all the day . several time it so happen that Sara have an opportunity of see thing carry in . it become plain that she have be right in guess that the newcomer be people of large mean . all the furniture be rich and beautiful , and a great deal of it be oriental . wonderful rug and drapery and ornament be take from the van , many picture , and book enough for a library . among other thing there be a superb god Buddha in a splendid shrine . 

 " someone in the family must have be in India , " Sara think . " they have get use to indian thing and like they . I be glad . I shall feel as if they be friend , even if a head never look out of the attic window . " 

 when she be take in the evening 's milk for the cook   there be really no odd job she be not call upon to do , she see something occur which make the situation more interesting than ever . the handsome , rosy man who be the father of the Large Family walk across the square in the most matter - of - fact manner , and run up the step of the next - door house . he run up they as if he feel quite at home and expect to run up and down they many a time in the future . he stay inside quite a long time , and several time come out and give direction to the workman , as if he have a right to do so . it be quite certain that he be in some intimate way connect with the newcomer and be act for they . 

 " if the new people have child , " Sara speculate , " the Large Family child will be sure to come and play with they , and they might come up into the attic just for fun . " 

 at night , after her work be do , Becky come in to see her fellow prisoner and bring her news . 

 " it be a ' nindian gentleman that be comin ' to live next door , miss , " she say . " I do not   know whether he be a black gentleman or not , but he be a nindian one . he be very rich , an ' he be ill , an ' the gentleman of the Large Family be his lawyer . he be have a lot of trouble , an ' it be make he ill an ' low in his mind . he worship idol , miss . he be an ' eathen an ' bow down to wood an ' stone . I see a ' idol bein ' carry in for he to worship . somebody have oughter send he a trac ' . you can get a trac ' for a penny . " 

 Sara laugh a little . 

 " I do not   believe he worship that idol , " she say ; ' some people like to keep they to look at because they be interesting . my papa have a beautiful one , and he do not worship it . " 

 but Becky be rather inclined to prefer to believe that the new neighbor be " an ' eathen . " it sound so much more romantic than that he should merely be the ordinary kind of gentleman who go to church with a prayer book . she sit and talk long that night of what he would be like , of what his wife would be like if he have one , and of what his child would be like if they have child . Sara see that privately she could not help hop very much that they would all be black , and would wear turban , and , above all , that like their parent they would all be " ' eathen . " 

 " I never live next door to no ' eathen , miss , " she say ; " I should like to see what sort o ' way they would have . " 

 it be several week before her curiosity be satisfied , and then it be reveal that the new occupant have neither wife nor child . he be a solitary man with no family at all , and it be evident that he be shatter in health and unhappy in mind . 

 a carriage drive up one day and stop before the house . when the footman dismount from the box and open the door the gentleman who be the father of the Large Family get out first . after he there descend a nurse in uniform , then come down the step two man - servant . they come to assist their master , who , when he be help out of the carriage , prove to be a man with a haggard , distressed face , and a skeleton body wrap in fur . he be carry up the step , and the head of the Large Family go with he , look very anxious . shortly afterward a doctor 's carriage arrive , and the doctor go in plainly to take care of he . 

 " there be such a yellow gentleman next door , Sara , " Lottie whisper at the french class afterward . " do you think he be a chinee ? the geography say the chinee man be yellow . " 

 " no , he be not chinese , " Sara whisper back ; " he be very ill . go on with your exercise , Lottie . ' non , monsieur . Je n'ai pas le canif de mon oncle . ' " 

 that be the beginning of the story of the indian gentleman . 




 11 

 Ram Dass 

 there be fine sunset even in the square , sometimes . one could only see part of they , however , between the chimney and over the roof . from the kitchen window one could not see they at all , and could only guess that they be go on because the brick look warm and the air rosy or yellow for a while , or perhaps one see a blaze glow strike a particular pane of glass somewhere . there be , however , one place from which one could see all the splendor of they : the pile of red or gold cloud in the west ; or the purple one edge with dazzle brightness ; or the little fleecy , float one , ting with rose - color and look like flight of pink dove scurry across the blue in a great hurry if there be a wind . the place where one could see all this , and seem at the same time to breathe a purer air , be , of course , the attic window . when the square suddenly seem to begin to glow in an enchant way and look wonderful in spite of its sooty tree and railing , Sara know something be go on in the sky ; and when it be at all possible to leave the kitchen without be miss or call back , she invariably steal away and creep up the flight of stair , and , climb on the old table , get her head and body as far out of the window as possible . when she have accomplish this , she always draw a long breath and look all round she . it use to seem as if she have all the sky and the world to herself . no one else ever look out of the other attic . generally the skylight be close ; but even if they be prop open to admit air , no one seem to come near they . and there Sara would stand , sometimes turn she face upward to the blue which seem so friendly and near just like a lovely vault ceiling sometimes watch the west and all the wonderful thing that happen there : the cloud melt or drift or wait softly to be change pink or crimson or snow - white or purple or pale dove - gray . sometimes they make island or great mountain enclose lake of deep turquoise - blue , or liquid amber , or chrysoprase - green ; sometimes dark headland jut into strange , lost sea ; sometimes slender strip of wonderful land join other wonderful land together . there be place where it seem that one could run or climb or stand and wait to see what next be come until , perhaps , as it all melt , one could float away . at least it seem so to Sara , and nothing have ever be quite so beautiful to she as the thing she see as she stand on the table her body half out of the skylight the sparrow twitter with sunset softness on the slate . the sparrow always seem to she to twitter with a sort of subdue softness just when these marvel be go on . 

 there be such a sunset as this a few day after the indian gentleman be bring to his new home ; and , as it fortunately happen that the afternoon 's work be do in the kitchen and nobody have order she to go anywhere or perform any task , Sara find it easy than usual to slip away and go upstairs . 

 she mount her table and stand look out . it be a wonderful moment . there be flood of molten gold cover the west , as if a glorious tide be sweep over the world . a deep , rich yellow light fill the air ; the bird fly across the top of the house show quite black against it . 

 " it be a splendid one , " say Sara , softly , to herself . " it make I feel almost afraid as if something strange be just go to happen . the splendid one always make I feel like that . " 

 she suddenly turn her head because she hear a sound a few yard away from she . it be an odd sound like a queer little squeaky chattering . it come from the window of the next attic . someone have come to look at the sunset as she have . there be a head and a part of a body emerge from the skylight , but it be not the head or body of a little girl or a housemaid ; it be the picturesque white - swathe form and dark - face , gleaming - eye , white - turbane head of a native indian man - servant " a Lascar , " Sara say to herself quickly and the sound she have hear come from a small monkey he hold in his arm as if he be fond of it , and which be snuggle and chatter against his breast . 

 as Sara look toward he he look toward she . the first thing she think be that his dark face look sorrowful and homesick . she feel absolutely sure he have come up to look at the sun , because he have see it so seldom in England that he long for a sight of it . she look at he interestedly for a second , and then smile across the slate . she have learn to know how comfort a smile , even from a stranger , may be . 

 Hers be evidently a pleasure to he . his whole expression alter , and he show such gleam white tooth as he smile back that it be as if a light have be illuminate in his dusky face . the friendly look in Sara 's eye be always very effective when people feel tired or dull . 

 it be perhaps in make his salute to she that he loosen his hold on the monkey . he be an impish monkey and always ready for adventure , and it be probable that the sight of a little girl excite he . he suddenly break loose , jump on to the slate , run across they chatter , and actually leap on to Sara 's shoulder , and from there down into her attic room . it make her laugh and delight she ; but she know he must be restore to his master if the Lascar be his master and she wonder how this be to be do . would he let she catch he , or would he be naughty and refuse to be catch , and perhaps get away and run off over the roof and be lose ? that would not do at all . perhaps he belong to the indian gentleman , and the poor man be fond of he . 

 she turn to the Lascar , feel glad that she remember still some of the Hindustani she have learn when she live with her father . she could make the man understand . she speak to he in the language he know . 

 " will he let I catch he ? " she ask . 

 she think she have never see more surprise and delight than the dark face express when she speak in the familiar tongue . the truth be that the poor fellow feel as if his god have intervene , and the kind little voice come from heaven itself . at once Sara see that he have be accustom to european child . he pour forth a flood of respectful thank . he be the servant of Missee Sahib . the monkey be a good monkey and would not bite ; but , unfortunately , he be difficult to catch . he would flee from one spot to another , like the lightning . he be disobedient , though not evil . Ram Dass know he as if he be his child , and Ram Dass he would sometimes obey , but not always . if Missee Sahib would permit Ram Dass , he himself could cross the roof to her room , enter the window , and regain the unworthy little animal . but he be evidently afraid Sara might think he be take a great liberty and perhaps would not let he come . 

 but Sara give he leave at once . 

 " can you get across ? " she inquire . 

 " in a moment , " he answer she . 

 " then come , " she say ; " he be fly from side to side of the room as if he be frightened . " 

 Ram Dass slip through his attic window and cross to hers as steadily and lightly as if he have walk on roof all his life . he slip through the skylight and drop upon his foot without a sound . then he turn to Sara and salaam again . the monkey see he and utter a little scream . Ram Dass hastily take the precaution of shut the skylight , and then go in chase of he . it be not a very long chase . the monkey prolong it a few minute evidently for the mere fun of it , but presently he spring chatter on to Ram Dass 's shoulder and sit there chatter and cling to his neck with a weird little skinny arm . 

 Ram Dass thank Sara profoundly . she have see that his quick native eye have take in at a glance all the bare shabbiness of the room , but he speak to she as if he be speak to the little daughter of a rajah , and pretend that he observe nothing . he do not presume to remain more than a few moment after he have catch the monkey , and those moment be give to far deep and grateful obeisance to she in return for her indulgence . this little evil one , he say , stroke the monkey , be , in truth , not so evil as he seem , and his master , who be ill , be sometimes amuse by he . he would have be make sad if his favorite have run away and be lose . then he salaam once more and get through the skylight and across the slate again with as much agility as the monkey himself have display . 

 when he have go Sara stand in the middle of her attic and think of many thing his face and his manner have bring back to she . the sight of his native costume and the profound reverence of his manner stir all her past memory . it seem a strange thing to remember that she the drudge whom the cook have say insult thing to an hour ago have only a few year ago be surround by people who all treat she as Ram Dass have treat she ; who salaam when she go by , whose forehead almost touch the ground when she speak to they , who be her servant and her slave . it be like a sort of dream . it be all over , and it could never come back . it certainly seem that there be no way in which any change could take place . she know what Miss Minchin intend that her future should be . so long as she be too young to be use as a regular teacher , she would be use as an errand girl and servant and yet expect to remember what she have learn and in some mysterious way to learn more . the great number of her evening she be suppose to spend at study , and at various indefinite interval she be examine and know she would have be severely admonish if she have not advance as be expect of she . the truth , indeed , be that Miss Minchin know that she be too anxious to learn to require teacher . give her book , and she would devour they and end by know they by heart . she might be trust to be equal to teach a good deal in the course of a few year . this be what would happen : when she be old she would be expect to drudge in the schoolroom as she drudge now in various part of the house ; they would be oblige to give she more respectable clothe , but they would be sure to be plain and ugly and to make she look somehow like a servant . that be all there seem to be to look forward to , and Sara stand quite still for several minute and think it over . 

 then a thought come back to she which make the color rise in her cheek and a spark light itself in her eye . she straighten her thin little body and lift her head . 

 " whatever come , " she say , " can not alter one thing . if I be a princess in rag and tatter , I can be a princess inside . it would be easy to be a princess if I be dress in cloth of gold , but it be a great deal more of a triumph to be one all the time when no one know it . there be Marie Antoinette when she be in prison and her throne be go and she have only a black gown on , and her hair be white , and they insult she and call her Widow Capet . she be a great deal more like a queen then than when she be so gay and everything be so grand . I like she good then . those howl mob of people do not frighten she . she be strong than they be , even when they cut her head off . " 

 this be not a new thought , but quite an old one , by this time . it have console she through many a bitter day , and she have go about the house with an expression in her face which Miss Minchin could not understand and which be a source of great annoyance to she , as it seem as if the child be mentally live a life which hold she above the rest of the world . it be as if she scarcely hear the rude and acid thing say to she ; or , if she hear they , do not care for they at all . sometimes , when she be in the midst of some harsh , domineering speech , Miss Minchin would find the still , unchildish eye fix upon she with something like a proud smile in they . at such time she do not know that Sara be say to herself : 

 " you do not   know that you be say these thing to a princess , and that if I choose I could wave my hand and order you to execution . I only spare you because I be a princess , and you be a poor , stupid , unkind , vulgar old thing , and do not   know any well . " 

 this use to interest and amuse she more than anything else ; and queer and fanciful as it be , she find comfort in it and it be a good thing for she . while the thought hold possession of she , she could not be make rude and malicious by the rudeness and malice of those about she . 

 " a princess must be polite , " she say to herself . 

 and so when the servant , take their tone from their mistress , be insolent and order she about , she would hold her head erect and reply to they with a quaint civility which often make they stare at she . 

 " she be get more air and grace than if she come from Buckingham Palace , that young one , " say the cook , chuckle a little sometimes . " I lose my temper with she often enough , but I will say she never forget her manner . ' if you please , cook ' ; ' will you be so kind , cook ? ' ' I beg your pardon , cook ' ; ' may I trouble you , cook ? ' she drop them about the kitchen as if they be nothing . " 

 the morning after the interview with Ram Dass and his monkey , Sara be in the schoolroom with her small pupil . have finish give they their lesson , she be put the french exercise - book together and think , as she do it , of the various thing royal personage in disguise be call upon to do : Alfred the Great , for instance , burn the cake and get his ear box by the wife of the neat - herd . how frightened she must have be when she find out what she have do . if Miss Minchin should find out that she Sara , whose toe be almost stick out of her boot be a princess a real one ! the look in her eye be exactly the look which Miss Minchin most dislike . she would not have it ; she be quite near she and be so enraged that she actually fly at she and box her ear exactly as the neat - herd 's wife have box King Alfred 's . it make Sara start . she waken from her dream at the shock , and , catch her breath , stand still a second . then , not know she be go to do it , she break into a little laugh . 

 " what be you laugh at , you bold , impudent child ? " Miss Minchin exclaim . 

 it take Sara a few second to control herself sufficiently to remember that she be a princess . her cheek be red and smart from the blow she have receive . 

 " I be think , " she answer . 

 " beg my pardon immediately , " say Miss Minchin . 

 Sara hesitate a second before she reply . 

 " I will beg your pardon for laugh , if it be rude , " she say then ; " but I will not   beg your pardon for think . " 

 " what be you think ? " demand Miss Minchin . " how dare you think ? what be you think ? " 

 Jessie titter , and she and Lavinia nudge each other in unison . all the girl look up from their book to listen . really , it always interest they a little when Miss Minchin attack sara . Sara always say something queer , and never seem the least bit frightened . she be not in the least frighten now , though her boxed ear be scarlet and her eye be as bright as star . 

 " I be think , " she answer grandly and politely , " that you do not know what you be do . " 

 " that I do not know what I be do ? " Miss Minchin fairly gasp . 

 " yes , " say Sara , " and I be think what would happen if I be a princess and you box my ear what I should do to you . and I be think that if I be one , you would never dare to do it , whatever I say or do . and I be think how surprised and frighten you would be if you suddenly find out " 

 she have the imagine future so clearly before her eye that she speak in a manner which have an effect even upon Miss Minchin . it almost seem for the moment to her narrow , unimaginative mind that there must be some real power hide behind this candid daring . 

 " what ? " she exclaim . " find out what ? " 

 " that I really be a princess , " say Sara , " and could do anything anything I like . " 

 every pair of eye in the room widen to its full limit . Lavinia lean forward on her seat to look . 

 " go to your room , " cry Miss Minchin , breathlessly , " this instant ! leave the schoolroom ! attend to your lesson , young lady ! " 

 Sara make a little bow . 

 " excuse I for laugh if it be impolite , " she say , and walk out of the room , leave Miss Minchin struggle with her rage , and the girl whisper over their book . 

 " do you see she ? do you see how queer she look ? " Jessie break out . " I should not   be at all surprised if she do turn out to be something . suppose she should ! " 




 12 

 the other side of the Wall 

 when one live in a row of house , it be interesting to think of the thing which be be do and say on the other side of the wall of the very room one be live in . Sara be fond of amuse herself by try to imagine the thing hide by the wall which divide the Select Seminary from the indian gentleman 's house . she know that the schoolroom be next to the indian gentleman 's study , and she hop that the wall be thick so that the noise make sometimes after lesson hour would not disturb he . 

 " I be grow quite fond of he , " she say to Ermengarde ; " I should not like he to be disturb . I have adopt he for a friend . you can do that with people you never speak to at all . you can just watch they , and think about they and be sorry for they , until they seem almost like relation . I be quite anxious sometimes when I see the doctor call twice a day . " 

 " I have very few relation , " say Ermengarde , reflectively , " and I be very glad of it . I do not   like those I have . my two aunt be always say , ' dear I , Ermengarde ! you be very fat . you should not   eat sweet , ' and my uncle be always ask I thing like , ' when do Edward the Third ascend the throne ? ' and , ' who die of a surfeit of lamprey ? ' " 

 Sara laugh . 

 " People you never speak to can not   ask you question like that , " she say ; " and I be sure the indian gentleman would not   even if he be quite intimate with you . I be fond of he . " 

 she have become fond of the Large Family because they look happy ; but she have become fond of the indian gentleman because he look unhappy . he have evidently not fully recover from some very severe illness . in the kitchen where , of course , the servant , through some mysterious mean , know everything there be much discussion of his case . he be not an indian gentleman really , but an Englishman who have live in India . he have meet with great misfortune which have for a time so imperille his whole fortune that he have think himself ruin and disgrace forever . the shock have be so great that he have almost die of brain fever ; and ever since he have be shatter in health , though his fortune have change and all his possession have be restore to he . his trouble and peril have be connect with mine . 

 " and mine with diamond in them ! " say the cook . " no savin 's of mine never go into no mine particular diamond one " with a side glance at Sara . " we all know something of they . " 

 " he feel as my papa feel , " Sara think . " he be ill as my papa be ; but he do not die . " 

 so her heart be more drawn to he than before . when she be send out at night she use sometimes to feel quite glad , because there be always a chance that the curtain of the house next door might not yet be close and she could look into the warm room and see her adopt friend . when no one be about she use sometimes to stop , and , hold to the iron railing , wish he good night as if he could hear she . 

 " perhaps you can feel if you can not   hear , " be her fancy . " perhaps kind thought reach people somehow , even through window and door and wall . perhaps you feel a little warm and comfort , and do not   know why , when I be stand here in the cold and hop you will get well and happy again . I be so sorry for you , " she would whisper in an intense little voice . " I wish you have a ' Little Missus ' who could pet you as I use to pet papa when he have a headache . I should like to be your ' Little Missus ' myself , poor dear ! good night good night . God bless you ! " 

 she would go away , feel quite comfort and a little warm herself . her sympathy be so strong that it seem as if it must reach he somehow as he sit alone in his armchair by the fire , nearly always in a great dressing gown , and nearly always with his forehead rest in his hand as he gaze hopelessly into the fire . he look to Sara like a man who have a trouble on his mind still , not merely like one whose trouble lay all in the past . 

 " he always seem as if he be think of something that hurt he now , " she say to herself , " but he have get his money back and he will get over his brain fever in time , so he ought not to look like that . I wonder if there be something else . " 

 if there be something else something even servant do not hear of she could not help believe that the father of the Large Family know it the gentleman she call Mr. Montmorency . Mr. Montmorency go to see he often , and Mrs. Montmorency and all the little Montmorencys go , too , though less often . he seem particularly fond of the two eld little girl the Janet and Nora who have be so alarmed when their small brother Donald have give Sara his sixpence . he have , in fact , a very tender place in his heart for all child , and particularly for little girl . Janet and Nora be as fond of he as he be of they , and look forward with the great pleasure to the afternoon when they be allow to cross the square and make their well - behave little visit to he . they be extremely decorous little visit because he be an invalid . 

 " he be a poor thing , " say Janet , " and he say we cheer he up . we try to cheer he up very quietly . " 

 Janet be the head of the family , and keep the rest of it in order . it be she who decide when it be discreet to ask the indian gentleman to tell story about India , and it be she who see when he be tired and it be the time to steal quietly away and tell Ram Dass to go to he . they be very fond of Ram Dass . he could have tell any number of story if he have be able to speak anything but Hindustani . the indian gentleman 's real name be Mr. Carrisford , and Janet tell Mr. Carrisford about the encounter with the little - girl - who - be - not - a - beggar . he be very much interested , and all the more so when he hear from Ram Dass of the adventure of the monkey on the roof . Ram Dass make for he a very clear picture of the attic and its desolateness of the bare floor and broken plaster , the rusty , empty grate , and the hard , narrow bed . 

 " Carmichael , " he say to the father of the Large Family , after he have hear this description , " I wonder how many of the attic in this square be like that one , and how many wretched little servant girl sleep on such bed , while I toss on my down pillow , load and harass by wealth that be , most of it not mine . " 

 " my dear fellow , " Mr. Carmichael answer cheerily , " the soon you cease torment yourself the well it will be for you . if you possess all the wealth of all the Indies , you could not set right all the discomfort in the world , and if you begin to refurnish all the attic in this square , there would still remain all the attic in all the other square and street to put in order . and there you be ! " 

 Mr. Carrisford sit and bite his nail as he look into the glow bed of coal in the grate . 

 " do you suppose , " he say slowly , after a pause " do you think it be possible that the other child the child I never cease think of , I believe could be could POSSIBLY be reduce to any such condition as the poor little soul next door ? " 

 Mr. Carmichael look at he uneasily . he know that the bad thing the man could do for himself , for his reason and his health , be to begin to think in the particular way of this particular subject . 

 " if the child at Madame Pascal 's school in Paris be the one you be in search of , " he answer soothingly , ' she would seem to be in the hand of people who can afford to take care of she . they adopt she because she have be the favorite companion of their little daughter who die . they have no other child , and Madame Pascal say that they be extremely well - to - do Russians . " 

 " and the wretched woman actually do not know where they have take she ! " exclaim Mr. Carrisford . 

 Mr. Carmichael shrug his shoulder . 

 " she be a shrewd , worldly Frenchwoman , and be evidently only too glad to get the child so comfortably off her hand when the father 's death leave she totally unprovided for . woman of her type do not trouble themselves about the future of child who might prove burden . the adopt parent apparently disappear and leave no trace . " 

 " but you say ' if the child be the one I be in search of . you say ' if . ' we be not sure . there be a difference in the name . " 

 " Madame Pascal pronounce it as if it be Carew instead of Crewe but that might be merely a matter of pronunciation . the circumstance be curiously similar . an english officer in India have place his motherless little girl at the school . he have die suddenly after lose his fortune . " Mr. Carmichael pause a moment , as if a new thought have occur to he . " be you sure the child be leave at a school in Paris ? be you sure it be Paris ? " 

 " my dear fellow , " break forth Carrisford , with restless bitterness , " I be sure of nothing . I never see either the child or her mother . Ralph Crewe and I love each other as boy , but we have not meet since our school day , until we meet in India . I be absorb in the magnificent promise of the mine . he become absorb , too . the whole thing be so huge and glitter that we half lose our head . when we meet we scarcely speak of anything else . I only know that the child have be send to school somewhere . I do not even remember , now , how I know it . " 

 he be begin to be excite . he always become excited when his still weaken brain be stir by memory of the catastrophe of the past . 

 Mr. Carmichael watch he anxiously . it be necessary to ask some question , but they must be put quietly and with caution . 

 " but you have reason to think the school be in Paris ? " 

 " yes , " be the answer , " because her mother be a Frenchwoman , and I have hear that she wish her child to be educate in Paris . it seem only likely that she would be there . " 

 " yes , " Mr. Carmichael say , " it seem more than probable . " 

 the indian gentleman lean forward and strike the table with a long , waste hand . 

 " Carmichael , " he say , " I must find she . if she be alive , she be somewhere . if she be friendless and penniless , it be through my fault . how be a man to get back his nerve with a thing like that on his mind ? this sudden change of luck at the mine have make reality of all our most fantastic dream , and poor Crewe 's child may be beg in the street ! " 

 " no , no , " say Carmichael . " try to be calm . console yourself with the fact that when she be find you have a fortune to hand over to she . " 

 " why be I not man enough to stand my ground when thing look black ? " Carrisford groan in petulant misery . " I believe I should have stand my ground if I have not be responsible for other people 's money as well as my own . Poor Crewe have put into the scheme every penny that he own . he trust I he love I . and he die think I have ruin he I Tom Carrisford , who play cricket at Eton with he . what a villain he must have think I ! " 

 " do not   reproach yourself so bitterly . " 

 " I do not   reproach myself because the speculation threaten to fail I reproach myself for lose my courage . I run away like a swindler and a thief , because I could not face my good friend and tell he I have ruin he and his child . " 

 the good - hearted father of the Large Family put his hand on his shoulder comfortingly . 

 " you run away because your brain have give way under the strain of mental torture , " he say . " you be half delirious already . if you have not be you would have stay and fight it out . you be in a hospital , strap down in bed , rave with brain fever , two day after you leave the place . remember that . " 

 Carrisford drop his forehead in his hand . 

 " good God ! yes , " he say . " I be drive mad with dread and horror . I have not sleep for week . the night I stagger out of my house all the air seem full of hideous thing mock and mouth at I . " 

 " that be explanation enough in itself , " say Mr. Carmichael . " how could a man on the verge of brain fever judge sanely ! " 

 Carrisford shake his droop head . 

 " and when I return to consciousness poor Crewe be dead and bury . and I seem to remember nothing . I do not remember the child for month and month . even when I begin to recall her existence everything seem in a sort of haze . " 

 he stop a moment and rub his forehead . " it sometimes seem so now when I try to remember . surely I must sometime have hear Crewe speak of the school she be send to . do not   you think so ? " 

 " he might not have speak of it definitely . you never seem even to have hear her real name . " 

 " he use to call she by an odd pet name he have invent . he call she his ' Little Missus . ' but the wretched mine drive everything else out of our head . we talk of nothing else . if he speak of the school , I forgot I forget . and now I shall never remember . " 

 " come , come , " say Carmichael . " we shall find she yet . we will continue to search for Madame Pascal 's good - natured Russians . she seem to have a vague idea that they live in Moscow . we will take that as a clue . I will go to Moscow . " 

 " if I be able to travel , I would go with you , " say Carrisford ; " but I can only sit here wrap in fur and stare at the fire . and when I look into it I seem to see Crewe 's gay young face gaze back at I . he look as if he be ask I a question . sometimes I dream of he at night , and he always stand before I and ask the same question in word . can you guess what he say , Carmichael ? " 

 Mr. Carmichael answer he in a rather low voice . 

 " not exactly , " he say . 

 " he always say , ' Tom , old man Tom where be the Little Missus ? ' " he catch at Carmichael 's hand and clung to it . " I must be able to answer he I must ! " he say . " help I to find she . help I . " 


 on the other side of the wall Sara be sit in her garret talk to Melchisedec , who have come out for his evening meal . 

 " it have be hard to be a princess today , Melchisedec , " she say . " it have be hard than usual . it get hard as the weather grow cold and the street get more sloppy . when Lavinia laugh at my muddy skirt as I pass she in the hall , I think of something to say all in a flash and I only just stop myself in time . you can not   sneer back at people like that if you be a princess . but you have to bite your tongue to hold yourself in . I bite mine . it be a cold afternoon , Melchisedec . and it be a cold night . " 

 quite suddenly she put her black head down in her arm , as she often do when she be alone . 

 " oh , papa , " she whisper , " what a long time it seem since I be your ' Little Missus ' ! " 

 this be what happen that day on both side of the wall . 




 13 

 one of the populace 

 the winter be a wretched one . there be day on which Sara tramp through snow when she go on her errand ; there be bad day when the snow melt and combine itself with mud to form slush ; there be other when the fog be so thick that the lamp in the street be light all day and London look as it have look the afternoon , several year ago , when the cab have drive through the thoroughfare with Sara tuck up on its seat , lean against her father 's shoulder . on such day the window of the house of the Large Family always look delightfully cozy and alluring , and the study in which the indian gentleman sit glow with warmth and rich color . but the attic be dismal beyond word . there be no long sunset or sunrise to look at , and scarcely ever any star , it seem to Sara . the cloud hang low over the skylight and be either gray or mud - color , or drop heavy rain . at four o'clock in the afternoon , even when there be no special fog , the daylight be at an end . if it be necessary to go to her attic for anything , Sara be oblige to light a candle . the woman in the kitchen be depressed , and that make they more ill - temper than ever . Becky be drive like a little slave . 

 " ' Twarn't   for you , miss , " she say hoarsely to Sara one night when she have creep into the attic " ' twarn't   for you , an ' the Bastille , an ' bein ' the prisoner in the next cell , I should die . that there do seem real now , do not   it ? the missus be more like the head jailer every day she live . I can jest see they big key you say she carry . the cook she be like one of the under - jailer . tell I some more , please , miss tell I about the subt'ranean passage we have   dig under the wall . " 

 " I will tell you something warmer , " shiver Sara . " get your coverlet and wrap it round you , and I will get mine , and we will huddle close together on the bed , and I will tell you about the tropical forest where the indian gentleman 's monkey use to live . when I see he sit on the table near the window and look out into the street with that mournful expression , I always feel sure he be think about the tropical forest where he use to swing by his tail from coconut tree . I wonder who catch he , and if he leave a family behind who have depend on he for coconut . " 

 " that be warmer , miss , " say Becky , gratefully ; " but , someway , even the Bastille be sort of heatin ' when you get to tellin ' about it . " 

 " that be because it make you think of something else , " say Sara , wrap the coverlet round she until only her small dark face be to be see look out of it . " I have   notice this . what you have to do with your mind , when your body be miserable , be to make it think of something else . " 

 " can you do it , miss ? " falter Becky , regard she with admire eye . 

 Sara knit her brow a moment . 

 " sometimes I can and sometimes I can not , " she say stoutly . " but when I can I be all right . and what I believe be that we always could if we practice enough . I have   be practice a good deal lately , and it be begin to be easy than it use to be . when thing be horrible just horrible I think as hard as ever I can of be a princess . I say to myself , ' I be a princess , and I be a fairy one , and because I be a fairy nothing can hurt I or make I uncomfortable . ' you do not   know how it make you forget " with a laugh . 

 she have many opportunity of make her mind think of something else , and many opportunity of prove to herself whether or not she be a princess . but one of the strong test she be ever put to come on a certain dreadful day which , she often think afterward , would never quite fade out of her memory even in the year to come . 

 for several day it have rain continuously ; the street be chilly and sloppy and full of dreary , cold mist ; there be mud everywhere sticky London mud and over everything the pall of drizzle and fog . of course there be several long and tiresome errand to be do there always be on day like this and Sara be send out again and again , until her shabby clothe be damp through . the absurd old feather on her forlorn hat be more draggled and absurd than ever , and her downtrodden shoe be so wet that they could not hold any more water . add to this , she have be deprive of her dinner , because Miss Minchin have choose to punish she . she be so cold and hungry and tired that her face begin to have a pinched look , and now and then some kind - hearted person pass she in the street glance at she with sudden sympathy . but she do not know that . she hurry on , try to make her mind think of something else . it be really very necessary . her way of do it be to " pretend " and ' suppose " with all the strength that be leave in she . but really this time it be hard than she have ever find it , and once or twice she think it almost make she more cold and hungry instead of less so . but she persevere obstinately , and as the muddy water squelch through her broken shoe and the wind seem try to drag her thin jacket from she , she talk to herself as she walk , though she do not speak aloud or even move her lip . 

 " suppose I have dry clothe on , " she think . " suppose I have good shoe and a long , thick coat and merino stocking and a whole umbrella . and suppose suppose just when I be near a baker 's where they sell hot bun , I should find sixpence which belong to nobody . SUPPOSE if I do , I should go into the shop and buy six of the hot bun and eat they all without stop . " 

 some very odd thing happen in this world sometimes . 

 it certainly be an odd thing that happen to Sara . she have to cross the street just when she be say this to herself . the mud be dreadful she almost have to wade . she pick her way as carefully as she could , but she could not save herself much ; only , in pick her way , she have to look down at her foot and the mud , and in look down just as she reach the pavement she see something shin in the gutter . it be actually a piece of silver a tiny piece tread upon by many foot , but still with spirit enough leave to shine a little . not quite a sixpence , but the next thing to it a fourpenny piece . 

 in one second it be in her cold little red - and - blue hand . 

 " oh , " she gasp , " it be true ! it be true ! " 

 and then , if you will believe I , she look straight at the shop directly face she . and it be a baker 's shop , and a cheerful , stout , motherly woman with rosy cheek be put into the window a tray of delicious newly bake hot bun , fresh from the oven large , plump , shiny bun , with currant in they . 

 it almost make Sara feel faint for a few second the shock , and the sight of the bun , and the delightful odor of warm bread float up through the baker 's cellar window . 

 she know she need not hesitate to use the little piece of money . it have evidently be lie in the mud for some time , and its owner be completely lose in the stream of pass people who crowd and jostle each other all day long . 

 " but I will go and ask the baker woman if she have lose anything , " she say to herself , rather faintly . so she cross the pavement and put her wet foot on the step . as she do so she see something that make her stop . 

 it be a little figure more forlorn even than herself a little figure which be not much more than a bundle of rag , from which small , bare , red muddy foot peep out , only because the rag with which their owner be try to cover they be not long enough . above the rag appear a shock head of tangled hair , and a dirty face with big , hollow , hungry eye . 

 Sara know they be hungry eye the moment she see they , and she feel a sudden sympathy . 

 " this , " she say to herself , with a little sigh , " be one of the populace and she be hungry than I be . " 

 the child this " one of the populace " star up at Sara , and shuffle herself aside a little , so as to give her room to pass . she be use to be make to give room to everybody . she know that if a policeman chance to see she he would tell she to " move on . " 

 Sara clutch her little fourpenny piece and hesitate for a few second . then she speak to she . 

 " be you hungry ? " she ask . 

 the child shuffle herself and her rag a little more . 

 " be not   I jist ? " she say in a hoarse voice . " Jist be not   I ? " 

 " have not   you have any dinner ? " say Sara . 

 " no dinner , " more hoarsely still and with more shuffling . " nor yet no bre'fast nor yet no supper . no nothing . 

 " since when ? " ask Sara . 

 " dunno . never get nothing today nowhere . I have   ax an ' ax . " 

 just to look at she make Sara more hungry and faint . but those queer little thought be at work in her brain , and she be talk to herself , though she be sick at heart . 

 " if I be a princess , " she be say , " if I be a princess when they be poor and drive from their throne they always share with the populace if they meet one poor and hungry than themselves . they always share . bun be a penny each . if it have be sixpence I could have eat six . it will not   be enough for either of we . but it will be well than nothing . " 

 " wait a minute , " she say to the beggar child . 

 she go into the shop . it be warm and smell deliciously . the woman be just go to put some more hot bun into the window . 

 " if you please , " say Sara , " have you lose fourpence a silver fourpence ? " and she hold the forlorn little piece of money out to she . 

 the woman look at it and then at she at her intense little face and draggle , once fine clothe . 

 " bless we , no , " she answer . " do you find it ? " 

 " yes , " say Sara . " in the gutter . " 

 " keep it , then , " say the woman . " it may have be there for a week , and goodness know who lose it . you could never find out . " 

 " I know that , " say Sara , " but I think I would ask you . " 

 " not many would , " say the woman , look puzzled and interested and good - natured all at once . 

 " do you want to buy something ? " she add , as she see sara glance at the bun . 

 " four bun , if you please , " say Sara . " those at a penny each . " 

 the woman go to the window and put some in a paper bag . 

 Sara notice that she put in six . 

 " I say four , if you please , " she explain . " I have only fourpence . " 

 " I will throw in two for makeweight , " say the woman with her good - natured look . " I dare say you can eat they sometime . be not   you hungry ? " 

 a mist rise before Sara 's eye . 

 " yes , " she answer . " I be very hungry , and I be much oblige to you for your kindness ; and " she be go to add " there be a child outside who be hungry than I be . " but just at that moment two or three customer come in at once , and each one seem in a hurry , so she could only thank the woman again and go out . 

 the beggar girl be still huddle up in the corner of the step . she look frightful in her wet and dirty rag . she be star straight before she with a stupid look of suffering , and Sara see she suddenly draw the back of her roughen black hand across her eye to rub away the tear which seem to have surprise she by force their way from under her lid . she be mutter to herself . 

 Sara open the paper bag and take out one of the hot bun , which have already warm her own cold hand a little . 

 " see , " she say , put the bun in the ragged lap , " this be nice and hot . eat it , and you will not feel so hungry . " 

 the child start and star up at she , as if such sudden , amazing good luck almost frighten she ; then she snatch up the bun and begin to cram it into her mouth with great wolfish bite . 

 " oh , my ! oh , my ! " Sara hear she say hoarsely , in wild delight . " oh my ! " 

 Sara take out three more bun and put they down . 

 the sound in the hoarse , ravenous voice be awful . 

 " she be hungry than I be , " she say to herself . " she be starve . " but her hand tremble when she put down the fourth bun . " I be not starve , " she say and she put down the fifth . 

 the little ravening London savage be still snatch and devouring when she turn away . she be too ravenous to give any thank , even if she have ever be teach politeness which she have not . she be only a poor little wild animal . 

 " good - bye , " say Sara . 

 when she reach the other side of the street she look back . the child have a bun in each hand and have stop in the middle of a bite to watch she . Sara give she a little nod , and the child , after another stare a curious linger stare jerk her shaggy head in response , and until Sara be out of sight she do not take another bite or even finish the one she have begin . 

 at that moment the baker - woman look out of her shop window . 

 " well , I never ! " she exclaim . " if that young un have not   give her bun to a beggar child ! it be not   because she do not   want they , either . well , well , she look hungry enough . I would give something to know what she do it for . " 

 she stand behind her window for a few moment and ponder . then her curiosity get the well of she . she go to the door and speak to the beggar child . 

 " who give you those bun ? " she ask she . the child nod her head toward Sara 's vanish figure . 

 " what do she say ? " inquire the woman . 

 " ax I if I be ' ungry , " reply the hoarse voice . 

 " what do you say ? " 

 " say I be jist . " 

 " and then she come in and get the bun , and give they to you , do she ? " 

 the child nod . 

 " how many ? " 

 " five . " 

 the woman think it over . 

 " leave just one for herself , " she say in a low voice . " and she could have eat the whole six I see it in her eye . " 

 she look after the little draggle far - away figure and feel more disturbed in her usually comfortable mind than she have feel for many a day . 

 " I wish she have not   go so quick , " she say . " I be blest if she should not   have have a dozen . " then she turn to the child . 

 " be you hungry yet ? " she say . 

 " I be allus hungry , " be the answer , " but ' t be not   as bad as it be . " 

 " come in here , " say the woman , and she hold open the shop door . 

 the child get up and shuffle in . to be invite into a warm place full of bread seem an incredible thing . she do not know what be go to happen . she do not care , even . 

 " get yourself warm , " say the woman , point to a fire in the tiny back room . " and look here ; when you be hard up for a bit of bread , you can come in here and ask for it . I be blest if I will not   give it to you for that young one 's sake . " 

     

 Sara find some comfort in her remain bun . at all event , it be very hot , and it be well than nothing . as she walk along she break off small piece and eat they slowly to make they last long . 

 " suppose it be a magic bun , " she say , " and a bite be as much as a whole dinner . I should be overeat myself if I go on like this . " 

 it be dark when she reach the square where the Select Seminary be situate . the light in the house be all light . the blind be not yet draw in the window of the room where she nearly always catch glimpse of member of the Large Family . frequently at this hour she could see the gentleman she call Mr. Montmorency sit in a big chair , with a small swarm round he , talk , laugh , perch on the arm of his seat or on his knee or lean against they . this evening the swarm be about he , but he be not seat . on the contrary , there be a good deal of excitement go on . it be evident that a journey be to be take , and it be Mr. Montmorency who be to take it . a brougham stand before the door , and a big portmanteau have be strap upon it . the child be dance about , chatter and hang on to their father . the pretty rosy mother be stand near he , talk as if she be ask final question . Sara pause a moment to see the little one lift up and kiss and the big one bend over and kiss also . 

 " I wonder if he will stay away long , " she think . " the portmanteau be rather big . oh , dear , how they will miss he ! I shall miss he myself even though he do not   know I be alive . " 

 when the door open she move away remember the sixpence but she see the traveler come out and stand against the background of the warmly - light hall , the old child still hover about he . 

 " will Moscow be cover with snow ? " say the little girl Janet . " will there be ice everywhere ? " 

 " shall you drive in a drosky ? " cry another . " shall you see the Czar ? " 

 " I will write and tell you all about it , " he answer , laugh . " and I will send you picture of muzhiks and thing . run into the house . it be a hideous damp night . I would rather stay with you than go to Moscow . good night ! good night , ducky ! God bless you ! " and he run down the step and jump into the brougham . 

 " if you find the little girl , give she our love , " shout Guy Clarence , jump up and down on the door mat . 

 then they go in and shut the door . 

 " do you see , " say Janet to Nora , as they go back to the room " the little - girl - who - be - not - a - beggar be pass ? she look all cold and wet , and I see she turn her head over her shoulder and look at we . Mamma say her clothe always look as if they have be give she by someone who be quite rich someone who only let she have they because they be too shabby to wear . the people at the school always send she out on errand on the horrid day and night there be . " 

 Sara cross the square to Miss Minchin 's area step , feel faint and shaky . 

 " I wonder who the little girl be , " she think " the little girl he be go to look for . " 

 and she go down the area step , lug her basket and find it very heavy indeed , as the father of the Large Family drive quickly on his way to the station to take the train which be to carry he to Moscow , where he be to make his good effort to search for the lost little daughter of Captain Crewe . 




 14 

 what Melchisedec Heard and see 

 on this very afternoon , while Sara be out , a strange thing happen in the attic . only Melchisedec see and hear it ; and he be so much alarmed and mystify that he scuttle back to his hole and hide there , and really quake and tremble as he peep out furtively and with great caution to watch what be go on . 

 the attic have be very still all the day after Sara have leave it in the early morning . the stillness have only be break by the pattering of the rain upon the slate and the skylight . Melchisedec have , in fact , find it rather dull ; and when the rain cease to patter and perfect silence reign , he decide to come out and reconnoiter , though experience teach he that Sara would not return for some time . he have be ramble and sniff about , and have just find a totally unexpected and unexplained crumb leave from his last meal , when his attention be attract by a sound on the roof . he stop to listen with a palpitating heart . the sound suggest that something be move on the roof . it be approach the skylight ; it reach the skylight . the skylight be be mysteriously open . a dark face peer into the attic ; then another face appear behind it , and both look in with sign of caution and interest . two man be outside on the roof , and be make silent preparation to enter through the skylight itself . one be Ram Dass and the other be a young man who be the indian gentleman 's secretary ; but of course Melchisedec do not know this . he only know that the man be invade the silence and privacy of the attic ; and as the one with the dark face let himself down through the aperture with such lightness and dexterity that he do not make the slight sound , Melchisedec turn tail and flee precipitately back to his hole . he be frightened to death . he have cease to be timid with Sara , and know she would never throw anything but crumb , and would never make any sound other than the soft , low , coax whistle ; but strange man be dangerous thing to remain near . he lie close and flat near the entrance of his home , just manage to peep through the crack with a bright , alarmed eye . how much he understand of the talk he hear I be not in the least able to say ; but , even if he have understand it all , he would probably have remain greatly mystify . 

 the secretary , who be light and young , slip through the skylight as noiselessly as Ram Dass have do ; and he catch a last glimpse of Melchisedec 's vanish tail . 

 " be that a rat ? " he ask Ram Dass in a whisper . 

 " yes ; a rat , Sahib , " answer Ram Dass , also whisper . " there be many in the wall . " 

 " Ugh ! " exclaim the young man . " it be a wonder the child be not terrified of they . " 

 Ram Dass make a gesture with his hand . he also smile respectfully . he be in this place as the intimate exponent of Sara , though she have only speak to he once . 

 " the child be the little friend of all thing , Sahib , " he answer . " she be not as other child . I see she when she do not see I . I slip across the slate and look at her many night to see that she be safe . I watch she from my window when she do not know I be near . she stand on the table there and look out at the sky as if it speak to she . the sparrow come at her call . the rat she have feed and tame in her loneliness . the poor slave of the house come to she for comfort . there be a little child who come to she in secret ; there be one old who worship she and would listen to she forever if she might . this I have see when I have creep across the roof . by the mistress of the house who be an evil woman she be treat like a pariah ; but she have the bearing of a child who be of the blood of king ! " 

 " you seem to know a great deal about she , " the secretary say . 

 " all her life each day I know , " answer Ram Dass . " she go out I know , and she come in ; her sadness and her poor joy ; her coldness and her hunger . I know when she be alone until midnight , learn from her book ; I know when her secret friend steal to she and she be happy as child can be , even in the midst of poverty because they come and she may laugh and talk with they in whisper . if she be ill I should know , and I would come and serve she if it might be do . " 

 " you be sure no one come near this place but herself , and that she will not return and surprise we . she would be frightened if she find we here , and the Sahib Carrisford 's plan would be spoil . " 

 Ram Dass cross noiselessly to the door and stand close to it . 

 " none mount here but herself , Sahib , " he say . " she have go out with her basket and may be go for hour . if I stand here I can hear any step before it reach the last flight of the stair . " 

 the secretary take a pencil and a tablet from his breast pocket . 

 " keep your ear open , " he say ; and he begin to walk slowly and softly round the miserable little room , make rapid note on his tablet as he look at thing . 

 first he go to the narrow bed . he press his hand upon the mattress and utter an exclamation . 

 " as hard as a stone , " he say . " that will have to be alter some day when she be out . a special journey can be make to bring it across . it can not be do tonight . " he lift the covering and examine the one thin pillow . 

 " coverlet dingy and worn , blanket thin , sheet patch and rag , " he say . " what a bed for a child to sleep in and in a house which call itself respectable ! there have not be a fire in that grate for many a day , " glance at the rusty fireplace . 

 " never since I have see it , " say Ram Dass . " the mistress of the house be not one who remember that another than herself may be cold . " 

 the secretary be write quickly on his tablet . he look up from it as he tear off a leaf and slip it into his breast pocket . 

 " it be a strange way of do the thing , " he say . " who plan it ? " 

 Ram Dass make a modestly apologetic obeisance . 

 " it be true that the first thought be mine , Sahib , " he say ; " though it be naught but a fancy . I be fond of this child ; we be both lonely . it be her way to relate her vision to her secret friend . be sad one night , I lay close to the open skylight and listen . the vision she relate tell what this miserable room might be if it have comfort in it . she seem to see it as she talk , and she grow cheer and warm as she speak . then she come to this fancy ; and the next day , the Sahib be ill and wretched , I tell he of the thing to amuse he . it seem then but a dream , but it please the Sahib . to hear of the child 's doing give he entertainment . he become interested in she and ask question . at last he begin to please himself with the thought of make her vision real thing . " 

 " you think that it can be do while she sleep ? suppose she awaken , " suggest the secretary ; and it be evident that whatsoever the plan refer to be , it have catch and please his fancy as well as the Sahib Carrisford 's . 

 " I can move as if my foot be of velvet , " Ram Dass reply ; " and child sleep soundly even the unhappy one . I could have enter this room in the night many time , and without cause she to turn upon her pillow . if the other bearer pass to I the thing through the window , I can do all and she will not stir . when she awaken she will think a magician have be here . " 

 he smile as if his heart warm under his white robe , and the secretary smile back at he . 

 " it will be like a story from the Arabian Nights , " he say . " only an oriental could have plan it . it do not belong to London fog . " 

 they do not remain very long , to the great relief of Melchisedec , who , as he probably do not comprehend their conversation , feel their movement and whisper ominous . the young secretary seem interested in everything . he write down thing about the floor , the fireplace , the broken footstool , the old table , the wall which last he touch with his hand again and again , seem much pleased when he find that a number of old nail have be drive in various place . 

 " you can hang thing on they , " he say . 

 Ram Dass smile mysteriously . 

 " yesterday , when she be out , " he say , " I enter , bring with I small , sharp nail which can be press into the wall without blow from a hammer . I place many in the plaster where I may need they . they be ready . " 

 the indian gentleman 's secretary stand still and look round he as he thrust his tablet back into his pocket . 

 " I think I have make note enough ; we can go now , " he say . " the Sahib Carrisford have a warm heart . it be a thousand pity that he have not find the lost child . " 

 " if he should find she his strength would be restore to he , " say Ram Dass . " his God may lead she to he yet . " 

 then they slip through the skylight as noiselessly as they have enter it . and , after he be quite sure they have go , Melchisedec be greatly relieve , and in the course of a few minute feel it safe to emerge from his hole again and scuffle about in the hope that even such alarming human being as these might have chance to carry crumb in their pocket and drop one or two of they . 




 15 

 the Magic 

 when Sara have pass the house next door she have see Ram Dass close the shutter , and catch her glimpse of this room also . 

 " it be a long time since I see a nice place from the inside , " be the thought which cross her mind . 

 there be the usual bright fire glow in the grate , and the indian gentleman be sit before it . his head be rest in his hand , and he look as lonely and unhappy as ever . 

 " poor man ! " say Sara . " I wonder what you be suppose . " 

 and this be what he be ' suppose " at that very moment . 

 " suppose , " he be think , ' suppose even if Carmichael trace the people to Moscow the little girl they take from Madame Pascal 's school in Paris be not the one we be in search of . suppose she prove to be quite a different child . what step shall I take next ? " 

 when Sara go into the house she meet Miss Minchin , who have come downstairs to scold the cook . 

 " where have you waste your time ? " she demand . " you have be out for hour . " 

 " it be so wet and muddy , " Sara answer , " it be hard to walk , because my shoe be so bad and slip about . " 

 " make no excuse , " say Miss Minchin , " and tell no falsehood . " 

 Sara go in to the cook . the cook have receive a severe lecture and be in a fearful temper as a result . she be only too rejoice to have someone to vent her rage on , and Sara be a convenience , as usual . 

 " why do not   you stay all night ? " she snap . 

 Sara lay her purchase on the table . 

 " here be the thing , " she say . 

 the cook look they over , grumble . she be in a very savage humor indeed . 

 " may I have something to eat ? " Sara ask rather faintly . 

 " Tea be over and do with , " be the answer . " do you expect I to keep it hot for you ? " 

 Sara stand silent for a second . 

 " I have no dinner , " she say next , and her voice be quite low . she make it low because she be afraid it would tremble . 

 " there be some bread in the pantry , " say the cook . " that be all you will get at this time of day . " 

 Sara go and find the bread . it be old and hard and dry . the cook be in too vicious a humor to give she anything to eat with it . it be always safe and easy to vent her spite on Sara . really , it be hard for the child to climb the three long flight of stair lead to her attic . she often find they long and steep when she be tired ; but tonight it seem as if she would never reach the top . several time she be oblige to stop to rest . when she reach the top landing she be glad to see the glimmer of a light come from under her door . that mean that Ermengarde have manage to creep up to pay she a visit . there be some comfort in that . it be well than to go into the room alone and find it empty and desolate . the mere presence of plump , comfortable Ermengarde , wrap in her red shawl , would warm it a little . 

 yes ; there Ermengarde be when she open the door . she be sit in the middle of the bed , with her foot tuck safely under she . she have never become intimate with Melchisedec and his family , though they rather fascinate she . when she find herself alone in the attic she always prefer to sit on the bed until Sara arrive . she have , in fact , on this occasion have time to become rather nervous , because Melchisedec have appear and sniff about a good deal , and once have make she utter a repressed squeal by sit up on his hind leg and , while he look at she , sniff pointedly in her direction . 

 " oh , Sara , " she cry out , " I be glad you have come . Melchy would sniff about so . I try to coax he to go back , but he would not   for such a long time . I like he , you know ; but it do frighten I when he sniff right at I . do you think he ever would jump ? " 

 " no , " answer Sara . 

 Ermengarde crawl forward on the bed to look at she . 

 " you do look tired , Sara , " she say ; " you be quite pale . " 

 " I be tired , " say Sara , drop on to the lopsided footstool . " oh , there 's Melchisedec , poor thing . he be come to ask for his supper . " 

 Melchisedec have come out of his hole as if he have be listen for her footstep . Sara be quite sure he know it . he come forward with an affectionate , expectant expression as Sara put her hand in her pocket and turn it inside out , shake her head . 

 " I be very sorry , " she say . " I have not   one crumb leave . go home , Melchisedec , and tell your wife there be nothing in my pocket . I be afraid I forget because the cook and Miss Minchin be so cross . " 

 Melchisedec seem to understand . he shuffle resignedly , if not contentedly , back to his home . 

 " I do not expect to see you tonight , Ermie , " Sara say . Ermengarde hug herself in the red shawl . 

 " Miss Amelia have go out to spend the night with her old aunt , " she explain . " no one else ever come and look into the bedroom after we be in bed . I could stay here until morning if I want to . " 

 she point toward the table under the skylight . Sara have not look toward it as she come in . a number of book be pile upon it . Ermengarde 's gesture be a dejected one . 

 " Papa have send I some more book , Sara , " she say . " there they be . " 

 Sara look round and get up at once . she run to the table , and pick up the top volume , turn over its leaf quickly . for the moment she forget her discomfort . 

 " ah , " she cry out , " how beautiful ! Carlyle 's French Revolution . I have so want to read that ! " 

 " I have not , " say Ermengarde . " and papa will be so cross if I do not . he will expect I to know all about it when I go home for the holiday . what shall I do ? " 

 Sara stop turn over the leaf and look at she with an excited flush on her cheek . 

 " look here , " she cry , " if you will lend I these book , I will read they and tell you everything that be in they afterward and I will tell it so that you will remember it , too . " 

 " oh , goodness ! " exclaim Ermengarde . " do you think you can ? " 

 " I know I can , " Sara answer . " the little one always remember what I tell they . " 

 " Sara , " say Ermengarde , hope gleam in her round face , " if you will do that , and make I remember , I will I will give you anything . " 

 " I do not   want you to give I anything , " say Sara . " I want your book I want they ! " and her eye grow big , and her chest heave . 

 " take they , then , " say Ermengarde . " I wish I want they but I do not . I be not clever , and my father be , and he think I ought to be . " 

 Sara be open one book after the other . " what be you go to tell your father ? " she ask , a slight doubt dawn in her mind . 

 " oh , he need not   know , " answer Ermengarde . " he will think I have   read they . " 

 Sara put down her book and shake her head slowly . " that be almost like tell lie , " she say . " and lie well , you see , they be not only wicked they be VULGAR . sometimes " reflectively " I have   think perhaps I might do something wicked I might suddenly fly into a rage and kill Miss Minchin , you know , when she be ill - treat I but I couldn't be vulgar . why can not   you tell your father I read they ? " 

 " he want I to read they , " say Ermengarde , a little discourage by this unexpected turn of affair . 

 " he want you to know what be in they , " say Sara . " and if I can tell it to you in an easy way and make you remember it , I should think he would like that . " 

 " he will like it if I learn anything in any way , " say rueful Ermengarde . " you would if you be my father . " 

 " it be not your fault that " begin Sara . she pull herself up and stop rather suddenly . she have be go to say , " it be not your fault that you be stupid . " 

 " that what ? " Ermengarde ask . 

 " that you can not   learn thing quickly , " amend Sara . " if you can not , you can not . if I can why , I can ; that be all . " 

 she always feel very tender of Ermengarde , and try not to let she feel too strongly the difference between be able to learn anything at once , and not be able to learn anything at all . as she look at her plump face , one of her wise , old - fashioned thought come to she . 

 " perhaps , " she say , " to be able to learn thing quickly be not   everything . to be kind be worth a great deal to other people . if Miss Minchin know everything on earth and be like what she be now , she would still be a detestable thing , and everybody would hate she . lot of clever people have do harm and have be wicked . look at Robespierre " 

 she stop and examine Ermengarde 's countenance , which be begin to look bewildered . " do not   you remember ? " she demand . " I tell you about he not long ago . I believe you have   forget . " 

 " well , I do not   remember all of it , " admit Ermengarde . 

 " well , you wait a minute , " say Sara , " and I will take off my wet thing and wrap myself in the coverlet and tell you over again . " 

 she take off her hat and coat and hang they on a nail against the wall , and she change her wet shoe for an old pair of slipper . then she jump on the bed , and draw the coverlet about her shoulder , sit with her arm round her knee . " now , listen , " she say . 

 she plunge into the gory record of the French Revolution , and tell such story of it that Ermengarde 's eye grow round with alarm and she hold her breath . but though she be rather terrified , there be a delightful thrill in listening , and she be not likely to forget Robespierre again , or to have any doubt about the Princesse de Lamballe . 

 " you know they put her head on a pike and dance round it , " Sara explain . " and she have beautiful float blonde hair ; and when I think of she , I never see her head on her body , but always on a pike , with those furious people dance and howling . " 

 it be agree that Mr. St. John be to be tell the plan they have make , and for the present the book be to be leave in the attic . 

 " now let us tell each other thing , " say Sara . " how be you get on with your french lesson ? " 

 " ever so much well since the last time I come up here and you explain the conjugation . Miss Minchin could not understand why I do my exercise so well that first morning . " 

 Sara laugh a little and hug her knee . 

 " she do not   understand why Lottie be do her sum so well , " she say ; " but it be because she creep up here , too , and I help she . " she glance round the room . " the attic would be rather nice if it be not   so dreadful , " she say , laugh again . " it be a good place to pretend in . " 

 the truth be that Ermengarde do not know anything of the sometimes almost unbearable side of life in the attic and she have not a sufficiently vivid imagination to depict it for herself . on the rare occasion that she could reach Sara 's room she only see the side of it which be make exciting by thing which be " pretended " and story which be tell . her visit partook of the character of adventure ; and though sometimes Sara look rather pale , and it be not to be deny that she have grow very thin , her proud little spirit would not admit of complaint . she have never confess that at time she be almost ravenous with hunger , as she be tonight . she be grow rapidly , and her constant walking and run about would have give she a keen appetite even if she have have abundant and regular meal of a much more nourishing nature than the unappetizing , inferior food snatch at such odd time as suit the kitchen convenience . she be grow use to a certain gnawing feeling in her young stomach . 

 " I suppose soldier feel like this when they be on a long and weary march , " she often say to herself . she like the sound of the phrase , " long and weary march . " it make she feel rather like a soldier . she have also a quaint sense of be a hostess in the attic . 

 " if I live in a castle , " she argue , " and Ermengarde be the lady of another castle , and come to see I , with knight and squire and vassal rid with she , and pennon fly , when I hear the clarion sound outside the drawbridge I should go down to receive she , and I should spread feast in the banquet hall and call in minstrel to sing and play and relate romance . when she come into the attic I can not   spread feast , but I can tell story , and not let she know disagreeable thing . I dare say poor chatelaine have to do that in time of famine , when their land have be pillage . " she be a proud , brave little chatelaine , and dispense generously the one hospitality she could offer the dream she dream the vision she see the imagining which be her joy and comfort . 

 so , as they sit together , Ermengarde do not know that she be faint as well as ravenous , and that while she talk she now and then wonder if her hunger would let her sleep when she be leave alone . she feel as if she have never be quite so hungry before . 

 " I wish I be as thin as you , Sara , " Ermengarde say suddenly . " I believe you be thin than you use to be . your eye look so big , and look at the sharp little bone stick out of your elbow ! " 

 Sara pull down her sleeve , which have push itself up . 

 " I always be a thin child , " she say bravely , " and I always have big green eye . " 

 " I love your queer eye , " say Ermengarde , look into they with affectionate admiration . " they always look as if they see such a long way . I love they and I love they to be green though they look black generally . " 

 " they be cat 's eye , " laugh Sara ; " but I can not   see in the dark with they because I have try , and I could not   I wish I could . " 

 it be just at this minute that something happen at the skylight which neither of they see . if either of they have chance to turn and look , she would have be startle by the sight of a dark face which peer cautiously into the room and disappear as quickly and almost as silently as it have appear . not quite as silently , however . Sara , who have keen ear , suddenly turn a little and look up at the roof . 

 " that do not   sound like Melchisedec , " she say . " it be not   scratchy enough . " 

 " what ? " say Ermengarde , a little startled . 

 " do not   you think you hear something ? " ask Sara . 

 " N - no , " Ermengarde falter . " do you ? "   another ed . have " no - no , " 

 " perhaps I do not , " say Sara ; " but I think I do . it sound as if something be on the slate something that drag softly . " 

 " what could it be ? " say Ermengarde . " could it be robber ? " 

 " no , " Sara begin cheerfully . " there be nothing to steal " 

 she break off in the middle of her word . they both hear the sound that check she . it be not on the slate , but on the stair below , and it be Miss Minchin 's angry voice . Sara spring off the bed , and put out the candle . 

 " she be scold Becky , " she whisper , as she stand in the darkness . " she be make her cry . " 

 " will she come in here ? " Ermengarde whisper back , panic - stricken . 

 " no . she will think I be in bed . do not   stir . " 

 it be very seldom that Miss Minchin mount the last flight of stair . Sara could only remember that she have do it once before . but now she be angry enough to be come at least part of the way up , and it sound as if she be drive Becky before she . 

 " you impudent , dishonest child ! " they hear she say . " Cook tell I she have miss thing repeatedly . " 

 " ' t warn't   I , mum , " say Becky sobbing . " I be ' ungry enough , but ' t warn't   I never ! " 

 " you deserve to be send to prison , " say Miss Minchin 's voice . " pick and steal ! half a meat pie , indeed ! " 

 " ' t warn't   I , " weep Becky . " I could ' ave eat a whole un but I never lay a finger on it . " 

 Miss Minchin be out of breath between temper and mount the stair . the meat pie have be intend for her special late supper . it become apparent that she box Becky 's ear . 

 " do not   tell falsehood , " she say . " go to your room this instant . " 

 both Sara and Ermengarde hear the slap , and then hear Becky run in her slipshod shoe up the stair and into her attic . they hear her door shut , and know that she throw herself upon her bed . 

 " I could ' ave e't two of them , " they hear her cry into her pillow . " an ' I never take a bite . ' twa cook give it to her policeman . " 

 Sara stand in the middle of the room in the darkness . she be clench her little tooth and opening and shut fiercely her outstretche hand . she could scarcely stand still , but she dare not move until Miss Minchin have go down the stair and all be still . 

 " the wicked , cruel thing ! " she burst forth . " the cook take thing herself and then say Becky steal they . she DOESN'T ! she DOESN'T ! she be so hungry sometimes that she eat crust out of the ash barrel ! " she press her hand hard against her face and burst into passionate little sob , and Ermengarde , hear this unusual thing , be overawe by it . Sara be cry ! the unconquerable Sara ! it seem to denote something new some mood she have never know . suppose suppose a new dread possibility present itself to her kind , slow , little mind all at once . she creep off the bed in the dark and find her way to the table where the candle stand . she strike a match and light the candle . when she have light it , she bent forward and look at Sara , with her new thought grow to definite fear in her eye . 

 " Sara , " she say in a timid , almost awe - stricken voice , " be be you never tell I I do not   want to be rude , but be you ever hungry ? " 

 it be too much just at that moment . the barrier break down . Sara lift her face from her hand . 

 " yes , " she say in a new passionate way . " yes , I be . I be so hungry now that I could almost eat you . and it make it bad to hear poor Becky . she be hungry than I be . " 

 Ermengarde gasp . 

 " oh , oh ! " she cry woefully . " and I never know ! " 

 " I do not   want you to know , " Sara say . " it would have make I feel like a street beggar . I know I look like a street beggar . " 

 " no , you do not   you do not ! " Ermengarde break in . " your clothe be a little queer but you could not   look like a street beggar . you have not   a street - beggar face . " 

 " a little boy once give I a sixpence for charity , " say Sara , with a short little laugh in spite of herself . " here it be . " and she pull out the thin ribbon from her neck . " he would not   have give I his Christmas sixpence if I have not   look as if I need it . " 

 somehow the sight of the dear little sixpence be good for both of they . it make they laugh a little , though they both have tear in their eye . 

 " who be he ? " ask Ermengarde , look at it quite as if it have not be a mere ordinary silver sixpence . 

 " he be a darling little thing go to a party , " say Sara . " he be one of the Large Family , the little one with the round leg the one I call Guy Clarence . I suppose his nursery be cram with Christmas present and hamper full of cake and thing , and he could see I have nothing . " 

 Ermengarde give a little jump backward . the last sentence have recall something to her troubled mind and give she a sudden inspiration . 

 " oh , Sara ! " she cry . " what a silly thing I be not to have think of it ! " 

 " of what ? " 

 " something splendid ! " say Ermengarde , in an excited hurry . " this very afternoon my nice aunt send I a box . it be full of good thing . I never touch it , I have so much pudding at dinner , and I be so bothered about papa 's book . " her word begin to tumble over each other . " it be get cake in it , and little meat pie , and jam tart and bun , and orange and red - currant wine , and fig and chocolate . I will creep back to my room and get it this minute , and we will eat it now . " 

 Sara almost reel . when one be faint with hunger the mention of food have sometimes a curious effect . she clutch Ermengarde 's arm . 

 " do you think you could ? " she ejaculate . 

 " I know I could , " answer Ermengarde , and she run to the door open it softly put her head out into the darkness , and listen . then she go back to Sara . " the light be out . everybody be in bed . I can creep and creep and no one will hear . " 

 it be so delightful that they catch each other 's hand and a sudden light spring into Sara 's eye . 

 " Ermie ! " she say . " let we PRETEND ! let we pretend it be a party ! and oh , will not   you invite the prisoner in the next cell ? " 

 " yes ! yes ! let we knock on the wall now . the jailer will not   hear . " 

 Sara go to the wall . through it she could hear poor Becky cry more softly . she knock four time . 

 " that mean , ' come to I through the secret passage under the wall , ' she explain . ' I have something to communicate . ' " 

 five quick knock answer she . 

 " she be come , " she say . 

 almost immediately the door of the attic open and Becky appear . her eye be red and her cap be slide off , and when she catch sight of Ermengarde she begin to rub her face nervously with her apron . 

 " do not   mind I a bit , Becky ! " cry Ermengarde . 

 " Miss Ermengarde have ask you to come in , " say Sara , " because she be go to bring a box of good thing up here to we . " 

 Becky 's cap almost fall off entirely , she break in with such excitement . 

 " to eat , miss ? " she say . " thing that be good to eat ? " 

 " yes , " answer Sara , " and we be go to pretend a party . " 

 " and you shall have as much as you want to eat , " put in Ermengarde . " I will go this minute ! " 

 she be in such haste that as she tiptoe out of the attic she drop her red shawl and do not know it have fall . no one see it for a minute or so . Becky be too much overpower by the good luck which have befall she . 

 " oh , miss ! oh , miss ! " she gasp ; " I know it be you that ask she to let I come . it it make I cry to think of it . " and she go to Sara 's side and stand and look at she worshipingly . 

 but in Sara 's hungry eye the old light have begin to glow and transform her world for she . here in the attic with the cold night outside with the afternoon in the sloppy street barely pass with the memory of the awful unfed look in the beggar child 's eye not yet fade this simple , cheerful thing have happen like a thing of magic . 

 she catch her breath . 

 " somehow , something always happen , " she cry , " just before thing get to the very bad . it be as if the Magic do it . if I could only just remember that always . the bad thing never quite come . " 

 she give Becky a little cheerful shake . 

 " no , no ! you must not   cry ! " she say . " we must make haste and set the table . " 

 " set the table , miss ? " say Becky , gaze round the room . " what will we set it with ? " 

 Sara look round the attic , too . 

 " there do not   seem to be much , " she answer , half laugh . 

 that moment she see something and pounce upon it . it be Ermengarde 's red shawl which lie upon the floor . 

 " here be the shawl , " she cry . " I know she will not   mind it . it will make such a nice red tablecloth . " 

 they pull the old table forward , and throw the shawl over it . Red be a wonderfully kind and comfortable color . it begin to make the room look furnish directly . 

 " how nice a red rug would look on the floor ! " exclaim Sara . " we must pretend there be one ! " 

 her eye sweep the bare board with a swift glance of admiration . the rug be lay down already . 

 " how soft and thick it be ! " she say , with the little laugh which Becky know the meaning of ; and she raise and set her foot down again delicately , as if she feel something under it . 

 " yes , miss , " answer Becky , watch she with serious rapture . she be always quite serious . 

 " what next , now ? " say Sara , and she stand still and put her hand over her eye . " something will come if I think and wait a little " in a soft , expectant voice . " the Magic will tell I . " 

 one of her favorite fancy be that on " the outside , " as she call it , thought be wait for people to call they . Becky have see her stand and wait many a time before , and know that in a few second she would uncover an enlighten , laugh face . 

 in a moment she do . 

 " there ! " she cry . " it have come ! I know now ! I must look among the thing in the old trunk I have when I be a princess . " 

 she fly to its corner and kneel down . it have not be put in the attic for her benefit , but because there be no room for it elsewhere . nothing have be leave in it but rubbish . but she know she should find something . the Magic always arrange that kind of thing in one way or another . 

 in a corner lie a package so insignificant - look that it have be overlook , and when she herself have find it she have keep it as a relic . it contain a dozen small white handkerchief . she seize they joyfully and run to the table . she begin to arrange they upon the red table - cover , pat and coax they into shape with the narrow lace edge curl outward , her Magic work its spell for she as she do it . 

 " these be the plate , " she say . " they be golden plate . these be the richly embroider napkin . nun work they in convent in Spain . " 

 " do they , miss ? " breathe Becky , her very soul uplift by the information . 

 " you must pretend it , " say Sara . " if you pretend it enough , you will see they . " 

 " yes , miss , " say Becky ; and as Sara return to the trunk she devote herself to the effort of accomplish an end so much to be desire . 

 Sara turn suddenly to find she stand by the table , look very queer indeed . she have shut her eye , and be twist her face in strange convulsive contortion , her hand hang stiffly clench at her side . she look as if she be try to lift some enormous weight . 

 " what be the matter , Becky ? " Sara cry . " what be you do ? " 

 Becky open her eye with a start . 

 " I be a-'pretendin ' , ' miss , " she answer a little sheepishly ; " I be tryin ' to see it like you do . I almost do , " with a hopeful grin . " but it take a lot o ' stren't h. " 

 " perhaps it do if you be not use to it , " say Sara , with friendly sympathy ; " but you do not   know how easy it be when you have   do it often . I would not   try so hard just at first . it will come to you after a while . I will just tell you what thing be . look at these . " 

 she hold an old summer hat in her hand which she have fish out of the bottom of the trunk . there be a wreath of flower on it . she pull the wreath off . 

 " these be garland for the feast , " she say grandly . " they fill all the air with perfume . there be a mug on the wash - stand , Becky . oh and bring the soap dish for a centerpiece . " 

 Becky hand they to she reverently . 

 " what be they now , miss ? " she inquire . " you would think they be make of crockery but I know they be not . " 

 " this be a carven flagon , " say Sara , arrange tendril of the wreath about the mug . " and this " bend tenderly over the soap dish and heap it with rose " be pure alabaster encrust with gem . " 

 she touch the thing gently , a happy smile hover about her lip which make she look as if she be a creature in a dream . 

 " my , be not   it lovely ! " whisper Becky . 

 " if we just have something for bonbon dish , " Sara murmur . " there ! " dart to the trunk again . " I remember I see something this minute . " 

 it be only a bundle of wool wrap in red and white tissue paper , but the tissue paper be soon twist into the form of little dish , and be combine with the remain flower to ornament the candlestick which be to light the feast . only the Magic could have make it more than an old table cover with a red shawl and set with rubbish from a long - unopened trunk . but Sara draw back and gaze at it , see wonder ; and Becky , after star in delight , speak with bated breath . 

 " this ' ere , " she suggest , with a glance round the attic " be it the Bastille now or have it turn into something different ? " 

 " oh , yes , yes ! " say Sara . " quite different . it be a banquet hall ! " 

 " my eye , miss ! " ejaculate Becky . " a blanket ' all ! " and she turn to view the splendor about she with awed bewilderment . 

 " a banquet hall , " say Sara . " a vast chamber where feast be give . it have a vaulted roof , and a minstrel ' gallery , and a huge chimney fill with blaze oaken log , and it be brilliant with waxen taper twinkle on every side . " 

 " my eye , Miss Sara ! " gasp Becky again . 

 then the door open , and Ermengarde come in , rather staggering under the weight of her hamper . she start back with an exclamation of joy . to enter from the chill darkness outside , and find one 's self confront by a totally unanticipated festal board , drape with red , adorn with white napery , and wreathe with flower , be to feel that the preparation be brilliant indeed . 

 " oh , Sara ! " she cry out . " you be the clever girl I ever see ! " 

 " be not   it nice ? " say Sara . " they be thing out of my old trunk . I ask my Magic , and it tell I to go and look . " 

 " but oh , miss , " cry Becky , " wait till she be tell you what they be ! they be not   just oh , miss , please tell she , " appeal to Sara . 

 so Sara tell she , and because her Magic help she she make she almost see it all : the golden platter the vaulted space the blazing log the twinkle waxen taper . as the thing be take out of the hamper the frosted cake the fruit the bonbon and the wine the feast become a splendid thing . 

 " it be like a real party ! " cry Ermengarde . 

 " it be like a queen 's table , " sigh Becky . 

 then Ermengarde have a sudden brilliant thought . 

 " I will tell you what , Sara , " she say . " pretend you be a princess now and this be a royal feast . " 

 " but it be your feast , " say Sara ; " you must be the princess , and we will be your maid of honor . " 

 " oh , I can not , " say Ermengarde . " I be too fat , and I do not   know how . you be she . " 

 " well , if you want I to , " say Sara . 

 but suddenly she think of something else and run to the rusty grate . 

 " there be a lot of paper and rubbish stuff in here ! " she exclaim . " if we light it , there will be a bright blaze for a few minute , and we shall feel as if it be a real fire . " she strike a match and light it up with a great specious glow which illuminate the room . 

 " by the time it stop blaze , " Sara say , " we shall forget about its not be real . " 

 she stand in the dancing glow and smile . 

 " do not   it LOOK real ? " she say . " now we will begin the party . " 

 she lead the way to the table . she wave her hand graciously to Ermengarde and Becky . she be in the midst of her dream . 

 " advance , fair damsel , " she say in her happy dream - voice , " and be seat at the banquet table . my noble father , the king , who be absent on a long journey , have command I to feast you . " she turn her head slightly toward the corner of the room . " what , ho , there , minstrel ! strike up with your viol and bassoon . princess , " she explain rapidly to Ermengarde and Becky , " always have minstrel to play at their feast . pretend there be a minstrel gallery up there in the corner . now we will begin . " 

 they have barely have time to take their piece of cake into their hand not one of they have time to do more , when they all three spring to their foot and turn pale face toward the door listen listening . 

 someone be come up the stair . there be no mistake about it . each of they recognize the angry , mount tread and know that the end of all thing have come . 

 " it be the missus ! " choke Becky , and drop her piece of cake upon the floor . 

 " yes , " say Sara , her eye grow shocked and large in her small white face . " Miss Minchin have find we out . " 

 Miss Minchin strike the door open with a blow of her hand . she be pale herself , but it be with rage . she look from the frightened face to the banquet table , and from the banquet table to the last flicker of the burn paper in the grate . 

 " I have be suspect something of this sort , " she exclaim ; " but I do not dream of such audacity . Lavinia be tell the truth . " 

 so they know that it be Lavinia who have somehow guess their secret and have betray they . Miss Minchin stride over to Becky and box her ear for a second time . 

 " you impudent creature ! " she say . " you leave the house in the morning ! " 

 Sara stand quite still , her eye grow large , her face paler . Ermengarde burst into tear . 

 " oh , do not   send she away , " she sob . " my aunt send I the hamper . we be only have a party . " 

 " so I see , " say Miss Minchin , witheringly . " with the Princess Sara at the head of the table . " she turn fiercely on Sara . " it be your doing , I know , " she cry . " Ermengarde would never have think of such a thing . you decorate the table , I suppose with this rubbish . " she stamp her foot at Becky . " go to your attic ! " she command , and Becky steal away , her face hide in her apron , her shoulder shake . 

 then it be Sara 's turn again . 

 " I will attend to you tomorrow . you shall have neither breakfast , dinner , nor supper ! " 

 " I have not have either dinner or supper today , Miss Minchin , " say Sara , rather faintly . 

 " then all the well . you will have something to remember . do not   stand there . put those thing into the hamper again . " 

 she begin to sweep they off the table into the hamper herself , and catch sight of Ermengarde 's new book . 

 " and you " to Ermengarde " have bring your beautiful new book into this dirty attic . take they up and go back to bed . you will stay there all day tomorrow , and I shall write to your papa . what would he say if he know where you be tonight ? " 

 something she see in Sara 's grave , fix gaze at this moment make her turn on she fiercely . 

 " what be you think of ? " she demand . " why do you look at I like that ? " 

 " I be wonder , " answer Sara , as she have answer that notable day in the schoolroom . 

 " what be you wonder ? " 

 it be very like the scene in the schoolroom . there be no pertness in Sara 's manner . it be only sad and quiet . 

 " I be wonder , " she say in a low voice , " what MY papa would say if he know where I be tonight . " 

 Miss Minchin be infuriate just as she have be before and her anger express itself , as before , in an intemperate fashion . she fly at she and shake she . 

 " you insolent , unmanageable child ! " she cry . " how dare you ! how dare you ! " 

 she pick up the book , sweep the rest of the feast back into the hamper in a jumbled heap , thrust it into Ermengarde 's arm , and push she before she toward the door . 

 " I will leave you to wonder , " she say . " go to bed this instant . " and she shut the door behind herself and poor stumble Ermengarde , and leave Sara standing quite alone . 

 the dream be quite at an end . the last spark have die out of the paper in the grate and leave only black tinder ; the table be leave bare , the golden plate and richly embroider napkin , and the garland be transform again into old handkerchief , scrap of red and white paper , and discard artificial flower all scatter on the floor ; the minstrel in the minstrel gallery have steal away , and the viol and bassoon be still . Emily be sit with she back against the wall , star very hard . Sara see she , and go and pick she up with tremble hand . 

 " there be not   any banquet leave , Emily , " she say . " and there be not   any princess . there be nothing leave but the prisoner in the Bastille . " and she sit down and hide her face . 

 what would have happen if she have not hide it just then , and if she have chance to look up at the skylight at the wrong moment , I do not know perhaps the end of this chapter might have be quite different because if she have glance at the skylight she would certainly have be startle by what she would have see . she would have see exactly the same face press against the glass and peer in at she as it have peer in early in the evening when she have be talk to Ermengarde . 

 but she do not look up . she sit with her little black head in her arm for some time . she always sit like that when she be try to bear something in silence . then she get up and go slowly to the bed . 

 " I can not   pretend anything else while I be awake , " she say . " there would not   be any use in try . if I go to sleep , perhaps a dream will come and pretend for I . " 

 she suddenly feel so tired perhaps through want of food that she sit down on the edge of the bed quite weakly . 

 " suppose there be a bright fire in the grate , with lot of little dancing flame , " she murmur . " suppose there be a comfortable chair before it and suppose there be a small table near , with a little hot hot supper on it . and suppose " as she draw the thin covering over she ' suppose this be a beautiful soft bed , with fleecy blanket and large downy pillow . suppose suppose " and her very weariness be good to she , for her eye close and she fall fast asleep . 


 she do not know how long she sleep . but she have be tired enough to sleep deeply and profoundly too deeply and soundly to be disturb by anything , even by the squeak and scampering of Melchisedec 's entire family , if all his son and daughter have choose to come out of their hole to fight and tumble and play . 

 when she awaken it be rather suddenly , and she do not know that any particular thing have call she out of her sleep . the truth be , however , that it be a sound which have call she back a real sound the click of the skylight as it fall in closing after a lithe white figure which slip through it and crouch down close by upon the slate of the roof just near enough to see what happen in the attic , but not near enough to be see . 

 at first she do not open her eye . she feel too sleepy and curiously enough too warm and comfortable . she be so warm and comfortable , indeed , that she do not believe she be really awake . she never be as warm and cozy as this except in some lovely vision . 

 " what a nice dream ! " she murmur . " I feel quite warm . I do not   want to wake up . " 

 of course it be a dream . she feel as if warm , delightful bedclothe be heap upon she . she could actually feel blanket , and when she put out her hand it touch something exactly like a satin - cover eider - down quilt . she must not awaken from this delight she must be quite still and make it last . 

 but she could not even though she keep her eye close tightly , she could not . something be force she to awaken something in the room . it be a sense of light , and a sound the sound of a crackling , roar little fire . 

 " oh , I be awaken , " she say mournfully . " I can not   help it I can not . " 

 her eye open in spite of herself . and then she actually smile for what she see she have never see in the attic before , and know she never should see . 

 " oh , I haven't awaken , " she whisper , dare to rise on her elbow and look all about she . " I be dream yet . " she know it must be a dream , for if she be awake such thing could not could not be . 

 do you wonder that she feel sure she have not come back to earth ? this be what she see . in the grate there be a glowing , blaze fire ; on the hob be a little brass kettle hiss and boiling ; spread upon the floor be a thick , warm crimson rug ; before the fire a folding - chair , unfold , and with cushion on it ; by the chair a small folding - table , unfold , cover with a white cloth , and upon it spread small cover dish , a cup , a saucer , a teapot ; on the bed be new warm covering and a satin - cover down quilt ; at the foot a curious wad silk robe , a pair of quilt slipper , and some book . the room of her dream seem change into fairyland and it be flood with warm light , for a bright lamp stand on the table cover with a rosy shade . 

 she sit up , rest on her elbow , and her breathing come short and fast . 

 " it do not melt away , " she pant . " oh , I never have such a dream before . " she scarcely dare to stir ; but at last she push the bedclothe aside , and put her foot on the floor with a rapturous smile . 

 " I be dream I be get out of bed , " she hear her own voice say ; and then , as she stand up in the midst of it all , turn slowly from side to side " I be dream it stay real ! I be dream it feel real . it be bewitch or I be bewitch . I only think I see it all . " her word begin to hurry themselves . " if I can only keep on think it , " she cry , " I do not   care ! I do not   care ! " 

 she stand pant a moment long , and then cry out again . 

 " oh , it be not   true ! " she say . " it can't be true ! but oh , how true it seem ! " 

 the blaze fire draw she to it , and she kneel down and hold out her hand close to it so close that the heat make she start back . 

 " a fire I only dream would not   be hot , " she cry . 

 she spring up , touch the table , the dish , the rug ; she go to the bed and touch the blanket . she take up the soft wad dressing - gown , and suddenly clutch it to her breast and hold it to her cheek . 

 " it be warm . it be soft ! " she almost sob . " it be real . it must be ! " 

 she throw it over her shoulder , and put her foot into the slipper . 

 " they be real , too . it be all real ! " she cry . " I be not I be not dream ! " 

 she almost stagger to the book and open the one which lie upon the top . something be write on the flyleaf just a few word , and they be these : 

 " to the little girl in the attic . from a friend . " 

 when she see that be not   it a strange thing for she to do she put she face down upon the page and burst into tear . 

 " I do not   know who it be , " she say ; " but somebody care for I a little . I have a friend . " 

 she take her candle and steal out of her own room and into Becky 's , and stand by her bedside . 

 " Becky , Becky ! " she whisper as loudly as she dare . " wake up ! " 

 when Becky waken , and she sit upright star aghast , her face still smudge with trace of tear , beside she stand a little figure in a luxurious wad robe of crimson silk . the face she see be a shin , wonderful thing . the Princess Sara as she remember she stand at her very bedside , hold a candle in her hand . 

 " come , " she say . " oh , Becky , come ! " 

 Becky be too frightened to speak . she simply get up and follow she , with her mouth and eye open , and without a word . 

 and when they cross the threshold , Sara shut the door gently and draw she into the warm , glow midst of thing which make her brain reel and her hungry sens faint . " it be true ! it be true ! " she cry . " I have   touch they all . they be as real as we be . the Magic have come and do it , Becky , while we be asleep the magic that will not   let those bad thing ever quite happen . " 




 16 

 the Visitor 

 Imagine , if you can , what the rest of the evening be like . how they crouch by the fire which blaze and leap and make so much of itself in the little grate . how they remove the cover of the dish , and find rich , hot , savory soup , which be a meal in itself , and sandwich and toast and muffin enough for both of they . the mug from the washstand be use as Becky 's tea cup , and the tea be so delicious that it be not necessary to pretend that it be anything but tea . they be warm and full - fed and happy , and it be just like Sara that , have find her strange good fortune real , she should give herself up to the enjoyment of it to the utmost . she have live such a life of imagining that she be quite equal to accept any wonderful thing that happen , and almost to cease , in a short time , to find it bewilder . 

 " I do not   know anyone in the world who could have do it , " she say ; " but there have be someone . and here we be sit by their fire and and it be true ! and whoever it be wherever they be I have a friend , Becky someone be my friend . " 

 it can not be deny that as they sit before the blaze fire , and eat the nourishing , comfortable food , they feel a kind of rapturous awe , and look into each other 's eye with something like doubt . 

 " do you think , " Becky falter once , in a whisper , " do you think it could melt away , miss ? had not   we well be quick ? " and she hastily cram her sandwich into her mouth . if it be only a dream , kitchen manner would be overlook . 

 " no , it will not   melt away , " say Sara . " I be eat this muffin , and I can taste it . you never really eat thing in dream . you only think you be go to eat they . besides , I keep give myself pinch ; and I touch a hot piece of coal just now , on purpose . " 

 the sleepy comfort which at length almost overpower they be a heavenly thing . it be the drowsiness of happy , well - feed childhood , and they sit in the fire glow and luxuriate in it until Sara find herself turn to look at her transform bed . 

 there be even blanket enough to share with Becky . the narrow couch in the next attic be more comfortable that night than its occupant have ever dream that it could be . 

 as she go out of the room , Becky turn upon the threshold and look about she with devouring eye . 

 " if it be not   here in the mornin ' , miss , " she say , " it be be here tonight , anyways , an ' I shall not   never forget it . " she look at each particular thing , as if to commit it to memory . " the fire be there " , point with her finger , " an ' the table be before it ; an ' the lamp be there , an ' the light look rosy red ; an ' there be a satin cover on your bed , an ' a warm rug on the floor , an ' everythin ' look beautiful ; an ' " she pause a second , and lay her hand on her stomach tenderly " there be soup an ' sandwich an ' muffin there be . " and , with this conviction a reality at least , she go away . 

 through the mysterious agency which work in school and among servant , it be quite well know in the morning that Sara Crewe be in horrible disgrace , that Ermengarde be under punishment , and that Becky would have be pack out of the house before breakfast , but that a scullery maid could not be dispense with at once . the servant know that she be allow to stay because Miss Minchin could not easily find another creature helpless and humble enough to work like a bounden slave for so few shilling a week . the elder girl in the schoolroom know that if Miss Minchin do not send Sara away it be for practical reason of her own . 

 " she be grow so fast and learn such a lot , somehow , " say Jessie to Lavinia , " that she will be give class soon , and Miss Minchin know she will have to work for nothing . it be rather nasty of you , Lavvy , to tell about she have fun in the garret . how do you find it out ? " 

 " I get it out of Lottie . she be such a baby she do not   know she be tell I . there be nothing nasty at all in speak to Miss Minchin . I feel it my duty " priggishly . " she be be deceitful . and it be ridiculous that she should look so grand , and be make so much of , in her rag and tatter ! " 

 " what be they do when Miss Minchin catch they ? " 

 " pretend some silly thing . Ermengarde have take up her hamper to share with Sara and Becky . she never invite we to share thing . not that I care , but it be rather vulgar of she to share with servant girl in attic . I wonder Miss Minchin do not   turn Sara out even if she do want she for a teacher . " 

 " if she be turn out where would she go ? " inquire Jessie , a trifle anxiously . 

 " how do I know ? " snap Lavinia . " she will look rather queer when she come into the schoolroom this morning , I should think after what be happen . she have no dinner yesterday , and she be not to have any today . " 

 Jessie be not as ill - natured as she be silly . she pick up her book with a little jerk . 

 " well , I think it be horrid , " she say . " they have   no right to starve she to death . " 

 when Sara go into the kitchen that morning the cook look askance at she , and so do the housemaid ; but she pass they hurriedly . she have , in fact , overslept herself a little , and as Becky have do the same , neither have have time to see the other , and each have come downstairs in haste . 

 Sara go into the scullery . Becky be violently scrub a kettle , and be actually gurgle a little song in her throat . she look up with a wildly elated face . 

 " it be there when I waken , miss the blanket , " she whisper excitedly . " it be as real as it be last night . " 

 " so be mine , " say Sara . " it be all there now all of it . while I be dress I eat some of the cold thing we leave . " 

 " oh , law ! oh , law ! " Becky utter the exclamation in a sort of rapturous groan , and duck her head over her kettle just in time , as the cook come in from the kitchen . 

 Miss Minchin have expect to see in Sara , when she appear in the schoolroom , very much what Lavinia have expect to see . Sara have always be an annoying puzzle to she , because severity never make her cry or look frightened . when she be scold she stand still and listen politely with a grave face ; when she be punish she perform her extra task or go without her meal , make no complaint or outward sign of rebellion . the very fact that she never make an impudent answer seem to Miss Minchin a kind of impudence in itself . but after yesterday 's deprivation of meal , the violent scene of last night , the prospect of hunger today , she must surely have break down . it would be strange indeed if she do not come downstairs with pale cheek and red eye and an unhappy , humble face . 

 Miss Minchin see she for the first time when she enter the schoolroom to hear the little french class recite its lesson and superintend its exercise . and she come in with a springing step , color in her cheek , and a smile hover about the corner of her mouth . it be the most astonishing thing Miss Minchin have ever know . it give she quite a shock . what be the child make of ? what could such a thing mean ? she call she at once to her desk . 

 " you do not look as if you realize that you be in disgrace , " she say . " be you absolutely harden ? " 

 the truth be that when one be still a child or even if one be grow up and have be well feed , and have sleep long and softly and warm ; when one have go to sleep in the midst of a fairy story , and have waken to find it real , one can not be unhappy or even look as if one be ; and one could not , if one try , keep a glow of joy out of one 's eye . Miss Minchin be almost strike dumb by the look of Sara 's eye when she make she perfectly respectful answer . 

 " I beg your pardon , Miss Minchin , " she say ; " I know that I be in disgrace . " 

 " be good enough not to forget it and look as if you have come into a fortune . it be an impertinence . and remember you be to have no food today . " 

 " yes , Miss Minchin , " Sara answer ; but as she turn away her heart leap with the memory of what yesterday have be . " if the Magic have not save I just in time , " she think , " how horrible it would have be ! " 

 " she can not   be very hungry , " whisper Lavinia . " just look at she . perhaps she be pretend she have have a good breakfast " with a spiteful laugh . 

 " she be different from other people , " say Jessie , watch Sara with her class . " sometimes I be a bit frightened of she . " 

 " ridiculous thing ! " ejaculate Lavinia . 

 all through the day the light be in Sara 's face , and the color in her cheek . the servant cast puzzled glance at she , and whisper to each other , and Miss Amelia 's small blue eye wear an expression of bewilderment . what such an audacious look of well - being , under august displeasure could mean she could not understand . it be , however , just like Sara 's singular obstinate way . she be probably determined to brave the matter out . 

 one thing Sara have resolve upon , as she think thing over . the wonder which have happen must be keep a secret , if such a thing be possible . if Miss Minchin should choose to mount to the attic again , of course all would be discover . but it do not seem likely that she would do so for some time at least , unless she be lead by suspicion . Ermengarde and Lottie would be watch with such strictness that they would not dare to steal out of their bed again . Ermengarde could be tell the story and trust to keep it secret . if Lottie make any discovery , she could be bind to secrecy also . perhaps the Magic itself would help to hide its own marvel . 

 " but whatever happen , " Sara keep say to herself all day " WHATEVER happen , somewhere in the world there be a heavenly kind person who be my friend my friend . if I never know who it be if I never can even thank he I shall never feel quite so lonely . oh , the Magic be good to I ! " 

 if it be possible for weather to be bad than it have be the day before , it be bad this day wetter , muddy , colder . there be more errand to be do , the cook be more irritable , and , know that Sara be in disgrace , she be more savage . but what do anything matter when one 's Magic have just prove itself one 's friend . Sara 's supper of the night before have give her strength , she know that she should sleep well and warmly , and , even though she have naturally begin to be hungry again before evening , she feel that she could bear it until breakfast - time on the follow day , when her meal would surely be give to she again . it be quite late when she be at last allow to go upstairs . she have be tell to go into the schoolroom and study until ten o'clock , and she have become interested in her work , and remain over her book later . 

 when she reach the top flight of stair and stand before the attic door , it must be confess that her heart beat rather fast . 

 " of course it might all have be take away , " she whisper , try to be brave . " it might only have be lend to I for just that one awful night . but it be lend to I I have it . it be real . " 

 she push the door open and go in . once inside , she gasp slightly , shut the door , and stand with she back against it look from side to side . 

 the Magic have be there again . it actually have , and it have do even more than before . the fire be blaze , in lovely leaping flame , more merrily than ever . a number of new thing have be bring into the attic which so alter the look of it that if she have not be past doubt she would have rub her eye . upon the low table another supper stand this time with cup and plate for Becky as well as herself ; a piece of bright , heavy , strange embroidery cover the battered mantel , and on it some ornament have be place . all the bare , ugly thing which could be cover with drapery have be conceal and make to look quite pretty . some odd material of rich color have be fasten against the wall with fine , sharp tack so sharp that they could be press into the wood and plaster without hammer . some brilliant fan be pin up , and there be several large cushion , big and substantial enough to use as seat . a wooden box be cover with a rug , and some cushion lie on it , so that it wear quite the air of a sofa . 

 Sara slowly move away from the door and simply sit down and look and look again . 

 " it be exactly like something fairy come true , " she say . " there be not   the least difference . I feel as if I might wish for anything diamond or bag of gold and they would appear ! that would not   be any strange than this . be this my garret ? be I the same cold , ragged , damp Sara ? and to think I use to pretend and pretend and wish there be fairy ! the one thing I always want be to see a fairy story come true . I be live in a fairy story . I feel as if I might be a fairy myself , and able to turn thing into anything else . " 

 she rise and knock upon the wall for the prisoner in the next cell , and the prisoner come . 

 when she enter she almost drop in a heap upon the floor . for a few second she quite lose her breath . 

 " oh , law ! " she gasp . " oh , law , miss ! " 

 " you see , " say Sara . 

 on this night Becky sit on a cushion upon the hearth rug and have a cup and saucer of her own . 

 when Sara go to bed she find that she have a new thick mattress and big downy pillow . her old mattress and pillow have be remove to Becky 's bedstead , and , consequently , with these addition Becky have be supply with unheard - of comfort . 

 " where do it all come from ? " Becky break forth once . " law , who do it , miss ? " 

 " do not   let we even ASK , " say Sara . " if it be not that I want to say , ' oh , thank you , ' I would rather not know . it make it more beautiful . " 

 from that time life become more wonderful day by day . the fairy story continue . almost every day something new be do . some new comfort or ornament appear each time Sara open the door at night , until in a short time the attic be a beautiful little room full of all sort of odd and luxurious thing . the ugly wall be gradually entirely cover with picture and drapery , ingenious piece of fold furniture appear , a bookshelf be hang up and fill with book , new comfort and convenience appear one by one , until there seem nothing leave to be desire . when Sara go downstairs in the morning , the remain of the supper be on the table ; and when she return to the attic in the evening , the magician have remove they and leave another nice little meal . Miss Minchin be as harsh and insulting as ever , Miss Amelia as peevish , and the servant be as vulgar and rude . Sara be send on errand in all weather , and scold and drive hither and thither ; she be scarcely allow to speak to Ermengarde and Lottie ; Lavinia sneer at the increase shabbiness of her clothe ; and the other girl star curiously at she when she appear in the schoolroom . but what do it all matter while she be live in this wonderful mysterious story ? it be more romantic and delightful than anything she have ever invent to comfort her starve young soul and save herself from despair . sometimes , when she be scold , she could scarcely keep from smile . 

 " if you only know ! " she be say to herself . " if you only know ! " 

 the comfort and happiness she enjoy be make she strong , and she have they always to look forward to . if she come home from her errand wet and tired and hungry , she know she would soon be warm and well feed after she have climb the stair . during the hard day she could occupy herself blissfully by think of what she should see when she open the attic door , and wonder what new delight have be prepare for she . in a very short time she begin to look less thin . color come into her cheek , and her eye do not seem so much too big for her face . 

 " Sara Crewe look wonderfully well , " Miss Minchin remark disapprovingly to her sister . 

 " yes , " answer poor , silly Miss Amelia . " she be absolutely fatten . she be begin to look like a little starve crow . " 

 " starve ! " exclaim Miss Minchin , angrily . " there be no reason why she should look starve . she always have plenty to eat ! " 

 " of of course , " agree Miss Amelia , humbly , alarm to find that she have , as usual , say the wrong thing . 

 " there be something very disagreeable in see that sort of thing in a child of her age , " say Miss Minchin , with haughty vagueness . 

 " what sort of thing ? " Miss Amelia venture . 

 " it might almost be call defiance , " answer Miss Minchin , feel annoyed because she know the thing she resent be nothing like defiance , and she do not know what other unpleasant term to use . " the spirit and will of any other child would have be entirely humble and break by by the change she have have to submit to . but , upon my word , she seem as little subdue as if as if she be a princess . " 

 " do you remember , " put in the unwise Miss Amelia , " what she say to you that day in the schoolroom about what you would do if you find out that she be " 

 " no , I do not , " say Miss Minchin . " do not   talk nonsense . " but she remember very clearly indeed . 

 very naturally , even Becky be begin to look plumper and less frightened . she could not help it . she have her share in the secret fairy story , too . she have two mattress , two pillow , plenty of bed - covering , and every night a hot supper and a seat on the cushion by the fire . the Bastille have melt away , the prisoner no long exist . two comfort child sit in the midst of delight . sometimes Sara read aloud from her book , sometimes she learn her own lesson , sometimes she sit and look into the fire and try to imagine who her friend could be , and wish she could say to he some of the thing in her heart . 

 then it come about that another wonderful thing happen . a man come to the door and leave several parcel . all be address in large letter , " to the little Girl in the right - hand attic . " 

 Sara herself be send to open the door and take they in . she lay the two large parcel on the hall table , and be look at the address , when Miss Minchin come down the stair and see she . 

 " take the thing to the young lady to whom they belong , " she say severely . " do not   stand there star at they . 

 " they belong to I , " answer Sara , quietly . 

 " to you ? " exclaim Miss Minchin . " what do you mean ? " 

 " I do not   know where they come from , " say Sara , " but they be address to I . I sleep in the right - hand attic . Becky have the other one . " 

 Miss Minchin come to her side and look at the parcel with an excited expression . 

 " what be in they ? " she demand . 

 " I do not   know , " reply Sara . 

 " open they , " she order . 

 Sara do as she be tell . when the package be unfold Miss Minchin 's countenance wear suddenly a singular expression . what she see be pretty and comfortable clothing clothing of different kind : shoe , stocking , and glove , and a warm and beautiful coat . there be even a nice hat and an umbrella . they be all good and expensive thing , and on the pocket of the coat be pin a paper , on which be write these word : " to be wear every day . will be replace by other when necessary . " 

 Miss Minchin be quite agitated . this be an incident which suggest strange thing to her sordid mind . could it be that she have make a mistake , after all , and that the neglect child have some powerful though eccentric friend in the background perhaps some previously unknown relation , who have suddenly trace her whereabout , and choose to provide for she in this mysterious and fantastic way ? relation be sometimes very odd particularly rich old bachelor uncle , who do not care for have child near they . a man of that sort might prefer to overlook his young relation 's welfare at a distance . such a person , however , would be sure to be crotchety and hot - temper enough to be easily offend . it would not be very pleasant if there be such a one , and he should learn all the truth about the thin , shabby clothe , the scant food , and the hard work . she feel very queer indeed , and very uncertain , and she give a side glance at Sara . 

 " well , " she say , in a voice such as she have never use since the little girl lose her father , ' someone be very kind to you . as the thing have be send , and you be to have new one when they be wear out , you may as well go and put they on and look respectable . after you be dress you may come downstairs and learn your lesson in the schoolroom . you need not go out on any more errand today . " 

 about half an hour afterward , when the schoolroom door open and Sara walk in , the entire seminary be strike dumb . 

 " my word ! " ejaculate Jessie , jog Lavinia 's elbow . " look at the Princess Sara ! " 

 everybody be look , and when Lavinia look she turn quite red . 

 it be the Princess Sara indeed . at least , since the day when she have be a princess , Sara have never look as she do now . she do not seem the Sara they have see come down the back stair a few hour ago . she be dress in the kind of frock Lavinia have be use to envy she the possession of . it be deep and warm in color , and beautifully make . her slender foot look as they have do when Jessie have admire they , and the hair , whose heavy lock have make she look rather like a Shetland pony when it fall loose about her small , odd face , be tie back with a ribbon . 

 " perhaps someone have leave she a fortune , " Jessie whisper . " I always think something would happen to she . she be so queer . " 

 " perhaps the diamond mine have suddenly appear again , " say Lavinia , scathingly . " do not   please she by star at she in that way , you silly thing . " 

 " Sara , " break in Miss Minchin 's deep voice , " come and sit here . " 

 and while the whole schoolroom star and push with elbow , and scarcely make any effort to conceal its excited curiosity , Sara go to her old seat of honor , and bent her head over her book . 

 that night , when she go to her room , after she and Becky have eat their supper she sit and look at the fire seriously for a long time . 

 " be you make something up in your head , miss ? " Becky inquire with respectful softness . when Sara sit in silence and look into the coal with dream eye it generally mean that she be make a new story . but this time she be not , and she shake her head . 

 " no , " she answer . " I be wonder what I ought to do . " 

 Becky star still respectfully . she be fill with something approach reverence for everything Sara do and say . 

 " I can not   help think about my friend , " Sara explain . " if he want to keep himself a secret , it would be rude to try and find out who he be . but I do so want he to know how thankful I be to he and how happy he have make I . anyone who be kind want to know when people have be make happy . they care for that more than for be thank . I wish I do wish " 

 she stop short because her eye at that instant fall upon something stand on a table in a corner . it be something she have find in the room when she come up to it only two day before . it be a little writing - case fit with paper and envelope and pen and ink . 

 " oh , " she exclaim , " why do I not think of that before ? " 

 she rise and go to the corner and bring the case back to the fire . 

 " I can write to he , " she say joyfully , " and leave it on the table . then perhaps the person who take the thing away will take it , too . I will not   ask he anything . he will not   mind my thank he , I feel sure . " 

 so she write a note . this be what she say : 


 I hope you will not think it be impolite that I should write this note to you when you wish to keep yourself a secret . please believe I do not mean to be impolite or try to find out anything at all ; only I want to thank you for be so kind to I so heavenly kind and make everything like a fairy story . I be so grateful to you , and I be so happy and so be Becky . Becky feel just as thankful as I do it be all just as beautiful and wonderful to she as it be to I . we use to be so lonely and cold and hungry , and now oh , just think what you have do for we ! please let I say just these word . it seem as if I ought to say they . thank you thank you thank you ! 

 the little girl in the ATTIC . 


 the next morning she leave this on the little table , and in the evening it have be take away with the other thing ; so she know the Magician have receive it , and she be happy for the thought . she be read one of her new book to Becky just before they go to their respective bed , when her attention be attract by a sound at the skylight . when she look up from her page she see that Becky have hear the sound also , as she have turn her head to look and be listen rather nervously . 

 " something be there , miss , " she whisper . 

 " yes , " say Sara , slowly . " it sound rather like a cat try to get in . " 

 she leave her chair and go to the skylight . it be a queer little sound she hear like a soft scratching . she suddenly remember something and laugh . she remember a quaint little intruder who have make his way into the attic once before . she have see he that very afternoon , sit disconsolately on a table before a window in the indian gentleman 's house . 

 " suppose , " she whisper in pleased excitement " just suppose it be the monkey who get away again . oh , I wish it be ! " 

 she climb on a chair , very cautiously raise the skylight , and peep out . it have be snow all day , and on the snow , quite near she , crouch a tiny , shiver figure , whose small black face wrinkle itself piteously at sight of she . 

 " it be the monkey , " she cry out . " he have creep out of the Lascar 's attic , and he see the light . " 

 Becky run to her side . 

 " be you go to let he in , miss ? " she say . 

 " yes , " Sara answer joyfully . " it be too cold for monkey to be out . they be delicate . I will coax he in . " 

 she put a hand out delicately , speak in a coax voice as she speak to the sparrow and to Melchisedec as if she be some friendly little animal herself . 

 " come along , monkey darling , " she say . " I will not   hurt you . " 

 he know she would not hurt he . he know it before she lay her soft , caress little paw on he and draw he towards she . he have feel human love in the slim brown hand of Ram Dass , and he feel it in her . he let she lift he through the skylight , and when he find himself in her arm he cuddle up to her breast and look up into her face . 

 " nice monkey ! nice monkey ! " she croon , kiss his funny head . " oh , I do love little animal thing . " 

 he be evidently glad to get to the fire , and when she sit down and hold he on her knee he look from she to Becky with mingled interest and appreciation . 

 " he be plain - look , miss , be not   he ? " say Becky . 

 " he look like a very ugly baby , " laugh Sara . " I beg your pardon , monkey ; but I be glad you be not a baby . your mother couldn't be proud of you , and no one would dare to say you look like any of your relation . oh , I do like you ! " 

 she lean back in her chair and reflect . 

 " perhaps he be sorry he be so ugly , " she say , " and it be always on his mind . I wonder if he have a mind . Monkey , my love , have you a mind ? " 

 but the monkey only put up a tiny paw and scratch his head . 

 " what shall you do with he ? " Becky ask . 

 " I shall let he sleep with I tonight , and then take he back to the indian gentleman tomorrow . I be sorry to take you back , monkey ; but you must go . you ought to be fondest of your own family ; and I be not a real relation . " 

 and when she go to bed she make he a nest at her foot , and he curl up and sleep there as if he be a baby and much pleased with his quarter . 




 17 

 " it be the child ! " 

 the next afternoon three member of the Large Family sit in the indian gentleman 's library , do their good to cheer he up . they have be allow to come in to perform this office because he have specially invite they . he have be live in a state of suspense for some time , and today he be wait for a certain event very anxiously . this event be the return of Mr. Carmichael from Moscow . his stay there have be prolong from week to week . on his first arrival there , he have not be able satisfactorily to trace the family he have go in search of . when he feel at last sure that he have find they and have go to their house , he have be tell that they be absent on a journey . his effort to reach they have be unavaile , so he have decide to remain in Moscow until their return . Mr. Carrisford sit in his reclining chair , and Janet sit on the floor beside he . he be very fond of Janet . Nora have find a footstool , and Donald be astride the tiger 's head which ornament the rug make of the animal 's skin . it must be own that he be rid it rather violently . 

 " do not   chirrup so loud , Donald , " Janet say . " when you come to cheer an ill person up you do not   cheer he up at the top of your voice . perhaps cheer up be too loud , Mr. Carrisford ? " turn to the indian gentleman . 

 but he only pat her shoulder . 

 " no , it be not , " he answer . " and it keep I from think too much . " 

 " I be go to be quiet , " Donald shout . " we will all be as quiet as mouse . " 

 " mouse do not   make a noise like that , " say Janet . 

 Donald make a bridle of his handkerchief and bounce up and down on the tiger 's head . 

 " a whole lot of mouse might , " he say cheerfully . " a thousand mouse might . " 

 " I do not   believe fifty thousand mouse would , " say Janet , severely ; " and we have to be as quiet as one mouse . " 

 Mr. Carrisford laugh and pat her shoulder again . 

 " Papa will not   be very long now , " she say . " may we talk about the lose little girl ? " 

 " I do not   think I could talk much about anything else just now , " the indian gentleman answer , knit his forehead with a tired look . 

 " we like she so much , " say Nora . " we call she the little un - fairy princess . " 

 " why ? " the indian gentleman inquire , because the fancy of the Large Family always make he forget thing a little . 

 it be Janet who answer . 

 " it be because , though she be not exactly a fairy , she will be so rich when she be find that she will be like a princess in a fairy tale . we call she the fairy princess at first , but it do not   quite suit . " 

 " be it true , " say Nora , " that her papa give all his money to a friend to put in a mine that have diamond in it , and then the friend think he have lose it all and run away because he feel as if he be a robber ? " 

 " but he be not   really , you know , " put in Janet , hastily . 

 the indian gentleman take hold of her hand quickly . 

 " no , he be not   really , " he say . 

 " I be sorry for the friend , " Janet say ; " I can not   help it . he do not   mean to do it , and it would break his heart . I be sure it would break his heart . " 

 " you be an understanding little woman , Janet , " the indian gentleman say , and he hold her hand close . 

 " do you tell Mr. Carrisford , " Donald shout again , " about the little - girl - who - isn't -a - beggar ? do you tell he she have new nice clothe ? p'r'ap she be be find by somebody when she be lose . " 

 " there be a cab ! " exclaim Janet . " it be stop before the door . it be papa ! " 

 they all run to the window to look out . 

 " yes , it be papa , " Donald proclaim . " but there be no little girl . " 

 all three of they incontinently flee from the room and tumble into the hall . it be in this way they always welcome their father . they be to be hear jump up and down , clap their hand , and be catch up and kiss . 

 Mr. Carrisford make an effort to rise and sink back again . 

 " it be no use , " he say . " what a wreck I be ! " 

 Mr. Carmichael 's voice approach the door . 

 " no , child , " he be say ; " you may come in after I have talk to Mr. Carrisford . go and play with Ram Dass . " 

 then the door open and he come in . he look rosy than ever , and bring an atmosphere of freshness and health with he ; but his eye be disappointed and anxious as they meet the invalid 's look of eager question even as they grasp each other 's hand . 

 " what news ? " Mr. Carrisford ask . " the child the russian people adopt ? " 

 " she be not the child we be look for , " be Mr. Carmichael 's answer . " she be much young than Captain Crewe 's little girl . her name be Emily Carew . I have see and talk to she . the Russians be able to give I every detail . " 

 how wearied and miserable the indian gentleman look ! his hand drop from Mr. Carmichael 's . 

 " then the search have to be begin over again , " he say . " that be all . please sit down . " 

 Mr. Carmichael take a seat . somehow , he have gradually grow fond of this unhappy man . he be himself so well and happy , and so surround by cheerfulness and love , that desolation and broken health seem pitifully unbearable thing . if there have be the sound of just one gay little high - pitch voice in the house , it would have be so much less forlorn . and that a man should be compel to carry about in his breast the thought that he have seem to wrong and desert a child be not a thing one could face . 

 " come , come , " he say in his cheery voice ; " we will find she yet . " 

 " we must begin at once . no time must be lose , " Mr. Carrisford fret . " have you any new suggestion to make any whatsoever ? " 

 Mr. Carmichael feel rather restless , and he rise and begin to pace the room with a thoughtful , though uncertain face . 

 " well , perhaps , " he say . " I do not   know what it may be worth . the fact be , an idea occur to I as I be think the thing over in the train on the journey from Dover . " 

 " what be it ? if she be alive , she be somewhere . " 

 " yes ; she be SOMEWHERE . we have search the school in Paris . let we give up Paris and begin in London . that be my idea to search London . " 

 " there be school enough in London , " say Mr. Carrisford . then he slightly start , rouse by a recollection . " by the way , there be one next door . " 

 " then we will begin there . we can not begin near than next door . " 

 " no , " say Carrisford . " there be a child there who interest I ; but she be not a pupil . and she be a little dark , forlorn creature , as unlike poor Crewe as a child could be . " 

 perhaps the Magic be at work again at that very moment the beautiful magic . it really seem as if it might be so . what be it that bring Ram Dass into the room even as his master speak salaam respectfully , but with a scarcely conceal touch of excitement in his dark , flash eye ? 

 " Sahib , " he say , " the child herself have come the child the sahib feel pity for . she bring back the monkey who have again run away to her attic under the roof . I have ask that she remain . it be my thought that it would please the sahib to see and speak with she . " 

 " who be she ? " inquire Mr. Carmichael . 

 " God know , " Mr. Carrrisford answer . " she be the child I speak of . a little drudge at the school . " he wave his hand to Ram Dass , and address he . " yes , I should like to see she . go and bring she in . " then he turn to Mr. Carmichael . " while you have be away , " he explain , " I have be desperate . the day be so dark and long . Ram Dass tell I of this child 's misery , and together we invent a romantic plan to help she . I suppose it be a childish thing to do ; but it give I something to plan and think of . without the help of an agile , soft - footed oriental like Ram Dass , however , it could not have be do . " 

 then Sara come into the room . she carry the monkey in her arm , and he evidently do not intend to part from she , if it could be help . he be cling to she and chattering , and the interesting excitement of find herself in the indian gentleman 's room have bring a flush to Sara 's cheek . 

 " your monkey run away again , " she say , in her pretty voice . " he come to my garret window last night , and I take he in because it be so cold . I would have bring he back if it have not be so late . I know you be ill and might not like to be disturb . " 

 the indian gentleman 's hollow eye dwelt on she with curious interest . 

 " that be very thoughtful of you , " he say . 

 Sara look toward Ram Dass , who stand near the door . 

 " shall I give he to the Lascar ? " she ask . 

 " how do you know he be a Lascar ? " say the indian gentleman , smile a little . 

 " oh , I know Lascars , " Sara say , hand over the reluctant monkey . " I be bear in India . " 

 the indian gentleman sit upright so suddenly , and with such a change of expression , that she be for a moment quite startle . 

 " you be bear in India , " he exclaim , " be you ? come here . " and he hold out his hand . 

 Sara go to he and lay her hand in his , as he seem to want to take it . she stand still , and her green - gray eye meet his wonderingly . something seem to be the matter with he . 

 " you live next door ? " he demand . 

 " yes ; I live at Miss Minchin 's seminary . " 

 " but you be not one of her pupil ? " 

 a strange little smile hover about Sara 's mouth . she hesitate a moment . 

 " I do not   think I know exactly what I be , " she reply . 

 " why not ? " 

 " at first I be a pupil , and a parlor boarder ; but now " 

 " you be a pupil ! what be you now ? " 

 the queer little sad smile be on Sara 's lip again . 

 " I sleep in the attic , next to the scullery maid , " she say . " I run errand for the cook I do anything she tell I ; and I teach the little one their lesson . " 

 " question she , Carmichael , " say Mr. Carrisford , sink back as if he have lose his strength . " question she ; I can not . " 

 the big , kind father of the Large Family know how to question little girl . Sara realize how much practice he have have when he speak to she in his nice , encourage voice . 

 " what do you mean by ' at first , ' my child ? " he inquire . 

 " when I be first take there by my papa . " 

 " where be your papa ? " 

 " he die , " say Sara , very quietly . " he lose all his money and there be none leave for I . there be no one to take care of I or to pay Miss Minchin . " 

 " Carmichael ! " the indian gentleman cry out loudly . " Carmichael ! " 

 " we must not frighten she , " Mr. Carmichael say aside to he in a quick , low voice . and he add aloud to Sara , " so you be send up into the attic , and make into a little drudge . that be about it , be not   it ? " 

 " there be no one to take care of I , " say Sara . " there be no money ; I belong to nobody . " 

 " how do your father lose his money ? " the indian gentleman break in breathlessly . 

 " he do not lose it himself , " Sara answer , wonder still more each moment . " he have a friend he be very fond of he be very fond of he . it be his friend who take his money . he trust his friend too much . " 

 the indian gentleman 's breath come more quickly . 

 " the friend might have mean to do no harm , " he say . " it might have happen through a mistake . " 

 Sara do not know how unrelenting her quiet young voice sound as she answer . if she have know , she would surely have try to soften it for the indian gentleman 's sake . 

 " the suffering be just as bad for my papa , " she say . " it kill he . " 

 " what be your father 's name ? " the indian gentleman say . " tell I . " 

 " his name be Ralph Crewe , " Sara answer , feel startle . " Captain Crewe . he die in India . " 

 the haggard face contract , and Ram Dass spring to his master 's side . 

 " Carmichael , " the invalid gasp , " it be the child the child ! " 

 for a moment Sara think he be go to die . Ram Dass pour out drop from a bottle , and hold they to his lip . Sara stand near , tremble a little . she look in a bewildered way at Mr. Carmichael . 

 " what child be I ? " she falter . 

 " he be your father 's friend , " Mr. Carmichael answer she . " do not   be frightened . we have be look for you for two year . " 

 Sara put her hand up to her forehead , and her mouth tremble . she speak as if she be in a dream . 

 " and I be at Miss Minchin 's all the while , " she half whisper . " just on the other side of the wall . " 




 18 

 " I try not to be " 

 it be pretty , comfortable Mrs. Carmichael who explain everything . she be send for at once , and come across the square to take Sara into her warm arm and make clear to she all that have happen . the excitement of the totally unexpected discovery have be temporarily almost overpower to Mr. Carrisford in his weak condition . 

 " upon my word , " he say faintly to Mr. Carmichael , when it be suggest that the little girl should go into another room . " I feel as if I do not want to lose sight of she . " 

 " I will take care of she , " Janet say , " and mamma will come in a few minute . " and it be Janet who lead she away . 

 " we be so glad you be find , " she say . " you do not   know how glad we be that you be find . " 

 Donald stand with his hand in his pocket , and gaze at Sara with reflect and self - reproachful eye . 

 " if I have just ask what your name be when I give you my sixpence , " he say , " you would have tell I it be Sara Crewe , and then you would have be find in a minute . " then Mrs. Carmichael come in . she look very much move , and suddenly take Sara in her arm and kiss she . 

 " you look bewilder , poor child , " she say . " and it be not to be wonder at . " 

 Sara could only think of one thing . 

 " be he , " she say , with a glance toward the closed door of the library " be he the wicked friend ? oh , do tell I ! " 

 Mrs. Carmichael be cry as she kiss she again . she feel as if she ought to be kiss very often because she have not be kiss for so long . 

 " he be not wicked , my dear , " she answer . " he do not really lose your papa 's money . he only think he have lose it ; and because he love he so much his grief make he so ill that for a time he be not in his right mind . he almost die of brain fever , and long before he begin to recover your poor papa be dead . " 

 " and he do not know where to find I , " murmur Sara . " and I be so near . " somehow , she could not forget that she have be so near . 

 " he believe you be in school in France , " Mrs. Carmichael explain . " and he be continually mislead by false clue . he have look for you everywhere . when he see you pass by , look so sad and neglect , he do not dream that you be his friend 's poor child ; but because you be a little girl , too , he be sorry for you , and want to make you happy . and he tell Ram Dass to climb into your attic window and try to make you comfortable . " 

 Sara give a start of joy ; her whole look change . 

 " do Ram Dass bring the thing ? " she cry out . " do he tell Ram Dass to do it ? do he make the dream that come true ? " 

 " yes , my dear yes ! he be kind and good , and he be sorry for you , for little lose Sara Crewe 's sake . " 

 the library door open and Mr. Carmichael appear , call Sara to he with a gesture . 

 " Mr. Carrisford be well already , " he say . " he want you to come to he . " 

 Sara do not wait . when the indian gentleman look at she as she enter , he see that her face be all alight . 

 she go and stand before his chair , with her hand clasp together against her breast . 

 " you send the thing to I , " she say , in a joyful emotional little voice , " the beautiful , beautiful thing ? you send they ! " 

 " yes , poor , dear child , I do , " he answer she . he be weak and break with long illness and trouble , but he look at she with the look she remember in her father 's eye that look of love she and want to take she in his arm . it make she kneel down by he , just as she use to kneel by her father when they be the dear friend and lover in the world . 

 " then it be you who be my friend , " she say ; " it be you who be my friend ! " and she drop her face on his thin hand and kiss it again and again . 

 " the man will be himself again in three week , " Mr. Carmichael say aside to his wife . " look at his face already . " 

 in fact , he do look change . here be the " Little Missus , " and he have new thing to think of and plan for already . in the first place , there be Miss Minchin . she must be interview and tell of the change which have take place in the fortune of her pupil . 

 Sara be not to return to the seminary at all . the indian gentleman be very determined upon that point . she must remain where she be , and Mr. Carmichael should go and see Miss Minchin himself . 

 " I be glad I need not go back , " say Sara . " she will be very angry . she do not like I ; though perhaps it be my fault , because I do not like she . " 

 but , oddly enough , Miss Minchin make it unnecessary for Mr. Carmichael to go to she , by actually come in search of her pupil herself . she have want Sara for something , and on inquiry have hear an astonishing thing . one of the housemaid have see she steal out of the area with something hide under her cloak , and have also see she go up the step of the next door and enter the house . 

 " what do she mean ! " cry Miss Minchin to Miss Amelia . 

 " I do not   know , I be sure , sister , " answer Miss Amelia . " unless she have make friend with he because he have live in India . " 

 " it would be just like she to thrust herself upon he and try to gain his sympathy in some such impertinent fashion , " say Miss Minchin . " she must have be in the house for two hour . I will not allow such presumption . I shall go and inquire into the matter , and apologize for her intrusion . " 

 Sara be sit on a footstool close to Mr. Carrisford 's knee , and listen to some of the many thing he feel it necessary to try to explain to she , when Ram Dass announce the visitor 's arrival . 

 Sara rise involuntarily , and become rather pale ; but Mr. Carrisford see that she stand quietly , and show none of the ordinary sign of child terror . 

 Miss Minchin enter the room with a sternly dignified manner . she be correctly and well dress , and rigidly polite . 

 " I be sorry to disturb Mr. Carrisford , " she say ; " but I have explanation to make . I be Miss Minchin , the proprietress of the Young Ladies ' Seminary next door . " 

 the indian gentleman look at she for a moment in silent scrutiny . he be a man who have naturally a rather hot temper , and he do not wish it to get too much the well of he . 

 " so you be Miss Minchin ? " he say . 

 " I be , sir . " 

 " in that case , " the indian gentleman reply , " you have arrive at the right time . my solicitor , Mr. Carmichael , be just on the point of go to see you . " 

 Mr. Carmichael bow slightly , and Miss Minchin look from he to Mr. Carrisford in amazement . 

 " your solicitor ! " she say . " I do not understand . I have come here as a matter of duty . I have just discover that you have be intrude upon through the forwardness of one of my pupil a charity pupil . I come to explain that she intrude without my knowledge . " she turn upon Sara . " go home at once , " she command indignantly . " you shall be severely punish . go home at once . " 

 the indian gentleman draw Sara to his side and pat her hand . 

 " she be not go . " 

 Miss Minchin feel rather as if she must be lose her sens . 

 " not go ! " she repeat . 

 " no , " say Mr. Carrisford . " she be not go home if you give your house that name . her home for the future will be with I . " 

 Miss Minchin fall back in amazed indignation . 

 " with you ! with you sir ! what do this mean ? " 

 " kindly explain the matter , Carmichael , " say the indian gentleman ; " and get it over as quickly as possible . " and he make Sara sit down again , and hold her hand in his which be another trick of her papa 's . 

 then Mr. Carmichael explain in the quiet , level - tone , steady manner of a man who know his subject , and all its legal significance , which be a thing Miss Minchin understand as a business woman , and do not enjoy . 

 " Mr. Carrisford , madam , " he say , " be an intimate friend of the late Captain Crewe . he be his partner in certain large investment . the fortune which Captain Crewe suppose he have lose have be recover , and be now in Mr. Carrisford 's hand . " 

 " the fortune ! " cry Miss Minchin ; and she really lose color as she utter the exclamation . " Sara 's fortune ! " 

 " it will be Sara 's fortune , " reply Mr. Carmichael , rather coldly . " it be Sara 's fortune now , in fact . certain event have increase it enormously . the diamond mine have retrieve themselves . " 

 " the diamond mine ! " Miss Minchin gasp out . if this be true , nothing so horrible , she feel , have ever happen to she since she be bear . 

 " the diamond mine , " Mr. Carmichael repeat , and he could not help add , with a rather sly , unlawyer - like smile , " there be not many princess , Miss Minchin , who be rich than your little charity pupil , Sara Crewe , will be . Mr. Carrisford have be search for she for nearly two year ; he have find she at last , and he will keep she . " 

 after which he ask Miss Minchin to sit down while he explain matter to she fully , and go into such detail as be necessary to make it quite clear to she that Sara 's future be an assured one , and that what have seem to be lose be to be restore to her tenfold ; also , that she have in Mr. Carrisford a guardian as well as a friend . 

 Miss Minchin be not a clever woman , and in her excitement she be silly enough to make one desperate effort to regain what she could not help see she have lose through her worldly folly . 

 " he find she under my care , " she protest . " I have do everything for she . but for I she should have starve in the street . " 

 here the indian gentleman lose his temper . 

 " as to starve in the street , " he say , ' she might have starve more comfortably there than in your attic . " 

 " Captain Crewe leave she in my charge , " Miss Minchin argue . " she must return to it until she be of age . she can be a parlor boarder again . she must finish her education . the law will interfere in my behalf . " 

 " come , come , Miss Minchin , " Mr. Carmichael interpose , " the law will do nothing of the sort . if Sara herself wish to return to you , I dare say Mr. Carrisford might not refuse to allow it . but that rest with Sara . " 

 " then , " say Miss Minchin , " I appeal to Sara . I have not spoil you , perhaps , " she say awkwardly to the little girl ; " but you know that your papa be pleased with your progress . and ahem I have always be fond of you . " 

 Sara 's green - gray eye fix themselves on she with the quiet , clear look Miss Minchin particularly dislike . 

 " have you , Miss Minchin ? " she say . " I do not know that . " 

 Miss Minchin reddened and draw herself up . 

 " you ought to have know it , " say she ; " but child , unfortunately , never know what be good for they . Amelia and I always say you be the clever child in the school . will you not do your duty to your poor papa and come home with I ? " 

 Sara take a step toward she and stand still . she be think of the day when she have be tell that she belong to nobody , and be in danger of be turn into the street ; she be think of the cold , hungry hour she have spend alone with Emily and Melchisedec in the attic . she look Miss Minchin steadily in the face . 

 " you know why I will not go home with you , Miss Minchin , " she say ; " you know quite well . " 

 a hot flush show itself on Miss Minchin 's hard , angry face . 

 " you will never see your companion again , " she begin . " I will see that Ermengarde and Lottie be keep away " 

 Mr. Carmichael stop she with polite firmness . 

 " excuse I , " he say ; ' she will see anyone she wish to see . the parent of Miss Crewe 's fellow - pupil be not likely to refuse her invitation to visit she at her guardian 's house . Mr. Carrisford will attend to that . " 

 it must be confess that even Miss Minchin flinch . this be bad than the eccentric bachelor uncle who might have a peppery temper and be easily offend at the treatment of his niece . a woman of sordid mind could easily believe that most people would not refuse to allow their child to remain friend with a little heiress of diamond mine . and if Mr. Carrisford choose to tell certain of her patron how unhappy Sara Crewe have be make , many unpleasant thing might happen . 

 " you have not undertake an easy charge , " she say to the indian gentleman , as she turn to leave the room ; " you will discover that very soon . the child be neither truthful nor grateful . I suppose " to Sara " that you feel now that you be a princess again . " 

 Sara look down and flush a little , because she think her pet fancy might not be easy for stranger even nice one to understand at first . 

 " I try not to be anything else , " she answer in a low voice " even when I be coldest and hungry I try not to be . " 

 " now it will not be necessary to try , " say Miss Minchin , acidly , as Ram Dass salaam she out of the room . 


 she return home and , go to her sitting room , send at once for Miss Amelia . she sit closet with she all the rest of the afternoon , and it must be admit that poor Miss Amelia pass through more than one bad quarter of an hour . she shed a good many tear , and mop her eye a good deal . one of her unfortunate remark almost cause her sister to snap her head entirely off , but it result in an unusual manner . 

 " I be not as clever as you , sister , " she say , " and I be always afraid to say thing to you for fear of make you angry . perhaps if I be not so timid it would be well for the school and for both of we . I must say I have   often think it would have be well if you have be less severe on Sara Crewe , and have see that she be decently dress and more comfortable . I know she be work too hard for a child of her age , and I know she be only half feed " 

 " how dare you say such a thing ! " exclaim Miss Minchin . 

 " I do not   know how I dare , " Miss Amelia answer , with a kind of reckless courage ; " but now I have   begin I may as well finish , whatever happen to I . the child be a clever child and a good child and she would have pay you for any kindness you have show she . but you do not   show she any . the fact be , she be too clever for you , and you always dislike she for that reason . she use to see through we both " 

 " Amelia ! " gasp she infuriate elder , look as if she would box her ear and knock her cap off , as she have often do to Becky . 

 but Miss Amelia 's disappointment have make she hysterical enough not to care what occur next . 

 " she do ! she do ! " she cry . " she see through we both . she see that you be a hard - hearted , worldly woman , and that I be a weak fool , and that we be both of we vulgar and mean enough to grovel on our knee for her money , and behave ill to she because it be take from she though she behave herself like a little princess even when she be a beggar . she do she do like a little princess ! " and her hysteric get the well of the poor woman , and she begin to laugh and cry both at once , and rock herself backward and forward . 

 " and now you have   lose she , " she cry wildly ; " and some other school will get she and her money ; and if she be like any other child she would tell how she be be treat , and all our pupil would be take away and we should be ruin . and it serve we right ; but it serve you right more than it do I , for you be a hard woman , Maria Minchin , you be a hard , selfish , worldly woman ! " 

 and she be in danger of make so much noise with her hysterical choke and gurgle that her sister be oblige to go to she and apply salt and sal volatile to quiet she , instead of pour forth her indignation at her audacity . 

 and from that time forward , it may be mention , the eld Miss Minchin actually begin to stand a little in awe of a sister who , while she look so foolish , be evidently not quite so foolish as she look , and might , consequently , break out and speak truth people do not want to hear . 

 that evening , when the pupil be gather together before the fire in the schoolroom , as be their custom before go to bed , Ermengarde come in with a letter in her hand and a queer expression on her round face . it be queer because , while it be an expression of delighted excitement , it be combine with such amazement as seem to belong to a kind of shock just receive . 

 " what be the matter ? " cry two or three voice at once . 

 " be it anything to do with the row that have be go on ? " say Lavinia , eagerly . " there have be such a row in Miss Minchin 's room , Miss Amelia have have something like hysteric and have have to go to bed . " 

 Ermengarde answer they slowly as if she be half stun . 

 " I have just have this letter from Sara , " she say , hold it out to let they see what a long letter it be . 

 " from Sara ! " every voice join in that exclamation . 

 " where be she ? " almost shriek Jessie . 

 " next door , " say Ermengarde , " with the indian gentleman . " 

 " where ? where ? have she be send away ? do Miss Minchin know ? be the row about that ? why do she write ? tell we ! tell we ! " 

 there be a perfect babel , and Lottie begin to cry plaintively . 

 Ermengarde answer they slowly as if she be half plunge out into what , at the moment , seem the most important and self - explain thing . 

 " there be diamond mine , " she say stoutly ; " there be ! " open mouth and open eye confront she . 

 " they be real , " she hurry on . " it be all a mistake about they . something happen for a time , and Mr. Carrisford think they be ruin " 

 " who be Mr. Carrisford ? " shout Jessie . 

 " the indian gentleman . and Captain Crewe think so , too and he die ; and Mr. Carrisford have brain fever and run away , and he almost die . and he do not know where Sara be . and it turn out that there be million and million of diamond in the mine ; and half of they belong to Sara ; and they belong to she when she be live in the attic with no one but Melchisedec for a friend , and the cook order she about . and Mr. Carrisford find she this afternoon , and he have get she in his home and she will never come back and she will be more a princess than she ever be a hundred and fifty thousand time more . and I be go to see she tomorrow afternoon . there ! " 

 even Miss Minchin herself could scarcely have control the uproar after this ; and though she hear the noise , she do not try . she be not in the mood to face anything more than she be face in her room , while Miss Amelia be weep in bed . she know that the news have penetrate the wall in some mysterious manner , and that every servant and every child would go to bed talk about it . 

 so until almost midnight the entire seminary , realize somehow that all rule be lay aside , crowd round Ermengarde in the schoolroom and hear read and re - read the letter contain a story which be quite as wonderful as any Sara herself have ever invent , and which have the amazing charm of have happen to Sara herself and the mystic indian gentleman in the very next house . 

 Becky , who have hear it also , manage to creep up stair early than usual . she want to get away from people and go and look at the little magic room once more . she do not know what would happen to it . it be not likely that it would be leave to Miss Minchin . it would be take away , and the attic would be bare and empty again . glad as she be for Sara 's sake , she go up the last flight of stair with a lump in her throat and tear blur her sight . there would be no fire tonight , and no rosy lamp ; no supper , and no princess sit in the glow reading or tell story no princess ! 

 she choke down a sob as she push the attic door open , and then she break into a low cry . 

 the lamp be flush the room , the fire be blaze , the supper be wait ; and Ram Dass be stand smile into her startled face . 

 " Missee sahib remember , " he say . " she tell the sahib all . she wish you to know the good fortune which have befall she . behold a letter on the tray . she have write . she do not wish that you should go to sleep unhappy . the sahib command you to come to he tomorrow . you be to be the attendant of missee sahib . tonight I take these thing back over the roof . " 

 and have say this with a beam face , he make a little salaam and slip through the skylight with an agile silentness of movement which show Becky how easily he have do it before . 




 19 

 Anne 

 never have such joy reign in the nursery of the Large Family . never have they dream of such delight as result from an intimate acquaintance with the little - girl - who - be - not - a - beggar . the mere fact of her suffering and adventure make she a priceless possession . everybody want to be tell over and over again the thing which have happen to she . when one be sit by a warm fire in a big , glowing room , it be quite delightful to hear how cold it could be in an attic . it must be admit that the attic be rather delighted in , and that its coldness and bareness quite sank into insignificance when Melchisedec be remember , and one hear about the sparrow and thing one could see if one climb on the table and stick one 's head and shoulder out of the skylight . 

 of course the thing love well be the story of the banquet and the dream which be true . Sara tell it for the first time the day after she have be find . several member of the Large Family come to take tea with she , and as they sit or curl up on the hearth - rug she tell the story in her own way , and the indian gentleman listen and watch she . when she have finish she look up at he and put her hand on his knee . 

 " that be my part , " she say . " now will not   you tell your part of it , Uncle Tom ? " he have ask she to call he always " Uncle Tom . " " I do not   know your part yet , and it must be beautiful . " 

 so he tell they how , when he sit alone , ill and dull and irritable , Ram Dass have try to distract he by describe the passer by , and there be one child who pass oftener than any one else ; he have begin to be interested in she partly perhaps because he be think a great deal of a little girl , and partly because Ram Dass have be able to relate the incident of his visit to the attic in chase of the monkey . he have describe its cheerless look , and the bearing of the child , who seem as if she be not of the class of those who be treat as drudge and servant . bit by bit , Ram Dass have make discovery concern the wretchedness of her life . he have find out how easy a matter it be to climb across the few yard of roof to the skylight , and this fact have be the beginning of all that follow . 

 " Sahib , " he have say one day , " I could cross the slate and make the child a fire when she be out on some errand . when she return , wet and cold , to find it blaze , she would think a magician have do it . " 

 the idea have be so fanciful that Mr. Carrisford 's sad face have light with a smile , and Ram Dass have be so fill with rapture that he have enlarge upon it and explain to his master how simple it would be to accomplish number of other thing . he have show a childlike pleasure and invention , and the preparation for the carrying out of the plan have fill many a day with interest which would otherwise have drag wearily . on the night of the frustrated banquet Ram Dass have keep watch , all his package be in readiness in the attic which be his own ; and the person who be to help he have wait with he , as interested as himself in the odd adventure . Ram Dass have be lie flat upon the slate , look in at the skylight , when the banquet have come to its disastrous conclusion ; he have be sure of the profoundness of Sara 's weary sleep ; and then , with a dark lantern , he have creep into the room , while his companion remain outside and hand the thing to he . when Sara have stir ever so faintly , Ram Dass have close the lantern - slide and lain flat upon the floor . these and many other exciting thing the child find out by ask a thousand question . 

 " I be so glad , " Sara say . " I be so glad it be you who be my friend ! " 

 there never be such friend as these two became . somehow , they seem to suit each other in a wonderful way . the indian gentleman have never have a companion he like quite as much as he like Sara . in a month 's time he be , as Mr. Carmichael have prophesy he would be , a new man . he be always amused and interested , and he begin to find an actual pleasure in the possession of the wealth he have imagine that he loathe the burden of . there be so many charming thing to plan for Sara . there be a little joke between they that he be a magician , and it be one of his pleasure to invent thing to surprise she . she find beautiful new flower grow in her room , whimsical little gift tuck under pillow , and once , as they sit together in the evening , they hear the scratch of a heavy paw on the door , and when Sara go to find out what it be , there stand a great dog a splendid russian boarhound with a grand silver and gold collar bear an inscription . " I be Boris , " it read ; " I serve the Princess Sara . " 

 there be nothing the indian gentleman love more than the recollection of the little princess in rag and tatter . the afternoon in which the Large Family , or Ermengarde and Lottie , gather to rejoice together be very delightful . but the hour when Sara and the indian gentleman sit alone and read or talk have a special charm of their own . during their pass many interesting thing occur . 

 one evening , Mr. Carrisford , look up from his book , notice that his companion have not stir for some time , but sit gaze into the fire . 

 " what be you ' supposing , ' Sara ? " he ask . 

 Sara look up , with a bright color on her cheek . 

 " I be supposing , " she say ; " I be remember that hungry day , and a child I see . " 

 " but there be a great many hungry day , " say the indian gentleman , with rather a sad tone in his voice . " which hungry day be it ? " 

 " I forget you do not   know , " say Sara . " it be the day the dream come true . " 

 then she tell he the story of the bun shop , and the fourpence she pick up out of the sloppy mud , and the child who be hungry than herself . she tell it quite simply , and in as few word as possible ; but somehow the indian gentleman find it necessary to shade his eye with his hand and look down at the carpet . 

 " and I be suppose a kind of plan , " she say , when she have finish . " I be think I should like to do something . " 

 " what be it ? " say Mr. Carrisford , in a low tone . " you may do anything you like to do , princess . " 

 " I be wonder , " rather hesitate Sara " you know , you say I have so much money I be wonder if I could go to see the bun - woman , and tell she that if , when hungry child particularly on those dreadful day come and sit on the step , or look in at the window , she would just call they in and give they something to eat , she might send the bill to I . could I do that ? " 

 " you shall do it tomorrow morning , " say the indian gentleman . 

 " thank you , " say Sara . " you see , I know what it be to be hungry , and it be very hard when one can not even pretend it away . " 

 " yes , yes , my dear , " say the indian gentleman . " yes , yes , it must be . try to forget it . come and sit on this footstool near my knee , and only remember you be a princess . " 

 " yes , " say Sara , smile ; " and I can give bun and bread to the populace . " and she go and sit on the stool , and the indian gentleman   he use to like she to call he that , too , sometimes   draw her small dark head down on his knee and stroke her hair . 

 the next morning , Miss Minchin , in look out of her window , see the thing she perhaps least enjoy see . the indian gentleman 's carriage , with its tall horse , draw up before the door of the next house , and its owner and a little figure , warm with soft , rich fur , descend the step to get into it . the little figure be a familiar one , and remind Miss Minchin of day in the past . it be follow by another as familiar the sight of which she find very irritate . it be Becky , who , in the character of delighted attendant , always accompany her young mistress to her carriage , carry wrap and belonging . already Becky have a pink , round face . 

 a little later the carriage draw up before the door of the baker 's shop , and its occupant get out , oddly enough , just as the bun - woman be put a tray of smoking - hot bun into the window . 

 when Sara enter the shop the woman turn and look at she , and , leave the bun , come and stand behind the counter . for a moment she look at Sara very hard indeed , and then her good - natured face light up . 

 " I be sure that I remember you , miss , " she say . " and yet " 

 " yes , " say Sara ; " once you give I six bun for fourpence , and " 

 " and you give five of them to a beggar child , " the woman break in on she . " I have   always remember it . I could not   make it out at first . " she turn round to the indian gentleman and speak she next word to he . " I beg your pardon , sir , but there be not many young people that notice a hungry face in that way ; and I have   think of it many a time . excuse the liberty , miss , " to Sara " but you look rosy and well , well than you do that that " 

 " I be well , thank you , " say Sara . " and I be much happy and I have come to ask you to do something for I . " 

 " I , miss ! " exclaim the bun - woman , smile cheerfully . " why , bless you ! yes , miss . what can I do ? " 

 and then Sara , lean on the counter , make her little proposal concern the dreadful day and the hungry waif and the bun . 

 the woman watch she , and listen with an astonished face . 

 " why , bless I ! " she say again when she have hear it all ; " it will be a pleasure to I to do it . I be a working - woman myself and can not afford to do much on my own account , and there be sight of trouble on every side ; but , if you will excuse I , I be bind to say I have   give away many a bit of bread since that wet afternoon , just along o ' thinking of you an ' how wet an ' cold you be , an ' how hungry you look ; an ' yet you give away your hot bun as if you be a princess . " 

 the indian gentleman smile involuntarily at this , and Sara smile a little , too , remember what she have say to herself when she put the bun down on the ravenous child 's ragged lap . 

 " she look so hungry , " she say . " she be even hungry than I be . " 

 " she be starve , " say the woman . " many be the time she be tell I of it since how she sit there in the wet , and feel as if a wolf be a - tear at her poor young inside . " 

 " oh , have you see she since then ? " exclaim Sara . " do you know where she be ? " 

 " yes , I do , " answer the woman , smile more good - naturedly than ever . " why , she be in that there back room , miss , an ' have be for a month ; an ' a decent , well - meanin ' girl she be go to turn out , an ' such a help to I in the shop an ' in the kitchen as you would scarce believe , knowin ' how she be live . " 

 she step to the door of the little back parlor and speak ; and the next minute a girl come out and follow she behind the counter . and actually it be the beggar - child , clean and neatly clothe , and look as if she have not be hungry for a long time . she look shy , but she have a nice face , now that she be no long a savage , and the wild look have go from her eye . she know Sara in an instant , and stand and look at she as if she could never look enough . 

 " you see , " say the woman , " I tell she to come when she be hungry , and when she would come I would give her odd job to do ; an ' I find she be willing , and somehow I get to like she ; and the end of it be , I have   give she a place an ' a home , and she help I , an ' behave well , an ' be as thankful as a girl can be . her name 's Anne . she have no other . " 

 the child stand and look at each other for a few minute ; and then Sara take her hand out of her muff and hold it out across the counter , and Anne take it , and they look straight into each other 's eye . 

 " I be so glad , " Sara say . " and I have just think of something . perhaps Mrs. Brown will let you be the one to give the bun and bread to the child . perhaps you would like to do it because you know what it be to be hungry , too . " 

 " yes , miss , " say the girl . 

 and , somehow , Sara feel as if she understand she , though she say so little , and only stand still and look and look after she as she go out of the shop with the indian gentleman , and they get into the carriage and drive away .