the secret GARDEN 




 CHAPTER I 

 there be no ONE LEFT 

 when Mary Lennox be send to Misselthwaite Manor to live with her uncle everybody say she be the most disagreeable - look child ever see . it be true , too . she have a little thin face and a little thin body , thin light hair and a sour expression . her hair be yellow , and her face be yellow because she have be bear in India and have always be ill in one way or another . her father have hold a position under the English Government and have always be busy and ill himself , and her mother have be a great beauty who care only to go to party and amuse herself with gay people . she have not want a little girl at all , and when Mary be bear she hand she over to the care of an Ayah , who be make to understand that if she wish to please the Mem Sahib she must keep the child out of sight as much as possible . so when she be a sickly , fretful , ugly little baby she be keep out of the way , and when she become a sickly , fretful , toddle thing she be keep out of the way also . she never remember see familiarly anything but the dark face of her Ayah and the other native servant , and as they always obey she and give she her own way in everything , because the Mem Sahib would be angry if she be disturb by her crying , by the time she be six year old she be as tyrannical and selfish a little pig as ever live . the young english governess who come to teach she to read and write dislike she so much that she give up her place in three month , and when other governess come to try to fill it they always go away in a short time than the first one . so if Mary have not choose to really want to know how to read book she would never have learn her letter at all . 

 one frightfully hot morning , when she be about nine year old , she awaken feel very cross , and she become crosser still when she see that the servant who stand by her bedside be not her ayah . 

 " why do you come ? " she say to the strange woman . " I will not let you stay . send my Ayah to I . " 

 the woman look frightened , but she only stammer that the Ayah could not come and when Mary throw herself into a passion and beat and kick she , she look only more frightened and repeat that it be not possible for the Ayah to come to Missie Sahib . 

 there be something mysterious in the air that morning . nothing be do in its regular order and several of the native servant seem missing , while those whom Mary see slunk or hurry about with ashy and scared face . but no one would tell she anything and her Ayah do not come . she be actually leave alone as the morning go on , and at last she wander out into the garden and begin to play by herself under a tree near the veranda . she pretend that she be make a flower - bed , and she stick big scarlet hibiscus blossom into little heap of earth , all the time grow more and more angry and mutter to herself the thing she would say and the name she would call Saidie when she return . 

 " Pig ! Pig ! daughter of Pigs ! " she say , because to call a native a pig be the bad insult of all . 

 she be grind her tooth and say this over and over again when she hear her mother come out on the veranda with some one . she be with a fair young man and they stand talk together in low strange voice . Mary know the fair young man who look like a boy . she have hear that he be a very young officer who have just come from England . the child star at he , but she star most at her mother . she always do this when she have a chance to see she , because the Mem Sahib Mary use to call she that oftener than anything else be such a tall , slim , pretty person and wear such lovely clothe . her hair be like curly silk and she have a delicate little nose which seem to be disdain thing , and she have large laugh eye . all her clothe be thin and floating , and Mary say they be " full of lace . " they look full of lace than ever this morning , but her eye be not laugh at all . they be large and scared and lift imploringly to the fair boy officer 's face . 

 " be it so very bad ? oh , be it ? " Mary hear she say . 

 " awfully , " the young man answer in a trembling voice . " awfully , Mrs. Lennox . you ought to have go to the hill two week ago . " 

 the Mem Sahib wring her hand . 

 " oh , I know I ought ! " she cry . " I only stay to go to that silly dinner party . what a fool I be ! " 

 at that very moment such a loud sound of wailing break out from the servant ' quarter that she clutch the young man 's arm , and Mary stand shiver from head to foot . the wail grow wilder and wilder . " what be it ? what be it ? " Mrs. Lennox gasp . 

 " some one have die , " answer the boy officer . " you do not say it have break out among your servant . " 

 " I do not know ! " the Mem Sahib cry . " come with I ! come with I ! " and she turn and run into the house . 

 after that , appal thing happen , and the mysteriousness of the morning be explain to Mary . the cholera have break out in its most fatal form and people be die like fly . the Ayah have be take ill in the night , and it be because she have just die that the servant have wail in the hut . before the next day three other servant be dead and other have run away in terror . there be panic on every side , and die people in all the bungalow . 

 during the confusion and bewilderment of the second day Mary hide herself in the nursery and be forget by everyone . nobody think of she , nobody want she , and strange thing happen of which she know nothing . Mary alternately cry and sleep through the hour . she only know that people be ill and that she hear mysterious and frightening sound . once she creep into the dining - room and find it empty , though a partly finish meal be on the table and chair and plate look as if they have be hastily push back when the diner rise suddenly for some reason . the child eat some fruit and biscuit , and be thirsty she drink a glass of wine which stand nearly fill . it be sweet , and she do not know how strong it be . very soon it make she intensely drowsy , and she go back to her nursery and shut herself in again , frighten by cry she hear in the hut and by the hurrying sound of foot . the wine make she so sleepy that she could scarcely keep her eye open and she lie down on her bed and know nothing more for a long time . 

 many thing happen during the hour in which she sleep so heavily , but she be not disturb by the wail and the sound of thing be carry in and out of the bungalow . 

 when she awaken she lie and star at the wall . the house be perfectly still . she have never know it to be so silent before . she hear neither voice nor footstep , and wonder if everybody have get well of the cholera and all the trouble be over . she wonder also who would take care of she now her Ayah be dead . there would be a new ayah , and perhaps she would know some new story . Mary have be rather tired of the old one . she do not cry because her nurse have die . she be not an affectionate child and have never care much for any one . the noise and hurry about and wail over the cholera have frighten she , and she have be angry because no one seem to remember that she be alive . everyone be too panic - stricken to think of a little girl no one be fond of . when people have the cholera it seem that they remember nothing but themselves . but if everyone have get well again , surely some one would remember and come to look for she . 

 but no one come , and as she lie wait the house seem to grow more and more silent . she hear something rustle on the matting and when she look down she see a little snake glide along and watch she with eye like jewel . she be not frightened , because he be a harmless little thing who would not hurt she and he seem in a hurry to get out of the room . he slip under the door as she watch he . 

 " how queer and quiet it be , " she say . " it sound as if there be no one in the bungalow but I and the snake . " 

 almost the next minute she hear footstep in the compound , and then on the veranda . they be man 's footstep , and the man enter the bungalow and talk in low voice . no one go to meet or speak to they and they seem to open door and look into room . " what desolation ! " she hear one voice say . " that pretty , pretty woman ! I suppose the child , too . I hear there be a child , though no one ever see she . " 

 Mary be stand in the middle of the nursery when they open the door a few minute later . she look an ugly , cross little thing and be frown because she be begin to be hungry and feel disgracefully neglect . the first man who come in be a large officer she have once see talk to her father . he look tired and troubled , but when he see she he be so startled that he almost jump back . 

 " Barney ! " he cry out . " there be a child here ! a child alone ! in a place like this ! mercy on we , who be she ! " 

 " I be Mary Lennox , " the little girl say , draw herself up stiffly . she think the man be very rude to call her father 's bungalow " a place like this ! " " I fall asleep when everyone have the cholera and I have only just waken up . why do nobody come ? " 

 " it be the child no one ever see ! " exclaim the man , turn to his companion . " she have actually be forget ! " 

 " why be I forget ? " Mary say , stamp her foot . " why do nobody come ? " 

 the young man whose name be Barney look at her very sadly . Mary even think she see he wink his eye as if to wink tear away . 

 " poor little kid ! " he say . " there be nobody leave to come . " 

 it be in that strange and sudden way that Mary find out that she have neither father nor mother leave ; that they have die and be carry away in the night , and that the few native servant who have not die also have leave the house as quickly as they could get out of it , none of they even remember that there be a Missie Sahib . that be why the place be so quiet . it be true that there be no one in the bungalow but herself and the little rustle snake . 




 CHAPTER II 

 MISTRESS MARY quite CONTRARY 

 Mary have like to look at her mother from a distance and she have think she very pretty , but as she know very little of she she could scarcely have be expect to love she or to miss she very much when she be go . she do not miss she at all , in fact , and as she be a self - absorb child she give her entire thought to herself , as she have always do . if she have be old she would no doubt have be very anxious at be leave alone in the world , but she be very young , and as she have always be take care of , she suppose she always would be . what she think be that she would like to know if she be go to nice people , who would be polite to she and give she her own way as her Ayah and the other native servant have do . 

 she know that she be not go to stay at the english clergyman 's house where she be take at first . she do not want to stay . the english clergyman be poor and he have five child nearly all the same age and they wear shabby clothe and be always quarrel and snatch toy from each other . Mary hat their untidy bungalow and be so disagreeable to they that after the first day or two nobody would play with she . by the second day they have give she a nickname which make she furious . 

 it be Basil who think of it first . Basil be a little boy with impudent blue eye and a turn - up nose , and Mary hat he . she be play by herself under a tree , just as she have be play the day the cholera break out . she be make heap of earth and path for a garden and Basil come and stand near to watch she . presently he get rather interested and suddenly make a suggestion . 

 " why do not   you put a heap of stone there and pretend it be a rockery ? " he say . " there in the middle , " and he lean over she to point . 

 " go away ! " cry Mary . " I do not   want boy . go away ! " 

 for a moment Basil look angry , and then he begin to tease . he be always tease his sister . he dance round and round she and make face and sing and laugh . 

 " Mistress Mary , quite contrary , 
 how do your garden grow ? 
 with silver bell , and cockle shell , 
 and marigold all in a row . " 
 he sing it until the other child hear and laugh , too ; and the crosser Mary get , the more they sing " Mistress Mary , quite contrary " ; and after that as long as she stay with they they call she " Mistress Mary Quite Contrary " when they speak of she to each other , and often when they speak to she . 

 " you be go to be send home , " Basil say to she , " at the end of the week . and we be glad of it . " 

 " I be glad of it , too , " answer Mary . " where be home ? " 

 " she do not   know where home be ! " say Basil , with seven - year - old scorn . " it be England , of course . our grandmama live there and our sister Mabel be send to her last year . you be not go to your grandmama . you have none . you be go to your uncle . his name be Mr. Archibald Craven . " 

 " I do not   know anything about he , " snap Mary . 

 " I know you do not , " Basil answer . " you do not   know anything . girl never do . I hear father and mother talk about he . he live in a great , big , desolate old house in the country and no one go near he . he be so cross he will not   let they , and they would not   come if he would let they . he be a hunchback , and he be horrid . " " I do not   believe you , " say Mary ; and she turn she back and stick her finger in her ear , because she would not listen any more . 

 but she think over it a great deal afterward ; and when Mrs. Crawford tell she that night that she be go to sail away to England in a few day and go to her uncle , Mr. Archibald Craven , who live at Misselthwaite Manor , she look so stony and stubbornly uninterested that they do not know what to think about she . they try to be kind to she , but she only turn she face away when Mrs. Crawford attempt to kiss she , and hold herself stiffly when Mr. Crawford pat her shoulder . 

 " she be such a plain child , " Mrs. Crawford say pityingly , afterward . " and her mother be such a pretty creature . she have a very pretty manner , too , and Mary have the most unattractive way I ever see in a child . the child call she ' mistress Mary Quite Contrary , ' and though it be naughty of they , one can not   help understand it . " 

 " perhaps if her mother have carry she pretty face and her pretty manner oftener into the nursery Mary might have learn some pretty way too . it be very sad , now the poor beautiful thing be go , to remember that many people never even know that she have a child at all . " 

 " I believe she scarcely ever look at she , " sigh Mrs. Crawford . " when her Ayah be dead there be no one to give a thought to the little thing . think of the servant run away and leave she all alone in that desert bungalow . Colonel McGrew say he nearly jump out of his skin when he open the door and find she stand by herself in the middle of the room . " 

 Mary make the long voyage to England under the care of an officer 's wife , who be take her child to leave they in a boarding - school . she be very much absorb in her own little boy and girl , and be rather glad to hand the child over to the woman Mr. Archibald Craven send to meet she , in London . the woman be his housekeeper at Misselthwaite Manor , and her name be Mrs. Medlock . she be a stout woman , with very red cheek and sharp black eye . she wear a very purple dress , a black silk mantle with jet fringe on it and a black bonnet with purple velvet flower which stick up and tremble when she move her head . Mary do not like she at all , but as she very seldom like people there be nothing remarkable in that ; besides which it be very evident Mrs. Medlock do not think much of she . 

 " my word ! she be a plain little piece of good ! " she say . " and we would hear that her mother be a beauty . she have not   hand much of it down , have she , ma'am ? " " perhaps she will improve as she grow old , " the officer 's wife say good - naturedly . " if she be not so sallow and have a nice expression , her feature be rather good . child alter so much . " 

 " she will have to alter a good deal , " answer Mrs. Medlock . " and , there be nothing likely to improve child at Misselthwaite if you ask I ! " they think Mary be not listen because she be stand a little apart from they at the window of the private hotel they have go to . she be watch the pass bus and cab and people , but she hear quite well and be make very curious about her uncle and the place he live in . what sort of a place be it , and what would he be like ? what be a hunchback ? she have never see one . perhaps there be none in India . 

 since she have be live in other people 's house and have have no ayah , she have begin to feel lonely and to think queer thought which be new to she . she have begin to wonder why she have never seem to belong to anyone even when her father and mother have be alive . other child seem to belong to their father and mother , but she have never seem to really be anyone 's little girl . she have have servant , and food and clothe , but no one have take any notice of she . she do not know that this be because she be a disagreeable child ; but then , of course , she do not know she be disagreeable . she often think that other people be , but she do not know that she be so herself . 

 she think Mrs. Medlock the most disagreeable person she have ever see , with her common , highly colored face and her common fine bonnet . when the next day they set out on their journey to Yorkshire , she walk through the station to the railway carriage with her head up and try to keep as far away from she as she could , because she do not want to seem to belong to she . it would have make she angry to think people imagine she be her little girl . 

 but Mrs. Medlock be not in the least disturb by she and her thought . she be the kind of woman who would ' stand no nonsense from young one . " at least , that be what she would have say if she have be ask . she have not want to go to London just when her sister Maria 's daughter be go to be marry , but she have a comfortable , well pay place as housekeeper at Misselthwaite Manor and the only way in which she could keep it be to do at once what Mr. Archibald Craven tell she to do . she never dare even to ask a question . 

 " Captain Lennox and his wife die of the cholera , " Mr. Craven have say in his short , cold way . " Captain Lennox be my wife 's brother and I be their daughter 's guardian . the child be to be bring here . you must go to London and bring she yourself . " 

 so she pack her small trunk and make the journey . 

 Mary sit in her corner of the railway carriage and look plain and fretful . she have nothing to read or to look at , and she have fold her thin little black - glove hand in her lap . her black dress make she look yellower than ever , and her limp light hair straggle from under her black crepe hat . 

 " a more marred - look young one I never see in my life , " Mrs. Medlock think .   Marred be a yorkshire word and mean spoiled and pettish .   she have never see a child who sit so still without do anything ; and at last she get tired of watch she and begin to talk in a brisk , hard voice . 

 " I suppose I may as well tell you something about where you be go to , " she say . " do you know anything about your uncle ? " 

 " no , " say Mary . 

 " never hear your father and mother talk about he ? " 

 " no , " say Mary frown . she frown because she remember that her father and mother have never talk to she about anything in particular . certainly they have never tell her thing . 

 " Humph , " mutter Mrs. Medlock , star at her queer , unresponsive little face . she do not say any more for a few moment and then she begin again . 

 " I suppose you might as well be tell something to prepare you . you be go to a queer place . " 

 Mary say nothing at all , and Mrs. Medlock look rather discomfited by her apparent indifference , but , after take a breath , she go on . 

 " not but that it be a grand big place in a gloomy way , and Mr. Craven be proud of it in his way and that be gloomy enough , too . the house be six hundred year old and it be on the edge of the moor , and there be near a hundred room in it , though most of they 's shut up and lock . and there be picture and fine old furniture and thing that be be there for age , and there be a big park round it and garden and tree with branch trail to the ground some of they . " she pause and take another breath . " but there be nothing else , " she end suddenly . 

 Mary have begin to listen in spite of herself . it all sound so unlike India , and anything new rather attract she . but she do not intend to look as if she be interested . that be one of her unhappy , disagreeable way . so she sit still . 

 " well , " say Mrs. Medlock . " what do you think of it ? " 

 " nothing , " she answer . " I know nothing about such place . " 

 that make Mrs. Medlock laugh a short sort of laugh . 

 " eh ! " she say , " but you be like an old woman . do not   you care ? " 

 " it do not   matter " say Mary , " whether I care or not . " 

 " you be right enough there , " say Mrs. Medlock . " it do not . what you be to be keep at Misselthwaite Manor for I do not   know , unless because it be the easy way . he be not go to trouble himself about you , that be sure and certain . he never trouble himself about no one . " 

 she stop herself as if she have just remember something in time . 

 " he be get a crooked back , " she say . " that set he wrong . he be a sour young man and get no good of all his money and big place till he be marry . " 

 Mary 's eye turn toward she in spite of her intention not to seem to care . she have never think of the hunchback 's be marry and she be a trifle surprised . Mrs. Medlock see this , and as she be a talkative woman she continue with more interest . this be one way of pass some of the time , at any rate . 

 " she be a sweet , pretty thing and he would have walk the world over to get she a blade o ' grass she want . nobody think she would marry he , but she do , and people say she marry he for his money . but she do not   she do not , " positively . " when she die " 

 Mary give a little involuntary jump . 

 " oh ! do she die ! " she exclaim , quite without meaning to . she have just remember a french fairy story she have once read call " Riquet a la Houppe . " it have be about a poor hunchback and a beautiful princess and it have make she suddenly sorry for Mr. Archibald Craven . 

 " yes , she die , " Mrs. Medlock answer . " and it make he queerer than ever . he care about nobody . he will not   see people . Most of the time he go away , and when he be at Misselthwaite he shut himself up in the West Wing and will not   let any one but Pitcher see he . Pitcher 's an old fellow , but he take care of he when he be a child and he know his way . " 

 it sound like something in a book and it do not make Mary feel cheerful . a house with a hundred room , nearly all shut up and with their door lock a house on the edge of a moor whatsoever a moor be sound dreary . a man with a crooked back who shut himself up also ! she star out of the window with her lip pinch together , and it seem quite natural that the rain should have begin to pour down in gray slanting line and splash and stream down the window - pane . if the pretty wife have be alive she might have make thing cheerful by be something like her own mother and by run in and out and go to party as she have do in frock " full of lace . " but she be not there any more . 

 " you need not   expect to see he , because ten to one you will not , " say Mrs. Medlock . " and you must not   expect that there will be people to talk to you . you will have to play about and look after yourself . you will be tell what room you can go into and what room you be to keep out of . there be garden enough . but when you be in the house do not   go wander and poke about . Mr. Craven will not   have it . " 

 " I shall not want to go poke about , " say sour little Mary and just as suddenly as she have begin to be rather sorry for Mr. Archibald Craven she begin to cease to be sorry and to think he be unpleasant enough to deserve all that have happen to he . 

 and she turn her face toward the stream pane of the window of the railway carriage and gaze out at the gray rain - storm which look as if it would go on forever and ever . she watch it so long and steadily that the grayness grow heavy and heavy before her eye and she fall asleep . 




 CHAPTER III 

 across the moor 

 she sleep a long time , and when she awaken Mrs. Medlock have buy a lunchbasket at one of the station and they have some chicken and cold beef and bread and butter and some hot tea . the rain seem to be stream down more heavily than ever and everybody in the station wear wet and glisten waterproof . the guard light the lamp in the carriage , and Mrs. Medlock cheer up very much over her tea and chicken and beef . she eat a great deal and afterward fall asleep herself , and Mary sit and star at she and watch her fine bonnet slip on one side until she herself fall asleep once more in the corner of the carriage , lull by the splashing of the rain against the window . it be quite dark when she awaken again . the train have stop at a station and Mrs. Medlock be shake she . 

 " you have have a sleep ! " she say . " it be time to open your eye ! we be at Thwaite Station and we have   get a long drive before we . " 

 Mary stand up and try to keep her eye open while Mrs. Medlock collect her parcel . the little girl do not offer to help she , because in India native servant always pick up or carry thing and it seem quite proper that other people should wait on one . 

 the station be a small one and nobody but themselves seem to be get out of the train . the station - master speak to Mrs. Medlock in a rough , good - natured way , pronounce his word in a queer broad fashion which Mary find out afterward be Yorkshire . 

 " I see tha 's get back , " he say . " an ' tha 's browt th ' young ' un with thee . " 

 " Aye , that be she , " answer Mrs. Medlock , speak with a Yorkshire accent herself and jerk her head over her shoulder toward Mary . " how be thy Missus ? " 

 " well enow . Th ' carriage be waitin ' outside for thee . " 

 a brougham stand on the road before the little outside platform . Mary see that it be a smart carriage and that it be a smart footman who help she in . his long waterproof coat and the waterproof cover of his hat be shin and dripping with rain as everything be , the burly station - master include . 

 when he shut the door , mount the box with the coachman , and they drive off , the little girl find herself seat in a comfortably cushion corner , but she be not inclined to go to sleep again . she sit and look out of the window , curious to see something of the road over which she be be drive to the queer place Mrs. Medlock have speak of . she be not at all a timid child and she be not exactly frightened , but she feel that there be no knowing what might happen in a house with a hundred room nearly all shut up a house stand on the edge of a moor . 

 " what be a moor ? " she say suddenly to Mrs. Medlock . 

 " look out of the window in about ten minute and you will see , " the woman answer . " we have   get to drive five mile across Missel Moor before we get to the Manor . you will not   see much because it be a dark night , but you can see something . " 

 Mary ask no more question but wait in the darkness of her corner , keep her eye on the window . the carriage lamp cast ray of light a little distance ahead of they and she catch glimpse of the thing they pass . after they have leave the station they have drive through a tiny village and she have see whitewash cottage and the light of a public house . then they have pass a church and a vicarage and a little shop - window or so in a cottage with toy and sweet and odd thing set out for sale . then they be on the highroad and she see hedge and tree . after that there seem nothing different for a long time or at least it seem a long time to she . 

 at last the horse begin to go more slowly , as if they be climb up - hill , and presently there seem to be no more hedge and no more tree . she could see nothing , in fact , but a dense darkness on either side . she lean forward and press her face against the window just as the carriage give a big jolt . 

 " eh ! we be on the moor now sure enough , " say Mrs. Medlock . 

 the carriage lamp shed a yellow light on a rough - look road which seem to be cut through bush and low - grow thing which end in the great expanse of dark apparently spread out before and around they . a wind be rise and make a singular , wild , low , rush sound . 

 " it be it be not the sea , be it ? " say Mary , look round at her companion . 

 " no , not it , " answer Mrs. Medlock . " nor it be not   field nor mountain , it be just mile and mile and mile of wild land that nothing grow on but heather and gorse and broom , and nothing live on but wild pony and sheep . " 

 " I feel as if it might be the sea , if there be water on it , " say Mary . " it sound like the sea just now . " 

 " that be the wind blow through the bush , " Mrs. Medlock say . " it be a wild , dreary enough place to my mind , though there be plenty that like it particularly when the heather 's in bloom . " 

 on and on they drive through the darkness , and though the rain stop , the wind rush by and whistle and make strange sound . the road go up and down , and several time the carriage pass over a little bridge beneath which water rush very fast with a great deal of noise . Mary feel as if the drive would never come to an end and that the wide , bleak moor be a wide expanse of black ocean through which she be pass on a strip of dry land . 

 " I do not   like it , " she say to herself . " I do not   like it , " and she pinch her thin lip more tightly together . 

 the horse be climb up a hilly piece of road when she first catch sight of a light . Mrs. Medlock see it as soon as she do and draw a long sigh of relief . 

 " eh , I be glad to see that bit o ' light twinkling , " she exclaim . " it be the light in the lodge window . we shall get a good cup of tea after a bit , at all event . " 

 it be " after a bit , " as she say , for when the carriage pass through the park gate there be still two mile of avenue to drive through and the tree   which nearly meet overhead   make it seem as if they be drive through a long dark vault . 

 they drive out of the vault into a clear space and stop before an immensely long but low - build house which seem to ramble round a stone court . at first Mary think that there be no light at all in the window , but as she get out of the carriage she see that one room in a corner upstairs show a dull glow . 

 the entrance door be a huge one make of massive , curiously shape panel of oak stud with big iron nail and bind with great iron bar . it open into an enormous hall , which be so dimly light that the face in the portrait on the wall and the figure in the suit of armor make Mary feel that she do not want to look at they . as she stand on the stone floor she look a very small , odd little black figure , and she feel as small and lost and odd as she look . 

 a neat , thin old man stand near the manservant who open the door for they . 

 " you be to take she to her room , " he say in a husky voice . " he do not   want to see she . he be go to London in the morning . " 

 " very well , Mr. Pitcher , " Mrs. Medlock answer . " so long as I know what be expect of I , I can manage . " 

 " what be expect of you , Mrs. Medlock , " Mr. Pitcher say , " be that you make sure that he be not disturb and that he do not   see what he do not   want to see . " 

 and then Mary Lennox be lead up a broad staircase and down a long corridor and up a short flight of step and through another corridor and another , until a door open in a wall and she find herself in a room with a fire in it and a supper on a table . 

 Mrs. Medlock say unceremoniously : 

 " well , here you be ! this room and the next be where you will live and you must keep to they . do not   you forget that ! " 

 it be in this way Mistress Mary arrive at Misselthwaite Manor and she have perhaps never feel quite so contrary in all her life . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 MARTHA 

 when she open her eye in the morning it be because a young housemaid have come into her room to light the fire and be kneel on the hearth - rug rake out the cinder noisily . Mary lie and watch she for a few moment and then begin to look about the room . she have never see a room at all like it and think it curious and gloomy . the wall be cover with tapestry with a forest scene embroider on it . there be fantastically dress people under the tree and in the distance there be a glimpse of the turret of a castle . there be hunter and horse and dog and lady . Mary feel as if she be in the forest with they . out of a deep window she could see a great climb stretch of land which seem to have no tree on it , and to look rather like an endless , dull , purplish sea . 

 " what be that ? " she say , point out of the window . 

 Martha , the young housemaid , who have just rise to her foot , look and point also . " that there ? " she say . 

 " yes . " 

 " that be th ' moor , " with a good - natured grin . " do tha ' like it ? " 

 " no , " answer Mary . " I hate it . " 

 " that be because tha'rt not use to it , " Martha say , go back to her hearth . " Tha ' think it be too big an ' bare now . but tha ' will like it . " 

 " do you ? " inquire Mary . 

 " Aye , that I do , " answer Martha , cheerfully polish away at the grate . " I just love it . it be none bare . it be cover wi ' growin ' thing as smell sweet . it be fair lovely in spring an ' summer when th ' gorse an ' broom an ' heather be in flower . it smell o ' honey an ' there be such a lot o ' fresh air an ' th ' sky look so high an ' th ' bee an ' skylark make such a nice noise hummin ' an ' singin ' . eh ! I would not   live away from th ' moor for anythin ' . " 

 Mary listen to she with a grave , puzzled expression . the native servant she have be use to in India be not in the least like this . they be obsequious and servile and do not presume to talk to their master as if they be their equal . they make salaam and call they " protector of the poor " and name of that sort . indian servant be command to do thing , not ask . it be not the custom to say " please " and " thank you " and Mary have always slap her Ayah in the face when she be angry . she wonder a little what this girl would do if one slap she in the face . she be a round , rosy , good - natured - look creature , but she have a sturdy way which make Mistress Mary wonder if she might not even slap back if the person who slap she be only a little girl . 

 " you be a strange servant , " she say from her pillow , rather haughtily . 

 Martha sit up on her heel , with her black - brush in her hand , and laugh , without seem the least out of temper . 

 " eh ! I know that , " she say . " if there be a grand Missus at Misselthwaite I should never have be even one of th ' under house - maid . I might have be let to be scullerymaid but I would never have be let upstairs . I be too common an ' I talk too much Yorkshire . but this be a funny house for all it be so grand . seem like there be neither Master nor Mistress except Mr. Pitcher an ' Mrs. Medlock . Mr. Craven , he will not   be trouble about anythin ' when he be here , an ' he be nearly always away . Mrs. Medlock give I th ' place out o ' kindness . she tell I she could never have do it if Misselthwaite have be like other big house . " " be you go to be my servant ? " Mary ask , still in her imperious little indian way . 

 Martha begin to rub her grate again . 

 " I be Mrs. Medlock 's servant , " she say stoutly . " an ' she be Mr. Craven 's but I be to do the housemaid 's work up here an ' wait on you a bit . but you will not   need much waitin ' on . " 

 " who be go to dress I ? " demand Mary . 

 Martha sit up on her heel again and star . she speak in broad Yorkshire in her amazement . 

 " Canna ' tha ' dress thysen ! " she say . 

 " what do you mean ? I do not   understand your language , " say Mary . 

 " eh ! I forget , " Martha say . " Mrs. Medlock tell I I would have to be careful or you would not   know what I be sayin ' . I mean can not   you put on your own clothe ? " 

 " no , " answer Mary , quite indignantly . " I never do in my life . my Ayah dress I , of course . " 

 " well , " say Martha , evidently not in the least aware that she be impudent , " it be time tha ' should learn . tha ' can not begin young . it will do thee good to wait on thysen a bit . my mother always say she could not   see why grand people 's child do not   turn out fair fool what with nurse an ' bein ' wash an ' dress an ' take out to walk as if they be puppy ! " 

 " it be different in India , " say Mistress Mary disdainfully . she could scarcely stand this . 

 but Martha be not at all crush . 

 " eh ! I can see it be different , " she answer almost sympathetically . " I dare say it be because there be such a lot o ' black there instead o ' respectable white people . when I hear you be comin ' from India I think you be a black too . " 

 Mary sit up in bed furious . 

 " what ! " she say . " what ! you think I be a native . you you daughter of a pig ! " 

 Martha star and look hot . 

 " who be you callin ' name ? " she say . " you need not   be so vexed . that be not th ' way for a young lady to talk . I have   nothing against th ' black . when you read about them in tract they be always very religious . you always read as a black 's a man an ' a brother . I have   never see a black an ' I be fair pleased to think I be go to see one close . when I come in to light your fire this mornin ' I crep ' up to your bed an ' pull th ' cover back careful to look at you . an ' there you be , " disappointedly , " no more black than I for all you be so yeller . " 

 Mary do not even try to control her rage and humiliation . " you think I be a native ! you dare ! you do not   know anything about native ! they be not people they be servant who must salaam to you . you know nothing about India . you know nothing about anything ! " 

 she be in such a rage and feel so helpless before the girl 's simple stare , and somehow she suddenly feel so horribly lonely and far away from everything she understand and which understand she , that she throw herself face downward on the pillow and burst into passionate sobbing . she sob so unrestrainedly that good - natured Yorkshire Martha be a little frightened and quite sorry for she . she go to the bed and bend over she . 

 " eh ! you must not   cry like that there ! " she beg . " you must not   for sure . I do not   know you would be vex . I do not   know anythin ' about anythin ' just like you say . I beg your pardon , Miss. do stop cryin ' . " 

 there be something comforting and really friendly in her queer Yorkshire speech and sturdy way which have a good effect on Mary . she gradually cease cry and become quiet . Martha look relieve . 

 " it be time for thee to get up now , " she say . " Mrs. Medlock say I be to carry tha ' breakfast an ' tea an ' dinner into th ' room next to this . it be be make into a nursery for thee . I will help thee on with thy clothe if tha'll get out o ' bed . if th ' button be at th ' back tha ' can not button they up tha'self . " 

 when Mary at last decide to get up , the clothe Martha take from the wardrobe be not the one she have wear when she arrive the night before with Mrs. Medlock . 

 " those be not mine , " she say . " mine be black . " 

 she look the thick white wool coat and dress over , and add with cool approval : 

 " those be nice than mine . " 

 " these be th ' one tha ' must put on , " Martha answer . " Mr. Craven order Mrs. Medlock to get them in London . he say ' I will not   have a child dress in black wanderin ' about like a lost soul , ' he say . ' it would make the place sad than it be . put color on she . ' Mother she say she know what he mean . mother always know what a body mean . she do not   hold with black hersel ' . " 

 " I hate black thing , " say Mary . 

 the dressing process be one which teach they both something . Martha have " button up " her little sister and brother but she have never see a child who stand still and wait for another person to do thing for she as if she have neither hand nor foot of her own . 

 " why do not   tha ' put on tha ' own shoe ? " she say when Mary quietly hold out her foot . 

 " my Ayah do it , " answer Mary , star . " it be the custom . " 

 she say that very often " it be the custom . " the native servant be always say it . if one tell they to do a thing their ancestor have not do for a thousand year they gaze at one mildly and say , " it be not the custom " and one know that be the end of the matter . 

 it have not be the custom that Mistress Mary should do anything but stand and allow herself to be dress like a doll , but before she be ready for breakfast she begin to suspect that her life at Misselthwaite Manor would end by teach she a number of thing quite new to her thing such as put on her own shoe and stocking , and pick up thing she let fall . if Martha have be a well - train fine young lady 's maid she would have be more subservient and respectful and would have know that it be her business to brush hair , and button boot , and pick thing up and lie they away . she be , however , only an untrained Yorkshire rustic who have be bring up in a moorland cottage with a swarm of little brother and sister who have never dream of do anything but wait on themselves and on the young one who be either baby in arm or just learn to totter about and tumble over thing . 

 if Mary Lennox have be a child who be ready to be amuse she would perhaps have laugh at Martha 's readiness to talk , but Mary only listen to she coldly and wonder at her freedom of manner . at first she be not at all interested , but gradually , as the girl rattle on in her good - temper , homely way , Mary begin to notice what she be say . 

 " eh ! you should see them all , " she say . " there be twelve of we an ' my father only get sixteen shilling a week . I can tell you my mother 's put to it to get porridge for them all . they tumble about on th ' moor an ' play there all day an ' mother say th ' air of th ' moor fatten them . she say she believe they eat th ' grass same as th ' wild pony do . our Dickon , he be twelve year old and he be get a young pony he call his own . " 

 " where do he get it ? " ask Mary . 

 " he find it on th ' moor with its mother when it be a little one an ' he begin to make friend with it an ' give it bit o ' bread an ' pluck young grass for it . and it get to like he so it follow he about an ' it let he get on its back . Dickon 's a kind lad an ' animal like he . " 

 Mary have never possess an animal pet of her own and have always think she should like one . so she begin to feel a slight interest in Dickon , and as she have never before be interested in any one but herself , it be the dawning of a healthy sentiment . when she go into the room which have be make into a nursery for she , she find that it be rather like the one she have sleep in . it be not a child 's room , but a grow - up person 's room , with gloomy old picture on the wall and heavy old oak chair . a table in the center be set with a good substantial breakfast . but she have always have a very small appetite , and she look with something more than indifference at the first plate Martha set before she . 

 " I do not   want it , " she say . 

 " Tha ' do not   want thy porridge ! " Martha exclaim incredulously . 

 " no . " 

 " Tha ' do not   know how good it be . put a bit o ' treacle on it or a bit o ' sugar . " 

 " I do not   want it , " repeat Mary . 

 " eh ! " say Martha . " I can not   abide to see good victual go to waste . if our child be at this table they would clean it bare in five minute . " 

 " why ? " say Mary coldly . " why ! " echo Martha . " because they scarce ever have their stomach full in their life . they be as hungry as young hawk an ' fox . " 

 " I do not   know what it be to be hungry , " say Mary , with the indifference of ignorance . 

 Martha look indignant . 

 " well , it would do thee good to try it . I can see that plain enough , " she say outspokenly . " I have   no patience with folk as sit an ' just stare at good bread an ' meat . my word ! do not   I wish Dickon and Phil an ' Jane an ' th ' rest of them have what be here under their pinafore . " 

 " why do not   you take it to they ? " suggest Mary . 

 " it be not mine , " answer Martha stoutly . " an ' this be not   my day out . I get my day out once a month same as th ' rest . then I go home an ' clean up for mother an ' give she a day 's rest . " 

 Mary drink some tea and eat a little toast and some marmalade . 

 " you wrap up warm an ' run out an ' play you , " say Martha . " it will do you good and give you some stomach for your meat . " 

 Mary go to the window . there be garden and path and big tree , but everything look dull and wintry . 

 " out ? why should I go out on a day like this ? " " well , if tha ' do not   go out tha'lt have to stay in , an ' what have tha ' get to do ? " 

 Mary glance about she . there be nothing to do . when Mrs. Medlock have prepare the nursery she have not think of amusement . perhaps it would be well to go and see what the garden be like . 

 " who will go with I ? " she inquire . 

 Martha star . 

 " you will go by yourself , " she answer . " you will have to learn to play like other child do when they have not   get sister and brother . our Dickon go off on th ' moor by himself an ' play for hour . that be how he make friend with th ' pony . he be get sheep on th ' moor that know he , an ' bird as come an ' eat out of his hand . however little there be to eat , he always save a bit o ' his bread to coax his pet . " 

 it be really this mention of Dickon which make Mary decide to go out , though she be not aware of it . there would be , bird outside though there would not be pony or sheep . they would be different from the bird in India and it might amuse she to look at they . 

 Martha find her coat and hat for she and a pair of stout little boot and she show she her way downstairs . 

 " if tha ' go round that way tha'll come to th ' garden , " she say , point to a gate in a wall of shrubbery . " there be lot o ' flower in summer - time , but there be nothing bloomin ' now . " she seem to hesitate a second before she add , " one of th ' garden be lock up . no one have be in it for ten year . " 

 " why ? " ask Mary in spite of herself . here be another locked door add to the hundred in the strange house . 

 " Mr. Craven have it shut when his wife die so sudden . he will not   let no one go inside . it be her garden . he lock th ' door an ' dig a hole and bury th ' key . there be Mrs. Medlock 's bell ring I must run . " 

 after she be go Mary turn down the walk which lead to the door in the shrubbery . she could not help think about the garden which no one have be into for ten year . she wonder what it would look like and whether there be any flower still alive in it . when she have pass through the shrubbery gate she find herself in great garden , with wide lawn and winding walk with clipped border . there be tree , and flower - bed , and evergreen clip into strange shape , and a large pool with an old gray fountain in its midst . but the flower - bed be bare and wintry and the fountain be not play . this be not the garden which be shut up . how could a garden be shut up ? you could always walk into a garden . 

 she be just think this when she see that , at the end of the path she be follow , there seem to be a long wall , with ivy grow over it . she be not familiar enough with England to know that she be come upon the kitchen - garden where the vegetable and fruit be grow . she go toward the wall and find that there be a green door in the ivy , and that it stand open . this be not the closed garden , evidently , and she could go into it . 

 she go through the door and find that it be a garden with wall all round it and that it be only one of several walled garden which seem to open into one another . she see another open green door , reveal bush and pathway between bed contain winter vegetable . fruit - tree be train flat against the wall , and over some of the bed there be glass frame . the place be bare and ugly enough , Mary think , as she stand and star about she . it might be nice in summer when thing be green , but there be nothing pretty about it now . 

 presently an old man with a spade over his shoulder walk through the door lead from the second garden . he look startled when he see Mary , and then touch his cap . he have a surly old face , and do not seem at all pleased to see she but then she be displeased with his garden and wear she " quite contrary " expression , and certainly do not seem at all pleased to see he . 

 " what be this place ? " she ask . 

 " one o ' th ' kitchen - garden , " he answer . 

 " what be that ? " say Mary , point through the other green door . 

 " another of them , " shortly . " there be another on t'other side o ' th ' wall an ' there be th ' orchard t'other side o ' that . " 

 " can I go in they ? " ask Mary . 

 " if tha ' like . but there be nowt to see . " 

 Mary make no response . she go down the path and through the second green door . there , she find more wall and winter vegetable and glass frame , but in the second wall there be another green door and it be not open . perhaps it lead into the garden which no one have see for ten year . as she be not at all a timid child and always do what she want to do , Mary go to the green door and turn the handle . she hop the door would not open because she want to be sure she have find the mysterious garden but it do open quite easily and she walk through it and find herself in an orchard . there be wall all round it also and tree train against they , and there be bare fruit - tree grow in the winter - brown grass but there be no green door to be see anywhere . Mary look for it , and yet when she have enter the upper end of the garden she have notice that the wall do not seem to end with the orchard but to extend beyond it as if it enclose a place at the other side . she could see the top of tree above the wall , and when she stand still she see a bird with a bright red breast sit on the topmost branch of one of they , and suddenly he burst into his winter song almost as if he have catch sight of she and be call to she . 

 she stop and listen to he and somehow his cheerful , friendly little whistle give she a pleased feeling even a disagreeable little girl may be lonely , and the big closed house and big bare moor and big bare garden have make this one feel as if there be no one leave in the world but herself . if she have be an affectionate child , who have be use to be love , she would have break her heart , but even though she be " Mistress Mary Quite Contrary " she be desolate , and the bright - breast little bird bring a look into her sour little face which be almost a smile . she listen to he until he fly away . he be not like an indian bird and she like he and wonder if she should ever see he again . perhaps he live in the mysterious garden and know all about it . 

 perhaps it be because she have nothing whatever to do that she think so much of the deserted garden . she be curious about it and want to see what it be like . why have Mr. Archibald Craven bury the key ? if he have like his wife so much why do he hate her garden ? she wonder if she should ever see he , but she know that if she do she should not like he , and he would not like she , and that she should only stand and stare at he and say nothing , though she should be want dreadfully to ask he why he have do such a queer thing . 

 " People never like I and I never like people , " she think . " and I never can talk as the crawford child could . they be always talk and laugh and make noise . " 

 she think of the robin and of the way he seem to sing his song at she , and as she remember the tree - top he perch on she stop rather suddenly on the path . 

 " I believe that tree be in the secret garden I feel sure it be , " she say . " there be a wall round the place and there be no door . " 

 she walk back into the first kitchen - garden she have enter and find the old man dig there . she go and stand beside he and watch he a few moment in her cold little way . he take no notice of she and so at last she speak to he . 

 " I have be into the other garden , " she say . 

 " there be nothing to prevent thee , " he answer crustily . 

 " I go into the orchard . " 

 " there be no dog at th ' door to bite thee , " he answer . 

 " there be no door there into the other garden , " say Mary . 

 " what garden ? " he say in a rough voice , stop his digging for a moment . 

 " the one on the other side of the wall , " answer Mistress Mary . " there be tree there I see the top of they . a bird with a red breast be sit on one of they and he sing . " 

 to her surprise the surly old weather - beat face actually change its expression . a slow smile spread over it and the gardener look quite different . it make she think that it be curious how much nice a person look when he smile . she have not think of it before . 

 he turn about to the orchard side of his garden and begin to whistle a low soft whistle . she could not understand how such a surly man could make such a coax sound . almost the next moment a wonderful thing happen . she hear a soft little rush flight through the air and it be the bird with the red breast fly to they , and he actually alight on the big clod of earth quite near to the gardener 's foot . 

 " here he be , " chuckle the old man , and then he speak to the bird as if he be speak to a child . 

 " where have tha ' be , tha ' cheeky little beggar ? " he say . " I have   not see thee before today . have tha , begin tha ' courtin ' this early in th ' season ? Tha'rt too forrad . " 

 the bird put his tiny head on one side and look up at he with his soft bright eye which be like a black dewdrop . he seem quite familiar and not the least afraid . he hop about and peck the earth briskly , look for seed and insect . it actually give Mary a queer feeling in her heart , because he be so pretty and cheerful and seem so like a person . he have a tiny plump body and a delicate beak , and slender delicate leg . 

 " will he always come when you call he ? " she ask almost in a whisper . 

 " Aye , that he will . I have   know he ever since he be a fledgling . he come out of th ' nest in th ' other garden an ' when first he fly over th ' wall he be too weak to fly back for a few day an ' we get friendly . when he go over th ' wall again th ' rest of th ' brood be go an ' he be lonely an ' he come back to I . " 

 " what kind of a bird be he ? " Mary ask . 

 " do not   tha ' know ? he be a robin redbreast an ' they be th ' friendly , curious bird alive . they be almost as friendly as dog if you know how to get on with them . watch he peckin ' about there an ' lookin ' round at we now an ' again . he know we be talkin ' about he . " 

 it be the queer thing in the world to see the old fellow . he look at the plump little scarlet - waistcoate bird as if he be both proud and fond of he . 

 " he be a conceited one , " he chuckle . " he like to hear folk talk about he . an ' curious bless I , there never be his like for curiosity an ' meddlin ' . he be always comin ' to see what I be plantin ' . he know all th ' thing Mester Craven never trouble hissel ' to find out . he be th ' head gardener , he be . " 

 the robin hop about busily peck the soil and now and then stop and look at they a little . Mary think his black dewdrop eye gaze at she with great curiosity . it really seem as if he be find out all about she . the queer feeling in her heart increase . " where do the rest of the brood fly to ? " she ask . 

 " there be no knowin ' . the old one turn them out o ' their nest an ' make them fly an ' they be scatter before you know it . this one be a knowin ' one an ' he know he be lonely . " 

 Mistress Mary go a step near to the robin and look at he very hard . 

 " I be lonely , " she say . 

 she have not know before that this be one of the thing which make she feel sour and cross . she seem to find it out when the robin look at she and she look at the robin . 

 the old gardener push his cap back on his bald head and star at she a minute . 

 " art tha ' th ' little wench from India ? " he ask . 

 Mary nod . 

 " then no wonder tha'rt lonely . Tha'lt be lonlier before tha 's do , " he say . 

 he begin to dig again , drive his spade deep into the rich black garden soil while the robin hop about very busily employ . 

 " what be your name ? " Mary inquire . 

 he stand up to answer she . 

 " Ben Weatherstaff , " he answer , and then he add with a surly chuckle , " I be lonely mysel ' except when he be with I , " and he jerk his thumb toward the robin . " he be th ' only friend I have   get . " 

 " I have no friend at all , " say Mary . " I never have . my Ayah do not   like I and I never play with any one . " 

 it be a Yorkshire habit to say what you think with blunt frankness , and old Ben Weatherstaff be a Yorkshire moor man . 

 " Tha ' an ' I be a good bit alike , " he say . " we be weave out of th ' same cloth . we be neither of we good lookin ' an ' we be both of we as sour as we look . we have   get the same nasty temper , both of we , I will warrant . " 

 this be plain speak , and Mary Lennox have never hear the truth about herself in her life . native servant always salaam and submit to you , whatever you do . she have never think much about her look , but she wonder if she be as unattractive as Ben Weatherstaff and she also wonder if she look as sour as he have look before the robin come . she actually begin to wonder also if she be " nasty temper . " she feel uncomfortable . 

 suddenly a clear ripple little sound break out near she and she turn round . she be stand a few foot from a young apple - tree and the robin have fly on to one of its branch and have burst out into a scrap of a song . Ben Weatherstaff laugh outright . 

 " what do he do that for ? " ask Mary . 

 " he be make up his mind to make friend with thee , " reply Ben . " dang I if he have not   take a fancy to thee . " 

 " to I ? " say Mary , and she move toward the little tree softly and look up . 

 " would you make friend with I ? " she say to the robin just as if she be speak to a person . " would you ? " and she do not say it either in her hard little voice or in her imperious indian voice , but in a tone so soft and eager and coax that Ben Weatherstaff be as surprised as she have be when she hear he whistle . 

 " why , " he cry out , " tha ' say that as nice an ' human as if tha ' be a real child instead of a sharp old woman . Tha ' say it almost like Dickon talk to his wild thing on th ' moor . " 

 " do you know Dickon ? " Mary ask , turn round rather in a hurry . 

 " everybody know he . Dickon 's wanderin ' about everywhere . th ' very blackberry an ' heather - bell know he . I warrant th ' fox show he where their cub lie an ' th ' skylark do not   hide their nest from he . " 

 Mary would have like to ask some more question . she be almost as curious about Dickon as she be about the deserted garden . but just that moment the robin , who have end his song , give a little shake of his wing , spread they and fly away . he have make his visit and have other thing to do . 

 " he have fly over the wall ! " Mary cry out , watch he . " he have fly into the orchard he have fly across the other wall into the garden where there be no door ! " 

 " he live there , " say old Ben . " he come out o ' th ' egg there . if he be courtin ' , he be makin ' up to some young madam of a robin that live among th ' old rose - tree there . " 

 " rose - tree , " say Mary . " be there rise - tree ? " 

 Ben Weatherstaff take up his spade again and begin to dig . 

 " there be ten year ' ago , " he mumble . 

 " I should like to see they , " say Mary . " where be the green door ? there must be a door somewhere . " 

 Ben drive his spade deep and look as uncompanionable as he have look when she first see he . 

 " there be ten year ' ago , but there be not   now , " he say . 

 " no door ! " cry Mary . " there must be . " " none as any one can find , an ' none as be any one 's business . do not   you be a meddlesome wench an ' poke your nose where it be no cause to go . here , I must go on with my work . get you go an ' play you . I have   no more time . " 

 and he actually stop dig , throw his spade over his shoulder and walk off , without even glance at she or say good - by . 




 CHAPTER V 

 the CRY in the corridor 

 at first each day which pass by for Mary Lennox be exactly like the other . every morning she awake in her tapestried room and find Martha kneeling upon the hearth build her fire ; every morning she eat her breakfast in the nursery which have nothing amusing in it ; and after each breakfast she gaze out of the window across to the huge moor which seem to spread out on all side and climb up to the sky , and after she have star for a while she realize that if she do not go out she would have to stay in and do nothing and so she go out . she do not know that this be the good thing she could have do , and she do not know that , when she begin to walk quickly or even run along the path and down the avenue , she be stir her slow blood and make herself strong by fight with the wind which sweep down from the moor . she run only to make herself warm , and she hat the wind which rush at her face and roar and hold she back as if it be some giant she could not see . but the big breath of rough fresh air blow over the heather fill her lung with something which be good for her whole thin body and whip some red color into her cheek and brighten her dull eye when she do not know anything about it . 

 but after a few day spend almost entirely out of door she waken one morning know what it be to be hungry , and when she sit down to her breakfast she do not glance disdainfully at her porridge and push it away , but take up her spoon and begin to eat it and go on eat it until her bowl be empty . 

 " Tha ' get on well enough with that this mornin ' , do not   tha ' ? " say Martha . 

 " it taste nice today , " say Mary , feel a little surprised her self . 

 " it be th ' air of th ' moor that be givin ' thee stomach for tha ' victual , " answer Martha . " it be lucky for thee that tha 's get victual as well as appetite . there be be twelve in our cottage as have th ' stomach an ' nothing to put in it . you go on playin ' you out o ' door every day an ' you will get some flesh on your bone an ' you will not   be so yell . " 

 " I do not   play , " say Mary . " I have nothing to play with . " 

 " nothing to play with ! " exclaim Martha . " our child play with stick and stone . they just run about an ' shout an ' look at thing . " Mary do not shout , but she look at thing . there be nothing else to do . she walk round and round the garden and wander about the path in the park . sometimes she look for Ben Weatherstaff , but though several time she see he at work he be too busy to look at she or be too surly . once when she be walk toward he he pick up his spade and turn away as if he do it on purpose . 

 one place she go to oftener than to any other . it be the long walk outside the garden with the wall round they . there be bare flower - bed on either side of it and against the wall ivy grow thickly . there be one part of the wall where the creep dark green leaf be more bushy than elsewhere . it seem as if for a long time that part have be neglect . the rest of it have be clip and make to look neat , but at this low end of the walk it have not be trim at all . 

 a few day after she have talk to Ben Weatherstaff , Mary stop to notice this and wonder why it be so . she have just pause and be look up at a long spray of ivy swing in the wind when she see a gleam of scarlet and hear a brilliant chirp , and there , on the top of the wall , forward perch Ben Weatherstaff 's robin redbreast , tilt forward to look at she with his small head on one side . 

 " oh ! " she cry out , " be it you be it you ? " and it do not seem at all queer to she that she speak to he as if she be sure that he would understand and answer she . 

 he do answer . he twitter and chirp and hop along the wall as if he be tell she all sort of thing . it seem to mistress Mary as if she understand he , too , though he be not speak in word . it be as if he say : 

 " good morning ! be not   the wind nice ? be not   the sun nice ? be not   everything nice ? let we both chirp and hop and twitter . come on ! come on ! " 

 Mary begin to laugh , and as he hop and take little flight along the wall she run after he . poor little thin , sallow , ugly Mary she actually look almost pretty for a moment . 

 " I like you ! I like you ! " she cry out , patter down the walk ; and she chirp and try to whistle , which last she do not know how to do in the least . but the robin seem to be quite satisfied and chirp and whistle back at she . at last he spread his wing and make a dart flight to the top of a tree , where he perch and sing loudly . that remind Mary of the first time she have see he . he have be swing on a tree - top then and she have be stand in the orchard . now she be on the other side of the orchard and stand in the path outside a wall much lower down and there be the same tree inside . 

 " it be in the garden no one can go into , " she say to herself . " it be the garden without a door . he live in there . how I wish I could see what it be like ! " 

 she run up the walk to the green door she have enter the first morning . then she run down the path through the other door and then into the orchard , and when she stand and look up there be the tree on the other side of the wall , and there be the robin just finish his song and , begin to preen his feather with his beak . 

 " it be the garden , " she say . " I be sure it be . " 

 she walk round and look closely at that side of the orchard wall , but she only find what she have find before that there be no door in it . then she run through the kitchen - garden again and out into the walk outside the long ivy - cover wall , and she walk to the end of it and look at it , but there be no door ; and then she walk to the other end , look again , but there be no door . 

 " it be very queer , " she say . " Ben Weatherstaff say there be no door and there be no door . but there must have be one ten year ago , because Mr. Craven bury the key . " 

 this give she so much to think of that she begin to be quite interested and feel that she be not sorry that she have come to Misselthwaite Manor . in India she have always feel hot and too languid to care much about anything . the fact be that the fresh wind from the moor have begin to blow the cobwebs out of her young brain and to waken she up a little . 

 she stay out of door nearly all day , and when she sit down to her supper at night she feel hungry and drowsy and comfortable . she do not feel cross when Martha chatter away . she feel as if she rather like to hear she , and at last she think she would ask she a question . she ask it after she have finish her supper and have sit down on the hearth - rug before the fire . 

 " why do Mr. Craven hate the garden ? " she say . 

 she have make Martha stay with she and Martha have not object at all . she be very young , and use to a crowded cottage full of brother and sister , and she find it dull in the great servant ' hall downstairs where the footman and upper - housemaid make fun of her Yorkshire speech and look upon she as a common little thing , and sit and whisper among themselves . Martha like to talk , and the strange child who have live in India , and be wait upon by " black , " be novelty enough to attract she . 

 she sit down on the hearth herself without wait to be ask . 

 " art tha ' thinkin ' about that garden yet ? " she say . " I know tha ' would . that be just the way with I when I first hear about it . " 

 " why do he hate it ? " Mary persist . 

 Martha tuck her foot under she and make herself quite comfortable . 

 " listen to th ' wind wutherin ' round the house , " she say . " you could bare stand up on the moor if you be out on it tonight . " 

 Mary do not know what " wutherin ' " mean until she listen , and then she understand . it must mean that hollow shuddering sort of roar which rush round and round the house as if the giant no one could see be buffet it and beat at the wall and window to try to break in . but one know he could not get in , and somehow it make one feel very safe and warm inside a room with a red coal fire . 

 " but why do he hate it so ? " she ask , after she have listen . she intend to know if Martha do . 

 then Martha give up her store of knowledge . 

 " mind , " she say , " Mrs. Medlock say it be not to be talk about . there be lot o ' thing in this place that be not to be talk over . that be Mr. Craven 's order . his trouble be none servant ' business , he say . but for th ' garden he would not   be like he be . it be Mrs. Craven 's garden that she have make when first they be marry an ' she just love it , an ' they use to ' tend the flower themselves . an ' none o ' th ' gardener be ever let to go in . he an ' she use to go in an ' shut th ' door an ' stay there hour an ' hour , readin ' and talkin ' . an ' she be just a bit of a girl an ' there be an old tree with a branch bent like a seat on it . an ' she make rose grow over it an ' she use to sit there . but one day when she be sittin ' there th ' branch break an ' she fall on th ' ground an ' be hurt so bad that next day she die . Th ' doctor think he would go out o ' his mind an ' die , too . that be why he hat it . no one be never go in since , an ' he will not   let any one talk about it . " 

 Mary do not ask any more question . she look at the red fire and listen to the wind " wutherin ' . " it seem to be " wutherin ' " louder than ever . at that moment a very good thing be happen to she . four good thing have happen to she , in fact , since she come to Misselthwaite Manor . she have feel as if she have understand a robin and that he have understand she ; she have run in the wind until her blood have grow warm ; she have be healthily hungry for the first time in her life ; and she have find out what it be to be sorry for some one . 

 but as she be listen to the wind she begin to listen to something else . she do not know what it be , because at first she could scarcely distinguish it from the wind itself . it be a curious sound it seem almost as if a child be cry somewhere . sometimes the wind sound rather like a child crying , but presently Mistress Mary feel quite sure this sound be inside the house , not outside it . it be far away , but it be inside . she turn round and look at Martha . 

 " do you hear any one cry ? " she say . 

 Martha suddenly look confused . 

 " no , " she answer . " it be th ' wind . sometimes it sound like as if some one be lose on th ' moor an ' wailin ' . it be get all sort o ' sound . " 

 " but listen , " say Mary . " it be in the house down one of those long corridor . " 

 and at that very moment a door must have be open somewhere downstairs ; for a great rushing draft blow along the passage and the door of the room they sit in be blow open with a crash , and as they both jump to their foot the light be blow out and the cry sound be sweep down the far corridor so that it be to be hear more plainly than ever . 

 " there ! " say Mary . " I tell you so ! it be some one cry and it be not   a grow - up person . " 

 Martha run and shut the door and turn the key , but before she do it they both hear the sound of a door in some far passage shut with a bang , and then everything be quiet , for even the wind cease " wutherin ' " for a few moment . 

 " it be th ' wind , " say Martha stubbornly . " an ' if it be not , it be little Betty Butterworth , th ' scullery - maid . she be have th ' toothache all day . " 

 but something troubled and awkward in her manner make Mistress Mary stare very hard at she . she do not believe she be speak the truth . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 " THERE be some one crying there be ! " 

 the next day the rain pour down in torrent again , and when Mary look out of her window the moor be almost hide by gray mist and cloud . there could be no go out today . 

 " what do you do in your cottage when it rain like this ? " she ask Martha . 

 " try to keep from under each other 's foot mostly , " Martha answer . " eh ! there do seem a lot of we then . Mother 's a good - temper woman but she get fair moithered . the big one go out in th ' cow - shed and play there . Dickon he do not   mind th ' wet . he go out just th ' same as if th ' sun be shinin ' . he say he see thing on rainy day as do not   show when it be fair weather . he once find a little fox cub half drown in its hole and he bring it home in th ' bosom of his shirt to keep it warm . its mother have be kill nearby an ' th ' hole be swum out an ' th ' rest o ' th ' litter be dead . he be get it at home now . he find a half - drown young crow another time an ' he bring it home , too , an ' tame it . it be name Soot because it be so black , an ' it hop an ' fly about with he everywhere . " 

 the time have come when Mary have forget to resent Martha 's familiar talk . she have even begin to find it interesting and to be sorry when she stop or go away . the story she have be tell by her Ayah when she live in India have be quite unlike those Martha have to tell about the moorland cottage which hold fourteen people who live in four little room and never have quite enough to eat . the child seem to tumble about and amuse themselves like a litter of rough , good - natured collie puppy . Mary be most attract by the mother and Dickon . when Martha tell story of what " mother " say or do they always sound comfortable . 

 " if I have a raven or a fox cub I could play with it , " say Mary . " but I have nothing . " 

 Martha look perplexed . 

 " can tha ' knit ? " she ask . 

 " no , " answer Mary . 

 " can tha ' sew ? " 

 " no . " 

 " can tha ' read ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " then why do not   tha , read something , or learn a bit o ' spellin ' ? tha'st old enough to be learnin ' thy book a good bit now . " 

 " I have not   any book , " say Mary . " those I have be leave in India . " 

 " that be a pity , " say Martha . " if Mrs. Medlock'd let thee go into th ' library , there be thousand o ' book there . " 

 Mary do not ask where the library be , because she be suddenly inspire by a new idea . she make up her mind to go and find it herself . she be not trouble about Mrs. Medlock . Mrs. Medlock seem always to be in her comfortable housekeeper 's sit - room downstair . in this queer place one scarcely ever see any one at all . in fact , there be no one to see but the servant , and when their master be away they live a luxurious life below stair , where there be a huge kitchen hang about with shin brass and pewter , and a large servant ' hall where there be four or five abundant meal eat every day , and where a great deal of lively romping go on when Mrs. Medlock be out of the way . 

 Mary 's meal be serve regularly , and Martha wait on she , but no one trouble themselves about she in the least . Mrs. Medlock come and look at she every day or two , but no one inquire what she do or tell she what to do . she suppose that perhaps this be the english way of treat child . in India she have always be attend by her Ayah , who have follow she about and wait on she , hand and foot . she have often be tired of her company . now she be follow by nobody and be learn to dress herself because Martha look as though she think she be silly and stupid when she want to have thing hand to she and put on . 

 " have not   tha ' get good sense ? " she say once , when Mary have stand wait for she to put on her glove for she . " our Susan Ann be twice as sharp as thee an ' she be only four year ' old . sometimes tha ' look fair soft in th ' head . " 

 Mary have wear her contrary scowl for an hour after that , but it make she think several entirely new thing . 

 she stand at the window for about ten minute this morning after Martha have sweep up the hearth for the last time and go downstairs . she be think over the new idea which have come to she when she hear of the library . she do not care very much about the library itself , because she have read very few book ; but to hear of it bring back to her mind the hundred room with closed door . she wonder if they be all really lock and what she would find if she could get into any of they . be there a hundred really ? why should not   she go and see how many door she could count ? it would be something to do on this morning when she could not go out . she have never be teach to ask permission to do thing , and she know nothing at all about authority , so she would not have think it necessary to ask Mrs. Medlock if she might walk about the house , even if she have see she . 

 she open the door of the room and go into the corridor , and then she begin her wandering . it be a long corridor and it branch into other corridor and it lead she up short flight of step which mount to other again . there be door and door , and there be picture on the wall . sometimes they be picture of dark , curious landscape , but oftenest they be portrait of man and woman in queer , grand costume make of satin and velvet . she find herself in one long gallery whose wall be cover with these portrait . she have never think there could be so many in any house . she walk slowly down this place and star at the face which also seem to stare at she . she feel as if they be wonder what a little girl from India be do in their house . some be picture of child little girl in thick satin frock which reach to their foot and stand out about they , and boy with puff sleeve and lace collar and long hair , or with big ruff around their neck . she always stop to look at the child , and wonder what their name be , and where they have go , and why they wear such odd clothe . there be a stiff , plain little girl rather like herself . she wear a green brocade dress and hold a green parrot on her finger . her eye have a sharp , curious look . 

 " where do you live now ? " say Mary aloud to she . " I wish you be here . " 

 surely no other little girl ever spend such a queer morning . it seem as if there be no one in all the huge ramble house but her own small self , wander about upstairs and down , through narrow passage and wide one , where it seem to she that no one but herself have ever walk . since so many room have be build , people must have live in they , but it all seem so empty that she could not quite believe it true . 

 it be not until she climb to the second floor that she think of turn the handle of a door . all the door be shut , as Mrs. Medlock have say they be , but at last she put her hand on the handle of one of they and turn it . she be almost frightened for a moment when she feel that it turn without difficulty and that when she push upon the door itself it slowly and heavily open . it be a massive door and open into a big bedroom . there be embroider hanging on the wall , and inlay furniture such as she have see in India stand about the room . a broad window with leaded pane look out upon the moor ; and over the mantel be another portrait of the stiff , plain little girl who seem to stare at she more curiously than ever . 

 " perhaps she sleep here once , " say Mary . " she star at I so that she make I feel queer . " 

 after that she open more door and more . she see so many room that she become quite tired and begin to think that there must be a hundred , though she have not count they . in all of they there be old picture or old tapestry with strange scene work on they . there be curious piece of furniture and curious ornament in nearly all of they . 

 in one room , which look like a lady 's sitting - room , the hanging be all embroider velvet , and in a cabinet be about a hundred little elephant make of ivory . they be of different size , and some have their mahout or palanquin on their back . some be much big than the other and some be so tiny that they seem only baby . Mary have see carve ivory in India and she know all about elephant . she open the door of the cabinet and stand on a footstool and play with these for quite a long time . when she get tired she set the elephant in order and shut the door of the cabinet . 

 in all her wandering through the long corridor and the empty room , she have see nothing alive ; but in this room she see something . just after she have close the cabinet door she hear a tiny rustle sound . it make her jump and look around at the sofa by the fireplace , from which it seem to come . in the corner of the sofa there be a cushion , and in the velvet which cover it there be a hole , and out of the hole peep a tiny head with a pair of frightened eye in it . 

 Mary creep softly across the room to look . the bright eye belong to a little gray mouse , and the mouse have eat a hole into the cushion and make a comfortable nest there . six baby mouse be cuddle up asleep near she . if there be no one else alive in the hundred room there be seven mouse who do not look lonely at all . 

 " if they would not   be so frightened I would take they back with I , " say Mary . 

 she have wander about long enough to feel too tired to wander any far , and she turn back . two or three time she lose her way by turn down the wrong corridor and be oblige to ramble up and down until she find the right one ; but at last she reach her own floor again , though she be some distance from her own room and do not know exactly where she be . 

 " I believe I have take a wrong turning again , " she say , stand still at what seem the end of a short passage with tapestry on the wall . " I do not   know which way to go . how still everything be ! " 

 it be while she be stand here and just after she have say this that the stillness be break by a sound . it be another cry , but not quite like the one she have hear last night ; it be only a short one , a fretful childish whine muffle by pass through wall . 

 " it be near than it be , " say Mary , her heart beat rather fast . " and it be cry . " 

 she put her hand accidentally upon the tapestry near she , and then spring back , feel quite startled . the tapestry be the covering of a door which fall open and show she that there be another part of the corridor behind it , and Mrs. Medlock be come up it with her bunch of key in her hand and a very cross look on her face . 

 " what be you do here ? " she say , and she take Mary by the arm and pull she away . " what do I tell you ? " 

 " I turn round the wrong corner , " explain Mary . " I do not   know which way to go and I hear some one cry . " she quite hat Mrs. Medlock at the moment , but she hat she more the next . 

 " you do not   hear anything of the sort , " say the housekeeper . " you come along back to your own nursery or I will box your ear . " 

 and she take she by the arm and half push , half pull she up one passage and down another until she push she in at the door of her own room . 

 " now , " she say , " you stay where you be tell to stay or you will find yourself lock up . the master have well get you a governess , same as he say he would . you be one that need some one to look sharp after you . I have   get enough to do . " 

 she go out of the room and slam the door after she , and Mary go and sit on the hearth - rug , pale with rage . she do not cry , but grind her tooth . 

 " there be some one cry there be there be ! " she say to herself . 

 she have hear it twice now , and sometime she would find out . she have find out a great deal this morning . she feel as if she have be on a long journey , and at any rate she have have something to amuse she all the time , and she have play with the ivory elephant and have see the gray mouse and its baby in their nest in the velvet cushion . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 the key to the GARDEN 

 two day after this , when Mary open her eye she sit upright in bed immediately , and call to Martha . 

 " look at the moor ! look at the moor ! " 

 the rainstorm have end and the gray mist and cloud have be sweep away in the night by the wind . the wind itself have cease and a brilliant , deep blue sky arch high over the moorland . never , never have Mary dream of a sky so blue . in India sky be hot and blazing ; this be of a deep cool blue which almost seem to sparkle like the water of some lovely bottomless lake , and here and there , high , high in the arched blueness float small cloud of snow - white fleece . the far - reach world of the moor itself look softly blue instead of gloomy purple - black or awful dreary gray . 

 " Aye , " say Martha with a cheerful grin . " Th ' storm be over for a bit . it do like this at this time o ' th ' year . it go off in a night like it be pretendin ' it have never be here an ' never mean to come again . that be because th ' springtime be on its way . it be a long way off yet , but it be comin ' . " 

 " I think perhaps it always rain or look dark in England , " Mary say . 

 " eh ! no ! " say Martha , sit up on her heel among her black lead brush . " nowt o ' th ' soart ! " 

 " what do that mean ? " ask Mary seriously . in India the native speak different dialect which only a few people understand , so she be not surprised when Martha use word she do not know . 

 Martha laugh as she have do the first morning . 

 " there now , " she say . " I have   talk broad Yorkshire again like Mrs. Medlock say I must not . ' nowt o ' th ' soart ' mean ' nothin'-of - the - sort , ' " slowly and carefully , " but it take so long to say it . Yorkshire 's th ' sunniest place on earth when it be sunny . I tell thee tha'd like th ' moor after a bit . just you wait till you see th ' gold - color gorse blossom an ' th ' blossom o ' th ' broom , an ' th ' heather flowerin ' , all purple bell , an ' hundred o ' butterfly flutterin ' an ' bee hummin ' an ' skylark soarin ' up an ' singin ' . you will want to get out on it as sunrise an ' live out on it all day like Dickon do . " " could I ever get there ? " ask Mary wistfully , look through her window at the far - off blue . it be so new and big and wonderful and such a heavenly color . 

 " I do not   know , " answer Martha . " Tha 's never use tha ' leg since tha ' be bear , it seem to I . Tha ' could not   walk five mile . it be five mile to our cottage . " 

 " I should like to see your cottage . " 

 Martha star at she a moment curiously before she take up her polishing brush and begin to rub the grate again . she be think that the small plain face do not look quite as sour at this moment as it have do the first morning she see it . it look just a trifle like little Susan Ann 's when she want something very much . 

 " I will ask my mother about it , " she say . " she be one o ' they that nearly always see a way to do thing . it be my day out today an ' I be go home . eh ! I be glad . Mrs. Medlock think a lot o ' mother . perhaps she could talk to she . " 

 " I like your mother , " say Mary . 

 " I should think tha ' do , " agree Martha , polish away . 

 " I have   never see she , " say Mary . 

 " no , tha ' have not , " reply Martha . 

 she sit up on her heel again and rub the end of her nose with the back of her hand as if puzzle for a moment , but she end quite positively . 

 " well , she be that sensible an ' hard workin ' an ' goodnatured an ' clean that no one could help likin ' she whether they would see she or not . when I be go home to she on my day out I just jump for joy when I be crossin ' the moor . " 

 " I like Dickon , " add Mary . " and I have   never see he . " 

 " well , " say Martha stoutly , " I have   tell thee that th ' very bird like he an ' th ' rabbit an ' wild sheep an ' pony , an ' th ' fox themselves . I wonder , " star at she reflectively , " what Dickon would think of thee ? " 

 " he would not   like I , " say Mary in her stiff , cold little way . " no one do . " 

 Martha look reflective again . 

 " how do tha ' like thysel ' ? " she inquire , really quite as if she be curious to know . 

 Mary hesitate a moment and think it over . 

 " not at all really , " she answer . " but I never think of that before . " 

 Martha grin a little as if at some homely recollection . 

 " Mother say that to I once , " she say . " she be at her wash - tub an ' I be in a bad temper an ' talkin ' ill of folk , an ' she turn round on I an ' say : ' tha ' young vixen , tha ' ! there tha ' stand sayin ' tha ' do not   like this one an ' tha ' do not   like that one . how do tha ' like thysel ' ? ' it make I laugh an ' it bring I to my sens in a minute . " 

 she go away in high spirit as soon as she have give Mary her breakfast . she be go to walk five mile across the moor to the cottage , and she be go to help her mother with the washing and do the week 's baking and enjoy herself thoroughly . 

 Mary feel lonely than ever when she know she be no long in the house . she go out into the garden as quickly as possible , and the first thing she do be to run round and round the fountain flower garden ten time . she count the time carefully and when she have finish she feel in well spirit . the sunshine make the whole place look different . the high , deep , blue sky arch over Misselthwaite as well as over the moor , and she keep lift her face and look up into it , try to imagine what it would be like to lie down on one of the little snow - white cloud and float about . she go into the first kitchen - garden and find Ben Weatherstaff work there with two other gardener . the change in the weather seem to have do he good . he speak to she of his own accord . " Springtime 's comin , ' " he say . " can not tha ' smell it ? " 

 Mary sniff and think she could . 

 " I smell something nice and fresh and damp , " she say . 

 " that be th ' good rich earth , " he answer , dig away . " it be in a good humor makin ' ready to grow thing . it be glad when plantin ' time come . it be dull in th ' winter when it be get nowt to do . in th ' flower garden out there thing will be stirrin ' down below in th ' dark . Th ' sun 's warmin ' them . you will see bit o ' green spike stickin ' out o ' th ' black earth after a bit . " 

 " what will they be ? " ask Mary . 

 " crocuse an ' snowdrop an ' daffydowndilly . have tha ' never see they ? " 

 " no . everything be hot , and wet , and green after the rain in India , " say Mary . " and I think thing grow up in a night . " 

 " these will not   grow up in a night , " say Weatherstaff . " Tha'll have to wait for them . they will poke up a bit high here , an ' push out a spike more there , an ' uncurl a leaf this day an ' another that . you watch them . " 

 " I be go to , " answer Mary . 

 very soon she hear the soft rustle flight of wing again and she know at once that the robin have come again . he be very pert and lively , and hop about so close to her foot , and put his head on one side and look at she so slyly that she ask Ben Weatherstaff a question . 

 " do you think he remember I ? " she say . 

 " Remembers thee ! " say Weatherstaff indignantly . " he know every cabbage stump in th ' garden , let alone th ' people . he be never see a little wench here before , an ' he be bent on findin ' out all about thee . Tha 's no need to try to hide anything from he . " 

 " be thing stir down below in the dark in that garden where he live ? " Mary inquire . 

 " what garden ? " grunt Weatherstaff , become surly again . 

 " the one where the old rose - tree be . " she could not help ask , because she want so much to know . " be all the flower dead , or do some of they come again in the summer ? be there ever any rose ? " 

 " ask he , " say Ben Weatherstaff , hunch his shoulder toward the robin . " he be the only one as know . no one else have see inside it for ten year ' . " 

 ten year be a long time , Mary think . she have be bear ten year ago . 

 she walk away , slowly think . she have begin to like the garden just as she have begin to like the robin and Dickon and Martha 's mother . she be begin to like Martha , too . that seem a good many people to like when you be not use to like . she think of the robin as one of the people . she go to her walk outside the long , ivy - cover wall over which she could see the tree - top ; and the second time she walk up and down the most interesting and exciting thing happen to she , and it be all through Ben Weatherstaff 's robin . 

 she hear a chirp and a twitter , and when she look at the bare flower - bed at her left side there he be hop about and pretend to peck thing out of the earth to persuade she that he have not follow she . but she know he have follow she and the surprise so fill she with delight that she almost tremble a little . 

 " you do remember I ! " she cry out . " you do ! you be pretty than anything else in the world ! " 

 she chirp , and talk , and coax and he hop , and flirt his tail and twitter . it be as if he be talk . his red waistcoat be like satin and he puff his tiny breast out and be so fine and so grand and so pretty that it be really as if he be show she how important and like a human person a robin could be . Mistress Mary forget that she have ever be contrary in her life when he allow she to draw close and close to he , and bend down and talk and try to make something like robin sound . 

 oh ! to think that he should actually let she come as near to he as that ! he know nothing in the world would make she put out her hand toward he or startle he in the least tiny way . he know it because he be a real person only nice than any other person in the world . she be so happy that she scarcely dare to breathe . 

 the flower - bed be not quite bare . it be bare of flower because the perennial plant have be cut down for their winter rest , but there be tall shrub and low one which grow together at the back of the bed , and as the robin hop about under they she see he hop over a small pile of freshly turn up earth . he stop on it to look for a worm . the earth have be turn up because a dog have be try to dig up a mole and he have scratch quite a deep hole . 

 Mary look at it , not really know why the hole be there , and as she look she see something almost bury in the newly - turn soil . it be something like a ring of rusty iron or brass and when the robin fly up into a tree nearby she put out her hand and pick the ring up . it be more than a ring , however ; it be an old key which look as if it have be bury a long time . 

 Mistress Mary stand up and look at it with an almost frightened face as it hang from her finger . 

 " perhaps it have be bury for ten year , " she say in a whisper . " perhaps it be the key to the garden ! " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 the ROBIN who show the WAY 

 she look at the key quite a long time . she turn it over and over , and think about it . as I have say before , she be not a child who have be train to ask permission or consult her elder about thing . all she think about the key be that if it be the key to the closed garden , and she could find out where the door be , she could perhaps open it and see what be inside the wall , and what have happen to the old rose - tree . it be because it have be shut up so long that she want to see it . it seem as if it must be different from other place and that something strange must have happen to it during ten year . besides that , if she like it she could go into it every day and shut the door behind she , and she could make up some play of her own and play it quite alone , because nobody would ever know where she be , but would think the door be still lock and the key bury in the earth . the thought of that please she very much . 

 live as it be , all by herself in a house with a hundred mysteriously close room and have nothing whatever to do to amuse herself , have set her inactive brain to work and be actually awaken her imagination . there be no doubt that the fresh , strong , pure air from the moor have a great deal to do with it . just as it have give she an appetite , and fight with the wind have stir her blood , so the same thing have stir her mind . in India she have always be too hot and languid and weak to care much about anything , but in this place she be begin to care and to want to do new thing . already she feel less " contrary , " though she do not know why . 

 she put the key in her pocket and walk up and down her walk . no one but herself ever seem to come there , so she could walk slowly and look at the wall , or , rather , at the ivy grow on it . the ivy be the baffle thing . Howsoever carefully she look she could see nothing but thickly grow , glossy , dark green leaf . she be very much disappointed . something of her contrariness come back to she as she pace the walk and look over it at the tree - top inside . it seem so silly , she say to herself , to be near it and not be able to get in . she take the key in her pocket when she go back to the house , and she make up her mind that she would always carry it with she when she go out , so that if she ever should find the hidden door she would be ready . 

 Mrs. Medlock have allow Martha to sleep all night at the cottage , but she be back at her work in the morning with cheek red than ever and in the good of spirit . 

 " I get up at four o'clock , " she say . " eh ! it be pretty on th ' moor with th ' bird gettin ' up an ' th ' rabbit scamperin ' about an ' th ' sun risin ' . I do not   walk all th ' way . a man give I a ride in his cart an ' I do enjoy myself . " 

 she be full of story of the delight of her day out . her mother have be glad to see she and they have get the baking and wash all out of the way . she have even make each of the child a doughcake with a bit of brown sugar in it . 

 " I have them all pipin ' hot when they come in from playin ' on th ' moor . an ' th ' cottage all smell o ' nice , clean hot bakin ' an ' there be a good fire , an ' they just shout for joy . our Dickon he say our cottage be good enough for a king . " 

 in the evening they have all sit round the fire , and Martha and her mother have sew patch on tear clothe and mend stocking and Martha have tell they about the little girl who have come from India and who have be wait on all her life by what Martha call " black " until she do not   know how to put on her own stocking . 

 " eh ! they do like to hear about you , " say Martha . " they want to know all about th ' black an ' about th ' ship you come in . I could not   tell them enough . " 

 Mary reflect a little . 

 " I will tell you a great deal more before your next day out , " she say , ' so that you will have more to talk about . I dare say they would like to hear about rid on elephant and camel , and about the officer go to hunt tiger . " 

 " my word ! " cry delight Martha . " it would set them clean off their head . would tha ' really do that , Miss ? it would be same as a wild beast show like we hear they have in York once . " 

 " India be quite different from Yorkshire , " Mary say slowly , as she think the matter over . " I never think of that . do Dickon and your mother like to hear you talk about I ? " 

 " why , our Dickon 's eye nearly start out o ' his head , they get that round , " answer Martha . " but mother , she be put out about your seemin ' to be all by yourself like . she say , ' have not   Mr. Craven get no governess for she , nor no nurse ? ' and I say , ' no , he have not , though Mrs. Medlock say he will when he think of it , but she say he may not   think of it for two or three year . ' " 

 " I do not   want a governess , " say Mary sharply . 

 " but mother say you ought to be learnin ' your book by this time an ' you ought to have a woman to look after you , an ' she say : ' now , Martha , you just think how you would feel yourself , in a big place like that , wanderin ' about all alone , an ' no mother . you do your good to cheer she up , ' she say , an ' I say I would . " 

 Mary give she a long , steady look . 

 " you do cheer I up , " she say . " I like to hear you talk . " 

 presently Martha go out of the room and come back with something hold in her hand under her apron . 

 " what do tha ' think , " she say , with a cheerful grin . " I have   bring thee a present . " 

 " a present ! " exclaim Mistress Mary . how could a cottage full of fourteen hungry people give any one a present ! 

 " a man be drivin ' across the moor peddlin ' , " Martha explain . " an ' he stop his cart at our door . he have pot an ' pan an ' odd an ' end , but mother have no money to buy anythin ' . just as he be go away our ' Lizabeth Ellen call out , ' Mother , he be get skippin'-ropes with red an ' blue handle . ' an ' mother she call out quite sudden , ' here , stop , mister ! how much be they ? ' an ' he say ' Tuppence ' , an ' mother she begin fumblin ' in her pocket an ' she say to I , ' Martha , tha 's bring I thy wage like a good lass , an ' I have   get four place to put every penny , but I be just go to take tuppence out of it to buy that child a skippin'-rope , ' an ' she buy one an ' here it be . " 

 she bring it out from under her apron and exhibit it quite proudly . it be a strong , slender rope with a strip red and blue handle at each end , but Mary Lennox have never see a skipping - rope before . she gaze at it with a mystified expression . 

 " what be it for ? " she ask curiously . 

 " for ! " cry out Martha . " do tha ' mean that they have   not get skippin'-ropes in India , for all they have   get elephant and tiger and camel ! no wonder most of them 's black . this be what it be for ; just watch I . " 

 and she run into the middle of the room and , take a handle in each hand , begin to skip , and skip , and skip , while Mary turn in her chair to stare at she , and the queer face in the old portrait seem to stare at she , too , and wonder what on earth this common little cottager have the impudence to be do under their very nose . but Martha do not even see they . the interest and curiosity in Mistress Mary 's face delight she , and she go on skip and count as she skip until she have reach a hundred . 

 " I could skip long than that , " she say when she stop . " I have   skip as much as five hundred when I be twelve , but I be not   as fat then as I be now , an ' I be in practice . " 

 Mary get up from her chair begin to feel excited herself . 

 " it look nice , " she say . " your mother be a kind woman . do you think I could ever skip like that ? " 

 " you just try it , " urge Martha , hand she the skipping - rope . " you can not   skip a hundred at first , but if you practice you will mount up . that be what mother say . she say , ' nothing will do she more good than skippin ' rope . it be th ' sensible toy a child can have . let she play out in th ' fresh air skippin ' an ' it will stretch her leg an ' arm an ' give she some strength in them . ' " 

 it be plain that there be not a great deal of strength in Mistress Mary 's arm and leg when she first begin to skip . she be not very clever at it , but she like it so much that she do not want to stop . 

 " put on tha ' thing and run an ' skip out o ' door , " say Martha . " Mother say I must tell you to keep out o ' door as much as you could , even when it rain a bit , so as tha ' wrap up warm . " 

 Mary put on her coat and hat and take her skipping - rope over her arm . she open the door to go out , and then suddenly think of something and turn back rather slowly . 

 " Martha , " she say , " they be your wage . it be your two - pence really . thank you . " she say it stiffly because she be not use to thank people or notice that they do thing for she . " thank you , " she say , and hold out her hand because she do not know what else to do . 

 Martha give her hand a clumsy little shake , as if she be not accustomed to this sort of thing either . then she laugh . 

 " eh ! th ' art a queer , old - womanish thing , " she say . " if tha'd be our ' Lizabeth Ellen tha'd have give I a kiss . " 

 Mary look stiff than ever . 

 " do you want I to kiss you ? " 

 Martha laugh again . 

 " Nay , not I , " she answer . " if tha ' be different , p'raps tha'd want to thysel ' . but tha ' be not . run off outside an ' play with thy rope . " 

 Mistress Mary feel a little awkward as she go out of the room . yorkshire people seem strange , and Martha be always rather a puzzle to she . at first she have dislike she very much , but now she do not . the skipping - rope be a wonderful thing . she count and skip , and skip and count , until her cheek be quite red , and she be more interested than she have ever be since she be bear . the sun be shin and a little wind be blow not a rough wind , but one which come in delightful little gust and bring a fresh scent of newly turn earth with it . she skip round the fountain garden , and up one walk and down another . she skip at last into the kitchen - garden and see Ben Weatherstaff dig and talk to his robin , which be hop about he . she skip down the walk toward he and he lift his head and look at she with a curious expression . she have wonder if he would notice she . she want he to see her skip . 

 " well ! " he exclaim . " upon my word . p'rap tha ' art a young ' un , after all , an ' p'raps tha 's get child 's blood in thy vein instead of sour buttermilk . Tha 's skip red into thy cheek as sure as my name 's Ben Weatherstaff . I would not   have believe tha ' could do it . " 

 " I never skip before , " Mary say . " I be just begin . I can only go up to twenty . " 

 " Tha ' keep on , " say Ben . " Tha ' shape well enough at it for a young ' un that be live with heathen . just see how he be watchin ' thee , " jerk his head toward the robin . " he follow after thee yesterday . he will be at it again today . he will be bind to find out what th ' skippin'-rope be . he be never see one . eh ! " shake his head at the bird , " tha ' curiosity will be th ' death of thee sometime if tha ' do not   look sharp . " 

 Mary skip round all the garden and round the orchard , rest every few minute . at length she go to her own special walk and make up her mind to try if she could skip the whole length of it . it be a good long skip and she begin slowly , but before she have go half - way down the path she be so hot and breathless that she be oblige to stop . she do not mind much , because she have already count up to thirty . she stop with a little laugh of pleasure , and there , lo and behold , be the robin sway on a long branch of ivy . he have follow she and he greet she with a chirp . as Mary have skip toward he she feel something heavy in her pocket strike against she at each jump , and when she see the robin she laugh again . 

 " you show I where the key be yesterday , " she say . " you ought to show I the door today ; but I do not   believe you know ! " 

 the robin fly from his swing spray of ivy on to the top of the wall and he open his beak and sing a loud , lovely trill , merely to show off . nothing in the world be quite as adorably lovely as a robin when he show off and they be nearly always do it . 

 Mary Lennox have hear a great deal about Magic in her ayah 's story , and she always say that what happen almost at that moment be magic . 

 one of the nice little gust of wind rush down the walk , and it be a strong one than the rest . it be strong enough to wave the branch of the tree , and it be more than strong enough to sway the trail spray of untrimmed ivy hang from the wall . Mary have step close to the robin , and suddenly the gust of wind swing aside some loose ivy trail , and more suddenly still she jump toward it and catch it in her hand . this she do because she have see something under it a round knob which have be cover by the leaf hang over it . it be the knob of a door . 

 she put her hand under the leaf and begin to pull and push they aside . thick as the ivy hung , it nearly all be a loose and swing curtain , though some have creep over wood and iron . Mary 's heart begin to thump and her hand to shake a little in her delight and excitement . the robin keep sing and twitter away and tilt his head on one side , as if he be as excited as she be . what be this under her hand which be square and make of iron and which her finger find a hole in ? 

 it be the lock of the door which have be close ten year and she put her hand in her pocket , draw out the key and find it fit the keyhole . she put the key in and turn it . it take two hand to do it , but it do turn . 

 and then she take a long breath and look behind she up the long walk to see if any one be come . no one be come . no one ever do come , it seem , and she take another long breath , because she could not help it , and she hold back the swing curtain of ivy and push back the door which open slowly slowly . 

 then she slip through it , and shut it behind she , and stand with she back against it , look about she and breathe quite fast with excitement , and wonder , and delight . 

 she be stand inside the secret garden . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 the STRANGEST HOUSE any one ever live in 

 it be the sweetest , most mysterious - look place any one could imagine . the high wall which shut it in be cover with the leafless stem of climb rose which be so thick that they be mat together . Mary Lennox know they be rose because she have see a great many rose in India . all the ground be cover with grass of a wintry brown and out of it grow clump of bush which be surely rosebush if they be alive . there be number of standard rose which have so spread their branch that they be like little tree . there be other tree in the garden , and one of the thing which make the place look strangest and loveliest be that climb rose have run all over they and swing down long tendril which make light swaying curtain , and here and there they have catch at each other or at a far - reach branch and have creep from one tree to another and make lovely bridge of themselves . there be neither leaf nor rose on they now and Mary do not know whether they be dead or alive , but their thin gray or brown branch and spray look like a sort of hazy mantle spread over everything , wall , and tree , and even brown grass , where they have fall from their fastening and run along the ground . it be this hazy tangle from tree to tree which make it all look so mysterious . Mary have think it must be different from other garden which have not be leave all by themselves so long ; and indeed it be different from any other place she have ever see in her life . 

 " how still it be ! " she whisper . " how still ! " 

 then she wait a moment and listen at the stillness . the robin , who have fly to his treetop , be still as all the rest . he do not even flutter his wing ; he sit without stir , and look at Mary . 

 " no wonder it be still , " she whisper again . " I be the first person who have speak in here for ten year . " 

 she move away from the door , step as softly as if she be afraid of awaken some one . she be glad that there be grass under her foot and that her step make no sound . she walk under one of the fairy - like gray arch between the tree and look up at the spray and tendril which form they . " I wonder if they be all quite dead , " she say . " be it all a quite dead garden ? I wish it be not . " 

 if she have be Ben Weatherstaff she could have tell whether the wood be alive by look at it , but she could only see that there be only gray or brown spray and branch and none show any sign of even a tiny leaf - bud anywhere . 

 but she be inside the wonderful garden and she could come through the door under the ivy any time and she feel as if she have find a world all her own . 

 the sun be shin inside the four wall and the high arch of blue sky over this particular piece of Misselthwaite seem even more brilliant and soft than it be over the moor . the robin fly down from his tree - top and hop about or fly after she from one bush to another . he chirp a good deal and have a very busy air , as if he be show her thing . everything be strange and silent and she seem to be hundred of mile away from any one , but somehow she do not feel lonely at all . all that trouble she be her wish that she know whether all the rose be dead , or if perhaps some of they have live and might put out leaf and bud as the weather get warm . she do not want it to be a quite dead garden . if it be a quite alive garden , how wonderful it would be , and what thousand of rose would grow on every side ! 

 her skipping - rope have hang over her arm when she come in and after she have walk about for a while she think she would skip round the whole garden , stop when she want to look at thing . there seem to have be grass path here and there , and in one or two corner there be alcove of evergreen with stone seat or tall moss - cover flower urn in they . 

 as she come near the second of these alcove she stop skip . there have once be a flowerbed in it , and she think she see something stick out of the black earth some sharp little pale green point . she remember what Ben Weatherstaff have say and she kneel down to look at they . 

 " yes , they be tiny grow thing and they might be crocus or snowdrop or daffodil , " she whisper . 

 she bent very close to they and sniff the fresh scent of the damp earth . she like it very much . 

 " perhaps there be some other one come up in other place , " she say . " I will go all over the garden and look . " 

 she do not skip , but walk . she go slowly and keep her eye on the ground . she look in the old border bed and among the grass , and after she have go round , try to miss nothing , she have find ever so many more sharp , pale green point , and she have become quite excited again . 

 " it be not   a quite dead garden , " she cry out softly to herself . " even if the rose be dead , there be other thing alive . " 

 she do not know anything about gardening , but the grass seem so thick in some of the place where the green point be push their way through that she think they do not seem to have room enough to grow . she search about until she find a rather sharp piece of wood and kneel down and dig and weed out the weed and grass until she make nice little clear place around they . 

 " now they look as if they could breathe , " she say , after she have finish with the first one . " I be go to do ever so many more . I will do all I can see . if I have not   time today I can come tomorrow . " 

 she go from place to place , and dig and weed , and enjoy herself so immensely that she be lead on from bed to bed and into the grass under the tree . the exercise make she so warm that she first throw her coat off , and then her hat , and without know it she be smile down on to the grass and the pale green point all the time . 

 the robin be tremendously busy . he be very much pleased to see gardening begin on his own estate . he have often wonder at Ben Weatherstaff . where gardening be do all sort of delightful thing to eat be turn up with the soil . now here be this new kind of creature who be not half Ben 's size and yet have have the sense to come into his garden and begin at once . 

 Mistress Mary work in her garden until it be time to go to her midday dinner . in fact , she be rather late in remembering , and when she put on her coat and hat , and pick up her skipping - rope , she could not believe that she have be work two or three hour . she have be actually happy all the time ; and dozen and dozen of the tiny , pale green point be to be see in clear place , look twice as cheerful as they have look before when the grass and weed have be smother they . 

 " I shall come back this afternoon , " she say , look all round at her new kingdom , and speak to the tree and the rose - bush as if they hear she . 

 then she run lightly across the grass , push open the slow old door and slip through it under the ivy . she have such red cheek and such bright eye and eat such a dinner that Martha be delighted . 

 " two piece o ' meat an ' two help o ' rice puddin ' ! " she say . " Eh ! mother will be pleased when I tell she what th ' skippin'-rope 's do for thee . " 

 in the course of she dig with her pointed stick Mistress Mary have find herself dig up a sort of white root rather like an onion . she have put it back in its place and pat the earth carefully down on it and just now she wonder if Martha could tell she what it be . 

 " Martha , " she say , " what be those white root that look like onion ? " 

 " they be bulb , " answer Martha . " lot o ' spring flower grow from them . th ' very little one be snowdrop an ' crocus an ' th ' big one be narcissus an ' jonquils and daffydowndilly . Th ' big of all be lily an ' purple flag . eh ! they be nice . Dickon 's get a whole lot of them plant in our bit o ' garden . " 

 " do Dickon know all about they ? " ask Mary , a new idea take possession of she . 

 " our Dickon can make a flower grow out of a brick walk . Mother say he just whisper thing out o ' th ' ground . " 

 " do bulb live a long time ? would they live year and year if no one help they ? " inquire Mary anxiously . 

 " they be thing as help themselves , " say Martha . " that be why poor folk can afford to have them . if you do not   trouble them , most of ' em'll work away underground for a lifetime an ' spread out an ' have little ' un . there be a place in th ' park wood here where there be snowdrop by thousand . they be the prettiest sight in Yorkshire when th ' spring come . no one know when they be first plant . " 

 " I wish the spring be here now , " say Mary . " I want to see all the thing that grow in England . " 

 she have finish her dinner and go to her favorite seat on the hearth - rug . 

 " I wish I wish I have a little spade , " she say . " whatever do tha ' want a spade for ? " ask Martha , laugh . " art tha ' go to take to diggin ' ? I must tell mother that , too . " 

 Mary look at the fire and ponder a little . she must be careful if she mean to keep her secret kingdom . she be not   do any harm , but if Mr. Craven find out about the open door he would be fearfully angry and get a new key and lock it up forevermore . she really could not bear that . 

 " this be such a big lonely place , " she say slowly , as if she be turn matter over in her mind . " the house be lonely , and the park be lonely , and the garden be lonely . so many place seem shut up . I never do many thing in India , but there be more people to look at native and soldier march by and sometimes band playing , and my Ayah tell I story . there be no one to talk to here except you and Ben Weatherstaff . and you have to do your work and Ben Weatherstaff will not   speak to I often . I think if I have a little spade I could dig somewhere as he do , and I might make a little garden if he would give I some seed . " 

 Martha 's face quite light up . 

 " there now ! " she exclaim , " if that be not   one of th ' thing mother say . she say , ' there be such a lot o ' room in that big place , why do not   they give she a bit for herself , even if she do not   plant nothing but parsley an ' radish ? she would dig an ' rake away an ' be right down happy over it . ' they be the very word she say . " 

 " be they ? " say Mary . " how many thing she know , do not   she ? " 

 " eh ! " say Martha . " it be like she say : ' a woman as bring up twelve child learn something besides her A B C. Children 's as good as ' rithmetic to set you findin ' out thing . ' " 

 " how much would a spade cost a little one ? " Mary ask . 

 " well , " be Martha 's reflective answer , " at Thwaite village there be a shop or so an ' I see little garden set with a spade an ' a rake an ' a fork all tie together for two shilling . an ' they be stout enough to work with , too . " 

 " I have   get more than that in my purse , " say Mary . " Mrs. Morrison give I five shilling and Mrs. Medlock give I some money from Mr. Craven . " 

 " do he remember thee that much ? " exclaim Martha . 

 " Mrs. Medlock say I be to have a shilling a week to spend . she give I one every Saturday . I do not   know what to spend it on . " 

 " my word ! that be rich , " say Martha . " Tha ' can buy anything in th ' world tha ' want . th ' rent of our cottage be only one an ' threepence an ' it be like pullin ' eye - tooth to get it . now I have   just think of something , " put her hand on her hip . 

 " what ? " say Mary eagerly . 

 " in the shop at Thwaite they sell package o ' flower - seed for a penny each , and our Dickon he know which be th ' prettiest one an ' how to make them grow . he walk over to Thwaite many a day just for th ' fun of it . do tha ' know how to print letter ? " suddenly . 

 " I know how to write , " Mary answer . 

 Martha shake her head . 

 " our Dickon can only read printin ' . if tha ' could print we could write a letter to he an ' ask he to go an ' buy th ' garden tool an ' th ' seed at th ' same time . " 

 " oh ! you be a good girl ! " Mary cry . " you be , really ! I do not   know you be so nice . I know I can print letter if I try . let us ask Mrs. Medlock for a pen and ink and some paper . " 

 " I have   get some of my own , " say Martha . " I buy them so I could print a bit of a letter to mother of a Sunday . I will go and get it . " she run out of the room , and Mary stand by the fire and twist her thin little hand together with sheer pleasure . 

 " if I have a spade , " she whisper , " I can make the earth nice and soft and dig up weed . if I have seed and can make flower grow the garden will not   be dead at all it will come alive . " 

 she do not go out again that afternoon because when Martha return with her pen and ink and paper she be oblige to clear the table and carry the plate and dish downstairs and when she get into the kitchen Mrs. Medlock be there and tell she to do something , so Mary wait for what seem to she a long time before she come back . then it be a serious piece of work to write to Dickon . Mary have be teach very little because her governess have dislike she too much to stay with she . she could not spell particularly well but she find that she could print letter when she try . this be the letter Martha dictate to she : " my Dear Dickon : 

 this come hop to find you well as it leave I at present . Miss Mary have plenty of money and will you go to Thwaite and buy she some flower seed and a set of garden tool to make a flower - bed . pick the prettiest one and easy to grow because she have never do it before and live in India which be different . give my love to mother and every one of you . Miss Mary be go to tell I a lot more so that on my next day out you can hear about elephant and camel and gentleman go hunt lion and tiger . 

 " your love sister , 
  Martha Phoebe Sowerby . " 
 " we will put the money in th ' envelope an ' I will get th ' butcher boy to take it in his cart . he be a great friend o ' Dickon 's , " say Martha . 

 " how shall I get the thing when Dickon buy they ? " 

 " he will bring them to you himself . he will like to walk over this way . " 

 " oh ! " exclaim Mary , " then I shall see he ! I never think I should see Dickon . " 

 " do tha ' want to see he ? " ask Martha suddenly , for Mary have look so pleased . 

 " yes , I do . I never see a boy fox and crow love . I want to see he very much . " 

 Martha give a little start , as if she remember something . " now to think , " she break out , " to think o ' I forgettin ' that there ; an ' I think I be go to tell you first thing this mornin ' . I ask mother and she say she would ask Mrs. Medlock her own self . " 

 " do you mean " Mary begin . 

 " what I say Tuesday . ask she if you might be drive over to our cottage some day and have a bit o ' mother 's hot oat cake , an ' butter , an ' a glass o ' milk . " 

 it seem as if all the interesting thing be happen in one day . to think of go over the moor in the daylight and when the sky be blue ! to think of go into the cottage which hold twelve child ! 

 " do she think Mrs. Medlock would let I go ? " she ask , quite anxiously . 

 " Aye , she think she would . she know what a tidy woman mother be and how clean she keep the cottage . " 

 " if I go I should see your mother as well as Dickon , " say Mary , think it over and like the idea very much . " she do not   seem to be like the mother in India . " 

 her work in the garden and the excitement of the afternoon end by make she feel quiet and thoughtful . Martha stay with she until tea - time , but they sit in comfortable quiet and talk very little . but just before Martha go downstairs for the tea - tray , Mary ask a question . 

 " Martha , " she say , " have the scullery - maid have the toothache again today ? " 

 Martha certainly start slightly . 

 " what make thee ask that ? " she say . 

 " because when I wait so long for you to come back I open the door and walk down the corridor to see if you be come . and I hear that far - off cry again , just as we hear it the other night . there be not   a wind today , so you see it could not   have be the wind . " 

 " eh ! " say Martha restlessly . " Tha ' must not   go walkin ' about in corridor an ' listenin ' . Mr. Craven would be that there angry there be no knowin ' what he would do . " 

 " I be not   listen , " say Mary . " I be just wait for you and I hear it . that be three time . " 

 " my word ! there be Mrs. Medlock 's bell , " say Martha , and she almost run out of the room . 

 " it be the strange house any one ever live in , " say Mary drowsily , as she drop her head on the cushioned seat of the armchair near she . fresh air , and dig , and skip - rope have make she feel so comfortably tired that she fall asleep . 




 CHAPTER x 

 DICKON 

 the sun shine down for nearly a week on the secret garden . the Secret Garden be what Mary call it when she be think of it . she like the name , and she like still more the feeling that when its beautiful old wall shut she in no one know where she be . it seem almost like be shut out of the world in some fairy place . the few book she have read and like have be fairy - story book , and she have read of secret garden in some of the story . sometimes people go to sleep in they for a hundred year , which she have think must be rather stupid . she have no intention of go to sleep , and , in fact , she be become wider awake every day which pass at Misselthwaite . she be begin to like to be out of door ; she no long hat the wind , but enjoy it . she could run fast , and long , and she could skip up to a hundred . the bulb in the secret garden must have be much astonish . such nice clear place be make round they that they have all the breathing space they want , and really , if Mistress Mary have know it , they begin to cheer up under the dark earth and work tremendously . the sun could get at they and warm they , and when the rain come down it could reach they at once , so they begin to feel very much alive . 

 Mary be an odd , determined little person , and now she have something interesting to be determine about , she be very much absorb , indeed . she work and dig and pull up weed steadily , only become more pleased with her work every hour instead of tire of it . it seem to she like a fascinating sort of play . she find many more of the sprout pale green point than she have ever hop to find . they seem to be start up everywhere and each day she be sure she find tiny new one , some so tiny that they barely peep above the earth . there be so many that she remember what Martha have say about the ' snowdrop by the thousand , " and about bulb spread and make new one . these have be leave to themselves for ten year and perhaps they have spread , like the snowdrop , into thousand . she wonder how long it would be before they show that they be flower . sometimes she stop dig to look at the garden and try to imagine what it would be like when it be cover with thousand of lovely thing in bloom . during that week of sunshine , she become more intimate with Ben Weatherstaff . she surprise he several time by seem to start up beside he as if she spring out of the earth . the truth be that she be afraid that he would pick up his tool and go away if he see she come , so she always walk toward he as silently as possible . but , in fact , he do not object to she as strongly as he have at first . perhaps he be secretly rather flatter by her evident desire for his elderly company . then , also , she be more civil than she have be . he do not know that when she first see he she speak to he as she would have speak to a native , and have not know that a cross , sturdy old Yorkshire man be not accustomed to salaam to his master , and be merely command by they to do thing . 

 " tha'rt like th ' robin , " he say to her one morning when he lift his head and see she stand by he . " I never know when I shall see thee or which side tha'll come from . " 

 " he be friend with I now , " say Mary . 

 " that be like he , " snap Ben Weatherstaff . " Makin ' up to th ' woman folk just for vanity an ' flightiness . there be nothing he would not   do for th ' sake o ' showin ' off an ' flirtin ' his tail - feather . he be as full o ' pride as an egg 's full o ' meat . " 

 he very seldom talk much and sometimes do not even answer Mary 's question except by a grunt , but this morning he say more than usual . he stand up and rest one hobnail boot on the top of his spade while he look she over . 

 " how long have tha ' be here ? " he jerk out . 

 " I think it be about a month , " she answer . 

 " Tha 's beginnin ' to do Misselthwaite credit , " he say . " Tha 's a bit fat than tha ' be an ' tha 's not quite so yeller . tha ' look like a young pluck crow when tha ' first come into this garden . think I to myself I never set eye on an uglier , sourer face young ' un . " 

 Mary be not vain and as she have never think much of her look she be not greatly disturb . 

 " I know I be fat , " she say . " my stocking be get tight . they use to make wrinkle . there be the robin , Ben Weatherstaff . " 

 there , indeed , be the robin , and she think he look nice than ever . his red waistcoat be as glossy as satin and he flirt his wing and tail and tilt his head and hop about with all sort of lively grace . he seem determined to make Ben Weatherstaff admire he . but Ben be sarcastic . 

 " Aye , there tha ' art ! " he say . " Tha ' can put up with I for a bit sometimes when tha 's get no one well . Tha 's be reddenin ' up thy waistcoat an ' polishin ' thy feather this two week . I know what tha 's up to . Tha 's courtin ' some bold young madam somewhere tellin ' thy lie to she about bein ' th ' fine cock robin on Missel Moor an ' ready to fight all th ' rest of them . " 

 " oh ! look at he ! " exclaim Mary . 

 the robin be evidently in a fascinating , bold mood . he hop close and close and look at Ben Weatherstaff more and more engagingly . he fly on to the near currant bush and tilt his head and sing a little song right at he . 

 " Tha ' think tha'll get over I by do that , " say Ben , wrinkle his face up in such a way that Mary feel sure he be try not to look pleased . " Tha ' think no one can stand out against thee that be what tha ' think . " 

 the robin spread his wing Mary could scarcely believe her eye . he fly right up to the handle of Ben Weatherstaff 's spade and alight on the top of it . then the old man 's face wrinkle itself slowly into a new expression . he stand still as if he be afraid to breathe as if he would not have stir for the world , lest his robin should start away . he speak quite in a whisper . 

 " well , I be dange ! " he say as softly as if he be say something quite different . " Tha ' do know how to get at a chap tha ' do ! Tha 's fair unearthly , tha 's so knowin ' . " 

 and he stand without stir almost without draw his breath until the robin give another flirt to his wing and fly away . then he stand look at the handle of the spade as if there might be Magic in it , and then he begin to dig again and say nothing for several minute . 

 but because he keep break into a slow grin now and then , Mary be not afraid to talk to he . 

 " have you a garden of your own ? " she ask . 

 " no . I be bachelder an ' lodge with Martin at th ' gate . " 

 " if you have one , " say Mary , " what would you plant ? " 

 " cabbage an ' ' tater an ' onion . " 

 " but if you want to make a flower garden , " persist Mary , " what would you plant ? " 

 " Bulbs an ' sweet - smellin ' thing but mostly rose . " 

 Mary 's face light up . 

 " do you like rose ? " she say . 

 Ben Weatherstaff root up a weed and throw it aside before he answer . 

 " well , yes , I do . I be learn that by a young lady I be gardener to . she have a lot in a place she be fond of , an ' she love them like they be child or robin . I have   see she bend over an ' kiss them . " he drag out another weed and scowl at it . " that be as much as ten year ' ago . " 

 " where be she now ? " ask Mary , much interested . 

 " Heaven , " he answer , and drive his spade deep into the soil , " ' cord to what parson say . " 

 " what happen to the rose ? " Mary ask again , more interested than ever . 

 " they be leave to themselves . " 

 Mary be become quite excited . 

 " do they quite die ? do rose quite die when they be leave to themselves ? " she venture . 

 " well , I would get to like them an ' I like she an ' she like them , " Ben Weatherstaff admit reluctantly . " once or twice a year I would go an ' work at them a bit prune them an ' dig about th ' root . they run wild , but they be in rich soil , so some of them live . " 

 " when they have no leaf and look gray and brown and dry , how can you tell whether they be dead or alive ? " inquire Mary . 

 " wait till th ' spring get at them wait till th ' sun shin on th ' rain and th ' rain fall on th ' sunshine an ' then tha'll find out . " 

 " how how ? " cry Mary , forget to be careful . " look along th ' twig an ' branch an ' if tha ' see a bit of a brown lump swell here an ' there , watch it after th ' warm rain an ' see what happen . " he stop suddenly and look curiously at her eager face . " why do tha ' care so much about rose an ' such , all of a sudden ? " he demand . 

 Mistress Mary feel her face grow red . she be almost afraid to answer . 

 " I I want to play that that I have a garden of my own , " she stammer . " I there be nothing for I to do . I have nothing and no one . " 

 " well , " say Ben Weatherstaff slowly , as he watch she , " that be true . Tha ' have not . " 

 he say it in such an odd way that Mary wonder if he be actually a little sorry for she . she have never feel sorry for herself ; she have only feel tired and cross , because she dislike people and thing so much . but now the world seem to be change and get nice . if no one find out about the secret garden , she should enjoy herself always . 

 she stay with he for ten or fifteen minute long and ask he as many question as she dare . he answer every one of they in his queer grunt way and he do not seem really cross and do not pick up his spade and leave she . he say something about rose just as she be go away and it remind she of the one he have say he have be fond of . 

 " do you go and see those other rose now ? " she ask . 

 " not be this year . my rheumatic have make I too stiff in th ' joint . " 

 he say it in his grumble voice , and then quite suddenly he seem to get angry with she , though she do not see why he should . 

 " now look here ! " he say sharply . " do not   tha ' ask so many question . tha'rt th ' bad wench for askin ' question I have   ever come a cross . get thee go an ' play thee . I have   do talkin ' for today . " 

 and he say it so crossly that she know there be not the least use in stay another minute . she go skip slowly down the outside walk , think he over and say to herself that , queer as it be , here be another person whom she like in spite of his crossness . she like old Ben Weatherstaff . yes , she do like he . she always want to try to make he talk to she . also she begin to believe that he know everything in the world about flower . 

 there be a laurel - hedge walk which curve round the secret garden and end at a gate which open into a wood , in the park . she think she would slip round this walk and look into the wood and see if there be any rabbit hop about . she enjoy the skipping very much and when she reach the little gate she open it and go through because she hear a low , peculiar whistle sound and want to find out what it be . 

 it be a very strange thing indeed . she quite catch her breath as she stop to look at it . a boy be sit under a tree , with his back against it , play on a rough wooden pipe . he be a funny look boy about twelve . he look very clean and his nose turn up and his cheek be as red as poppy and never have Mistress Mary see such round and such blue eye in any boy 's face . and on the trunk of the tree he lean against , a brown squirrel be cling and watch he , and from behind a bush nearby a cock pheasant be delicately stretch his neck to peep out , and quite near he be two rabbit sit up and sniff with tremulous nose and actually it appear as if they be all draw near to watch he and listen to the strange low little call his pipe seem to make . 

 when he see Mary he hold up his hand and speak to she in a voice almost as low as and rather like his piping . 

 " do not   tha ' move , " he say . " it would flight them . " Mary remain motionless . he stop play his pipe and begin to rise from the ground . he move so slowly that it scarcely seem as though he be move at all , but at last he stand on his foot and then the squirrel scamper back up into the branch of his tree , the pheasant withdraw his head and the rabbit drop on all four and begin to hop away , though not at all as if they be frightened . 

 " I be Dickon , " the boy say . " I know tha'rt Miss Mary . " 

 then Mary realize that somehow she have know at first that he be Dickon . who else could have be charming rabbit and pheasant as the native charm snake in India ? he have a wide , red , curve mouth and his smile spread all over his face . 

 " I get up slow , " he explain , " because if tha ' make a quick move it startle them . a body ' as to move gentle an ' speak low when wild thing be about . " 

 he do not speak to she as if they have never see each other before but as if he know she quite well . Mary know nothing about boy and she speak to he a little stiffly because she feel rather shy . 

 " do you get Martha 's letter ? " she ask . 

 he nod his curly , rust - color head . " that be why I come . " 

 he stoop to pick up something which have be lie on the ground beside he when he pip . 

 " I have   get th ' garden tool . there be a little spade an ' rake an ' a fork an ' hoe . eh ! they be good ' un . there be a trowel , too . an ' th ' woman in th ' shop throw in a packet o ' white poppy an ' one o ' blue larkspur when I buy th ' other seed . " 

 " will you show the seed to I ? " Mary say . 

 she wish she could talk as he do . his speech be so quick and easy . it sound as if he like she and be not the least afraid she would not like he , though he be only a common moor boy , in patch clothe and with a funny face and a rough , rusty - red head . as she come close to he she notice that there be a clean fresh scent of heather and grass and leave about he , almost as if he be make of they . she like it very much and when she look into his funny face with the red cheek and round blue eye she forget that she have feel shy . 

 " let we sit down on this log and look at they , " she say . 

 they sit down and he take a clumsy little brown paper package out of his coat pocket . he untie the string and inside there be ever so many neater and small package with a picture of a flower on each one . 

 " there be a lot o ' mignonette an ' poppy , " he say . " Mignonette 's th ' sweetest smellin ' thing as grow , an ' it will grow wherever you cast it , same as poppy will . they as'll come up an ' bloom if you just whistle to them , they be th ' nicest of all . " he stop and turn his head quickly , his poppy - cheeked face light up . 

 " where be that robin as be callin ' us ? " he say . 

 the chirp come from a thick holly bush , bright with scarlet berry , and Mary think she know whose it be . 

 " be it really call we ? " she ask . 

 " Aye , " say Dickon , as if it be the most natural thing in the world , " he be callin ' some one he be friend with . that be same as sayin ' ' here I be . look at I . I want a bit of a chat . ' there he be in the bush . whose be he ? " 

 " he be Ben Weatherstaff 's , but I think he know I a little , " answer Mary . 

 " Aye , he know thee , " say Dickon in his low voice again . " an ' he like thee . he be take thee on . he will tell I all about thee in a minute . " 

 he move quite close to the bush with the slow movement Mary have notice before , and then he make a sound almost like the robin 's own twitter . the robin listen a few second , intently , and then answer quite as if he be reply to a question . 

 " Aye , he be a friend o ' your , " chuckle Dickon . 

 " do you think he be ? " cry Mary eagerly . she do so want to know . " do you think he really like I ? " 

 " he would not   come near thee if he do not , " answer Dickon . " bird be rare chooser an ' a robin can flout a body bad than a man . see , he be make up to thee now . ' can not tha ' see a chap ? ' he be sayin ' . " 

 and it really seem as if it must be true . he so sidle and twitter and tilt as he hop on his bush . 

 " do you understand everything bird say ? " say Mary . 

 Dickon 's grin spread until he seem all wide , red , curve mouth , and he rub his rough head . 

 " I think I do , and they think I do , " he say . " I have   live on th ' moor with them so long . I have   watch them break shell an ' come out an ' fledge an ' learn to fly an ' begin to sing , till I think I be one of them . sometimes I think p'raps I be a bird , or a fox , or a rabbit , or a squirrel , or even a beetle , an ' I do not   know it . " 

 he laugh and come back to the log and begin to talk about the flower seed again . he tell she what they look like when they be flower ; he tell she how to plant they , and watch they , and feed and water they . 

 " see here , " he say suddenly , turn round to look at she . " I will plant they for thee myself . where be tha ' garden ? " 

 Mary 's thin hand clutch each other as they lie on her lap . she do not know what to say , so for a whole minute she say nothing . she have never think of this . she feel miserable . and she feel as if she go red and then pale . 

 " Tha 's get a bit o ' garden , have not   tha ' ? " Dickon say . 

 it be true that she have turn red and then pale . Dickon see she do it , and as she still say nothing , he begin to be puzzle . 

 " would not   they give thee a bit ? " he ask . " have not   tha ' get any yet ? " 

 she hold her hand tighter and turn her eye toward he . 

 " I do not   know anything about boy , " she say slowly . " could you keep a secret , if I tell you one ? it be a great secret . I do not   know what I should do if any one find it out . I believe I should die ! " she say the last sentence quite fiercely . 

 Dickon look more puzzled than ever and even rub his hand over his rough head again , but he answer quite good - humoredly . " I be keepin ' secret all th ' time , " he say . " if I could not   keep secret from th ' other lad , secret about fox ' cub , an ' bird ' nest , an ' wild thing ' hole , there would be naught safe on th ' moor . Aye , I can keep secret . " 

 Mistress Mary do not mean to put out her hand and clutch his sleeve but she do it . 

 " I have   steal a garden , " she say very fast . " it be not   mine . it be not   anybody 's . nobody want it , nobody care for it , nobody ever go into it . perhaps everything be dead in it already . I do not   know . " 

 she begin to feel hot and as contrary as she have ever feel in her life . 

 " I do not   care , I do not   care ! nobody have any right to take it from I when I care about it and they do not . they be let it die , all shut in by itself , " she end passionately , and she throw her arm over her face and burst out cry - poor little Mistress Mary . 

 Dickon 's curious blue eye grow rounder and rounder . " eh - h - h ! " he say , draw his exclamation out slowly , and the way he do it mean both wonder and sympathy . 

 " I have   nothing to do , " say Mary . " nothing belong to I . I find it myself and I get into it myself . I be only just like the robin , and they would not   take it from the robin . " " where be it ? " ask Dickon in a drop voice . 

 Mistress Mary get up from the log at once . she know she feel contrary again , and obstinate , and she do not care at all . she be imperious and indian , and at the same time hot and sorrowful . 

 " come with I and I will show you , " she say . 

 she lead he round the laurel path and to the walk where the ivy grow so thickly . Dickon follow she with a queer , almost pity , look on his face . he feel as if he be be lead to look at some strange bird 's nest and must move softly . when she step to the wall and lift the hang ivy he start . there be a door and Mary push it slowly open and they pass in together , and then Mary stand and wave her hand round defiantly . 

 " it be this , " she say . " it be a secret garden , and I be the only one in the world who want it to be alive . " 

 Dickon look round and round about it , and round and round again . 

 " eh ! " he almost whisper , " it be a queer , pretty place ! it be like as if a body be in a dream . " 




 CHAPTER XI 

 the nest of the MISSEL thrush 

 for two or three minute he stand look round he , while Mary watch he , and then he begin to walk about softly , even more lightly than Mary have walk the first time she have find herself inside the four wall . his eye seem to be take in everything the gray tree with the gray creeper climb over they and hang from their branch , the tangle on the wall and among the grass , the evergreen alcove with the stone seat and tall flower urn stand in they . 

 " I never think I would see this place , " he say at last , in a whisper . 

 " do you know about it ? " ask Mary . 

 she have speak aloud and he make a sign to she . 

 " we must talk low , " he say , " or some one'll hear we an ' wonder what be to do in here . " 

 " oh ! I forget ! " say Mary , feel frightened and put her hand quickly against her mouth . " do you know about the garden ? " she ask again when she have recover herself . Dickon nod . 

 " Martha tell I there be one as no one ever go inside , " he answer . " Us use to wonder what it be like . " 

 he stop and look round at the lovely gray tangle about he , and his round eye look queerly happy . 

 " eh ! the nest as'll be here come springtime , " he say . " it would be th ' safe nestin ' place in England . no one never comin ' near an ' tangle o ' tree an ' rose to build in . I wonder all th ' bird on th ' moor do not   build here . " 

 Mistress Mary put her hand on his arm again without know it . 

 " will there be rose ? " she whisper . " can you tell ? I think perhaps they be all dead . " 

 " eh ! no ! not they not all of them ! " he answer . " look here ! " 

 he step over to the near tree an old , old one with gray lichen all over its bark , but uphold a curtain of tangle spray and branch . he take a thick knife out of his pocket and open one of its blade . 

 " there be lot o ' dead wood as ought to be cut out , " he say . " an ' there be a lot o ' old wood , but it make some new last year . this here be a new bit , " and he touch a shoot which look brownish green instead of hard , dry gray . Mary touch it herself in an eager , reverent way . 

 " that one ? " she say . " be that one quite alive quite ? " 

 Dickon curve his wide smile mouth . 

 " it be as wick as you or I , " he say ; and Mary remember that Martha have tell she that " wick " mean " alive " or " lively . " 

 " I be glad it be wick ! " she cry out in her whisper . " I want they all to be wick . let we go round the garden and count how many wick one there be . " 

 she quite pant with eagerness , and Dickon be as eager as she be . they go from tree to tree and from bush to bush . Dickon carry his knife in his hand and show her thing which she think wonderful . 

 " they have   run wild , " he say , " but th ' strong one have fair thrive on it . the delicatest one have die out , but th ' other have grow an ' grow , an ' spread an ' spread , till they be a wonder . see here ! " and he pull down a thick gray , dry - look branch . " a body might think this be dead wood , but I do not   believe it be down to th ' root . I will cut it low down an ' see . " 

 he kneel and with his knife cut the lifeless - look branch through , not far above the earth . 

 " there ! " he say exultantly . " I tell thee so . there be green in that wood yet . look at it . " 

 Mary be down on her knee before he speak , gaze with all her might . 

 " when it look a bit greenish an ' juicy like that , it be wick , " he explain . " when th ' inside be dry an ' break easy , like this here piece I have   cut off , it be do for . there be a big root here as all this live wood spring out of , an ' if th ' old wood 's cut off an ' it be dig round , and take care of there will be " he stop and lift his face to look up at the climbing and hang spray above he " there will be a fountain o ' rose here this summer . " 

 they go from bush to bush and from tree to tree . he be very strong and clever with his knife and know how to cut the dry and dead wood away , and could tell when an unpromising bough or twig have still green life in it . in the course of half an hour Mary think she could tell too , and when he cut through a lifeless - look branch she would cry out joyfully under her breath when she catch sight of the least shade of moist green . the spade , and hoe , and fork be very useful . he show she how to use the fork while he dig about root with the spade and stir the earth and let the air in . 

 they be work industriously round one of the big standard rose when he catch sight of something which make he utter an exclamation of surprise . 

 " why ! " he cry , point to the grass a few foot away . " who do that there ? " 

 it be one of Mary 's own little clearing round the pale green point . 

 " I do it , " say Mary . 

 " why , I think tha ' do not   know nothing about gardenin ' , " he exclaim . 

 " I do not , " she answer , " but they be so little , and the grass be so thick and strong , and they look as if they have no room to breathe . so I make a place for they . I do not   even know what they be . " 

 Dickon go and kneel down by they , smile his wide smile . 

 " Tha ' be right , " he say . " a gardener could not   have tell thee well . they will grow now like Jack 's bean - stalk . they be crocuse an ' snowdrop , an ' these here be narcissus , " turn to another patch , " an here 's daffydowndilly . eh ! they will be a sight . " 

 he run from one clearing to another . 

 " Tha ' have do a lot o ' work for such a little wench , " he say , look she over . 

 " I be grow fat , " say Mary , " and I be grow strong . I use always to be tired . when I dig I be not tired at all . I like to smell the earth when it be turn up . " 

 " it be rare good for thee , " he say , nod his head wisely . " there be naught as nice as th ' smell o ' good clean earth , except th ' smell o ' fresh growin ' thing when th ' rain fall on them . I get out on th ' moor many a day when it be rainin ' an ' I lie under a bush an ' listen to th ' soft swish o ' drop on th ' heather an ' I just sniff an ' sniff . my nose end fair quiver like a rabbit 's , mother say . " 

 " do you never catch cold ? " inquire Mary , gaze at he wonderingly . she have never see such a funny boy , or such a nice one . 

 " not I , " he say , grin . " I never ketche cold since I be bear . I be not   bring up nesh enough . I have   chase about th ' moor in all weather same as th ' rabbit do . Mother say I have   sniff up too much fresh air for twelve year ' to ever get to sniffin ' with cold . I be as tough as a white - thorn knobstick . " 

 he be work all the time he be talk and Mary be follow he and help he with her fork or the trowel . 

 " there be a lot of work to do here ! " he say once , look about quite exultantly . 

 " will you come again and help I to do it ? " Mary beg . " I be sure I can help , too . I can dig and pull up weed , and do whatever you tell I . oh ! do come , Dickon ! " 

 " I will come every day if tha ' want I , rain or shine , " he answer stoutly . " it be the good fun I ever have in my life shut in here an ' wakenin ' up a garden . " 

 " if you will come , " say Mary , " if you will help I to make it alive I will I do not   know what I will do , " she end helplessly . what could you do for a boy like that ? 

 " I will tell thee what tha'll do , " say Dickon , with his happy grin . " Tha'll get fat an ' tha'll get as hungry as a young fox an ' tha'll learn how to talk to th ' robin same as I do . eh ! we will have a lot o ' fun . " 

 he begin to walk about , look up in the tree and at the wall and bush with a thoughtful expression . 

 " I would not   want to make it look like a gardener 's garden , all clip an ' spick an ' span , would you ? " he say . " it be nice like this with thing runnin ' wild , an ' swingin ' an ' catchin ' hold of each other . " 

 " do not   let we make it tidy , " say Mary anxiously . " it would not   seem like a secret garden if it be tidy . " 

 Dickon stand rub his rusty - red head with a rather puzzled look . " it be a secret garden sure enough , " he say , " but seem like some one besides th ' robin must have be in it since it be shut up ten year ' ago . " 

 " but the door be lock and the key be bury , " say Mary . " no one could get in . " 

 " that be true , " he answer . " it be a queer place . seem to I as if there have be a bit o ' prunin ' do here an ' there , later than ten year ' ago . " 

 " but how could it have be do ? " say Mary . 

 he be examine a branch of a standard rise and he shake his head . 

 " Aye ! how could it ! " he murmur . " with th ' door lock an ' th ' key bury . " 

 Mistress Mary always feel that however many year she live she should never forget that first morning when her garden begin to grow . of course , it do seem to begin to grow for she that morning . when Dickon begin to clear place to plant seed , she remember what Basil have sing at she when he want to tease she . 

 " be there any flower that look like bell ? " she inquire . 

 " lily o ' th ' valley do , " he answer , dig away with the trowel , " an ' there be Canterbury bell , an ' campanulas . " 

 " let us plant some , " say Mary . " there 's lily o ' th , valley here already ; I see them . they will have grow too close an ' we will have to separate them , but there be plenty . Th ' other one take two year to bloom from seed , but I can bring you some bit o ' plant from our cottage garden . why do tha ' want them ? " 

 then Mary tell he about Basil and his brother and sister in India and of how she have hat they and of their call she " Mistress Mary Quite Contrary . " 

 " they use to dance round and sing at I . they sing 

 ' Mistress Mary , quite contrary , 
 how do your garden grow ? 
 with silver bell , and cockle shell , 
 and marigold all in a row . ' 
 I just remember it and it make I wonder if there be really flower like silver bell . " 

 she frown a little and give her trowel a rather spiteful dig into the earth . 

 " I be not   as contrary as they be . " 

 but Dickon laugh . 

 " eh ! " he say , and as he crumble the rich black soil she see he be sniff up the scent of it . " there do not   seem to be no need for no one to be contrary when there be flower an ' such like , an ' such lot o ' friendly wild thing runnin ' about makin ' home for themselves , or buildin ' nest an ' singin ' an ' whistlin ' , do there ? " 

 Mary , kneeling by he hold the seed , look at he and stop frown . 

 " Dickon , " she say , " you be as nice as Martha say you be . I like you , and you make the fifth person . I never think I should like five people . " 

 Dickon sit up on his heel as Martha do when she be polish the grate . he do look funny and delightful , Mary think , with his round blue eye and red cheek and happy look turn - up nose . 

 " only five folk as tha ' like ? " he say . " who be th ' other four ? " 

 " your mother and Martha , " Mary check they off on her finger , " and the robin and Ben Weatherstaff . " 

 Dickon laugh so that he be oblige to stifle the sound by put his arm over his mouth . 

 " I know tha ' think I be a queer lad , " he say , " but I think tha ' art th ' queer little lass I ever see . " 

 then Mary do a strange thing . she lean forward and ask he a question she have never dream of ask any one before . and she try to ask it in Yorkshire because that be his language , and in India a native be always pleased if you know his speech . 

 " do tha ' like I ? " she say . 

 " eh ! " he answer heartily , " that I do . I like thee wonderful , an ' so do th ' robin , I do believe ! " 

 " that be two , then , " say Mary . " that be two for I . " 

 and then they begin to work hard than ever and more joyfully . Mary be startled and sorry when she hear the big clock in the courtyard strike the hour of her midday dinner . 

 " I shall have to go , " she say mournfully . " and you will have to go too , will not   you ? " 

 Dickon grin . 

 " my dinner 's easy to carry about with I , " he say . " mother always let I put a bit o ' something in my pocket . " 

 he pick up his coat from the grass and bring out of a pocket a lumpy little bundle tie up in a quite clean , coarse , blue and white handkerchief . it hold two thick piece of bread with a slice of something lay between they . 

 " it be oftenest naught but bread , " he say , " but I have   get a fine slice o ' fat bacon with it today . " 

 Mary think it look a queer dinner , but he seem ready to enjoy it . 

 " run on an ' get thy victual , " he say . " I will be do with mine first . I will get some more work do before I start back home . " 

 he sit down with his back against a tree . 

 " I will call th ' robin up , " he say , " and give he th ' rind o ' th ' bacon to peck at . they like a bit o ' fat wonderful . " 

 Mary could scarcely bear to leave he . suddenly it seem as if he might be a sort of wood fairy who might be go when she come into the garden again . he seem too good to be true . she go slowly half - way to the door in the wall and then she stop and go back . 

 " whatever happen , you you never would tell ? " she say . 

 his poppy - color cheek be distend with his first big bite of bread and bacon , but he manage to smile encouragingly . 

 " if tha ' be a missel thrush an ' show I where thy nest be , do tha ' think I would tell any one ? not I , " he say . " Tha ' art as safe as a missel thrush . " 

 and she be quite sure she be . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 " might I have a bit of EARTH ? " 

 Mary run so fast that she be rather out of breath when she reach her room . her hair be ruffle on her forehead and her cheek be bright pink . her dinner be wait on the table , and Martha be wait near it . 

 " Tha 's a bit late , " she say . " where have tha ' be ? " 

 " I have   see Dickon ! " say Mary . " I have   see Dickon ! " 

 " I know he would come , " say Martha exultantly . " how do tha ' like he ? " 

 " I think I think he be beautiful ! " say Mary in a determined voice . 

 Martha look rather take aback but she look pleased , too . 

 " well , " she say , " he be th ' good lad as ever be bear , but we never think he be handsome . his nose turn up too much . " 

 " I like it to turn up , " say Mary . 

 " an ' his eye be so round , " say Martha , a trifle doubtful . " though they be a nice color . " " I like they round , " say Mary . " and they be exactly the color of the sky over the moor . " 

 Martha beam with satisfaction . 

 " mother say he make them that color with always lookin ' up at th ' bird an ' th ' cloud . but he have get a big mouth , have not   he , now ? " 

 " I love his big mouth , " say Mary obstinately . " I wish mine be just like it . " 

 Martha chuckle delightedly . 

 " it would look rare an ' funny in thy bit of a face , " she say . " but I know it would be that way when tha ' see he . how do tha ' like th ' seed an ' th ' garden tool ? " 

 " how do you know he bring they ? " ask Mary . 

 " eh ! I never think of he not bringin ' them . he would be sure to bring them if they be in Yorkshire . he be such a trusty lad . " 

 Mary be afraid that she might begin to ask difficult question , but she do not . she be very much interested in the seed and gardening tool , and there be only one moment when Mary be frightened . this be when she begin to ask where the flower be to be plant . 

 " who do tha ' ask about it ? " she inquire . 

 " I have not   ask anybody yet , " say Mary , hesitate . " well , I would not   ask th ' head gardener . he be too grand , Mr. Roach be . " 

 " I have   never see he , " say Mary . " I have   only see undergardener and Ben Weatherstaff . " 

 " if I be you , I would ask Ben Weatherstaff , " advise Martha . " he be not half as bad as he look , for all he be so crabbed . Mr. Craven let he do what he like because he be here when Mrs. Craven be alive , an ' he use to make her laugh . she like he . perhaps he would find you a corner somewhere out o ' the way . " 

 " if it be out of the way and no one want it , no one could mind my have it , could they ? " Mary say anxiously . 

 " there would not   be no reason , " answer Martha . " you would not   do no harm . " 

 Mary eat her dinner as quickly as she could and when she rise from the table she be go to run to her room to put on her hat again , but Martha stop she . 

 " I have   get something to tell you , " she say . " I think I would let you eat your dinner first . Mr. Craven come back this mornin ' and I think he want to see you . " 

 Mary turn quite pale . 

 " oh ! " she say . " why ! why ! he do not   want to see I when I come . I hear Pitcher say he do not . " " well , " explain Martha , " Mrs. Medlock say it be because o ' mother . she be walkin ' to thwaite village an ' she meet he . she would never speak to he before , but Mrs. Craven have be to our cottage two or three time . he have forgot , but mother have not   an ' she make bold to stop he . I do not   know what she say to he about you but she say something as put he in th ' mind to see you before he go away again , tomorrow . " 

 " oh ! " cry Mary , " be he go away tomorrow ? I be so glad ! " 

 " he be go for a long time . he may not   come back till autumn or winter . he be go to travel in foreign place . he be always do it . " 

 " oh ! I be so glad so glad ! " say Mary thankfully . 

 if he do not come back until winter , or even autumn , there would be time to watch the secret garden come alive . even if he find out then and take it away from she she would have have that much at least . 

 " when do you think he will want to see " 

 she do not finish the sentence , because the door open , and Mrs. Medlock walk in . she have on her good black dress and cap , and her collar be fasten with a large brooch with a picture of a man 's face on it . it be a colored photograph of Mr. Medlock who have die year ago , and she always wear it when she be dress up . she look nervous and excited . 

 " your hair be rough , " she say quickly . " go and brush it . Martha , help she to slip on her good dress . Mr. Craven send I to bring she to he in his study . " 

 all the pink leave Mary 's cheek . her heart begin to thump and she feel herself change into a stiff , plain , silent child again . she do not even answer Mrs. Medlock , but turn and walk into her bedroom , follow by Martha . she say nothing while her dress be change , and her hair brush , and after she be quite tidy she follow Mrs. Medlock down the corridor , in silence . what be there for she to say ? she be oblige to go and see Mr. Craven and he would not like she , and she would not like he . she know what he would think of she . 

 she be take to a part of the house she have not be into before . at last Mrs. Medlock knock at a door , and when some one say , " come in , " they enter the room together . a man be sit in an armchair before the fire , and Mrs. Medlock speak to he . 

 " this be Miss Mary , sir , " she say . 

 " you can go and leave she here . I will ring for you when I want you to take she away , " say Mr. Craven . 

 when she go out and close the door , Mary could only stand wait , a plain little thing , twist her thin hand together . she could see that the man in the chair be not so much a hunchback as a man with high , rather crooked shoulder , and he have black hair streak with white . he turn his head over his high shoulder and speak to she . 

 " come here ! " he say . 

 Mary go to he . 

 he be not ugly . his face would have be handsome if it have not be so miserable . he look as if the sight of she worried and fret he and as if he do not know what in the world to do with she . 

 " be you well ? " he ask . 

 " yes , " answer Mary . 

 " do they take good care of you ? " 

 " yes . " 

 he rub his forehead fretfully as he look she over . 

 " you be very thin , " he say . 

 " I be get fat , " Mary answer in what she know be her stiff way . 

 what an unhappy face he have ! his black eye seem as if they scarcely see she , as if they be see something else , and he could hardly keep his thought upon she . 

 " I forget you , " he say . " how could I remember you ? I intend to send you a governess or a nurse , or some one of that sort , but I forget . " 

 " please , " begin Mary . " please " and then the lump in her throat choke she . 

 " what do you want to say ? " he inquire . 

 " I be I be too big for a nurse , " say Mary . " and please please do not   make I have a governess yet . " 

 he rub his forehead again and star at she . 

 " that be what the Sowerby woman say , " he mutter absentmindedly . 

 then Mary gather a scrap of courage . 

 " be she be she Martha 's mother ? " she stammer . 

 " yes , I think so , " he reply . 

 " she know about child , " say Mary . " she have twelve . she know . " 

 he seem to rouse himself . 

 " what do you want to do ? " 

 " I want to play out of door , " Mary answer , hop that her voice do not tremble . " I never like it in India . it make I hungry here , and I be get fat . " 

 he be watch she . 

 " Mrs. Sowerby say it would do you good . perhaps it will , " he say . " she think you have well get strong before you have a governess . " 

 " it make I feel strong when I play and the wind come over the moor , " argue Mary . 

 " where do you play ? " he ask next . 

 " everywhere , " gasp Mary . " Martha 's mother send I a skipping - rope . I skip and run and I look about to see if thing be begin to stick up out of the earth . I do not   do any harm . " 

 " do not   look so frightened , " he say in a worried voice . " you could not do any harm , a child like you ! you may do what you like . " 

 Mary put her hand up to her throat because she be afraid he might see the excited lump which she feel jump into it . she come a step near to he . 

 " May I ? " she say tremulously . 

 her anxious little face seem to worry he more than ever . 

 " do not   look so frightened , " he exclaim . " of course you may . I be your guardian , though I be a poor one for any child . I can not give you time or attention . I be too ill , and wretche and distract ; but I wish you to be happy and comfortable . I do not   know anything about child , but Mrs. Medlock be to see that you have all you need . I send for you to - day because Mrs. Sowerby say I ought to see you . her daughter have talk about you . she think you need fresh air and freedom and run about . " 

 " she know all about child , " Mary say again in spite of herself . 

 " she ought to , " say Mr. Craven . " I think she rather bold to stop I on the moor , but she say Mrs. Craven have be kind to she . " it seem hard for he to speak his dead wife 's name . " she be a respectable woman . now I have see you I think she say sensible thing . play out of door as much as you like . it be a big place and you may go where you like and amuse yourself as you like . be there anything you want ? " as if a sudden thought have strike he . " do you want toy , book , doll ? " 

 " might I , " quaver Mary , " might I have a bit of earth ? " 

 in her eagerness she do not realize how queer the word would sound and that they be not the one she have mean to say . Mr. Craven look quite startled . 

 " Earth ! " he repeat . " what do you mean ? " 

 " to plant seed in to make thing grow to see they come alive , " Mary falter . 

 he gaze at she a moment and then pass his hand quickly over his eye . 

 " do you care about garden so much , " he say slowly . 

 " I do not   know about they in India , " say Mary . " I be always ill and tired and it be too hot . I sometimes make little bed in the sand and stick flower in they . but here it be different . " 

 Mr. Craven get up and begin to walk slowly across the room . 

 " a bit of earth , " he say to himself , and Mary think that somehow she must have remind he of something . when he stop and speak to she his dark eye look almost soft and kind . 

 " you can have as much earth as you want , " he say . " you remind I of some one else who love the earth and thing that grow . when you see a bit of earth you want , " with something like a smile , " take it , child , and make it come alive . " 

 " may I take it from anywhere if it be not want ? " 

 " anywhere , " he answer . " there ! you must go now , I be tired . " he touch the bell to call Mrs. Medlock . " good - by . I shall be away all summer . " 

 Mrs. Medlock come so quickly that Mary think she must have be wait in the corridor . 

 " Mrs. Medlock , " Mr. Craven say to she , " now I have see the child I understand what Mrs. Sowerby mean . she must be less delicate before she begin lesson . give her simple , healthy food . let she run wild in the garden . do not   look after her too much . she need liberty and fresh air and romp about . Mrs. Sowerby be to come and see she now and then and she may sometimes go to the cottage . " 

 Mrs. Medlock look pleased . she be relieve to hear that she need not " look after " Mary too much . she have feel she a tiresome charge and have indeed see as little of she as she dare . in addition to this she be fond of Martha 's mother . 

 " thank you , sir , " she say . " Susan Sowerby and I go to school together and she be as sensible and good - hearte a woman as you would find in a day 's walk . I never have any child myself and she be have twelve , and there never be healthy or well one . Miss Mary can get no harm from they . I would always take Susan Sowerby 's advice about child myself . she be what you might call healthy - minded if you understand I . " 

 " I understand , " Mr. Craven answer . " take Miss Mary away now and send Pitcher to I . " 

 when Mrs. Medlock leave she at the end of her own corridor Mary fly back to her room . she find Martha wait there . Martha have , in fact , hurry back after she have remove the dinner service . 

 " I can have my garden ! " cry Mary . " I may have it where I like ! I be not go to have a governess for a long time ! your mother be come to see I and I may go to your cottage ! he say a little girl like I could not do any harm and I may do what I like anywhere ! " 

 " eh ! " say Martha delightedly , " that be nice of he be not   it ? " 

 " Martha , " say Mary solemnly , " he be really a nice man , only his face be so miserable and his forehead be all draw together . " 

 she run as quickly as she could to the garden . she have be away so much long than she have think she should and she know Dickon would have to set out early on his five - mile walk . when she slip through the door under the ivy , she see he be not work where she have leave he . the gardening tool be lay together under a tree . she run to they , look all round the place , but there be no Dickon to be see . he have go away and the secret garden be empty except for the robin who have just fly across the wall and sit on a standard rose - bush watch she . " he be go , " she say woefully . " oh ! be he be he be he only a wood fairy ? " 

 something white fasten to the standard rose - bush catch her eye . it be a piece of paper , in fact , it be a piece of the letter she have print for Martha to send to Dickon . it be fasten on the bush with a long thorn , and in a minute she know Dickon have leave it there . there be some roughly print letter on it and a sort of picture . at first she could not tell what it be . then she see it be mean for a nest with a bird sit on it . underneath be the print letter and they say : 

 " I will cum bak . " 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 " I be COLIN " 

 Mary take the picture back to the house when she go to her supper and she show it to Martha . 

 " eh ! " say Martha with great pride . " I never know our Dickon be as clever as that . that there be a picture of a missel thrush on her nest , as large as life an ' twice as natural . " 

 then Mary know Dickon have mean the picture to be a message . he have mean that she might be sure he would keep her secret . her garden be her nest and she be like a missel thrush . oh , how she do like that queer , common boy ! 

 she hop he would come back the very next day and she fall asleep look forward to the morning . 

 but you never know what the weather will do in Yorkshire , particularly in the springtime . she be awaken in the night by the sound of rain beat with heavy drop against her window . it be pour down in torrent and the wind be " wuthere " round the corner and in the chimney of the huge old house . Mary sit up in bed and feel miserable and angry . 

 " the rain be as contrary as I ever be , " she say . " it come because it know I do not want it . " 

 she throw herself back on her pillow and bury her face . she do not cry , but she lie and hat the sound of the heavily beat rain , she hat the wind and its " wuthering . " she could not go to sleep again . the mournful sound keep she awake because she feel mournful herself . if she have feel happy it would probably have lull she to sleep . how it " wuthere " and how the big raindrop pour down and beat against the pane ! 

 " it sound just like a person lose on the moor and wander on and on cry , " she say . 


 she have be lie awake turning from side to side for about an hour , when suddenly something make she sit up in bed and turn her head toward the door listen . she listen and she listen . 

 " it be not   the wind now , " she say in a loud whisper . " that be not   the wind . it be different . it be that cry I hear before . " 

 the door of her room be ajar and the sound come down the corridor , a far - off faint sound of fretful crying . she listen for a few minute and each minute she become more and more sure . she feel as if she must find out what it be . it seem even strange than the secret garden and the bury key . perhaps the fact that she be in a rebellious mood make she bold . she put her foot out of bed and stand on the floor . 

 " I be go to find out what it be , " she say . " everybody be in bed and I do not   care about Mrs. Medlock I do not   care ! " 

 there be a candle by her bedside and she take it up and go softly out of the room . the corridor look very long and dark , but she be too excited to mind that . she think she remember the corner she must turn to find the short corridor with the door cover with tapestry the one Mrs. Medlock have come through the day she lose herself . the sound have come up that passage . so she go on with her dim light , almost feel her way , her heart beat so loud that she fancy she could hear it . the far - off faint crying go on and lead she . sometimes it stop for a moment or so and then begin again . be this the right corner to turn ? she stop and think . yes it be . down this passage and then to the left , and then up two broad step , and then to the right again . yes , there be the tapestry door . 

 she push it open very gently and close it behind she , and she stand in the corridor and could hear the crying quite plainly , though it be not loud . it be on the other side of the wall at she leave and a few yard far on there be a door . she could see a glimmer of light come from beneath it . the someone be cry in that room , and it be quite a young someone . 

 so she walk to the door and push it open , and there she be stand in the room ! 

 it be a big room with ancient , handsome furniture in it . there be a low fire glow faintly on the hearth and a night light burn by the side of a carved four - post bed hang with brocade , and on the bed be lie a boy , cry fretfully . 

 Mary wonder if she be in a real place or if she have fall asleep again and be dream without know it . 

 the boy have a sharp , delicate face the color of ivory and he seem to have eye too big for it . he have also a lot of hair which tumble over his forehead in heavy lock and make his thin face seem small . he look like a boy who have be ill , but he be cry more as if he be tired and cross than as if he be in pain . 

 Mary stand near the door with her candle in her hand , hold her breath . then she creep across the room , and , as she draw nearer , the light attract the boy 's attention and he turn his head on his pillow and star at she , his gray eye open so wide that they seem immense . 

 " who be you ? " he say at last in a half - frightened whisper . " be you a ghost ? " 

 " no , I be not , " Mary answer , her own whisper sound half frightened . " be you one ? " 

 he star and star and star . Mary could not help notice what strange eye he have . they be agate gray and they look too big for his face because they have black lash all round they . 

 " no , " he reply after wait a moment or so . " I be Colin . " 

 " who be Colin ? " she falter . 

 " I be Colin Craven . who be you ? " 

 " I be Mary Lennox . Mr. Craven be my uncle . " 

 " he be my father , " say the boy . 

 " your father ! " gasp Mary . " no one ever tell I he have a boy ! why do not   they ? " 

 " come here , " he say , still keep his strange eye fix on she with an anxious expression . 

 she come close to the bed and he put out his hand and touch she . 

 " you be real , be not   you ? " he say . " I have such real dream very often . you might be one of they . " 

 Mary have slip on a woolen wrapper before she leave her room and she put a piece of it between his finger . 

 " rub that and see how thick and warm it be , " she say . " I will pinch you a little if you like , to show you how real I be . for a minute I think you might be a dream too . " 

 " where do you come from ? " he ask . 

 " from my own room . the wind wuthere so I could not   go to sleep and I hear some one cry and want to find out who it be . what be you cry for ? " 

 " because I could not   go to sleep either and my head ache . tell I your name again . " 

 " Mary Lennox . do no one ever tell you I have come to live here ? " 

 he be still finger the fold of her wrapper , but he begin to look a little more as if he believe in her reality . 

 " no , " he answer . " they dare not . " 

 " why ? " ask Mary . 

 " because I should have be afraid you would see I . I will not   let people see I and talk I over . " 

 " why ? " Mary ask again , feel more mystified every moment . 

 " because I be like this always , ill and have to lie down . my father will not   let people talk I over either . the servant be not allow to speak about I . if I live I may be a hunchback , but I shall not   live . my father hat to think I may be like he . " 

 " oh , what a queer house this be ! " Mary say . " what a queer house ! everything be a kind of secret . room be lock up and garden be lock up and you ! have you be lock up ? " 

 " no . I stay in this room because I do not   want to be move out of it . it tire I too much . " 

 " do your father come and see you ? " Mary venture . 

 " sometimes . generally when I be asleep . he do not   want to see I . " 

 " why ? " Mary could not help ask again . 

 a sort of angry shadow pass over the boy 's face . 

 " my mother die when I be bear and it make he wretched to look at I . he think I do not   know , but I have   hear people talk . he almost hat I . " 

 " he hat the garden , because she die , " say Mary half speak to herself . 

 " what garden ? " the boy ask . 

 " oh ! just just a garden she use to like , " Mary stammer . " have you be here always ? " " nearly always . sometimes I have be take to place at the seaside , but I will not   stay because people stare at I . I use to wear an iron thing to keep my back straight , but a grand doctor come from London to see I and say it be stupid . he tell they to take it off and keep I out in the fresh air . I hate fresh air and I do not   want to go out . " 

 " I do not   when first I come here , " say Mary . " why do you keep look at I like that ? " 

 " because of the dream that be so real , " he answer rather fretfully . " sometimes when I open my eye I do not   believe I be awake . " 

 " we be both awake , " say Mary . she glance round the room with its high ceiling and shadowy corner and dim fire - light . " it look quite like a dream , and it be the middle of the night , and everybody in the house be asleep everybody but we . we be wide awake . " 

 " I do not   want it to be a dream , " the boy say restlessly . 

 Mary think of something all at once . 

 " if you do not   like people to see you , " she begin , " do you want I to go away ? " 

 he still hold the fold of her wrapper and he give it a little pull . 

 " no , " he say . " I should be sure you be a dream if you go . if you be real , sit down on that big footstool and talk . I want to hear about you . " 

 Mary put down her candle on the table near the bed and sit down on the cushion stool . she do not want to go away at all . she want to stay in the mysterious hide - away room and talk to the mysterious boy . 

 " what do you want I to tell you ? " she say . 

 he want to know how long she have be at Misselthwaite ; he want to know which corridor her room be on ; he want to know what she have be do ; if she dislike the moor as he dislike it ; where she have live before she come to Yorkshire . she answer all these question and many more and he lie back on his pillow and listen . he make she tell he a great deal about India and about her voyage across the ocean . she find out that because he have be an invalid he have not learn thing as other child have . one of his nurse have teach he to read when he be quite little and he be always read and look at picture in splendid book . 

 though his father rarely see he when he be awake , he be give all sort of wonderful thing to amuse himself with . he never seem to have be amuse , however . he could have anything he ask for and be never make to do anything he do not like to do . " everyone be oblige to do what please I , " he say indifferently . " it make I ill to be angry . no one believe I shall live to grow up . " 

 he say it as if he be so accustomed to the idea that it have cease to matter to he at all . he seem to like the sound of Mary 's voice . as she go on talk he listen in a drowsy , interested way . once or twice she wonder if he be not gradually fall into a doze . but at last he ask a question which open up a new subject . 

 " how old be you ? " he ask . 

 " I be ten , " answer Mary , forget herself for the moment , " and so be you . " 

 " how do you know that ? " he demand in a surprised voice . 

 " because when you be bear the garden door be lock and the key be bury . and it have be lock for ten year . " 

 Colin half sit up , turn toward she , lean on his elbow . 

 " what garden door be lock ? who do it ? where be the key bury ? " he exclaim as if he be suddenly very much interested . 

 " it it be the garden Mr. Craven hat , " say Mary nervously . " he lock the door . no one no one know where he bury the key . " " what sort of a garden be it ? " Colin persist eagerly . 

 " no one have be allow to go into it for ten year , " be Mary 's careful answer . 

 but it be too late to be careful . he be too much like herself . he too have have nothing to think about and the idea of a hide garden attract he as it have attract she . he ask question after question . where be it ? have she never look for the door ? have she never ask the gardener ? 

 " they will not   talk about it , " say Mary . " I think they have be tell not to answer question . " 

 " I would make they , " say Colin . 

 " could you ? " Mary falter , begin to feel frightened . if he could make people answer question , who know what might happen ! 

 " everyone be oblige to please I . I tell you that , " he say . " if I be to live , this place would sometime belong to I . they all know that . I would make they tell I . " 

 Mary have not know that she herself have be spoil , but she could see quite plainly that this mysterious boy have be . he think that the whole world belong to he . how peculiar he be and how coolly he speak of not live . 

 " do you think you will not   live ? " she ask , partly because she be curious and partly in hope of make he forget the garden . 

 " I do not   suppose I shall , " he answer as indifferently as he have speak before . " ever since I remember anything I have hear people say I shall not . at first they think I be too little to understand and now they think I do not   hear . but I do . my doctor be my father 's cousin . he be quite poor and if I die he will have all Misselthwaite when my father be dead . I should think he would not   want I to live . " 

 " do you want to live ? " inquire Mary . 

 " no , " he answer , in a cross , tired fashion . " but I do not   want to die . when I feel ill I lie here and think about it until I cry and cry . " 

 " I have hear you cry three time , " Mary say , " but I do not know who it be . be you cry about that ? " she do so want he to forget the garden . 

 " I dare say , " he answer . " let we talk about something else . talk about that garden . do not   you want to see it ? " 

 " yes , " answer Mary , in quite a low voice . 

 " I do , " he go on persistently . " I do not   think I ever really want to see anything before , but I want to see that garden . I want the key dig up . I want the door unlocked . I would let they take I there in my chair . that would be get fresh air . I be go to make they open the door . " 

 he have become quite excited and his strange eye begin to shine like star and look more immense than ever . 

 " they have to please I , " he say . " I will make they take I there and I will let you go , too . " 

 Mary 's hand clutch each other . everything would be spoil everything ! Dickon would never come back . she would never again feel like a missel thrush with a safe - hidden nest . 

 " oh , do not   do not   do not   do not   do that ! " she cry out . 

 he star as if he think she have go crazy ! 

 " why ? " he exclaim . " you say you want to see it . " 

 " I do , " she answer almost with a sob in her throat , " but if you make they open the door and take you in like that it will never be a secret again . " 

 he lean still far forward . 

 " a secret , " he say . " what do you mean ? tell I . " 

 Mary 's word almost tumble over one another . 

 " you see you see , " she pant , " if no one know but ourselves if there be a door , hide somewhere under the ivy if there be and we could find it ; and if we could slip through it together and shut it behind we , and no one know any one be inside and we call it our garden and pretend that that we be missel thrush and it be our nest , and if we play there almost every day and dig and plant seed and make it all come alive " 

 " be it dead ? " he interrupt she . 

 " it soon will be if no one care for it , " she go on . " the bulb will live but the rose " 

 he stop she again as excited as she be herself . 

 " what be bulb ? " he put in quickly . 

 " they be daffodil and lily and snowdrop . they be work in the earth now push up pale green point because the spring be come . " 

 " be the spring come ? " he say . " what be it like ? you do not   see it in room if you be ill . " 

 " it be the sun shin on the rain and the rain fall on the sunshine , and thing push up and work under the earth , " say Mary . " if the garden be a secret and we could get into it we could watch the thing grow big every day , and see how many rose be alive . do not   you see ? oh , do not   you see how much nice it would be if it be a secret ? " 

 he drop back on his pillow and lie there with an odd expression on his face . 

 " I never have a secret , " he say , " except that one about not live to grow up . they do not   know I know that , so it be a sort of secret . but I like this kind well . " 

 " if you will not   make they take you to the garden , " plead Mary , " perhaps I feel almost sure I can find out how to get in sometime . and then if the doctor want you to go out in your chair , and if you can always do what you want to do , perhaps perhaps we might find some boy who would push you , and we could go alone and it would always be a secret garden . " 

 " I should like that , " he say very slowly , his eye look dreamy . " I should like that . I should not mind fresh air in a secret garden . " 

 Mary begin to recover her breath and feel safe because the idea of keep the secret seem to please he . she feel almost sure that if she keep on talk and could make he see the garden in his mind as she have see it he would like it so much that he could not bear to think that everybody might tramp in to it when they choose . 

 " I will tell you what I think it would be like , if we could go into it , " she say . " it have be shut up so long thing have grow into a tangle perhaps . " 

 he lie quite still and listen while she go on talk about the rose which might have clamber from tree to tree and hang down about the many bird which might have build their nest there because it be so safe . and then she tell he about the robin and Ben Weatherstaff , and there be so much to tell about the robin and it be so easy and safe to talk about it that she cease to be afraid . the robin please he so much that he smile until he look almost beautiful , and at first Mary have think that he be even plain than herself , with his big eye and heavy lock of hair . 

 " I do not know bird could be like that , " he say . " but if you stay in a room you never see thing . what a lot of thing you know . I feel as if you have be inside that garden . " 

 she do not know what to say , so she do not say anything . he evidently do not expect an answer and the next moment he give she a surprise . 

 " I be go to let you look at something , " he say . " do you see that rose - color silk curtain hang on the wall over the mantel - piece ? " 

 Mary have not notice it before , but she look up and see it . it be a curtain of soft silk hang over what seem to be some picture . 

 " yes , " she answer . 

 " there be a cord hang from it , " say Colin . " go and pull it . " 

 Mary get up , much mystified , and find the cord . when she pull it the silk curtain run back on ring and when it run back it uncover a picture . it be the picture of a girl with a laugh face . she have bright hair tie up with a blue ribbon and her gay , lovely eye be exactly like Colin 's unhappy one , agate gray and look twice as big as they really be because of the black lash all round they . 

 " she be my mother , " say Colin complainingly . " I do not   see why she die . sometimes I hate she for do it . " 

 " how queer ! " say Mary . 

 " if she have live I believe I should not have be ill always , " he grumble . " I dare say I should have live , too . and my father would not have hat to look at I . I dare say I should have have a strong back . draw the curtain again . " 

 Mary do as she be tell and return to her footstool . 

 " she be much pretty than you , " she say , " but her eye be just like yours at least they be the same shape and color . why be the curtain draw over she ? " 

 he move uncomfortably . 

 " I make they do it , " he say . " sometimes I do not   like to see she look at I . she smile too much when I be ill and miserable . besides , she be mine and I do not   want everyone to see she . " there be a few moment of silence and then Mary speak . 

 " what would Mrs. Medlock do if she find out that I have be here ? " she inquire . 

 " she would do as I tell she to do , " he answer . " and I should tell she that I want you to come here and talk to I every day . I be glad you come . " 

 " so be I , " say Mary . " I will come as often as I can , but " she hesitate " I shall have to look every day for the garden door . " 

 " yes , you must , " say Colin , " and you can tell I about it afterward . " 

 he lie think a few minute , as he have do before , and then he speak again . 

 " I think you shall be a secret , too , " he say . " I will not tell they until they find out . I can always send the nurse out of the room and say that I want to be by myself . do you know Martha ? " 

 " yes , I know she very well , " say Mary . " she wait on I . " 

 he nod his head toward the outer corridor . 

 " she be the one who be asleep in the other room . the nurse go away yesterday to stay all night with her sister and she always make Martha attend to I when she want to go out . Martha shall tell you when to come here . " 

 then Mary understand Martha 's troubled look when she have ask question about the crying . 

 " Martha know about you all the time ? " she say . 

 " yes ; she often attend to I . the nurse like to get away from I and then Martha come . " 

 " I have be here a long time , " say Mary . " shall I go away now ? your eye look sleepy . " 

 " I wish I could go to sleep before you leave I , " he say rather shyly . 

 " shut your eye , " say Mary , draw her footstool close , " and I will do what my Ayah use to do in India . I will pat your hand and stroke it and sing something quite low . " 

 " I should like that perhaps , " he say drowsily . 

 somehow she be sorry for he and do not want he to lie awake , so she lean against the bed and begin to stroke and pat his hand and sing a very low little chant song in Hindustani . 

 " that be nice , " he say more drowsily still , and she go on chant and stroking , but when she look at he again his black lash be lie close against his cheek , for his eye be shut and he be fast asleep . so she get up softly , take her candle and creep away without make a sound . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 a young rajah 

 the moor be hide in mist when the morning come , and the rain have not stop pour down . there could be no go out of door . Martha be so busy that Mary have no opportunity of talk to she , but in the afternoon she ask she to come and sit with she in the nursery . she come bring the stocking she be always knit when she be do nothing else . 

 " what be the matter with thee ? " she ask as soon as they sit down . " Tha ' look as if tha'd something to say . " 

 " I have . I have find out what the crying be , " say Mary . 

 Martha let she knitting drop on her knee and gaze at she with startled eye . 

 " Tha ' have not ! " she exclaim . " never ! " 

 " I hear it in the night , " Mary go on . " and I get up and go to see where it come from . it be Colin . I find he . " 

 Martha 's face become red with fright . 

 " eh ! Miss Mary ! " she say half cry . " Tha ' should not   have do it tha ' should not ! Tha'll get I in trouble . I never tell thee nothing about he but tha'll get I in trouble . I shall lose my place and what will mother do ! " 

 " you will not   lose your place , " say Mary . " he be glad I come . we talk and talk and he say he be glad I come . " 

 " be he ? " cry Martha . " art tha ' sure ? Tha ' do not   know what he be like when anything vex he . he be a big lad to cry like a baby , but when he be in a passion he will fair scream just to frighten we . he know we dare not   call our soul our own . " 

 " he be not   vex , " say Mary . " I ask he if I should go away and he make I stay . he ask I question and I sit on a big footstool and talk to he about India and about the robin and garden . he would not   let I go . he let I see his mother 's picture . before I leave he I sing he to sleep . " 

 Martha fairly gasp with amazement . 

 " I can scarcely believe thee ! " she protest . " it be as if tha'd walk straight into a lion 's den . if he have be like he be most time he would have throw himself into one of his tantrum and rouse th ' house . he will not   let stranger look at he . " 

 " he let I look at he . I look at he all the time and he look at I . we star ! " say Mary . 

 " I do not   know what to do ! " cry agitated Martha . " if Mrs. Medlock find out , she will think I break order and tell thee and I shall be pack back to mother . " 

 " he be not go to tell Mrs. Medlock anything about it yet . it be to be a sort of secret just at first , " say Mary firmly . " and he say everybody be oblige to do as he please . " 

 " Aye , that be true enough th ' bad lad ! " sigh Martha , wipe her forehead with her apron . 

 " he say Mrs. Medlock must . and he want I to come and talk to he every day . and you be to tell I when he want I . " 

 " I ! " say Martha ; " I shall lose my place I shall for sure ! " 

 " you can not   if you be do what he want you to do and everybody be order to obey he , " Mary argue . 

 " do tha ' mean to say , " cry Martha with wide open eye , " that he be nice to thee ! " 

 " I think he almost like I , " Mary answer . 

 " then tha ' must have bewitch he ! " decide Martha , draw a long breath . 

 " do you mean Magic ? " inquire Mary . " I have   hear about Magic in India , but I can not   make it . I just go into his room and I be so surprised to see he I stand and star . and then he turn round and star at I . and he think I be a ghost or a dream and I think perhaps he be . and it be so queer be there alone together in the middle of the night and not know about each other . and we begin to ask each other question . and when I ask he if I must go away he say I must not . " 

 " Th ' world 's comin ' to a end ! " gasp Martha . 

 " what be the matter with he ? " ask Mary . 

 " nobody know for sure and certain , " say Martha . " Mr. Craven go off his head like when he be bear . Th ' doctor think he would have to be put in a ' sylum . it be because Mrs. Craven die like I tell you . he would not   set eye on th ' baby . he just rave and say it would be another hunchback like he and it would well die . " 

 " be Colin a hunchback ? " Mary ask . " he do not   look like one . " 

 " he be not   yet , " say Martha . " but he begin all wrong . Mother say that there be enough trouble and rag in th ' house to set any child wrong . they be afraid his back be weak an ' they have   always be takin ' care of it keepin ' him lyin ' down and not lettin ' he walk . once they make he wear a brace but he fret so he be downright ill . then a big doctor come to see he an ' make they take it off . he talk to th ' other doctor quite rough in a polite way . he say there would be too much medicine and too much lettin ' he have his own way . " 

 " I think he be a very spoiled boy , " say Mary . 

 " he be th ' bad young nowt as ever be ! " say Martha . " I will not   say as he have not   be ill a good bit . he be have cough an ' cold that be nearly kill he two or three time . once he have rheumatic fever an ' once he have typhoid . eh ! Mrs. Medlock do get a fright then . he have be out of his head an ' she be talkin ' to th ' nurse , thinkin ' he do not   know nothing , an ' she say , ' he will die this time sure enough , an ' good thing for he an ' for everybody . ' an ' she look at he an ' there he be with his big eye open , starin ' at she as sensible as she be herself . she do not   know wha'd happen but he just star at she an ' say , ' you give I some water an ' stop talkin ' . ' " 

 " do you think he will die ? " ask Mary . 

 " mother say there be no reason why any child should live that get no fresh air an ' do not   do nothing but lie on his back an ' read picture - book an ' take medicine . he be weak and hat th ' trouble o ' bein ' take out o ' door , an ' he get cold so easy he say it make he ill . " 

 Mary sit and look at the fire . " I wonder , " she say slowly , " if it would not do he good to go out into a garden and watch thing grow . it do I good . " 

 " one of th ' bad fit he ever have , " say Martha , " be one time they take he out where the rose be by the fountain . he have be readin ' in a paper about people gettin ' something he call ' rise cold ' an ' he begin to sneeze an ' say he would got it an ' then a new gardener as do not   know th ' rule pass by an ' look at he curious . he throw himself into a passion an ' he say he have look at he because he be go to be a hunchback . he cry himself into a fever an ' be ill all night . " 

 " if he ever get angry at I , I will never go and see he again , " say Mary . 

 " he will have thee if he want thee , " say Martha . " Tha ' may as well know that at th ' start . " 

 very soon afterward a bell rang and she roll up her knitting . 

 " I dare say th ' nurse want I to stay with he a bit , " she say . " I hope he be in a good temper . " 

 she be out of the room about ten minute and then she come back with a puzzled expression . 

 " well , tha ' have bewitch he , " she say . " he be up on his sofa with his picture - book . he be tell the nurse to stay away until six o'clock . I be to wait in the next room . Th ' minute she be go he call I to he an ' say , ' I want Mary Lennox to come and talk to I , and remember you be not to tell any one . ' you would well go as quick as you can . " 

 Mary be quite willing to go quickly . she do not want to see Colin as much as she want to see Dickon ; but she want to see he very much . 

 there be a bright fire on the hearth when she enter his room , and in the daylight she see it be a very beautiful room indeed . there be rich color in the rug and hanging and picture and book on the wall which make it look glow and comfortable even in spite of the gray sky and fall rain . Colin look rather like a picture himself . he be wrap in a velvet dressing - gown and sit against a big brocade cushion . he have a red spot on each cheek . 

 " come in , " he say . " I have   be think about you all morning . " 

 " I have   be think about you , too , " answer Mary . " you do not   know how frightened Martha be . she say Mrs. Medlock will think she tell I about you and then she will be send away . " 

 he frown . 

 " go and tell she to come here , " he say . " she be in the next room . " 

 Mary go and bring she back . poor Martha be shake in her shoe . Colin be still frown . 

 " have you to do what I please or have you not ? " he demand . 

 " I have to do what you please , sir , " Martha falter , turn quite red . 

 " have Medlock to do what I please ? " 

 " everybody have , sir , " say Martha . 

 " well , then , if I order you to bring Miss Mary to I , how can Medlock send you away if she find it out ? " 

 " please do not   let she , sir , " plead Martha . 

 " I will send she away if she dare to say a word about such a thing , " say Master Craven grandly . " she would not   like that , I can tell you . " 

 " thank you , sir , " bob a curtsy , " I want to do my duty , sir . " 

 " what I want be your duty " say Colin more grandly still . " I will take care of you . now go away . " 

 when the door close behind Martha , Colin find Mistress Mary gaze at he as if he have set she wonder . 

 " why do you look at I like that ? " he ask she . " what be you think about ? " 

 " I be think about two thing . " 

 " what be they ? sit down and tell I . " 

 " this be the first one , " say Mary , seat herself on the big stool . " once in India I see a boy who be a Rajah . he have ruby and emerald and diamond stick all over he . he speak to his people just as you speak to Martha . everybody have to do everything he tell they in a minute . I think they would have be kill if they have not . " 

 " I shall make you tell I about Rajahs presently , " he say , " but first tell I what the second thing be . " 

 " I be think , " say Mary , " how different you be from Dickon . " 

 " who be Dickon ? " he say . " what a queer name ! " 

 she might as well tell he , she think she could talk about Dickon without mention the secret garden . she have like to hear Martha talk about he . besides , she long to talk about he . it would seem to bring he nearer . 

 " he be Martha 's brother . he be twelve year old , " she explain . " he be not like any one else in the world . he can charm fox and squirrel and bird just as the native in India charm snake . he play a very soft tune on a pipe and they come and listen . " 

 there be some big book on a table at his side and he drag one suddenly toward he . " there be a picture of a snake - charmer in this , " he exclaim . " come and look at it . " 

 the book be a beautiful one with superb color illustration and he turn to one of they . 

 " can he do that ? " he ask eagerly . 

 " he play on his pipe and they listen , " Mary explain . " but he do not   call it magic . he say it be because he live on the moor so much and he know their way . he say he feel sometimes as if he be a bird or a rabbit himself , he like they so . I think he ask the robin question . it seem as if they talk to each other in soft chirp . " 

 Colin lie back on his cushion and his eye grow large and large and the spot on his cheek burn . 

 " tell I some more about he , " he say . 

 " he know all about egg and nest , " Mary go on . " and he know where fox and badger and otter live . he keep they secret so that other boy will not   find their hole and frighten they . he know about everything that grow or live on the moor . " 

 " do he like the moor ? " say Colin . " how can he when it be such a great , bare , dreary place ? " 

 " it be the most beautiful place , " protest Mary . " thousand of lovely thing grow on it and there be thousand of little creature all busy building nest and make hole and burrow and chippere or singing or squeaking to each other . they be so busy and have such fun under the earth or in the tree or heather . it be their world . " 

 " how do you know all that ? " say Colin , turn on his elbow to look at she . 

 " I have never be there once , really , " say Mary suddenly remember . " I only drive over it in the dark . I think it be hideous . Martha tell I about it first and then Dickon . when Dickon talk about it you feel as if you see thing and hear they and as if you be stand in the heather with the sun shin and the gorse smelling like honey and all full of bee and butterfly . " 

 " you never see anything if you be ill , " say Colin restlessly . he look like a person listen to a new sound in the distance and wonder what it be . 

 " you can not   if you stay in a room , " say Mary . 

 " I could not   go on the moor , " he say in a resentful tone . 

 Mary be silent for a minute and then she say something bold . 

 " you might sometime . " 

 he move as if he be startle . 

 " go on the moor ! how could I ? I be go to die . " " how do you know ? " say Mary unsympathetically . she do not   like the way he have of talk about die . she do not feel very sympathetic . she feel rather as if he almost boast about it . 

 " oh , I have   hear it ever since I remember , " he answer crossly . " they be always whisper about it and think I do not   notice . they wish I would , too . " 

 Mistress Mary feel quite contrary . she pinch her lip together . 

 " if they wish I would , " she say , " I would not . who wish you would ? " 

 " the servant and of course Dr. Craven because he would get Misselthwaite and be rich instead of poor . he dare not   say so , but he always look cheerful when I be bad . when I have typhoid fever his face get quite fat . I think my father wish it , too . " 

 " I do not   believe he do , " say Mary quite obstinately . 

 that make Colin turn and look at she again . 

 " do not   you ? " he say . 

 and then he lie back on his cushion and be still , as if he be think . and there be quite a long silence . perhaps they be both of they think strange thing child do not usually think . " I like the grand doctor from London , because he make they take the iron thing off , " say Mary at last " do he say you be go to die ? " 

 " no . " . 

 " what do he say ? " 

 " he do not   whisper , " Colin answer . " perhaps he know I hat whispering . I hear he say one thing quite aloud . he say , ' the lad might live if he would make up his mind to it . put he in the humor . ' it sound as if he be in a temper . " 

 " I will tell you who would put you in the humor , perhaps , " say Mary reflect . she feel as if she would like this thing to be settle one way or the other . " I believe Dickon would . he be always talk about live thing . he never talk about dead thing or thing that be ill . he be always look up in the sky to watch bird fly or look down at the earth to see something grow . he have such round blue eye and they be so wide open with look about . and he laugh such a big laugh with his wide mouth and his cheek be as red as red as cherry . " she pull her stool nearer to the sofa and her expression quite change at the remembrance of the wide curve mouth and wide open eye . 

 " see here , " she say . " do not   let we talk about die ; I do not   like it . let we talk about living . let we talk and talk about Dickon . and then we will look at your picture . " 

 it be the good thing she could have say . to talk about Dickon mean to talk about the moor and about the cottage and the fourteen people who live in it on sixteen shilling a week and the child who get fat on the moor grass like the wild pony . and about Dickon 's mother and the skip - rope and the moor with the sun on it and about pale green point stick up out of the black sod . and it be all so alive that Mary talk more than she have ever talk before and Colin both talk and listen as he have never do either before . and they both begin to laugh over nothing as child will when they be happy together . and they laugh so that in the end they be make as much noise as if they have be two ordinary healthy natural ten - year - old creature instead of a hard , little , unlove girl and a sickly boy who believe that he be go to die . 

 they enjoy themselves so much that they forget the picture and they forget about the time . they have be laugh quite loudly over Ben Weatherstaff and his robin , and Colin be actually sit up as if he have forget about his weak back , when he suddenly remember something . " do you know there be one thing we have never once think of , " he say . " we be cousin . " 

 it seem so queer that they have talk so much and never remember this simple thing that they laugh more than ever , because they have get into the humor to laugh at anything . and in the midst of the fun the door open and in walk Dr. Craven and Mrs. Medlock . 

 Dr. Craven start in actual alarm and Mrs. Medlock almost fall back because he have accidentally bump against she . 

 " Good Lord ! " exclaim poor Mrs. Medlock with her eye almost start out of her head . " Good Lord ! " 

 " what be this ? " say Dr. Craven , come forward . " what do it mean ? " 

 then Mary be remind of the boy Rajah again . Colin answer as if neither the doctor 's alarm nor Mrs. Medlock 's terror be of the slight consequence . he be as little disturbed or frighten as if an elderly cat and dog have walk into the room . 

 " this be my cousin , Mary Lennox , " he say . " I ask she to come and talk to I . I like she . she must come and talk to I whenever I send for she . " 

 Dr. Craven turn reproachfully to Mrs. Medlock . " oh , sir " she pant . " I do not   know how it be happen . there be not a servant on the place tha'd dare to talk they all have their order . " 

 " nobody tell she anything , " say Colin . " she hear I cry and find I herself . I be glad she come . do not   be silly , Medlock . " 

 Mary see that Dr. Craven do not look pleased , but it be quite plain that he dare not oppose his patient . he sit down by Colin and feel his pulse . 

 " I be afraid there have be too much excitement . Excitement be not good for you , my boy , " he say . 

 " I should be excited if she keep away , " answer Colin , his eye begin to look dangerously sparkling . " I be well . she make I well . the nurse must bring up her tea with mine . we will have tea together . " 

 Mrs. Medlock and Dr. Craven look at each other in a troubled way , but there be evidently nothing to be do . 

 " he do look rather well , sir , " venture Mrs. Medlock . " but " think the matter over " he look well this morning before she come into the room . " 

 " she come into the room last night . she stay with I a long time . she sing a Hindustani song to I and it make I go to sleep , " say Colin . " I be well when I waken up . I want my breakfast . I want my tea now . tell nurse , Medlock . " 

 Dr. Craven do not stay very long . he talk to the nurse for a few minute when she come into the room and say a few word of warn to Colin . he must not talk too much ; he must not forget that he be ill ; he must not forget that he be very easily tired . Mary think that there seem to be a number of uncomfortable thing he be not to forget . 

 Colin look fretful and keep his strange black - lash eye fix on Dr. Craven 's face . 

 " I want to forget it , " he say at last . " she make I forget it . that be why I want she . " 

 Dr. Craven do not look happy when he leave the room . he give a puzzled glance at the little girl sit on the large stool . she have become a stiff , silent child again as soon as he enter and he could not see what the attraction be . the boy actually do look brighter , however and he sigh rather heavily as he go down the corridor . 

 " they be always want I to eat thing when I do not   want to , " say Colin , as the nurse bring in the tea and put it on the table by the sofa . " now , if you will eat I will . those muffin look so nice and hot . tell I about Rajahs . " 




 CHAPTER XV 

 NEST BUILDING 

 after another week of rain the high arch of blue sky appear again and the sun which pour down be quite hot . though there have be no chance to see either the secret garden or Dickon , Mistress Mary have enjoy herself very much . the week have not seem long . she have spend hour of every day with Colin in his room , talk about Rajahs or garden or Dickon and the cottage on the moor . they have look at the splendid book and picture and sometimes Mary have read thing to Colin , and sometimes he have read a little to she . when he be amuse and interested she think he scarcely look like an invalid at all , except that his face be so colorless and he be always on the sofa . 

 " you be a sly young one to listen and get out of your bed to go follow thing up like you do that night , " Mrs. Medlock say once . " but there be no saying it be not be a sort of blessing to the lot of we . he be not have a tantrum or a whining fit since you make friend . the nurse be just go to give up the case because she be so sick of he , but she say she do not   mind stay now you have   go on duty with she , " laugh a little . 

 in her talk with Colin , Mary have try to be very cautious about the secret garden . there be certain thing she want to find out from he , but she feel that she must find they out without ask he direct question . in the first place , as she begin to like to be with he , she want to discover whether he be the kind of boy you could tell a secret to . he be not in the least like Dickon , but he be evidently so pleased with the idea of a garden no one know anything about that she think perhaps he could be trust . but she have not know he long enough to be sure . the second thing she want to find out be this : if he could be trust if he really could would not   it be possible to take he to the garden without have any one find it out ? the grand doctor have say that he must have fresh air and Colin have say that he would not mind fresh air in a secret garden . perhaps if he have a great deal of fresh air and know Dickon and the robin and see thing grow he might not think so much about die . Mary have see herself in the glass sometimes lately when she have realize that she look quite a different creature from the child she have see when she arrive from India . this child look nicer . even Martha have see a change in she . 

 " Th ' air from th ' moor have do thee good already , " she have say . " Tha'rt not nigh so yeller and tha'rt not nigh so scrawny . even tha ' hair do not   slamp down on tha ' head so flat . it be get some life in it so as it stick out a bit . " 

 " it be like I , " say Mary . " it be grow strong and fat . I be sure there be more of it . " 

 " it look it , for sure , " say Martha , ruffle it up a little round her face . " Tha'rt not half so ugly when it be that way an ' there be a bit o ' red in tha ' cheek . " 

 if garden and fresh air have be good for she perhaps they would be good for Colin . but then , if he hat people to look at he , perhaps he would not like to see Dickon . 

 " why do it make you angry when you be look at ? " she inquire one day . 

 " I always hat it , " he answer , " even when I be very little . then when they take I to the seaside and I use to lie in my carriage everybody use to stare and lady would stop and talk to my nurse and then they would begin to whisper and I know then they be say I should not   live to grow up . then sometimes the lady would pat my cheek and say ' poor child ! ' once when a lady do that I scream out loud and bit her hand . she be so frightened she run away . " 

 " she think you have go mad like a dog , " say Mary , not at all admiringly . 

 " I do not   care what she think , " say Colin , frown . 

 " I wonder why you do not   scream and bite I when I come into your room ? " say Mary . then she begin to smile slowly . 

 " I think you be a ghost or a dream , " he say . " you can not   bite a ghost or a dream , and if you scream they do not   care . " 

 " would you hate it if if a boy look at you ? " Mary ask uncertainly . 

 he lie back on his cushion and pause thoughtfully . 

 " there be one boy , " he say quite slowly , as if he be think over every word , " there be one boy I believe I should not   mind . it be that boy who know where the fox live Dickon . " 

 " I be sure you would not   mind he , " say Mary . 

 " the bird do not   and other animal , " he say , still think it over , " perhaps that be why I should not . he be a sort of animal charmer and I be a boy animal . " 

 then he laugh and she laugh too ; in fact it end in their both laugh a great deal and find the idea of a boy animal hiding in his hole very funny indeed . 

 what Mary feel afterward be that she need not fear about Dickon . 


 on that first morning when the sky be blue again Mary waken very early . the sun be pour in slant ray through the blind and there be something so joyous in the sight of it that she jump out of bed and run to the window . she draw up the blind and open the window itself and a great waft of fresh , scented air blow in upon she . the moor be blue and the whole world look as if something Magic have happen to it . there be tender little fluting sound here and there and everywhere , as if score of bird be begin to tune up for a concert . Mary put her hand out of the window and hold it in the sun . 

 " it be warm warm ! " she say . " it will make the green point push up and up and up , and it will make the bulb and root work and struggle with all their might under the earth . " 

 she kneel down and lean out of the window as far as she could , breathe big breath and sniff the air until she laugh because she remember what Dickon 's mother have say about the end of his nose quiver like a rabbit 's . " it must be very early , " she say . " the little cloud be all pink and I have   never see the sky look like this . no one be up . I do not   even hear the stable boy . " 

 a sudden thought make she scramble to her foot . 

 " I can not   wait ! I be go to see the garden ! " 

 she have learn to dress herself by this time and she put on her clothe in five minute . she know a small side door which she could unbolt herself and she fly downstairs in her stocking foot and put on her shoe in the hall . she unchain and unbolted and unlocked and when the door be open she spring across the step with one bind , and there she be stand on the grass , which seem to have turn green , and with the sun pour down on she and warm sweet waft about she and the fluting and twitter and singing come from every bush and tree . she clasp her hand for pure joy and look up in the sky and it be so blue and pink and pearly and white and flood with springtime light that she feel as if she must flute and sing aloud herself and know that thrush and robin and skylark could not possibly help it . she run around the shrub and path towards the secret garden . 

 " it be all different already , " she say . " the grass be green and thing be stick up everywhere and thing be uncurling and green bud of leaf be show . this afternoon I be sure Dickon will come . " 

 the long warm rain have do strange thing to the herbaceous bed which border the walk by the low wall . there be thing sprout and push out from the root of clump of plant and there be actually here and there glimpse of royal purple and yellow unfurling among the stem of crocus . six month before Mistress Mary would not have see how the world be wake up , but now she miss nothing . 

 when she have reach the place where the door hide itself under the ivy , she be startle by a curious loud sound . it be the caw caw of a crow and it come from the top of the wall , and when she look up , there sit a big glossy - plumage blue - black bird , look down at she very wisely indeed . she have never see a crow so close before and he make she a little nervous , but the next moment he spread his wing and flap away across the garden . she hop he be not go to stay inside and she push the door open wonder if he would . when she get fairly into the garden she see that he probably do intend to stay because he have alight on a dwarf apple - tree and under the apple - tree be lie a little reddish animal with a bushy tail , and both of they be watch the stoop body and rust - red head of Dickon , who be kneel on the grass work hard . 

 Mary fly across the grass to he . 

 " oh , Dickon ! Dickon ! " she cry out . " how could you get here so early ! how could you ! the sun have only just get up ! " 

 he get up himself , laugh and glowing , and tousle ; his eye like a bit of the sky . 

 " eh ! " he say . " I be up long before he . how could I have stay abe ! th ' world 's all fair begin again this mornin ' , it have . an ' it be workin ' an ' hummin ' an ' scratchin ' an ' pipin ' an ' nest - buildin ' an ' breathin ' out scent , till you have   get to be out on it ' stead o ' lyin ' on your back . when th ' sun do jump up , th ' moor go mad for joy , an ' I be in the midst of th ' heather , an ' I run like mad myself , shoutin ' an ' singin ' . an ' I come straight here . I could not   have stay away . why , th ' garden be lyin ' here waitin ' ! " 

 Mary put her hand on her chest , pant , as if she have be run herself . 

 " oh , Dickon ! Dickon ! " she say . " I be so happy I can scarcely breathe ! " 

 see he talk to a stranger , the little bushy - tail animal rise from its place under the tree and come to he , and the rook , caw once , fly down from its branch and settle quietly on his shoulder . 

 " this be th ' little fox cub , " he say , rub the little reddish animal 's head . " it be name Captain . an ' this here 's soot . soot he fly across th ' moor with I an ' Captain he run same as if th ' hound have be after he . they both feel same as I do . " 

 neither of the creature look as if he be the least afraid of Mary . when Dickon begin to walk about , Soot stay on his shoulder and Captain trot quietly close to his side . 

 " see here ! " say Dickon . " see how these have push up , an ' these an ' these ! an ' eh ! look at these here ! " 

 he throw himself upon his knee and Mary go down beside he . they have come upon a whole clump of crocus burst into purple and orange and gold . Mary bend her face down and kiss and kiss they . 

 " you never kiss a person in that way , " she say when she lift her head . " flower be so different . " 

 he look puzzled but smile . 

 " eh ! " he say , " I have   kiss mother many a time that way when I come in from th ' moor after a day 's roamin ' an ' she stand there at th ' door in th ' sun , lookin ' so glad an ' comfortable . " they run from one part of the garden to another and find so many wonder that they be oblige to remind themselves that they must whisper or speak low . he show her swell leafbud on rose branch which have seem dead . he show she ten thousand new green point push through the mould . they put their eager young nose close to the earth and sniff its warm springtime breathing ; they dig and pull and laugh low with rapture until Mistress Mary 's hair be as tumble as Dickon 's and her cheek be almost as poppy red as his . 

 there be every joy on earth in the secret garden that morning , and in the midst of they come a delight more delightful than all , because it be more wonderful . swiftly something fly across the wall and dart through the tree to a close grow corner , a little flare of red - breast bird with something hang from its beak . Dickon stand quite still and put his hand on Mary almost as if they have suddenly find themselves laugh in a church . 

 " we munnot stir , " he whisper in broad Yorkshire . " we munnot scarce breathe . I know he be mate - huntin ' when I seed he last . it be Ben Weatherstaff 's robin . he be buildin ' his nest . he will stay here if we do not   fight he . " they settle down softly upon the grass and sit there without move . 

 " we must not   seem as if we be watchin ' he too close , " say Dickon . " he would be out with we for good if he get th ' notion we be interferin ' now . he will be a good bit different till all this be over . he be settin ' up housekeepin ' . he will be shyer an ' readier to take thing ill . he be get no time for visitin ' an ' gossipin ' . we must keep still a bit an ' try to look as if we be grass an ' tree an ' bush . then when he be get use to seein ' us I will chirp a bit an ' he will know us'll not be in his way . " 

 Mistress Mary be not at all sure that she know , as Dickon seem to , how to try to look like grass and tree and bush . but he have say the queer thing as if it be the simple and most natural thing in the world , and she feel it must be quite easy to he , and indeed she watch he for a few minute carefully , wonder if it be possible for he to quietly turn green and put out branch and leaf . but he only sit wonderfully still , and when he speak drop his voice to such a softness that it be curious that she could hear he , but she could . 

 " it be part o ' th ' springtime , this nest - buildin ' be , " he say . " I warrant it be be go on in th ' same way every year since th ' world be begin . they have   get their way o ' thinkin ' and do thing an ' a body have well not meddle . you can lose a friend in springtime easy than any other season if you be too curious . " 

 " if we talk about he I can not   help look at he , " Mary say as softly as possible . " we must talk of something else . there be something I want to tell you . " 

 " he will like it well if we talk o ' something else , " say Dickon . " what be it tha 's get to tell I ? " 

 " well do you know about Colin ? " she whisper . 

 he turn his head to look at she . 

 " what do tha ' know about he ? " he ask . 

 " I have   see he . I have be to talk to he every day this week . he want I to come . he say I be make he forget about be ill and die , " answer Mary . 

 Dickon look actually relieve as soon as the surprise die away from his round face . 

 " I be glad o ' that , " he exclaim . " I be right down glad . it make I easy . I know I must say nothing about he an ' I do not   like havin' to hide thing . " 

 " do not   you like hide the garden ? " say Mary . 

 " I will never tell about it , " he answer . " but I say to mother , ' mother , ' I say , ' I get a secret to keep . it be not a bad ' un , tha ' know that . it be no bad than hidin ' where a bird 's nest be . Tha ' do not   mind it , do tha ' ? ' " 

 Mary always want to hear about mother . 

 " what do she say ? " she ask , not at all afraid to hear . 

 Dickon grin sweet - temperedly . 

 " it be just like she , what she say , " he answer . " she give my head a bit of a rub an ' laugh an ' she say , ' eh , lad , tha ' can have all th ' secret tha ' like . I have   know thee twelve year ' . ' " 

 " how do you know about Colin ? " ask Mary . 

 " everybody as know about Mester Craven know there be a little lad as be like to be a cripple , an ' they know Mester Craven do not   like he to be talk about . folk be sorry for Mester Craven because Mrs. Craven be such a pretty young lady an ' they be so fond of each other . Mrs. Medlock stop in our cottage whenever she go to Thwaite an ' she do not   mind talkin ' to mother before we child , because she know we have be bring up to be trusty . how do tha ' find out about he ? Martha be in fine trouble th ' last time she come home . she say tha'd hear he frettin ' an ' tha ' be askin ' question an ' she do not   know what to say . " 

 Mary tell he her story about the midnight wuthere of the wind which have waken she and about the faint far - off sound of the complain voice which have lead she down the dark corridor with her candle and have end with her opening of the door of the dimly light room with the carven four - post bed in the corner . when she describe the small ivory - white face and the strange black - rim eye Dickon shake his head . 

 " they be just like his mother 's eye , only her be always laughin ' , they say , " he say . " they say as Mr. Craven can not   bear to see he when he be awake an ' it be because his eye be so like his mother 's an ' yet look so different in his miserable bit of a face . " 

 " do you think he want to die ? " whisper Mary . 

 " no , but he wish he would never be bear . Mother she say that be th ' bad thing on earth for a child . they as be not want scarce ever thrive . Mester Craven he would buy anythin ' as money could buy for th ' poor lad but he would like to forget as he be on earth . for one thing , he be afraid he will look at he some day and find he be grow hunchback . " 

 " Colin 's so afraid of it himself that he will not   sit up , " say Mary . " he say he be always think that if he should feel a lump come he should go crazy and scream himself to death . " 

 " eh ! he ought not   to lie there thinkin ' thing like that , " say Dickon . " no lad could get well as think they sort o ' thing . " 

 the fox be lie on the grass close by he , look up to ask for a pat now and then , and Dickon bend down and rub his neck softly and think a few minute in silence . presently he lift his head and look round the garden . 

 " when first we get in here , " he say , " it seem like everything be gray . look round now and tell I if tha ' do not   see a difference . " 

 Mary look and catch her breath a little . 

 " why ! " she cry , " the gray wall be change . it be as if a green mist be creep over it . it be almost like a green gauze veil . " 

 " aye , " say Dickon . " an ' it will be green and greener till th ' gray 's all go . can tha ' guess what I be thinkin ' ? " 

 " I know it be something nice , " say Mary eagerly . " I believe it be something about Colin . " 

 " I be thinkin ' that if he be out here he would not   be watchin ' for lump to grow on his back ; he would be watchin ' for bud to break on th ' rose - bush , an ' he would likely be healthy , " explain Dickon . " I be wonderin ' if we could ever get he in th ' humor to come out here an ' lie under th ' tree in his carriage . " 

 " I have   be wonder that myself . I have   think of it almost every time I have   talk to he , " say Mary . " I have   wonder if he could keep a secret and I have   wonder if we could bring he here without any one see we . I think perhaps you could push his carriage . the doctor say he must have fresh air and if he want we to take he out no one dare disobey he . he will not   go out for other people and perhaps they will be glad if he will go out with we . he could order the gardener to keep away so they would not   find out . " 

 Dickon be think very hard as he scratch Captain 's back . 

 " it would be good for he , I will warrant , " he say . " Us'd not be thinkin ' he would well never be bear . Us'd be just two child watchin ' a garden grow , an ' he would be another . two lad an ' a little lass just lookin ' on at th ' springtime . I warrant it would be well than doctor 's stuff . " 

 " he be be lie in his room so long and he be always be so afraid of his back that it have make he queer , " say Mary . " he know a good many thing out of book but he do not   know anything else . he say he have be too ill to notice thing and he hat go out of door and hat garden and gardener . but he like to hear about this garden because it be a secret . I dare not   tell he much but he say he want to see it . " 

 " Us'll have he out here sometime for sure , " say Dickon . " I could push his carriage well enough . have tha ' notice how th ' robin an ' his mate have be workin ' while we have   be sittin ' here ? look at he perch on that branch wonderin ' where it would be good to put that twig he be get in his beak . " 

 he make one of his low whistle call and the robin turn his head and look at he inquiringly , still hold his twig . Dickon speak to he as Ben Weatherstaff do , but Dickon 's tone be one of friendly advice . 

 " wheres'ever tha ' put it , " he say , " it will be all right . Tha ' know how to build tha ' nest before tha ' come out o ' th ' egg . get on with thee , lad . Tha'st get no time to lose . " 

 " oh , I do like to hear you talk to he ! " Mary say , laugh delightedly . " Ben Weatherstaff scold he and make fun of he , and he hop about and look as if he understand every word , and I know he like it . Ben Weatherstaff say he be so conceited he would rather have stone throw at he than not be notice . " 

 Dickon laugh too and go on talk . 

 " Tha ' know we will not   trouble thee , " he say to the robin . " Us be near bein ' wild thing ourselves . Us be nest - buildin ' too , bless thee . look out tha ' do not   tell on we . " 

 and though the robin do not answer , because his beak be occupy , Mary know that when he fly away with his twig to his own corner of the garden the darkness of his dew - bright eye mean that he would not tell their secret for the world . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 " I won't ! " say MARY 

 they find a great deal to do that morning and Mary be late in return to the house and be also in such a hurry to get back to her work that she quite forget Colin until the last moment . 

 " tell Colin that I can not   come and see he yet , " she say to Martha . " I be very busy in the garden . " 

 Martha look rather frightened . 

 " eh ! Miss Mary , " she say , " it may put he all out of humor when I tell he that . " 

 but Mary be not as afraid of he as other people be and she be not a self - sacrifice person . 

 " I can not   stay , " she answer . " Dickon 's wait for I ; " and she run away . 

 the afternoon be even lovely and busy than the morning have be . already nearly all the weed be clear out of the garden and most of the rose and tree have be prune or dig about . Dickon have bring a spade of his own and he have teach Mary to use all her tool , so that by this time it be plain that though the lovely wild place be not likely to become a " gardener 's garden " it would be a wilderness of grow thing before the springtime be over . 

 " there will be apple blossom an ' cherry blossom overhead , " Dickon say , work away with all his might . " an ' there will be peach an ' plum tree in bloom against th ' wall , an ' th ' grass'll be a carpet o ' flower . " 

 the little fox and the rook be as happy and busy as they be , and the robin and his mate fly backward and forward like tiny streak of lightning . sometimes the rook flap his black wing and soar away over the tree - top in the park . each time he come back and perch near Dickon and caw several time as if he be relate his adventure , and Dickon talk to he just as he have talk to the robin . once when Dickon be so busy that he do not answer he at first , Soot fly on to his shoulder and gently tweak his ear with his large beak . when Mary want to rest a little Dickon sit down with she under a tree and once he take his pipe out of his pocket and play the soft strange little note and two squirrel appear on the wall and look and listen . 

 " Tha 's a good bit strong than tha ' be , " Dickon say , look at she as she be dig . " Tha 's beginning to look different , for sure . " 

 Mary be glow with exercise and good spirit . 

 " I be get fat and fat every day , " she say quite exultantly . " Mrs. Medlock will have to get I some big dress . Martha say my hair be grow thick . it be not   so flat and stringy . " 

 the sun be begin to set and send deep gold - color ray slant under the tree when they part . 

 " it will be fine tomorrow , " say Dickon . " I will be at work by sunrise . " 

 " so will I , " say Mary . 


 she run back to the house as quickly as her foot would carry she . she want to tell Colin about Dickon 's fox cub and the rook and about what the springtime have be do . she feel sure he would like to hear . so it be not very pleasant when she open the door of her room , to see Martha standing wait for she with a doleful face . 

 " what be the matter ? " she ask . " what do Colin say when you tell he I could not   come ? " 

 " eh ! " say Martha , " I wish tha'd go . he be nigh go into one o ' his tantrum . there be be a nice to do all afternoon to keep he quiet . he would watch the clock all th ' time . " 

 Mary 's lip pinch themselves together . she be no more used to consider other people than Colin be and she see no reason why an ill - temper boy should interfere with the thing she like well . she know nothing about the pitifulness of people who have be ill and nervous and who do not know that they could control their temper and need not make other people ill and nervous , too . when she have have a headache in India she have do she good to see that everybody else also have a headache or something quite as bad . and she feel she be quite right ; but of course now she feel that Colin be quite wrong . 

 he be not on his sofa when she go into his room . he be lie flat on his back in bed and he do not turn his head toward she as she come in . this be a bad beginning and Mary march up to he with her stiff manner . 

 " why do not   you get up ? " she say . 

 " I do get up this morning when I think you be come , " he answer , without look at she . " I make they put I back in bed this afternoon . my back ache and my head ache and I be tired . why do not   you come ? " " I be work in the garden with Dickon , " say Mary . 

 Colin frown and condescend to look at she . 

 " I will not   let that boy come here if you go and stay with he instead of come to talk to I , " he say . 

 Mary fly into a fine passion . she could fly into a passion without make a noise . she just grow sour and obstinate and do not care what happen . 

 " if you send Dickon away , I will never come into this room again ! " she retort . 

 " you will have to if I want you , " say Colin . 

 " I will not ! " say Mary . 

 " I will make you , " say Colin . " they shall drag you in . " 

 " shall they , Mr. Rajah ! " say Mary fiercely . " they may drag I in but they can not   make I talk when they get I here . I will sit and clench my tooth and never tell you one thing . I will not   even look at you . I will stare at the floor ! " 

 they be a nice agreeable pair as they glare at each other . if they have be two little street boy they would have spring at each other and have a rough - and - tumble fight . as it be , they do the next thing to it . 

 " you be a selfish thing ! " cry Colin . 

 " what be you ? " say Mary . " selfish people always say that . any one be selfish who do not   do what they want . you be more selfish than I be . you be the most selfish boy I ever see . " 

 " I be not ! " snap Colin . " I be not as selfish as your fine Dickon be ! he keep you play in the dirt when he know I be all by myself . he be selfish , if you like ! " 

 Mary 's eye flash fire . 

 " he be nice than any other boy that ever live ! " she say . " he be he be like an angel ! " it might sound rather silly to say that but she do not care . 

 " a nice angel ! " Colin sneer ferociously . " he be a common cottage boy off the moor ! " 

 " he be well than a common Rajah ! " retort Mary . " he be a thousand time well ! " 

 because she be the strong of the two she be begin to get the well of he . the truth be that he have never have a fight with any one like himself in his life and , upon the whole , it be rather good for he , though neither he nor Mary know anything about that . he turn his head on his pillow and shut his eye and a big tear be squeeze out and run down his cheek . he be begin to feel pathetic and sorry for himself not for any one else . 

 " I be not as selfish as you , because I be always ill , and I be sure there be a lump come on my back , " he say . " and I be go to die besides . " 

 " you be not ! " contradict Mary unsympathetically . 

 he open his eye quite wide with indignation . he have never hear such a thing say before . he be at once furious and slightly pleased , if a person could be both at one time . 

 " I be not ? " he cry . " I be ! you know I be ! everybody say so . " 

 " I do not   believe it ! " say Mary sourly . " you just say that to make people sorry . I believe you be proud of it . I do not   believe it ! if you be a nice boy it might be true but you be too nasty ! " 

 in spite of his invalid back Colin sit up in bed in quite a healthy rage . 

 " get out of the room ! " he shout and he catch hold of his pillow and throw it at she . he be not strong enough to throw it far and it only fall at her foot , but Mary 's face look as pinch as a nutcracker . 

 " I be go , " she say . " and I will not   come back ! " she walk to the door and when she reach it she turn round and speak again . 

 " I be go to tell you all sort of nice thing , " she say . " Dickon bring his fox and his rook and I be go to tell you all about they . now I will not   tell you a single thing ! " 

 she march out of the door and close it behind she , and there to her great astonishment she find the train nurse stand as if she have be listen and , more amazing still she be laugh . she be a big handsome young woman who ought not to have be a train nurse at all , as she could not bear invalid and she be always make excuse to leave Colin to Martha or any one else who would take her place . Mary have never like she , and she simply stand and gaze up at she as she stand giggle into her handkerchief .. 

 " what be you laugh at ? " she ask she . 

 " at you two young one , " say the nurse . " it be the good thing that could happen to the sickly pamper thing to have some one to stand up to he that be as spoil as himself ; " and she laugh into her handkerchief again . " if he have have a young vixen of a sister to fight with it would have be the saving of he . " 

 " be he go to die ? " 

 " I do not   know and I do not   care , " say the nurse . " hysteric and temper be half what ail he . " 

 " what be hysteric ? " ask Mary . 

 " you will find out if you work he into a tantrum after this but at any rate you have   give he something to have hysteric about , and I be glad of it . " 

 Mary go back to her room not feel at all as she have feel when she have come in from the garden . she be cross and disappointed but not at all sorry for Colin . she have look forward to tell he a great many thing and she have mean to try to make up her mind whether it would be safe to trust he with the great secret . she have be begin to think it would be , but now she have change her mind entirely . she would never tell he and he could stay in his room and never get any fresh air and die if he like ! it would serve he right ! she feel so sour and unrelenting that for a few minute she almost forget about Dickon and the green veil creep over the world and the soft wind blow down from the moor . 

 Martha be wait for she and the trouble in her face have be temporarily replace by interest and curiosity . there be a wooden box on the table and its cover have be remove and reveal that it be full of neat package . 

 " Mr. Craven send it to you , " say Martha . " it look as if it have picture - book in it . " 

 Mary remember what he have ask she the day she have go to his room . " do you want anything doll toy book ? " she open the package wonder if he have send a doll , and also wonder what she should do with it if he have . but he have not send one . there be several beautiful book such as Colin have , and two of they be about garden and be full of picture . there be two or three game and there be a beautiful little writing - case with a gold monogram on it and a gold pen and inkstand . 

 everything be so nice that her pleasure begin to crowd her anger out of her mind . she have not expect he to remember she at all and her hard little heart grow quite warm . 

 " I can write well than I can print , " she say , " and the first thing I shall write with that pen will be a letter to tell he I be much oblige . " 

 if she have be friend with Colin she would have run to show he her present at once , and they would have look at the picture and read some of the gardening book and perhaps try play the game , and he would have enjoy himself so much he would never once have think he be go to die or have put his hand on his spine to see if there be a lump come . he have a way of do that which she could not bear . it give she an uncomfortable frightened feeling because he always look so frightened himself . he say that if he feel even quite a little lump some day he should know his hunch have begin to grow . something he have hear Mrs. Medlock whisper to the nurse have give he the idea and he have think over it in secret until it be quite firmly fix in his mind . Mrs. Medlock have say his father 's back have begin to show its crookedness in that way when he be a child . he have never tell any one but Mary that most of his " tantrum " as they call they grow out of his hysterical hide fear . Mary have be sorry for he when he have tell she . 

 " he always begin to think about it when he be cross or tired , " she say to herself . " and he have be cross today . perhaps perhaps he have be think about it all afternoon . " 

 she stand still , look down at the carpet and thinking . 

 " I say I would never go back again " she hesitate , knit her brow " but perhaps , just perhaps , I will go and see if he want I in the morning . perhaps he will try to throw his pillow at I again , but I think I will go . " 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 a TANTRUM 

 she have get up very early in the morning and have work hard in the garden and she be tired and sleepy , so as soon as Martha have bring her supper and she have eat it , she be glad to go to bed . as she lay her head on the pillow she murmur to herself : 

 " I will go out before breakfast and work with Dickon and then afterward I believe I will go to see he . " 

 she think it be the middle of the night when she be awaken by such dreadful sound that she jump out of bed in an instant . what be it what be it ? the next minute she feel quite sure she know . door be open and shut and there be hurry foot in the corridor and some one be cry and scream at the same time , scream and cry in a horrible way . 

 " it be Colin , " she say . " he be have one of those tantrum the nurse call hysteric . how awful it sound . " 

 as she listen to the sobbing scream she do not wonder that people be so frightened that they give he his own way in everything rather than hear they . she put her hand over her ear and feel sick and shivering . 

 " I do not   know what to do . I do not   know what to do , " she keep say . " I can not   bear it . " 

 once she wonder if he would stop if she dare go to he and then she remember how he have drive she out of the room and think that perhaps the sight of she might make he bad . even when she press her hand more tightly over her ear she could not keep the awful sound out . she hat they so and be so terrified by they that suddenly they begin to make she angry and she feel as if she should like to fly into a tantrum herself and frighten he as he be frightening she . she be not use to any one 's temper but her own . she take her hand from her ear and spring up and stamp her foot . 

 " he ought to be stop ! somebody ought to make he stop ! somebody ought to beat he ! " she cry out . 

 just then she hear foot almost run down the corridor and her door open and the nurse come in . she be not laugh now by any mean . she even look rather pale . 

 " he be work himself into hysteric , " she say in a great hurry . " he will do himself harm . no one can do anything with he . you come and try , like a good child . he like you . " 

 " he turn I out of the room this morning , " say Mary , stamp her foot with excitement . 

 the stamp rather please the nurse . the truth be that she have be afraid she might find Mary cry and hide her head under the bed - clothe . 

 " that be right , " she say . " you be in the right humor . you go and scold he . give he something new to think of . do go , child , as quick as ever you can . " 

 it be not until afterward that Mary realize that the thing have be funny as well as dreadful that it be funny that all the grow - up people be so frightened that they come to a little girl just because they guess she be almost as bad as Colin himself . 

 she fly along the corridor and the nearer she get to the scream the high her temper mount . she feel quite wicked by the time she reach the door . she slap it open with her hand and run across the room to the four - post bed . 

 " you stop ! " she almost shout . " you stop ! I hate you ! everybody hat you ! I wish everybody would run out of the house and let you scream yourself to death ! you will scream yourself to death in a minute , and I wish you would ! " a nice sympathetic child could neither have think nor say such thing , but it just happen that the shock of hear they be the well possible thing for this hysterical boy whom no one have ever dare to restrain or contradict . 

 he have be lie on his face beat his pillow with his hand and he actually almost jump around , he turn so quickly at the sound of the furious little voice . his face look dreadful , white and red and swollen , and he be gasp and choking ; but savage little Mary do not care an atom . 

 " if you scream another scream , " she say , " I will scream too and I can scream louder than you can and I will frighten you , I will frighten you ! " 

 he actually have stop scream because she have startle he so . the scream which have be come almost choke he . the tear be stream down his face and he shake all over . 

 " I can not   stop ! " he gasp and sob . " I can not   I can not ! " 

 " you can ! " shout Mary . " half that ail you be hysteric and temper just hysteric hysteric hysteric ! " and she stamp each time she say it . 

 " I feel the lump I feel it , " choke out Colin . " I know I should . I shall have a hunch on my back and then I shall die , " and he begin to writhe again and turn on his face and sob and wail but he do not   scream . 

 " you do not   feel a lump ! " contradict Mary fiercely . " if you do it be only a hysterical lump . hysteric make lump . there be nothing the matter with your horrid back nothing but hysteric ! turn over and let I look at it ! " 

 she like the word " hysteric " and feel somehow as if it have an effect on he . he be probably like herself and have never hear it before . 

 " Nurse , " she command , " come here and show I his back this minute ! " 

 the nurse , Mrs. Medlock and Martha have be stand huddle together near the door star at she , their mouth half open . all three have gasp with fright more than once . the nurse come forward as if she be half afraid . Colin be heave with great breathless sob . 

 " perhaps he he will not   let I , " she hesitate in a low voice . 

 Colin hear she , however , and he gasp out between two sob : 

 " sh - show she ! she - she'll see then ! " 

 it be a poor thin back to look at when it be bar . every rib could be count and every joint of the spine , though Mistress Mary do not count they as she bent over and examine they with a solemn savage little face . she look so sour and old - fashioned that the nurse turn her head aside to hide the twitching of her mouth . there be just a minute 's silence , for even Colin try to hold his breath while Mary look up and down his spine , and down and up , as intently as if she have be the great doctor from London . 

 " there be not a single lump there ! " she say at last . " there be not a lump as big as a pin except backbone lump , and you can only feel they because you be thin . I have   get backbone lump myself , and they use to stick out as much as yours do , until I begin to get fat , and I be not fat enough yet to hide they . there be not a lump as big as a pin ! if you ever say there be again , I shall laugh ! " 

 no one but Colin himself know what effect those crossly speak childish word have on he . if he have ever have any one to talk to about his secret terror if he have ever dare to let himself ask question if he have have childish companion and have not lain on his back in the huge closed house , breathe an atmosphere heavy with the fear of people who be most of they ignorant and tired of he , he would have find out that most of his fright and illness be create by himself . but he have lie and thought of himself and his ache and weariness for hour and day and month and year . and now that an angry unsympathetic little girl insist obstinately that he be not as ill as he think he be he actually feel as if she might be speak the truth . 

 " I do not   know , " venture the nurse , " that he think he have a lump on his spine . his back be weak because he will not   try to sit up . I could have tell he there be no lump there . " Colin gulp and turn his face a little to look at she . 

 " C - could you ? " he say pathetically . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " there ! " say Mary , and she gulp too . 

 Colin turn on his face again and but for his long - draw broken breath , which be the dying down of his storm of sob , he lie still for a minute , though great tear stream down his face and wet the pillow . actually the tear mean that a curious great relief have come to he . presently he turn and look at the nurse again and strangely enough he be not like a Rajah at all as he speak to she . 

 " do you think I could live to grow up ? " he say . 

 the nurse be neither clever nor soft - hearted but she could repeat some of the London doctor 's word . 

 " you probably will if you will do what you be tell to do and not give way to your temper , and stay out a great deal in the fresh air . " 

 Colin 's tantrum have pass and he be weak and wear out with cry and this perhaps make he feel gentle . he put out his hand a little toward Mary , and I be glad to say that , her own tantum have pass , she be soften too and meet he half - way with her hand , so that it be a sort of make up . 

 " I will I will go out with you , Mary , " he say . " I shall not   hate fresh air if we can find " he remember just in time to stop himself from say " if we can find the secret garden " and he end , " I shall like to go out with you if Dickon will come and push my chair . I do so want to see Dickon and the fox and the crow . " 

 the nurse remade the tumbled bed and shake and straighten the pillow . then she make Colin a cup of beef tea and give a cup to Mary , who really be very glad to get it after her excitement . Mrs. Medlock and Martha gladly slip away , and after everything be neat and calm and in order the nurse look as if she would very gladly slip away also . she be a healthy young woman who resent be rob of her sleep and she yawn quite openly as she look at Mary , who have push her big footstool close to the four - post bed and be hold Colin 's hand . 

 " you must go back and get your sleep out , " she say . " he will drop off after a while if he be not too upset . then I will lie down myself in the next room . " 

 " would you like I to sing you that song I learn from my ayah ? " Mary whisper to Colin . 

 his hand pull hers gently and he turn his tired eye on her appealingly . 

 " oh , yes ! " he answer . " it be such a soft song . I shall go to sleep in a minute . " 

 " I will put he to sleep , " Mary say to the yawning nurse . " you can go if you like . " 

 " well , " say the nurse , with an attempt at reluctance . " if he do not   go to sleep in half an hour you must call I . " 

 " very well , " answer Mary . 

 the nurse be out of the room in a minute and as soon as she be go Colin pull Mary 's hand again . 

 " I almost tell , " he say ; " but I stop myself in time . I will not   talk and I will go to sleep , but you say you have a whole lot of nice thing to tell I . have you do you think you have find out anything at all about the way into the secret garden ? " 

 Mary look at his poor little tired face and swollen eye and her heart relent . 

 " ye - es , " she answer , " I think I have . and if you will go to sleep I will tell you tomorrow . " his hand quite tremble . 

 " oh , Mary ! " he say . " oh , Mary ! if I could get into it I think I should live to grow up ! do you suppose that instead of sing the Ayah song you could just tell I softly as you do that first day what you imagine it look like inside ? I be sure it will make I go to sleep . " 

 " yes , " answer Mary . " shut your eye . " 

 he close his eye and lie quite still and she hold his hand and begin to speak very slowly and in a very low voice . 

 " I think it have be leave alone so long that it have grow all into a lovely tangle . I think the rose have climb and climb and climb until they hang from the branch and wall and creep over the ground almost like a strange gray mist . some of they have die but many be alive and when the summer come there will be curtain and fountain of rose . I think the ground be full of daffodil and snowdrop and lily and iris work their way out of the dark . now the spring have begin perhaps perhaps " 

 the soft drone of her voice be make he stiller and stiller and she see it and go on . 

 " perhaps they be come up through the grass perhaps there be cluster of purple crocus and gold one even now . perhaps the leaf be begin to break out and uncurl and perhaps the gray be change and a green gauze veil be creep and creep over everything . and the bird be come to look at it because it be so safe and still . and perhaps perhaps perhaps " very softly and slowly indeed , " the robin have find a mate and be build a nest . " 

 and Colin be asleep . 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 " THA ' MUNNOT WASTE no TIME " 

 of course Mary do not waken early the next morning . she sleep late because she be tired , and when Martha bring her breakfast she tell she that though . Colin be quite quiet he be ill and feverish as he always be after he have wear himself out with a fit of cry . Mary eat her breakfast slowly as she listen . 

 " he say he wish tha ' would please go and see he as soon as tha ' can , " Martha say . " it be queer what a fancy he be take to thee . Tha ' do give it he last night for sure do not   tha ? nobody else would have dare to do it . eh ! poor lad ! he be be spoil till salt will not   save he . Mother say as th ' two bad thing as can happen to a child be never to have his own way or always to have it . she do not   know which be th ' bad . tha ' be in a fine temper tha'self , too . but he say to I when I go into his room , ' please ask Miss Mary if she will please come an ' talk to I ? ' think o ' he say please ! will you go , Miss ? " " I will run and see Dickon first , " say Mary . " no , I will go and see Colin first and tell he I know what I will tell he , " with a sudden inspiration . 

 she have her hat on when she appear in Colin 's room and for a second he look disappointed . he be in bed . his face be pitifully white and there be dark circle round his eye . 

 " I be glad you come , " he say . " my head ache and I ache all over because I be so tired . be you go somewhere ? " 

 Mary go and lean against his bed . 

 " I will not   be long , " she say . " I be go to Dickon , but I will come back . Colin , it be it be something about the garden . " 

 his whole face brighten and a little color come into it . 

 " oh ! be it ? " he cry out . " I dream about it all night I hear you say something about gray change into green , and I dream I be stand in a place all fill with tremble little green leaf and there be bird on nest everywhere and they look so soft and still . I will lie and think about it until you come back . " 


 in five minute Mary be with Dickon in their garden . the fox and the crow be with he again and this time he have bring two tame squirrel . " I come over on the pony this mornin ' , " he say . " eh ! he be a good little chap Jump be ! I bring these two in my pocket . this here one he be call Nut an ' this here other one 's call Shell . " 

 when he say " Nut " one squirrel leap on to his right shoulder and when he say " Shell " the other one leap on to his left shoulder . 

 when they sit down on the grass with Captain curl at their foot , Soot solemnly listen on a tree and Nut and Shell nose about close to they , it seem to Mary that it would be scarcely bearable to leave such delightfulness , but when she begin to tell her story somehow the look in Dickon 's funny face gradually change her mind . she could see he feel sorrier for Colin than she do . he look up at the sky and all about he . 

 " just listen to they bird th ' world seem full of them all whistlin ' an ' pipin ' , " he say . " look at them dartin ' about , an ' hearken at them callin ' to each other . come springtime seem like as if all th ' world 's callin ' . the leaf be uncurlin ' so you can see them an ' , my word , th ' nice smell there be about ! " sniff with his happy turn - up nose . " an ' that poor lad lyin ' shut up an ' seein ' so little that he get to thinkin ' o ' thing as set he screamin ' . eh ! my ! we mun get he out here we mun get he watchin ' an listenin ' an ' sniffin ' up th ' air an ' get he just soak through wi ' sunshine . an ' we munnot lose no time about it . " 

 when he be very much interested he often speak quite broad Yorkshire though at other time he try to modify his dialect so that Mary could well understand . but she love his broad Yorkshire and have in fact be try to learn to speak it herself . so she speak a little now . 

 " Aye , that we mun , " she say   which mean " yes , indeed , we must " . " I will tell thee what us'll do first , " she proceed , and Dickon grin , because when the little wench try to twist her tongue into speak Yorkshire it amuse he very much . " he be take a graidely fancy to thee . he want to see thee and he want to see Soot an ' Captain . when I go back to the house to talk to he I will ax he if tha ' canna ' come an ' see he tomorrow mornin ' an ' . bring tha ' creature wi ' thee an ' then in a bit , when there be more leaf out , an ' happen a bud or two , we will get he to come out an ' tha ' shall push he in his chair an ' we will bring he here an ' show he everything . " 

 when she stop she be quite proud of herself . she have never make a long speech in Yorkshire before and she have remember very well . 

 " Tha ' mun talk a bit o ' yorkshire like that to Mester Colin , " Dickon chuckle . " Tha'll make he laugh an ' there be nowt as good for ill folk as laughin ' be . Mother say she believe as half a hour 's good laugh every mornin ' ' ud cure a chap as be makin ' ready for typhus fever . " 

 " I be go to talk Yorkshire to he this very day , " say Mary , chuckle herself . 

 the garden have reach the time when every day and every night it seem as if Magicians be pass through it draw loveliness out of the earth and the bough with wand . it be hard to go away and leave it all , particularly as Nut have actually creep on to her dress and Shell have scramble down the trunk of the apple - tree they sit under and stay there look at she with inquire eye . but she go back to the house and when she sit down close to Colin 's bed he begin to sniff as Dickon do though not in such an experienced way . 

 " you smell like flower and and fresh thing , " he cry out quite joyously . " what be it you smell of ? it be cool and warm and sweet all at the same time . " 

 " it be th ' wind from th ' moor , " say Mary . " it come o ' sittin ' on th ' grass under a tree wi ' Dickon an ' wi ' Captain an ' soot an ' Nut an ' Shell . it be th ' springtime an ' out o ' door an ' sunshine as smell so graidely . " 

 she say it as broadly as she could , and you do not know how broadly Yorkshire sound until you have hear some one speak it . Colin begin to laugh . 

 " what be you do ? " he say . " I never hear you talk like that before . how funny it sound . " 

 " I be givin ' thee a bit o ' yorkshire , " answer Mary triumphantly . " I canna ' talk as graidely as Dickon an ' Martha can but tha ' see I can shape a bit . do not   tha ' understand a bit o ' Yorkshire when tha ' hear it ? an ' tha ' a yorkshire lad thysel ' breed an ' bear ! eh ! I wonder tha'rt not ashamed o ' thy face . " 

 and then she begin to laugh too and they both laugh until they could not stop themselves and they laugh until the room echo and Mrs. Medlock open the door to come in draw back into the corridor and stand listen amazed . 

 " well , upon my word ! " she say , speak rather broad Yorkshire herself because there be no one to hear she and she be so astonished . " whoever hear th ' like ! whoever on earth would ha ' think it ! " 

 there be so much to talk about . it seem as if Colin could never hear enough of Dickon and Captain and Soot and Nut and Shell and the pony whose name be Jump . Mary have run round into the wood with Dickon to see Jump . he be a tiny little shaggy moor pony with thick lock hang over his eye and with a pretty face and a nuzzling velvet nose . he be rather thin with live on moor grass but he be as tough and wiry as if the muscle in his little leg have be make of steel spring . he have lift his head and whinny softly the moment he see Dickon and he have trot up to he and put his head across his shoulder and then Dickon have talk into his ear and Jump have talk back in odd little whinny and puff and snort . Dickon have make he give Mary his small front hoof and kiss she on her cheek with his velvet muzzle . 

 " do he really understand everything Dickon say ? " Colin ask . 

 " it seem as if he do , " answer Mary . " Dickon say anything will understand if you be friend with it for sure , but you have to be friend for sure . " 

 Colin lie quiet a little while and his strange gray eye seem to be star at the wall , but Mary see he be think . 

 " I wish I be friend with thing , " he say at last , " but I be not . I never have anything to be friend with , and I can not   bear people . " 

 " can not   you bear I ? " ask Mary . 

 " yes , I can , " he answer . " it be funny but I even like you . " 

 " Ben Weatherstaff say I be like he , " say Mary . " he say he would warrant we would both get the same nasty temper . I think you be like he too . we be all three alike you and I and Ben Weatherstaff . he say we be neither of we much to look at and we be as sour as we look . but I do not   feel as sour as I use to before I know the robin and Dickon . " 

 " do you feel as if you hat people ? " 

 " yes , " answer Mary without any affectation . " I should have detest you if I have see you before I see the robin and Dickon . " 

 Colin put out his thin hand and touch she . 

 " Mary , " he say , " I wish I have not   say what I do about send Dickon away . I hat you when you say he be like an angel and I laugh at you but but perhaps he be . " 

 " well , it be rather funny to say it , " she admit frankly , " because his nose do turn up and he have a big mouth and his clothe have patch all over they and he talk broad Yorkshire , but but if an angel do come to Yorkshire and live on the moor if there be a yorkshire angel I believe he would understand the green thing and know how to make they grow and he would know how to talk to the wild creature as Dickon do and they would know he be friend for sure . " 

 " I should not   mind Dickon look at I , " say Colin ; " I want to see he . " 

 " I be glad you say that , " answer Mary , " because because " 

 quite suddenly it come into her mind that this be the minute to tell he . Colin know something new be come . 

 " because what ? " he cry eagerly . 

 Mary be so anxious that she get up from her stool and come to he and catch hold of both his hand . 

 " can I trust you ? I trust Dickon because bird trust he . can I trust you for sure for sure ? " she implore . 

 her face be so solemn that he almost whisper his answer . 

 " yes yes ! " 

 " well , Dickon will come to see you tomorrow morning , and he will bring his creature with he . " 

 " oh ! oh ! " Colin cry out in delight . 

 " but that be not all , " Mary go on , almost pale with solemn excitement . " the rest be well . there be a door into the garden . I find it . it be under the ivy on the wall . " 

 if he have be a strong healthy boy Colin would probably have shout " Hooray ! Hooray ! Hooray ! " but he be weak and rather hysterical ; his eye grow big and big and he gasp for breath . 

 " oh ! Mary ! " he cry out with a half sob . " shall I see it ? shall I get into it ? shall I live to get into it ? " and he clutch her hand and drag she toward he . 

 " of course you will see it ! " snap Mary indignantly . " of course you will live to get into it ! do not   be silly ! " 

 and she be so un - hysterical and natural and childish that she bring he to his sens and he begin to laugh at himself and a few minute afterward she be sit on her stool again tell he not what she imagine the secret garden to be like but what it really be , and Colin 's ache and tiredness be forget and he be listen enrapture . 

 " it be just what you think it would be , " he say at last . " it sound just as if you have really see it . you know I say that when you tell I first . " 

 Mary hesitate about two minute and then boldly speak the truth . 

 " I have see it and I have be in , " she say . " I find the key and get in week ago . but I dare not   tell you I dare not   because I be so afraid I could not   trust you for sure ! " 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 " it have come ! " 

 of course Dr. Craven have be send for the morning after Colin have have his tantrum . he be always send for at once when such a thing occur and he always find , when he arrive , a white shaken boy lie on his bed , sulky and still so hysterical that he be ready to break into fresh sobbing at the least word . in fact , Dr. Craven dread and detest the difficulty of these visit . on this occasion he be away from Misselthwaite Manor until afternoon . 

 " how be he ? " he ask Mrs. Medlock rather irritably when he arrive . " he will break a blood - vessel in one of those fit some day . the boy be half insane with hysteria and self - indulgence . " 

 " well , sir , " answer Mrs. Medlock , " you will scarcely believe your eye when you see he . that plain sour - faced child that be almost as bad as himself have just bewitch he . how she be do it there be no telling . the Lord know she be nothing to look at and you scarcely ever hear she speak , but she do what none of we dare do . she just fly at he like a little cat last night , and stamp her foot and order he to stop scream , and somehow she startle he so that he actually do stop , and this afternoon well just come up and see , sir . it be past credit . " 

 the scene which Dr. Craven beheld when he enter his patient 's room be indeed rather astonishing to he . as Mrs. Medlock open the door he hear laugh and chattering . Colin be on his sofa in his dressing - gown and he be sit up quite straight look at a picture in one of the garden book and talk to the plain child who at that moment could scarcely be call plain at all because her face be so glowing with enjoyment . 

 " those long spire of blue one we will have a lot of those , " Colin be announce . " they be call Del - phin - ium . " 

 " Dickon say they be larkspur make big and grand , " cry Mistress Mary . " there be clump there already . " 

 then they see Dr. Craven and stop . Mary become quite still and Colin look fretful . 

 " I be sorry to hear you be ill last night , my boy , " Dr. Craven say a trifle nervously . he be rather a nervous man . 

 " I be well now much well , " Colin answer , rather like a Rajah . " I be go out in my chair in a day or two if it be fine . I want some fresh air . " 

 Dr. Craven sit down by he and feel his pulse and look at he curiously . 

 " it must be a very fine day , " he say , " and you must be very careful not to tire yourself . " 

 " fresh air will not   tire I , " say the young Rajah . 

 as there have be occasion when this same young gentleman have shriek aloud with rage and have insist that fresh air would give he cold and kill he , it be not to be wonder at that his doctor feel somewhat startled . 

 " I think you do not like fresh air , " he say . 

 " I do not   when I be by myself , " reply the Rajah ; " but my cousin be go out with I . " 

 " and the nurse , of course ? " suggest Dr. Craven . 

 " no , I will not have the nurse , " so magnificently that Mary could not help remember how the young native Prince have look with his diamond and emerald and pearl stick all over he and the great ruby on the small dark hand he have wave to command his servant to approach with salaam and receive his order . 

 " my cousin know how to take care of I . I be always well when she be with I . she make I well last night . a very strong boy I know will push my carriage . " 

 Dr. Craven feel rather alarmed . if this tiresome hysterical boy should chance to get well he himself would lose all chance of inherit Misselthwaite ; but he be not an unscrupulous man , though he be a weak one , and he do not intend to let he run into actual danger . 

 " he must be a strong boy and a steady boy , " he say . " and I must know something about he . who be he ? what be his name ? " 

 " it be Dickon , " Mary speak up suddenly . she feel somehow that everybody who know the moor must know Dickon . and she be right , too . she see that in a moment Dr. Craven 's serious face relax into a relieved smile . 

 " oh , Dickon , " he say . " if it be Dickon you will be safe enough . he be as strong as a moor pony , be Dickon . " 

 " and he be trusty , " say Mary . " he be th ' trusty lad i ' Yorkshire . " she have be talk Yorkshire to Colin and she forget herself . 

 " do Dickon teach you that ? " ask Dr. Craven , laugh outright . 

 " I be learn it as if it be french , " say Mary rather coldly . " it be like a native dialect in India . very clever people try to learn they . I like it and so do Colin . " " well , well , " he say . " if it amuse you perhaps it will not   do you any harm . do you take your bromide last night , Colin ? " 

 " no , " Colin answer . " I would not   take it at first and after Mary make I quiet she talk I to sleep in a low voice about the spring creep into a garden . " 

 " that sound soothe , " say Dr. Craven , more perplexed than ever and glance sideway at Mistress Mary sit on her stool and look down silently at the carpet . " you be evidently well , but you must remember " 

 " I do not   want to remember , " interrupt the Rajah , appear again . " when I lie by myself and remember I begin to have pain everywhere and I think of thing that make I begin to scream because I hate they so . if there be a doctor anywhere who could make you forget you be ill instead of remember it I would have he bring here . " and he wave a thin hand which ought really to have be cover with royal signet ring make of ruby . " it be because my cousin make I forget that she make I well . " 

 Dr. Craven have never make such a short stay after a " tantrum " ; usually he be oblige to remain a very long time and do a great many thing . this afternoon he do not give any medicine or leave any new order and he be spar any disagreeable scene . when he go downstairs he look very thoughtful and when he talk to Mrs. Medlock in the library she feel that he be a much puzzled man . 

 " well , sir , " she venture , " could you have believe it ? " 

 " it be certainly a new state of affair , " say the doctor . " and there be no deny it be well than the old one . " 

 " I believe Susan Sowerby 's right I do that , " say Mrs. Medlock . " I stop in her cottage on my way to Thwaite yesterday and have a bit of talk with she . and she say to I , ' well , Sarah Ann , she may not   be a good child , an ' she may not   be a pretty one , but she be a child , an ' child need child . ' we go to school together , Susan Sowerby and I . " 

 " she be the good sick nurse I know , " say Dr. Craven . " when I find she in a cottage I know the chance be that I shall save my patient . " 

 Mrs. Medlock smile . she be fond of Susan Sowerby . 

 " she be get a way with she , have Susan , " she go on quite volubly . " I have   be think all morning of one thing she say yesterday . she say , ' once when I be givin ' th ' child a bit of a preach after they would be fightin ' I ses to them all , " when I be at school my jography tell as th ' world be shape like a orange an ' I find out before I be ten that th ' whole orange do not   belong to nobody . no one own more than his bit of a quarter an ' there be time it seem like there be not enow quarter to go round . but do not   you none o ' you think as you own th ' whole orange or you will find out you be mistaken , an ' you will not   find it out without hard knock . " ' what child learn from child , ' she say , ' be that there be no sense in grabbin ' at th ' whole orange peel an ' all . if you do you will likely not get even th ' pip , an ' they be too bitter to eat . ' " 

 " she be a shrewd woman , " say Dr. Craven , put on his coat . 

 " well , she be get a way of say thing , " end Mrs. Medlock , much pleased . " sometimes I have   say to she , ' eh ! Susan , if you be a different woman an ' do not   talk such broad Yorkshire I have   see the time when I should have say you be clever . ' " 


 that night Colin sleep without once awakening and when he open his eye in the morning he lie still and smile without know it smile because he feel so curiously comfortable . it be actually nice to be awake , and he turn over and stretch his limb luxuriously . he feel as if tight string which have hold he have loosen themselves and let he go . he do not know that Dr. Craven would have say that his nerve have relax and rest themselves . instead of lie and star at the wall and wish he have not awaken , his mind be full of the plan he and Mary have make yesterday , of picture of the garden and of Dickon and his wild creature . it be so nice to have thing to think about . and he have not be awake more than ten minute when he hear foot run along the corridor and Mary be at the door . the next minute she be in the room and have run across to his bed , bring with she a waft of fresh air full of the scent of the morning . 

 " you have   be out ! you have   be out ! there be that nice smell of leaf ! " he cry . 

 she have be run and her hair be loose and blow and she be bright with the air and pink - cheeked , though he could not see it . 

 " it be so beautiful ! " she say , a little breathless with her speed . " you never see anything so beautiful ! it have come ! I think it have come that other morning , but it be only come . it be here now ! it have come , the Spring ! Dickon say so ! " 

 " have it ? " cry Colin , and though he really know nothing about it he feel his heart beat . he actually sit up in bed . 

 " open the window ! " he add , laugh half with joyful excitement and half at his own fancy . " perhaps we may hear golden trumpet ! " 

 and though he laugh , Mary be at the window in a moment and in a moment more it be open wide and freshness and softness and scent and bird ' song be pour through . 

 " that be fresh air , " she say . " lie on your back and draw in long breath of it . that be what Dickon do when he be lie on the moor . he say he feel it in his vein and it make he strong and he feel as if he could live forever and ever . breathe it and breathe it . " 

 she be only repeat what Dickon have tell she , but she catch Colin 's fancy . 

 " ' forever and ever ' ! do it make he feel like that ? " he say , and he do as she tell he , draw in long deep breath over and over again until he feel that something quite new and delightful be happen to he . 

 Mary be at his bedside again . 

 " thing be crowd up out of the earth , " she run on in a hurry . " and there be flower uncurling and bud on everything and the green veil have cover nearly all the gray and the bird be in such a hurry about their nest for fear they may be too late that some of they be even fight for place in the secret garden . and the rose - bush look as wick as wick can be , and there be primrose in the lane and wood , and the seed we plant be up , and Dickon have bring the fox and the crow and the squirrel and a new - bear lamb . " 

 and then she pause for breath . the new - bear lamb Dickon have find three day before lie by its dead mother among the gorse bush on the moor . it be not the first motherless lamb he have find and he know what to do with it . he have take it to the cottage wrap in his jacket and he have let it lie near the fire and have feed it with warm milk . it be a soft thing with a darling silly baby face and leg rather long for its body . Dickon have carry it over the moor in his arm and its feeding bottle be in his pocket with a squirrel , and when Mary have sit under a tree with its limp warmness huddle on her lap she have feel as if she be too full of strange joy to speak . a lamb a lamb ! a live lamb who lie on your lap like a baby ! 

 she be describe it with great joy and Colin be listen and draw in long breath of air when the nurse enter . she start a little at the sight of the open window . she have sit stifle in the room many a warm day because her patient be sure that open window give people cold . 

 " be you sure you be not chilly , Master Colin ? " she inquire . 

 " no , " be the answer . " I be breathe long breath of fresh air . it make you strong . I be go to get up to the sofa for breakfast . my cousin will have breakfast with I . " 

 the nurse go away , conceal a smile , to give the order for two breakfast . she find the servant ' hall a more amusing place than the invalid 's chamber and just now everybody want to hear the news from upstairs . there be a great deal of joke about the unpopular young recluse who , as the cook say , " have find his master , and good for he . " the servant ' hall have be very tired of the tantrum , and the butler , who be a man with a family , have more than once express his opinion that the invalid would be all the well " for a good hiding . " 

 when Colin be on his sofa and the breakfast for two be put upon the table he make an announcement to the nurse in his most Rajah - like manner . 

 " a boy , and a fox , and a crow , and two squirrel , and a new - bear lamb , be come to see I this morning . I want they bring upstairs as soon as they come , " he say . " you be not to begin play with the animal in the servant ' hall and keep they there . I want they here . " the nurse give a slight gasp and try to conceal it with a cough . 

 " yes , sir , " she answer . 

 " I will tell you what you can do , " add Colin , wave his hand . " you can tell Martha to bring they here . the boy be Martha 's brother . his name be Dickon and he be an animal charmer . " 

 " I hope the animal will not   bite , Master Colin , " say the nurse . 

 " I tell you he be a charmer , " say Colin austerely . " charmer ' animal never bite . " 

 " there be snake - charmer in India , " say Mary . " and they can put their snake ' head in their mouth . " 

 " Goodness ! " shudder the nurse . 

 they eat their breakfast with the morning air pour in upon they . Colin 's breakfast be a very good one and Mary watch he with serious interest . 

 " you will begin to get fat just as I do , " she say . " I never want my breakfast when I be in India and now I always want it . " 

 " I want mine this morning , " say Colin . " perhaps it be the fresh air . when do you think Dickon will come ? " 

 he be not long in come . in about ten minute Mary hold up her hand . 

 " listen ! " she say . " do you hear a caw ? " 

 Colin listen and hear it , the odd sound in the world to hear inside a house , a hoarse " caw - caw . " 

 " yes , " he answer . 

 " that be soot , " say Mary . " listen again . do you hear a bleat a tiny one ? " 

 " oh , yes ! " cry Colin , quite flush . 

 " that be the new - bear lamb , " say Mary . " he be come . " 

 Dickon 's moorland boot be thick and clumsy and though he try to walk quietly they make a clumping sound as he walk through the long corridor . Mary and Colin hear he march marching , until he pass through the tapestry door on to the soft carpet of Colin 's own passage . 

 " if you please , sir , " announce Martha , open the door , " if you please , sir , here be Dickon an ' his creature . " 

 Dickon come in smile his nice wide smile . the new - bear lamb be in his arm and the little red fox trot by his side . Nut sit on his left shoulder and Soot on his right and Shell 's head and paw peep out of his coat pocket . 

 Colin slowly sit up and star and star as he have star when he first see Mary ; but this be a stare of wonder and delight . the truth be that in spite of all he have hear he have not in the least understand what this boy would be like and that his fox and his crow and his squirrel and his lamb be so near to he and his friendliness that they seem almost to be part of himself . Colin have never talk to a boy in his life and he be so overwhelmed by his own pleasure and curiosity that he do not even think of speak . 

 but Dickon do not feel the least shy or awkward . he have not feel embarrassed because the crow have not know his language and have only star and have not speak to he the first time they meet . creature be always like that until they find out about you . he walk over to Colin 's sofa and put the new - bear lamb quietly on his lap , and immediately the little creature turn to the warm velvet dressing - gown and begin to nuzzle and nuzzle into its fold and butt its tight - curl head with soft impatience against his side . of course no boy could have help speak then . 

 " what be it do ? " cry Colin . " what do it want ? " 

 " it want its mother , " say Dickon , smile more and more . " I bring it to thee a bit hungry because I know tha'd like to see it feed . " 

 he kneel down by the sofa and take a feeding - bottle from his pocket . 

 " come on , little ' un , " he say , turn the small woolly white head with a gentle brown hand . " this be what tha 's after . Tha'll get more out o ' this than tha ' will out o ' silk velvet coat . there now , " and he push the rubber tip of the bottle into the nuzzling mouth and the lamb begin to suck it with ravenous ecstasy . 

 after that there be no wonder what to say . by the time the lamb fall asleep question pour forth and Dickon answer they all . he tell they how he have find the lamb just as the sun be rise three morning ago . he have be stand on the moor listen to a skylark and watch he swing higher and high into the sky until he be only a speck in the height of blue . 

 " I would almost lose he but for his song an ' I be wonderin ' how a chap could hear it when it seem as if he would get out o ' th ' world in a minute an ' just then I hear something else far off among th ' gorse bush . it be a weak bleatin ' an ' I know it be a new lamb as be hungry an ' I know it would not   be hungry if it have not   lose its mother somehow , so I set off searchin ' . eh ! I do have a look for it . I go in an ' out among th ' gorse bush an ' round an ' round an ' I always seem to take th ' wrong turnin ' . but at last I seed a bit o ' white by a rock on top o ' th ' moor an ' I climb up an ' find th ' little ' un half dead wi ' cold an ' clemmin ' . " while he talk , Soot fly solemnly in and out of the open window and caw remark about the scenery while Nut and Shell make excursion into the big tree outside and run up and down trunk and explore branch . Captain curl up near Dickon , who sit on the hearth - rug from preference . 

 they look at the picture in the gardening book and Dickon know all the flower by their country name and know exactly which one be already grow in the secret garden . 

 " I couldna ' say that there name , " he say , point to one under which be write " Aquilegia , " " but we call that a columbine , an ' that there one it be a snapdragon and they both grow wild in hedge , but these be garden one an ' they be big an ' grander . there be some big clump o ' columbine in th ' garden . they will look like a bed o ' blue an ' white butterfly flutterin ' when they be out . " 

 " I be go to see they , " cry Colin . " I be go to see they ! " 

 " Aye , that tha ' mun , " say Mary quite seriously . " an ' tha ' munnot lose no time about it . " 




 CHAPTER XX 

 " I shall live forever and ever and ever ! " 

 but they be oblige to wait more than a week because first there come some very windy day and then Colin be threaten with a cold , which two thing happen one after the other would no doubt have throw he into a rage but that there be so much careful and mysterious planning to do and almost every day Dickon come in , if only for a few minute , to talk about what be happen on the moor and in the lane and hedge and on the border of stream . the thing he have to tell about otter ' and badger ' and water - rat ' house , not to mention bird ' nest and field - mouse and their burrow , be enough to make you almost tremble with excitement when you hear all the intimate detail from an animal charmer and realize with what thrilling eagerness and anxiety the whole busy underworld be work . 

 " they be same as we , " say Dickon , " only they have to build their home every year . an ' it keep them so busy they fair scuffle to get them do . " 

 the most absorbing thing , however , be the preparation to be make before Colin could be transport with sufficient secrecy to the garden . no one must see the chair - carriage and Dickon and Mary after they turn a certain corner of the shrubbery and enter upon the walk outside the ivied wall . as each day pass , Colin have become more and more fix in his feeling that the mystery surround the garden be one of its great charm . nothing must spoil that . no one must ever suspect that they have a secret . People must think that he be simply go out with Mary and Dickon because he like they and do not object to their look at he . they have long and quite delightful talk about their route . they would go up this path and down that one and cross the other and go round among the fountain flower - bed as if they be look at the " bed - out plant " the head gardener , Mr. Roach , have be have arrange . that would seem such a rational thing to do that no one would think it at all mysterious . they would turn into the shrubbery walk and lose themselves until they come to the long wall . it be almost as serious and elaborately think out as the plan of march make by great general in time of war . 

 rumor of the new and curious thing which be occur in the invalid 's apartment have of course filter through the servant ' hall into the stable yard and out among the gardener , but notwithstanding this , Mr. Roach be startle one day when he receive order from Master Colin 's room to the effect that he must report himself in the apartment no outsider have ever see , as the invalid himself desire to speak to he . 

 " well , well , " he say to himself as he hurriedly change his coat , " what be to do now ? his Royal Highness that be not   to be look at call up a man he be never set eye on . " 

 Mr. Roach be not without curiosity . he have never catch even a glimpse of the boy and have hear a dozen exaggerated story about his uncanny look and way and his insane temper . the thing he have hear oftenest be that he might die at any moment and there have be numerous fanciful description of a hump back and helpless limb , give by people who have never see he . 

 " thing be change in this house , Mr. Roach , " say Mrs. Medlock , as she lead he up the back staircase to the corridor on to which open the hitherto mysterious chamber . 

 " let us hope they be change for the well , Mrs. Medlock , " he answer . 

 " they could not   well change for the bad , " she continue ; " and queer as it all be there be they as find their duty make a lot easy to stand up under . do not   you be surprised , Mr. Roach , if you find yourself in the middle of a menagerie and Martha Sowerby 's Dickon more at home than you or I could ever be . " 

 there really be a sort of Magic about Dickon , as Mary always privately believe . when Mr. Roach hear his name he smile quite leniently . 

 " he would be at home in Buckingham Palace or at the bottom of a coal mine , " he say . " and yet it be not impudence , either . he be just fine , be that lad . " 

 it be perhaps well he have be prepare or he might have be startle . when the bedroom door be open a large crow , which seem quite at home perch on the high back of a carven chair , announce the entrance of a visitor by say " Caw Caw " quite loudly . in spite of Mrs. Medlock 's warning , Mr. Roach only just escape be sufficiently undignifie to jump backward . 

 the young Rajah be neither in bed nor on his sofa . he be sit in an armchair and a young lamb be stand by he shake its tail in feeding - lamb fashion as Dickon knelt give it milk from its bottle . a squirrel be perch on Dickon 's bent back attentively nibble a nut . the little girl from India be sit on a big footstool look on . 

 " here be Mr. Roach , Master Colin , " say Mrs. Medlock . 

 the young Rajah turn and look his servitor over at least that be what the head gardener feel happen . 

 " oh , you be Roach , be you ? " he say . " I send for you to give you some very important order . " 

 " very good , sir , " answer Roach , wonder if he be to receive instruction to fall all the oak in the park or to transform the orchard into water - garden . 

 " I be go out in my chair this afternoon , " say Colin . " if the fresh air agree with I I may go out every day . when I go , none of the gardener be to be anywhere near the Long Walk by the garden wall . no one be to be there . I shall go out about two o'clock and everyone must keep away until I send word that they may go back to their work . " 

 " very good , sir , " reply Mr. Roach , much relieved to hear that the oak might remain and that the orchard be safe . " Mary , " say Colin , turn to she , " what be that thing you say in India when you have finish talk and want people to go ? " 

 " you say , ' you have my permission to go , ' " answer Mary . 

 the Rajah wave his hand . 

 " you have my permission to go , Roach , " he say . " but , remember , this be very important . " 

 " Caw Caw ! " remark the crow hoarsely but not impolitely . 

 " very good , sir . thank you , sir , " say Mr. Roach , and Mrs. Medlock take he out of the room . 

 outside in the corridor , be a rather good - natured man , he smile until he almost laugh . 

 " my word ! " he say , " he be get a fine lordly way with he , have not   he ? you would think he be a whole Royal Family roll into one Prince Consort and all . " . 

 " eh ! " protest Mrs. Medlock , " we have   have to let he trample all over every one of we ever since he have foot and he think that be what folk be bear for . " 

 " perhaps he will grow out of it , if he live , " suggest Mr. Roach . 

 " well , there be one thing pretty sure , " say Mrs. Medlock . " if he do live and that indian child stay here I will warrant she teach he that the whole orange do not belong to he , as Susan Sowerby say . and he will be likely to find out the size of his own quarter . " 

 inside the room Colin be lean back on his cushion . 

 " it be all safe now , " he say . " and this afternoon I shall see it this afternoon I shall be in it ! " 

 Dickon go back to the garden with his creature and Mary stay with Colin . she do not think he look tired but he be very quiet before their lunch come and he be quiet while they be eat it . she wonder why and ask he about it . 

 " what big eye you have   get , Colin , " she say . " when you be think they get as big as saucer . what be you think about now ? " 

 " I can not   help think about what it will look like , " he answer . 

 " the garden ? " ask Mary . 

 " the springtime , " he say . " I be think that I have   really never see it before . I scarcely ever go out and when I do go I never look at it . I do not   even think about it . " 

 " I never see it in India because there be not   any , " say Mary . 

 shut in and morbid as his life have be , Colin have more imagination than she have and at least he have spend a good deal of time look at wonderful book and picture . 

 " that morning when you run in and say ' it be come ! it be come ! ' , you make I feel quite queer . it sound as if thing be come with a great procession and big burst and waft of music . I have   a picture like it in one of my book crowd of lovely people and child with garland and branch with blossom on they , everyone laugh and dancing and crowd and play on pipe . that be why I say , ' perhaps we shall hear golden trumpet ' and tell you to throw open the window . " 

 " how funny ! " say Mary . " that be really just what it feel like . and if all the flower and leaf and green thing and bird and wild creature dance past at once , what a crowd it would be ! I be sure they would dance and sing and flute and that would be the waft of music . " 

 they both laugh but it be not because the idea be laughable but because they both so like it . 

 a little later the nurse make Colin ready . she notice that instead of lie like a log while his clothe be put on he sit up and make some effort to help himself , and he talk and laugh with Mary all the time . 

 " this be one of his good day , sir , " she say to Dr. Craven , who drop in to inspect he . " he be in such good spirit that it make he strong . " 

 " I will call in again later in the afternoon , after he have come in , " say Dr. Craven . " I must see how the go out agree with he . I wish , " in a very low voice , " that he would let you go with he . " 

 " I would rather give up the case this moment , sir , than even stay here while it be suggest , " answer the nurse . with sudden firmness . 

 " I have not   really decide to suggest it , " say the doctor , with his slight nervousness . " we will try the experiment . Dickon 's a lad I would trust with a new - bear child . " 

 the strong footman in the house carry Colin down stair and put he in his wheeled chair near which Dickon wait outside . after the manservant have arrange his rug and cushion the Rajah wave his hand to he and to the nurse . 

 " you have my permission to go , " he say , and they both disappear quickly and it must be confess giggled when they be safely inside the house . 

 Dickon begin to push the wheeled chair slowly and steadily . Mistress Mary walk beside it and Colin lean back and lift his face to the sky . the arch of it look very high and the small snowy cloud seem like white bird float on outspread wing below its crystal blueness . the wind sweep in soft big breath down from the moor and be strange with a wild clear scented sweetness . Colin keep lift his thin chest to draw it in , and his big eye look as if it be they which be listen listening , instead of his ear . 

 " there be so many sound of singing and hum and call out , " he say . " what be that scent the puff of wind bring ? " 

 " it be gorse on th ' moor that be openin ' out , " answer Dickon . " eh ! th ' bee be at it wonderful today . " 

 not a human creature be to be catch sight of in the path they take . in fact every gardener or gardener 's lad have be witch away . but they wound in and out among the shrubbery and out and round the fountain bed , follow their carefully plan route for the mere mysterious pleasure of it . but when at last they turn into the Long Walk by the ivie wall the excited sense of an approach thrill make they , for some curious reason they could not have explain , begin to speak in whisper . 

 " this be it , " breathe Mary . " this be where I use to walk up and down and wonder and wonder . " " be it ? " cry Colin , and his eye begin to search the ivy with eager curiousness . " but I can see nothing , " he whisper . " there be no door . " 

 " that be what I think , " say Mary . 

 then there be a lovely breathless silence and the chair wheel on . 

 " that be the garden where Ben Weatherstaff work , " say Mary . 

 " be it ? " say Colin . 

 a few yard more and Mary whisper again . 

 " this be where the robin fly over the wall , " she say . 

 " be it ? " cry Colin . " oh ! I wish he would come again ! " 

 " and that , " say Mary with solemn delight , point under a big lilac bush , " be where he perch on the little heap of earth and show I the key . " 

 then Colin sit up . 

 " where ? where ? there ? " he cry , and his eye be as big as the wolf 's in Red Riding - Hood , when Red Riding - Hood feel call upon to remark on they . Dickon stand still and the wheeled chair stop . 

 " and this , " say Mary , step on to the bed close to the ivy , " be where I go to talk to he when he chirp at I from the top of the wall . and this be the ivy the wind blow back , " and she take hold of the hang green curtain . 

 " oh ! be it be it ! " gasp Colin . 

 " and here be the handle , and here be the door . Dickon push he in push he in quickly ! " 

 and Dickon do it with one strong , steady , splendid push . 

 but Colin have actually drop back against his cushion , even though he gasp with delight , and he have cover his eye with his hand and hold they there shut out everything until they be inside and the chair stop as if by magic and the door be close . not till then do he take they away and look round and round and round as Dickon and Mary have do . and over wall and earth and tree and swing spray and tendril the fair green veil of tender little leaf have creep , and in the grass under the tree and the gray urn in the alcove and here and there everywhere be touch or splash of gold and purple and white and the tree be show pink and snow above his head and there be flutter of wing and faint sweet pipe and humming and scent and scent . and the sun fall warm upon his face like a hand with a lovely touch . and in wonder Mary and Dickon stand and star at he . he look so strange and different because a pink glow of color have actually creep all over he ivory face and neck and hand and all . 

 " I shall get well ! I shall get well ! " he cry out . " Mary ! Dickon ! I shall get well ! and I shall live forever and ever and ever ! " 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 BEN WEATHERSTAFF 

 one of the strange thing about live in the world be that it be only now and then one be quite sure one be go to live forever and ever and ever . one know it sometimes when one get up at the tender solemn dawn - time and go out and stand alone and throw one 's head far back and look up and up and watch the pale sky slowly change and flush and marvelous unknown thing happen until the East almost make one cry out and one 's heart stand still at the strange unchanging majesty of the rise of the sun which have be happen every morning for thousand and thousand and thousand of year . one know it then for a moment or so . and one know it sometimes when one stand by oneself in a wood at sunset and the mysterious deep gold stillness slant through and under the branch seem to be say slowly again and again something one can not quite hear , however much one try . then sometimes the immense quiet of the dark blue at night with million of star wait and watch make one sure ; and sometimes a sound of far - off music make it true ; and sometimes a look in some one 's eye . 

 and it be like that with Colin when he first see and hear and feel the Springtime inside the four high wall of a hide garden . that afternoon the whole world seem to devote itself to be perfect and radiantly beautiful and kind to one boy . perhaps out of pure heavenly goodness the spring come and crown everything it possibly could into that one place . More than once Dickon pause in what he be do and stand still with a sort of grow wonder in his eye , shake his head softly . 

 " eh ! it be graidely , " he say . " I be twelve go on thirteen an ' there be a lot o ' afternoon in thirteen year , but seem to I like I never seed one as graidely as this ' ere . " 

 " Aye , it be a graidely one , " say Mary , and she sigh for mere joy . " I will warrant it be the graidel one as ever be in this world . " 

 " do tha ' think , " say Colin with dreamy carefulness , " as happen it be make loike this ' ere all o ' purpose for I ? " 

 " my word ! " cry Mary admiringly , " that there be a bit o ' good Yorkshire . tha'rt shapin ' first - rate that tha ' art . " 

 and delight reign . they draw the chair under the plum - tree , which be snow - white with blossom and musical with bee . it be like a king 's canopy , a fairy king 's . there be flower cherry - tree near and apple - tree whose bud be pink and white , and here and there one have burst open wide . between the blossoming branch of the canopy bit of blue sky look down like wonderful eye . 

 Mary and Dickon work a little here and there and Colin watch they . they bring he thing to look at bud which be open , bud which be tight closed , bit of twig whose leaf be just show green , the feather of a woodpecker which have drop on the grass , the empty shell of some bird early hatch . Dickon push the chair slowly round and round the garden , stop every other moment to let he look at wonder spring out of the earth or trail down from tree . it be like be take in state round the country of a magic king and queen and show all the mysterious rich it contain . 

 " I wonder if we shall see the robin ? " say Colin . 

 " Tha'll see he often enow after a bit , " answer Dickon . " when th ' egg hatch out th ' little chap he will be kep ' so busy it will make his head swim . Tha'll see he flyin ' backward an ' for'ard carryin ' worms nigh as big as himsel ' an ' that much noise go on in th ' nest when he get there as fair fluster he so as he scarce know which big mouth to drop th ' first piece in . an ' gapin ' beak an ' squawk on every side . Mother say as when she see th ' work a robin have to keep they gapin ' beak fill , she feel like she be a lady with nothing to do . she say she be see th ' little chap when it seem like th ' sweat must be droppin ' off them , though folk can not   see it . " 

 this make they giggle so delightedly that they be oblige to cover their mouth with their hand , remember that they must not be hear . Colin have be instruct as to the law of whisper and low voice several day before . he like the mysteriousness of it and do his good , but in the midst of excited enjoyment it be rather difficult never to laugh above a whisper . 

 every moment of the afternoon be full of new thing and every hour the sunshine grow more golden . the wheeled chair have be draw back under the canopy and Dickon have sit down on the grass and have just draw out his pipe when Colin see something he have not have time to notice before . 

 " that be a very old tree over there , be not   it ? " he say . Dickon look across the grass at the tree and Mary look and there be a brief moment of stillness . 

 " yes , " answer Dickon , after it , and his low voice have a very gentle sound . 

 Mary gaze at the tree and thought . 

 " the branch be quite gray and there be not a single leaf anywhere , " Colin go on . " it be quite dead , be not   it ? " 

 " aye , " admit Dickon . " but they rose as have climb all over it will near hide every bit o ' th ' dead wood when they be full o ' leave an ' flower . it will not   look dead then . it will be th ' prettiest of all . " 

 Mary still gaze at the tree and thought . 

 " it look as if a big branch have be break off , " say Colin . " I wonder how it be do . " 

 " it be be do many a year , " answer Dickon . " eh ! " with a sudden relieved start and lay his hand on Colin . " look at that robin ! there he be ! he be be foragin ' for his mate . " 

 Colin be almost too late but he just catch sight of he , the flash of red - breast bird with something in his beak . he dart through the greenness and into the close - grow corner and be out of sight . Colin lean back on his cushion again , laugh a little . " he be take her tea to she . perhaps it be five o'clock . I think I would like some tea myself . " 

 and so they be safe . 

 " it be Magic which send the robin , " say Mary secretly to Dickon afterward . " I know it be magic . " for both she and Dickon have be afraid Colin might ask something about the tree whose branch have break off ten year ago and they have talk it over together and Dickon have stand and rub his head in a troubled way . 

 " we mun look as if it be not   no different from th ' other tree , " he have say . " we could not   never tell he how it break , poor lad . if he say anything about it we mun we mun try to look cheerful . " 

 " Aye , that we mun , " have answer Mary . 

 but she have not feel as if she look cheerful when she gaze at the tree . she wonder and wonder in those few moment if there be any reality in that other thing Dickon have say . he have go on rub his rust - red hair in a puzzled way , but a nice comfort look have begin to grow in his blue eye . 

 " Mrs. Craven be a very lovely young lady , " he have go on rather hesitatingly . " an ' mother she think maybe she be about Misselthwaite many a time lookin ' after Mester Colin , same as all mother do when they be take out o ' th ' world . they have to come back , tha ' see . happen she be be in the garden an ' happen it be she set we to work , an ' tell we to bring he here . " 

 Mary have think he mean something about Magic . she be a great believer in Magic . secretly she quite believe that Dickon work Magic , of course good Magic , on everything near he and that be why people like he so much and wild creature know he be their friend . she wonder , indeed , if it be not possible that his gift have bring the robin just at the right moment when Colin ask that dangerous question . she feel that his Magic be work all the afternoon and make Colin look like an entirely different boy . it do not seem possible that he could be the crazy creature who have scream and beat and bitten his pillow . even his ivory whiteness seem to change . the faint glow of color which have show on his face and neck and hand when he first get inside the garden really never quite die away . he look as if he be make of flesh instead of ivory or wax . 

 they see the robin carry food to his mate two or three time , and it be so suggestive of afternoon tea that Colin feel they must have some . 

 " go and make one of the man servant bring some in a basket to the rhododendron walk , " he say . " and then you and Dickon can bring it here . " 

 it be an agreeable idea , easily carry out , and when the white cloth be spread upon the grass , with hot tea and butter toast and crumpet , a delightfully hungry meal be eat , and several bird on domestic errand pause to inquire what be go on and be lead into investigate crumb with great activity . Nut and Shell whisk up tree with piece of cake and Soot take the entire half of a buttered crumpet into a corner and peck at and examine and turn it over and make hoarse remark about it until he decide to swallow it all joyfully in one gulp . 

 the afternoon be drag towards its mellow hour . the sun be deepen the gold of its lance , the bee be go home and the bird be fly past less often . Dickon and Mary be sit on the grass , the tea - basket be repacke ready to be take back to the house , and Colin be lie against his cushion with his heavy lock push back from his forehead and his face look quite a natural color . 

 " I do not   want this afternoon to go , " he say ; " but I shall come back tomorrow , and the day after , and the day after , and the day after . " 

 " you will get plenty of fresh air , will not   you ? " say Mary . " I be go to get nothing else , " he answer . " I have   see the spring now and I be go to see the summer . I be go to see everything grow here . I be go to grow here myself . " 

 " that tha ' will , " say Dickon . " Us'll have thee walkin ' about here an ' diggin ' same as other folk afore long . " 

 Colin flush tremendously . 

 " Walk ! " he say . " Dig ! shall I ? " 

 Dickon 's glance at he be delicately cautious . neither he nor Mary have ever ask if anything be the matter with his leg . 

 " for sure tha ' will , " he say stoutly . " tha tha 's get leg o ' thine own , same as other folk ! " 

 Mary be rather frightened until she hear Colin 's answer . 

 " nothing really ail they , " he say , " but they be so thin and weak . they shake so that I be afraid to try to stand on they . " 

 both Mary and Dickon draw a relieved breath . 

 " when tha ' stop bein ' afraid tha'lt stand on them , " Dickon say with renew cheer . " an ' tha'lt stop bein ' afraid in a bit . " 

 " I shall ? " say Colin , and he lie still as if he be wonder about thing . 

 they be really very quiet for a little while . the sun be drop lower . it be that hour when everything still itself , and they really have have a busy and exciting afternoon . Colin look as if he be rest luxuriously . even the creature have cease move about and have draw together and be rest near they . Soot have perch on a low branch and draw up one leg and drop the gray film drowsily over his eye . Mary privately think he look as if he might snore in a minute . 

 in the midst of this stillness it be rather startling when Colin half lift his head and exclaim in a loud suddenly alarm whisper : 

 " who be that man ? " Dickon and Mary scramble to their foot . 

 " Man ! " they both cry in low quick voice . 

 Colin point to the high wall . " look ! " he whisper excitedly . " just look ! " 

 Mary and Dickon wheel about and look . there be Ben Weatherstaff 's indignant face glare at they over the wall from the top of a ladder ! he actually shake his fist at Mary . 

 " if I be not   a bachelder , an ' tha ' be a wench o ' mine , " he cry , " I would give thee a hidin ' ! " 

 he mount another step threateningly as if it be his energetic intention to jump down and deal with she ; but as she come toward he he evidently think well of it and stand on the top step of his ladder shake his fist down at she . 

 " I never thowt much o ' thee ! " he harangue . " I couldna ' abide thee th ' first time I set eye on thee . a scrawny buttermilk - face young besom , allus askin ' question an ' pokin ' tha ' nose where it wasna , want . I never know how tha ' get so thick wi ' I . if it hadna ' be for th ' robin Drat he " 

 " Ben Weatherstaff , " call out Mary , find her breath . she stand below he and call up to he with a sort of gasp . " Ben Weatherstaff , it be the robin who show I the way ! " 

 then it do seem as if Ben really would scramble down on her side of the wall , he be so outraged . 

 " Tha ' young bad ' un ! " he call down at she . " Layin ' tha ' badness on a robin not but what he be impidint enow for anythin ' . he showin ' thee th ' way ! he ! Eh ! tha ' young nowt " she could see his next word burst out because he be overpower by curiosity " however I ' this world do tha ' get in ? " 

 " it be the robin who show I the way , " she protest obstinately . " he do not   know he be do it but he do . and I can not   tell you from here while you be shake your fist at I . " 

 he stop shake his fist very suddenly at that very moment and his jaw actually drop as he star over her head at something he see come over the grass toward he . 

 at the first sound of his torrent of word Colin have be so surprised that he have only sit up and listen as if he be spellbound . but in the midst of it he have recover himself and beckon imperiously to Dickon . 

 " wheel I over there ! " he command . " wheel I quite close and stop right in front of he ! " 

 and this , if you please , this be what Ben Weatherstaff beheld and which make his jaw drop . a wheeled chair with luxurious cushion and robe which come toward he look rather like some sort of State Coach because a young Rajah lean back in it with royal command in his great black - rim eye and a thin white hand extend haughtily toward he . and it stop right under Ben Weatherstaff 's nose . it be really no wonder his mouth drop open . 

 " do you know who I be ? " demand the Rajah . 

 how Ben Weatherstaff star ! his red old eye fix themselves on what be before he as if he be see a ghost . he gaze and gaze and gulp a lump down his throat and do not say a word . " do you know who I be ? " demand Colin still more imperiously . " answer ! " 

 Ben Weatherstaff put his gnarled hand up and pass it over his eye and over his forehead and then he do answer in a queer shaky voice . 

 " who tha ' art ? " he say . " Aye , that I do wi ' tha ' mother 's eye starin ' at I out o ' tha ' face . Lord know how tha ' come here . but tha'rt th ' poor cripple . " 

 Colin forget that he have ever have a back . his face flush scarlet and he sit bolt upright . 

 " I be not a cripple ! " he cry out furiously . " I be not ! " 

 " he be not ! " cry Mary , almost shout up the wall in her fierce indignation . " he be not get a lump as big as a pin ! I look and there be none there not one ! " 

 Ben Weatherstaff pass his hand over his forehead again and gaze as if he could never gaze enough . his hand shake and his mouth shake and his voice shake . he be an ignorant old man and a tactless old man and he could only remember the thing he have hear . 

 " Tha ' tha ' have not   get a crooked back ? " he say hoarsely . 

 " no ! " shout Colin . 

 " Tha ' tha ' have not   get crooked leg ? " quaver Ben more hoarsely yet . it be too much . the strength which Colin usually throw into his tantrum rush through he now in a new way . never yet have he be accuse of crooked leg even in whisper and the perfectly simple belief in their existence which be reveal by Ben Weatherstaff 's voice be more than Rajah flesh and blood could endure . his anger and insult pride make he forget everything but this one moment and fill he with a power he have never know before , an almost unnatural strength . 

 " come here ! " he shout to Dickon , and he actually begin to tear the covering off his low limb and disentangle himself . " come here ! come here ! this minute ! " 

 Dickon be by his side in a second . Mary catch her breath in a short gasp and feel herself turn pale . 

 " he can do it ! he can do it ! he can do it ! he can ! " she gabble over to herself under her breath as fast as ever she could . 

 there be a brief fierce scramble , the rug be toss on the ground , Dickon hold Colin 's arm , the thin leg be out , the thin foot be on the grass . Colin be stand upright upright as straight as an arrow and look strangely tall his head throw back and his strange eye flash lightning . " look at I ! " he fling up at Ben Weatherstaff . " just look at I you ! just look at I ! " 

 " he be as straight as I be ! " cry Dickon . " he be as straight as any lad I ' Yorkshire ! " 

 what Ben Weatherstaff do Mary think queer beyond measure . he choke and gulp and suddenly tear run down his weather - wrinkle cheek as he strike his old hand together . 

 " eh ! " he burst forth , " th ' lie folk tell ! Tha'rt as thin as a lath an ' as white as a wraith , but there be not a knob on thee . Tha'lt make a mon yet . God bless thee ! " 

 Dickon hold Colin 's arm strongly but the boy have not begin to falter . he stand straight and straighter and look Ben Weatherstaff in the face . 

 " I be your master , " he say , " when my father be away . and you be to obey I . this be my garden . do not   dare to say a word about it ! you get down from that ladder and go out to the Long Walk and Miss Mary will meet you and bring you here . I want to talk to you . we do not want you , but now you will have to be in the secret . be quick ! " 

 Ben Weatherstaff 's crab old face be still wet with that one queer rush of tear . it seem as if he could not take his eye from thin straight Colin stand on his foot with his head throw back . 

 " Eh ! lad , " he almost whisper . " eh ! my lad ! " and then remember himself he suddenly touch his hat gardener fashion and say , " yes , sir ! yes , sir ! " and obediently disappear as he descend the ladder . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 when the SUN go down 

 when his head be out of sight Colin turn to Mary . 

 " go and meet he , " he say ; and Mary fly across the grass to the door under the ivy . 

 Dickon be watch he with sharp eye . there be scarlet spot on his cheek and he look amazing , but he show no sign of fall . 

 " I can stand , " he say , and his head be still hold up and he say it quite grandly . 

 " I tell thee tha ' could as soon as tha ' stop bein ' afraid , " answer Dickon . " an ' tha 's stop . " 

 " yes , I have   stop , " say Colin . 

 then suddenly he remember something Mary have say . 

 " be you make magic ? " he ask sharply . 

 Dickon 's curly mouth spread in a cheerful grin . 

 " Tha 's do Magic thysel ' , " he say . " it be same magic as make these ' ere work out o ' th ' earth , " and he touch with his thick boot a clump of crocus in the grass . Colin look down at they . 

 " Aye , " he say slowly , " there couldna ' be big Magic than that there there couldna ' be . " 

 he draw himself up straighter than ever . 

 " I be go to walk to that tree , " he say , point to one a few foot away from he . " I be go to be stand when Weatherstaff come here . I can rest against the tree if I like . when I want to sit down I will sit down , but not before . bring a rug from the chair . " 

 he walk to the tree and though Dickon hold his arm he be wonderfully steady . when he stand against the tree trunk it be not too plain that he support himself against it , and he still hold himself so straight that he look tall . 

 when Ben Weatherstaff come through the door in the wall he see he stand there and he hear Mary mutter something under her breath . 

 " what art sayin ' ? " he ask rather testily because he do not want his attention distract from the long thin straight boy figure and proud face . 

 but she do not tell he . what she be say be this : 

 " you can do it ! you can do it ! I tell you you could ! you can do it ! you can do it ! you can ! " she be say it to Colin because she want to make magic and keep he on his foot look like that . she could not bear that he should give in before Ben Weatherstaff . he do not give in . she be uplift by a sudden feeling that he look quite beautiful in spite of his thinness . he fix his eye on Ben Weatherstaff in his funny imperious way . 

 " look at I ! " he command . " look at I all over ! be I a hunchback ? have I get crooked leg ? " 

 Ben Weatherstaff have not quite get over his emotion , but he have recover a little and answer almost in his usual way . 

 " not tha ' , " he say . " nowt o ' th ' sort . what be tha ' be do with thysel ' hidin ' out o ' sight an ' lettin ' folk think tha ' be cripple an ' half - witte ? " 

 " half - witte ! " say Colin angrily . " who think that ? " 

 " lot o ' fool , " say Ben . " Th ' world 's full o ' jackasses brayin ' an ' they never bray nowt but lie . what do tha ' shut thysel ' up for ? " 

 " everyone think I be go to die , " say Colin shortly . " I be not ! " 

 and he say it with such decision Ben Weatherstaff look he over , up and down , down and up . 

 " Tha ' die ! " he say with dry exultation . " nowt o ' th ' sort ! Tha 's get too much pluck in thee . when I seed thee put tha ' leg on th ' ground in such a hurry I know tha ' be all right . sit thee down on th ' rug a bit young Mester an ' give I thy order . " 

 there be a queer mixture of crab tenderness and shrewd understanding in his manner . Mary have pour out speech as rapidly as she could as they have come down the Long Walk . the chief thing to be remember , she have tell he , be that Colin be get well get well . the garden be do it . no one must let he remember about have hump and dying . 

 the Rajah condescend to seat himself on a rug under the tree . 

 " what work do you do in the garden , Weatherstaff ? " he inquire . 

 " Anythin ' I be tell to do , " answer old Ben . " I be kep ' on by favor because she like I . " 

 " she ? " say Colin . 

 " Tha ' mother , " answer Ben Weatherstaff . 

 " my mother ? " say Colin , and he look about he quietly . " this be her garden , be not   it ? " 

 " Aye , it be that ! " and Ben Weatherstaff look about he too . " she be main fond of it . " 

 " it be my garden now . I be fond of it . I shall come here every day , " announce Colin . " but it be to be a secret . my order be that no one be to know that we come here . Dickon and my cousin have work and make it come alive . I shall send for you sometimes to help but you must come when no one can see you . " 

 Ben Weatherstaff 's face twist itself in a dry old smile . 

 " I have   come here before when no one see I , " he say . 

 " what ! " exclaim Colin . 

 " when ? " 

 " Th ' last time I be here , " rub his chin and look round , " be about two year ' ago . " 

 " but no one have be in it for ten year ! " cry Colin . 

 " there be no door ! " 

 " I be no one , " say old Ben dryly . " an ' I do not   come through th ' door . I come over th ' wall . Th ' rheumatic hold I back th ' last two year ' . " 

 " Tha ' come an ' do a bit o ' prunin ' ! " cry Dickon . " I could not   make out how it have be do . " 

 " she be so fond of it she be ! " say Ben Weatherstaff slowly . " an ' she be such a pretty young thing . she say to I once , ' Ben , ' say she laughin ' , ' if ever I be ill or if I go away you must take care of my rose . ' when she do go away th ' order be no one be ever to come nigh . but I come , " with grumpy obstinacy . " over th ' wall I come until th ' rheumatic stop I an ' I do a bit o ' work once a year . she would give her order first . " 

 " it would not   have be as wick as it be if tha ' have not   do it , " say Dickon . " I do wonder . " 

 " I be glad you do it , Weatherstaff , " say Colin . " you will know how to keep the secret . " 

 " Aye , I will know , sir , " answer Ben . " an ' it will be easy for a man wi ' rheumatic to come in at th ' door . " 

 on the grass near the tree Mary have drop her trowel . Colin stretch out his hand and take it up . an odd expression come into his face and he begin to scratch at the earth . his thin hand be weak enough but presently as they watch he Mary with quite breathless interest he drive the end of the trowel into the soil and turn some over . 

 " you can do it ! you can do it ! " say Mary to herself . " I tell you , you can ! " 

 Dickon 's round eye be full of eager curiousness but he say not a word . Ben Weatherstaff look on with interested face . 

 Colin persevere . after he have turn a few trowelful of soil he speak exultantly to Dickon in his good yorkshire . 

 " Tha ' say as tha'd have I walkin ' about here same as other folk an ' tha ' say tha'd have I diggin ' . I thowt tha ' be just leein ' to please I . this be only th ' first day an ' I have   walk an ' here I be diggin ' . " 

 Ben Weatherstaff 's mouth fall open again when he hear he , but he end by chuckle . 

 " eh ! " he say , " that sound as if tha'd get wit enow . Tha'rt a Yorkshire lad for sure . an ' tha'rt diggin ' , too . how would tha ' like to plant a bit o ' something ? I can get thee a rose in a pot . " 

 " go and get it ! " say Colin , dig excitedly . " quick ! quick ! " 

 it be do quickly enough indeed . Ben Weatherstaff go his way forget rheumatic . Dickon take his spade and dig the hole deeply and wide than a new digger with thin white hand could make it . Mary slip out to run and bring back a watering - can . when Dickon have deepen the hole Colin go on turn the soft earth over and over . he look up at the sky , flushed and glow with the strangely new exercise , slight as it be . 

 " I want to do it before the sun go quite quite down , " he say . 

 Mary think that perhaps the sun hold back a few minute just on purpose . Ben Weatherstaff bring the rose in its pot from the greenhouse . he hobble over the grass as fast as he could . he have begin to be excited , too . he kneel down by the hole and break the pot from the mould . 

 " here , lad , " he say , hand the plant to Colin . " set it in the earth thysel ' same as th ' king do when he go to a new place . " 

 the thin white hand shake a little and Colin 's flush grow deep as he set the rose in the mould and hold it while old Ben make firm the earth . it be fill in and press down and make steady . Mary be lean forward on her hand and knee . Soot have fly down and march forward to see what be be do . Nut and Shell chatter about it from a cherry - tree . 

 " it be plant ! " say Colin at last . " and the sun be only slip over the edge . help I up , Dickon . I want to be stand when it go . that be part of the Magic . " 

 and Dickon help he , and the Magic or whatever it be so give he strength that when the sun do slip over the edge and end the strange lovely afternoon for they there he actually stand on his two foot laugh . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 MAGIC 

 Dr. Craven have be wait some time at the house when they return to it . he have indeed begin to wonder if it might not be wise to send some one out to explore the garden path . when Colin be bring back to his room the poor man look he over seriously . 

 " you should not have stay so long , " he say . " you must not overexert yourself . " 

 " I be not tired at all , " say Colin . " it have make I well . tomorrow I be go out in the morning as well as in the afternoon . " 

 " I be not sure that I can allow it , " answer Dr. Craven . " I be afraid it would not be wise . " 

 " it would not be wise to try to stop I , " say Colin quite seriously . " I be go . " 

 even Mary have find out that one of Colin 's chief peculiarity be that he do not know in the least what a rude little brute he be with his way of order people about . he have live on a sort of desert island all his life and as he have be the king of it he have make his own manner and have have no one to compare himself with . Mary have indeed be rather like he herself and since she have be at Misselthwaite have gradually discover that her own manner have not be of the kind which be usual or popular . have make this discovery she naturally think it of enough interest to communicate to Colin . so she sit and look at he curiously for a few minute after Dr. Craven have go . she want to make he ask she why she be do it and of course she do . 

 " what be you look at I for ? " he say . 

 " I be think that I be rather sorry for Dr. Craven . " 

 " so be I , " say Colin calmly , but not without an air of some satisfaction . " he will not   get Misselthwaite at all now I be not go to die . " 

 " I be sorry for he because of that , of course , " say Mary , " but I be think just then that it must have be very horrid to have have to be polite for ten year to a boy who be always rude . I would never have do it . " 

 " be I rude ? " Colin inquire undisturbedly . 

 " if you have be his own boy and he have be a slapping sort of man , " say Mary , " he would have slap you . " 

 " but he dare not , " say Colin . 

 " no , he dare not , " answer Mistress Mary , think the thing out quite without prejudice . " nobody ever dare to do anything you do not   like because you be go to die and thing like that . you be such a poor thing . " 

 " but , " announce Colin stubbornly , " I be not go to be a poor thing . I will not   let people think I be one . I stand on my foot this afternoon . " 

 " it be always have your own way that have make you so queer , " Mary go on , think aloud . 

 Colin turn his head , frown . 

 " be I queer ? " he demand . 

 " yes , " answer Mary , " very . but you need not   be cross , " she add impartially , " because so be I queer and so be Ben Weatherstaff . but I be not as queer as I be before I begin to like people and before I find the garden . " 

 " I do not   want to be queer , " say Colin . " I be not go to be , " and he frown again with determination . 

 he be a very proud boy . he lie think for a while and then Mary see his beautiful smile begin and gradually change his whole face . 

 " I shall stop be queer , " he say , " if I go every day to the garden . there be Magic in there good Magic , you know , Mary . I be sure there be . " " so be I , " say Mary . 

 " even if it be not   real magic , " Colin say , " we can pretend it be . something be there something ! " 

 " it be magic , " say Mary , " but not black . it be as white as snow . " 

 they always call it Magic and indeed it seem like it in the month that follow the wonderful month the radiant month the amazing one . oh ! the thing which happen in that garden ! if you have never have a garden you can not understand , and if you have have a garden you will know that it would take a whole book to describe all that come to pass there . at first it seem that green thing would never cease push their way through the earth , in the grass , in the bed , even in the crevice of the wall . then the green thing begin to show bud and the bud begin to unfurl and show color , every shade of blue , every shade of purple , every tint and hue of crimson . in its happy day flower have be tuck away into every inch and hole and corner . Ben Weatherstaff have see it do and have himself scrap out mortar from between the brick of the wall and make pocket of earth for lovely cling thing to grow on . Iris and white lily rise out of the grass in sheaf , and the green alcove fill themselves with amazing army of the blue and white flower lance of tall delphinium or columbine or campanula . 

 " she be main fond o ' they she be , " Ben Weatherstaff say . " she like they thing as be allus pointin ' up to th ' blue sky , she use to tell . not as she be one o ' they as look down on th ' earth not she . she just love it but she say as th ' blue sky allus look so joyful . " 

 the seed Dickon and Mary have plant grow as if fairy have tend they . satiny poppy of all tint dance in the breeze by the score , gaily defy flower which have live in the garden for year and which it might be confess seem rather to wonder how such new people have get there . and the rose the rose ! rise out of the grass , tangle round the sun - dial , wreathe the tree trunk and hang from their branch , climb up the wall and spread over they with long garland fall in cascade they come alive day by day , hour by hour . fair fresh leaf , and bud and bud tiny at first but swell and work Magic until they burst and uncurl into cup of scent delicately spill themselves over their brim and fill the garden air . 

 Colin see it all , watch each change as it take place . every morning he be bring out and every hour of each day when it do not   rain he spend in the garden . even gray day please he . he would lie on the grass " watch thing grow , " he say . if you watch long enough , he declare , you could see bud unsheath themselves . also you could make the acquaintance of strange busy insect thing run about on various unknown but evidently serious errand , sometimes carry tiny scrap of straw or feather or food , or climbing blade of grass as if they be tree from whose top one could look out to explore the country . a mole throw up its mound at the end of its burrow and make its way out at last with the long - nail paw which look so like elfish hand , have absorb he one whole morning . ant ' way , beetle ' way , bee ' way , frog ' way , bird ' way , plant ' way , give he a new world to explore and when Dickon reveal they all and add fox ' way , otter ' way , ferret ' way , squirrel ' way , and trout ' and water - rat ' and badger ' way , there be no end to the thing to talk about and think over . 

 and this be not the half of the Magic . the fact that he have really once stand on his foot have set Colin think tremendously and when Mary tell he of the spell she have work he be excited and approve of it greatly . he talk of it constantly . 

 " of course there must be lot of Magic in the world , " he say wisely one day , " but people do not   know what it be like or how to make it . perhaps the beginning be just to say nice thing be go to happen until you make they happen . I be go to try and experiment . " 

 the next morning when they go to the secret garden he send at once for Ben Weatherstaff . Ben come as quickly as he could and find the Rajah stand on his foot under a tree and look very grand but also very beautifully smile . 

 " good morning , Ben Weatherstaff , " he say . " I want you and Dickon and Miss Mary to stand in a row and listen to I because I be go to tell you something very important . " 

 " aye , aye , sir ! " answer Ben Weatherstaff , touch his forehead .   one of the long conceal charm of Ben Weatherstaff be that in his boyhood he have once run away to sea and have make voyage . so he could reply like a sailor . 

 " I be go to try a scientific experiment , " explain the Rajah . " when I grow up I be go to make great scientific discovery and I be go to begin now with this experiment . " 

 " aye , aye , sir ! " say Ben Weatherstaff promptly , though this be the first time he have hear of great scientific discovery . 

 it be the first time Mary have hear of they , either , but even at this stage she have begin to realize that , queer as he be , Colin have read about a great many singular thing and be somehow a very convincing sort of boy . when he hold up his head and fix his strange eye on you it seem as if you believe he almost in spite of yourself though he be only ten year old go on eleven . at this moment he be especially convincing because he suddenly feel the fascination of actually make a sort of speech like a grow - up person . 

 " the great scientific discovery I be go to make , " he go on , " will be about Magic . Magic be a great thing and scarcely any one know anything about it except a few people in old book and Mary a little , because she be bear in India where there be fakir . I believe Dickon know some Magic , but perhaps he do not   know he know it . he charm animal and people . I would never have let he come to see I if he have not be an animal charmer which be a boy charmer , too , because a boy be an animal . I be sure there be Magic in everything , only we have not sense enough to get hold of it and make it do thing for we like electricity and horse and steam . " 

 this sound so impose that Ben Weatherstaff become quite excited and really could not keep still . " aye , aye , sir , " he say and he begin to stand up quite straight . 

 " when Mary find this garden it look quite dead , " the orator proceed . " then something begin push thing up out of the soil and make thing out of nothing . one day thing be not   there and another they be . I have never watch thing before and it make I feel very curious . scientific people be always curious and I be go to be scientific . I keep say to myself , ' what be it ? what be it ? ' it be something . it can not   be nothing ! I do not   know its name so I call it Magic . I have never see the sun rise but Mary and Dickon have and from what they tell I I be sure that be Magic too . something push it up and draw it . sometimes since I have   be in the garden I have   look up through the tree at the sky and I have have a strange feeling of be happy as if something be push and draw in my chest and make I breathe fast . Magic be always push and draw and make thing out of nothing . everything be make out of Magic , leaf and tree , flower and bird , badger and fox and squirrel and people . so it must be all around we . in this garden in all the place . the Magic in this garden have make I stand up and know I be go to live to be a man . I be go to make the scientific experiment of try to get some and put it in myself and make it push and draw I and make I strong . I do not   know how to do it but I think that if you keep think about it and call it perhaps it will come . perhaps that be the first baby way to get it . when I be go to try to stand that first time Mary keep say to herself as fast as she could , ' you can do it ! you can do it ! ' and I do . I have to try myself at the same time , of course , but her Magic help I and so do Dickon 's . every morning and evening and as often in the daytime as I can remember I be go to say , ' Magic be in I ! Magic be make I well ! I be go to be as strong as Dickon , as strong as Dickon ! ' and you must all do it , too . that be my experiment will you help , Ben Weatherstaff ? " 

 " aye , aye , sir ! " say Ben Weatherstaff . " Aye , aye ! " 

 " if you keep do it every day as regularly as soldier go through drill we shall see what will happen and find out if the experiment succeed . you learn thing by say they over and over and think about they until they stay in your mind forever and I think it will be the same with Magic . if you keep call it to come to you and help you it will get to be part of you and it will stay and do thing . " " I once hear an officer in India tell my mother that there be fakir who say word over and over thousand of time , " say Mary . 

 " I have   hear Jem Fettleworth 's wife say th ' same thing over thousand o ' times callin ' Jem a drunken brute , " say Ben Weatherstaff dryly . " Summat allus come o ' that , sure enough . he give she a good hidin ' an ' go to th ' Blue Lion an ' get as drunk as a lord . " 

 Colin draw his brow together and think a few minute . then he cheer up . 

 " well , " he say , " you see something do come of it . she use the wrong magic until she make he beat she . if she have use the right magic and have say something nice perhaps he would not   have get as drunk as a lord and perhaps perhaps he might have buy she a new bonnet . " 

 Ben Weatherstaff chuckle and there be shrewd admiration in his little old eye . 

 " Tha'rt a clever lad as well as a straight - legged one , Mester Colin , " he say . " next time I see Bess Fettleworth I will give she a bit of a hint o ' what Magic will do for she . she would be rare an ' pleased if th ' sinetifik ' speriment work an ' so ' ud Jem . " 

 Dickon have stand listen to the lecture , his round eye shin with curious delight . Nut and Shell be on his shoulder and he hold a long - eared white rabbit in his arm and stroke and stroke it softly while it lay its ear along its back and enjoy itself . 

 " do you think the experiment will work ? " Colin ask he , wonder what he be think . he so often wonder what Dickon be think when he see he look at he or at one of his " creature " with his happy wide smile . 

 he smile now and his smile be wide than usual . 

 " Aye , " he answer , " that I do . it will work same as th ' seed do when th ' sun shin on them . it will work for sure . shall we begin it now ? " 

 Colin be delighted and so be Mary . fire by recollection of fakir and devotee in illustration Colin suggest that they should all sit cross - legged under the tree which make a canopy . 

 " it will be like sit in a sort of temple , " say Colin . " I be rather tired and I want to sit down . " 

 " eh ! " say Dickon , " tha ' must not   begin by sayin ' tha'rt tired . Tha ' might spoil th ' Magic . " 

 Colin turn and look at he into his innocent round eye . 

 " that be true , " he say slowly . " I must only think of the Magic . " it all seem most majestic and mysterious when they sit down in their circle . Ben Weatherstaff feel as if he have somehow be lead into appear at a prayer - meeting . ordinarily he be very fixed in be what he call " agen ' prayer - meetin 's " but this be the Rajah 's affair he do not resent it and be indeed inclined to be gratify at be call upon to assist . Mistress Mary feel solemnly enrapture . Dickon hold his rabbit in his arm , and perhaps he make some charmer 's signal no one hear , for when he sit down , cross - legged like the rest , the crow , the fox , the squirrel and the lamb slowly draw near and make part of the circle , settle each into a place of rest as if of their own desire . 

 " the ' creature ' have come , " say Colin gravely . " they want to help we . " 

 Colin really look quite beautiful , Mary think . he hold his head high as if he feel like a sort of priest and his strange eye have a wonderful look in they . the light shine on he through the tree canopy . 

 " now we will begin , " he say . " shall we sway backward and forward , Mary , as if we be dervish ? " 

 " I canna ' do no swayin ' back'ard and for'ard , " say Ben Weatherstaff . " I have   get th ' rheumatic . " 

 " the Magic will take they away , " say Colin in a High Priest tone , " but we will not   sway until it have do it . we will only chant . " 

 " I canna ' do no chantin ' " say Ben Weatherstaff a trifle testily . " they turn I out o ' th ' church choir th ' only time I ever try it . " 

 no one smile . they be all too much in earnest . Colin 's face be not even cross by a shadow . he be think only of the Magic . 

 " then I will chant , " he say . and he begin , look like a strange boy spirit . " the sun be shin the sun be shin . that be the Magic . the flower be grow the root be stir . that be the Magic . be alive be the Magic be strong be the Magic . the Magic be in I the Magic be in I . it be in I it be in I . it be in every one of we . it be in Ben Weatherstaff 's back . magic ! magic ! come and help ! " 

 he say it a great many time not a thousand time but quite a goodly number . Mary listen entrance . she feel as if it be at once queer and beautiful and she want he to go on and on . Ben Weatherstaff begin to feel soothe into a sort of dream which be quite agreeable . the humming of the bee in the blossom mingle with the chant voice and drowsily melt into a doze . Dickon sit cross - legged with his rabbit asleep on his arm and a hand rest on the lamb 's back . Soot have push away a squirrel and huddle close to he on his shoulder , the gray film drop over his eye . at last Colin stop . 

 " now I be go to walk round the garden , " he announce . 

 Ben Weatherstaff 's head have just drop forward and he lift it with a jerk . 

 " you have be asleep , " say Colin . 

 " nowt o ' th ' sort , " mumble Ben . " Th ' sermon be good enow but I be bind to get out afore th ' collection . " 

 he be not quite awake yet . 

 " you be not in church , " say Colin . 

 " not I , " say Ben , straighten himself . " who say I be ? I hear every bit of it . you say th ' Magic be in my back . Th ' doctor call it rheumatic . " 

 the Rajah wave his hand . 

 " that be the wrong magic , " he say . " you will get well . you have my permission to go to your work . but come back tomorrow . " 

 " I would like to see thee walk round the garden , " grunt Ben . 

 it be not an unfriendly grunt , but it be a grunt . in fact , be a stubborn old party and not have entire faith in Magic he have make up his mind that if he be send away he would climb his ladder and look over the wall so that he might be ready to hobble back if there be any stumbling . 

 the Rajah do not object to his staying and so the procession be form . it really do look like a procession . Colin be at its head with Dickon on one side and Mary on the other . Ben Weatherstaff walk behind , and the " creature " trail after they , the lamb and the fox cub keep close to Dickon , the white rabbit hop along or stop to nibble and Soot follow with the solemnity of a person who feel himself in charge . 

 it be a procession which move slowly but with dignity . every few yard it stop to rest . Colin lean on Dickon 's arm and privately Ben Weatherstaff keep a sharp lookout , but now and then Colin take his hand from its support and walk a few step alone . his head be hold up all the time and he look very grand . 

 " the Magic be in I ! " he keep say . " the Magic be make I strong ! I can feel it ! I can feel it ! " 

 it seem very certain that something be uphold and uplift he . he sit on the seat in the alcove , and once or twice he sit down on the grass and several time he pause in the path and lean on Dickon , but he would not give up until he have go all round the garden . when he return to the canopy tree his cheek be flush and he look triumphant . 

 " I do it ! the Magic work ! " he cry . " that be my first scientific discovery . " . 

 " what will Dr. Craven say ? " break out Mary . 

 " he will not   say anything , " Colin answer , " because he will not be tell . this be to be the big secret of all . no one be to know anything about it until I have grow so strong that I can walk and run like any other boy . I shall come here every day in my chair and I shall be take back in it . I will not   have people whisper and ask question and I will not   let my father hear about it until the experiment have quite succeed . then sometime when he come back to Misselthwaite I shall just walk into his study and say ' here I be ; I be like any other boy . I be quite well and I shall live to be a man . it have be do by a scientific experiment . ' " 

 " he will think he be in a dream , " cry Mary . " he will not   believe his eye . " 

 Colin flush triumphantly . he have make himself believe that he be go to get well , which be really more than half the battle , if he have be aware of it . and the thought which stimulate he more than any other be this imagine what his father would look like when he see that he have a son who be as straight and strong as other father ' son . one of his dark misery in the unhealthy morbid past day have be his hatred of be a sickly weak - back boy whose father be afraid to look at he . 

 " he will be oblige to believe they , " he say . 

 " one of the thing I be go to do , after the Magic work and before I begin to make scientific discovery , be to be an athlete . " 

 " we shall have thee takin ' to boxin ' in a week or so , " say Ben Weatherstaff . " Tha'lt end wi ' winnin ' th ' Belt an ' bein ' champion prize - fighter of all England . " 

 Colin fix his eye on he sternly . 

 " Weatherstaff , " he say , " that be disrespectful . you must not take liberty because you be in the secret . however much the Magic work I shall not be a prize - fighter . I shall be a scientific discoverer . " 

 " ax pardon ax pardon , sir " answer Ben , touch his forehead in salute . " I ought to have seed it be not   a jokin ' matter , " but his eye twinkle and secretly he be immensely pleased . he really do not mind be snub since the snubbing mean that the lad be gain strength and spirit . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 " LET they LAUGH " 

 the secret garden be not the only one Dickon work in . round the cottage on the moor there be a piece of ground enclose by a low wall of rough stone . early in the morning and late in the fade twilight and on all the day Colin and Mary do not see he , Dickon work there plant or tend potato and cabbage , turnip and carrot and herb for his mother . in the company of his " creature " he do wonder there and be never tired of do they , it seem . while he dig or weed he whistle or sing bit of Yorkshire moor song or talk to Soot or Captain or the brother and sister he have teach to help he . 

 " we would never get on as comfortable as we do , " Mrs. Sowerby say , " if it be not   for Dickon 's garden . Anything'll grow for he . his ' tater and cabbage be twice th ' size of any one else 's an ' they have   get a flavor with them as nobody 's have . " 

 when she find a moment to spare she like to go out and talk to he . after supper there be still a long clear twilight to work in and that be her quiet time . she could sit upon the low rough wall and look on and hear story of the day . she love this time . there be not only vegetable in this garden . Dickon have buy penny package of flower seed now and then and sow bright sweet - scented thing among gooseberry bush and even cabbage and he grow border of mignonette and pink and pansy and thing whose seed he could save year after year or whose root would bloom each spring and spread in time into fine clump . the low wall be one of the prettiest thing in Yorkshire because he have tuck moorland foxglove and fern and rock - cress and hedgerow flower into every crevice until only here and there glimpse of the stone be to be see . 

 " all a chap 's get to do to make them thrive , mother , " he would say , " be to be friend with them for sure . they be just like th ' ' creature . ' if they be thirsty give them drink and if they be hungry give them a bit o ' food . they want to live same as we do . if they die I should feel as if I have be a bad lad and somehow treat they heartless . " 

 it be in these twilight hour that Mrs. Sowerby hear of all that happen at Misselthwaite Manor . at first she be only tell that " Mester Colin " have take a fancy to go out into the ground with Miss Mary and that it be do he good . but it be not long before it be agree between the two child that Dickon 's mother might " come into the secret . " somehow it be not doubted that she be ' safe for sure . " 

 so one beautiful still evening Dickon tell the whole story , with all the thrilling detail of the bury key and the robin and the gray haze which have seem like deadness and the secret Mistress Mary have plan never to reveal . the come of Dickon and how it have be tell to he , the doubt of Mester Colin and the final drama of his introduction to the hide domain , combine with the incident of Ben Weatherstaff 's angry face peer over the wall and Mester Colin 's sudden indignant strength , make Mrs. Sowerby 's nice - look face quite change color several time . 

 " my word ! " she say . " it be a good thing that little lass come to th ' Manor . it be be th ' makin ' o ' she an ' th ' savin , o ' he . Standin ' on his foot ! an ' we all thinkin ' he be a poor half - witted lad with not a straight bone in he . " 

 she ask a great many question and her blue eye be full of deep thinking . 

 " what do they make of it at th ' Manor he be so well an ' cheerful an ' never complainin ' ? " she inquire . " they do not   know what to make of it , " answer Dickon . " every day as come round his face look different . it be fillin ' out and do not   look so sharp an ' th ' waxy color be go . but he have to do his bit o ' complainin ' , " with a highly entertained grin . 

 " what for , I ' Mercy 's name ? " ask Mrs. Sowerby . 

 Dickon chuckle . 

 " he do it to keep they from guessin ' what be happen . if the doctor know he would find out he could stand on his foot he would likely write and tell Mester Craven . Mester Colin 's savin ' th ' secret to tell himself . he be go to practise his magic on his leg every day till his father come back an ' then he be go to march into his room an ' show he he be as straight as other lad . but he an ' Miss Mary think it be good plan to do a bit o ' groanin ' an ' frettin ' now an ' then to throw folk off th ' scent . " 

 Mrs. Sowerby be laugh a low comfortable laugh long before he have finish his last sentence . 

 " eh ! " she say , " that pair 's enjoyin ' their - self I will warrant . they will get a good bit o ' actin ' out of it an ' there be nothing child like as much as play actin ' . let us hear what they do , Dickon lad . " Dickon stop weed and sit up on his heel to tell she . his eye be twinkle with fun . 

 " Mester Colin be carry down to his chair every time he go out , " he explain . " an ' he fly out at John , th ' footman , for not carryin ' him careful enough . he make himself as helpless lookin ' as he can an ' never lift his head until we be out o ' sight o ' th ' house . an ' he grunt an ' fret a good bit when he be bein ' settle into his chair . he an ' Miss Mary 's both get to enjoyin ' it an ' when he groan an ' complain she will say , ' poor Colin ! do it hurt you so much ? be you so weak as that , poor Colin ? ' but th ' trouble be that sometimes they can scarce keep from burstin ' out laughin ' . when we get safe into the garden they laugh till they have   no breath leave to laugh with . an ' they have to stuff their face into Mester Colin 's cushion to keep the gardener from hearin ' , if any of , them be about . " 

 " Th ' more they laugh th ' well for them ! " say Mrs. Sowerby , still laugh herself . " good healthy child laughin be well than pill any day o ' th ' year . that pair'll plump up for sure . " 

 " they be plumpin ' up , " say Dickon . " they be that hungry they do not   know how to get enough to eat without makin ' talk . Mester Colin say if he keep sendin ' for more food they will not   believe he be an invalid at all . Miss Mary say she will let he eat her share , but he say that if she go hungry she will get thin an ' they mun both get fat at once . " 

 Mrs. Sowerby laugh so heartily at the revelation of this difficulty that she quite rock backward and forward in her blue cloak , and Dickon laugh with she . 

 " I will tell thee what , lad , " Mrs. Sowerby say when she could speak . " I have   think of a way to help them . when tha ' go to them in th ' mornin 's tha ' shall take a pail o ' good new milk an ' I will bake them a crusty cottage loaf or some bun wi ' currant in them , same as you children like . Nothin be so good as fresh milk an ' bread . then they could take off th ' edge o ' their hunger while they be in their garden an ' th , fine food they get indoor ' ud polish off th ' corner . " 

 " Eh ! mother ! " say Dickon admiringly , " what a wonder tha ' art ! tha ' always see a way out o ' thing . they be quite in a pother yesterday . they do not   see how they be to manage without orderin ' up more food they feel that empty inside . " 

 " they be two young ' un growin ' fast , an ' health 's comin ' back to both of them . child like that feel like young wolf an ' food 's flesh an ' blood to them , " say Mrs. Sowerby . then she smile Dickon 's own curve smile . " eh ! but they be enjoyin ' theirselve for sure , " she say . 

 she be quite right , the comfortable wonderful mother creature and she have never be more so than when she say their " play actin ' " would be their joy . Colin and Mary find it one of their most thrilling source of entertainment . the idea of protect themselves from suspicion have be unconsciously suggest to they first by the puzzled nurse and then by Dr. Craven himself . 

 " your appetite . be improve very much , Master Colin , " the nurse have say one day . " you use to eat nothing , and so many thing disagree with you . " 

 " nothing disagree with I now " reply Colin , and then see the nurse look at he curiously he suddenly remember that perhaps he ought not to appear too well just yet . " at least thing do not   so often disagree with I . it be the fresh air . " 

 " perhaps it be , " say the nurse , still look at he with a mystified expression . " but I must talk to Dr. Craven about it . " 

 " how she star at you ! " say Mary when she go away . " as if she think there must be something to find out . " 

 " I will not   have she find out thing , " say Colin . " no one must begin to find out yet . " when Dr. Craven come that morning he seem puzzle , also . he ask a number of question , to Colin 's great annoyance . 

 " you stay out in the garden a great deal , " he suggest . " where do you go ? " 

 Colin put on his favorite air of dignified indifference to opinion . 

 " I will not let any one know where I go , " he answer . " I go to a place I like . every one have order to keep out of the way . I will not   be watch and star at . you know that ! " 

 " you seem to be out all day but I do not think it have do you harm I do not think so . the nurse say that you eat much more than you have ever do before . " 

 " perhaps , " say Colin , prompt by a sudden inspiration , " perhaps it be an unnatural appetite . " 

 " I do not think so , as your food seem to agree with you , " say Dr. Craven . " you be gain flesh rapidly and your color be well . " 

 " perhaps perhaps I be bloated and feverish , " say Colin , assume a discouraging air of gloom . " People who be not go to live be often different . " Dr. Craven shake his head . he be hold Colin 's wrist and he push up his sleeve and feel his arm . 

 " you be not feverish , " he say thoughtfully , " and such flesh as you have gain be healthy . if you can keep this up , my boy , we need not talk of die . your father will be happy to hear of this remarkable improvement . " 

 " I will not   have he tell ! " Colin break forth fiercely . " it will only disappoint he if I get bad again and I may get bad this very night . I might have a rag fever . I feel as if I might be begin to have one now . I will not   have letter write to my father I will not   I will not ! you be make I angry and you know that be bad for I . I feel hot already . I hate be write about and be talk over as much as I hate be star at ! " 

 " Hush - h ! my boy , " Dr. Craven soothe he . " nothing shall be write without your permission . you be too sensitive about thing . you must not undo the good which have be do . " 

 he say no more about write to Mr. Craven and when he see the nurse he privately warn she that such a possibility must not be mention to the patient . 

 " the boy be extraordinarily well , " he say . " his advance seem almost abnormal . but of course he be do now of his own free will what we could not make he do before . still , he excite himself very easily and nothing must be say to irritate he . " Mary and Colin be much alarmed and talk together anxiously . from this time date their plan of " play actin ' . " 

 " I may be oblige to have a tantrum , " say Colin regretfully . " I do not   want to have one and I be not miserable enough now to work myself into a big one . perhaps I could not   have one at all . that lump do not   come in my throat now and I keep think of nice thing instead of horrible one . but if they talk about write to my father I shall have to do something . " 

 he make up his mind to eat less , but unfortunately it be not possible to carry out this brilliant idea when he waken each morning with an amazing appetite and the table near his sofa be set with a breakfast of home - make bread and fresh butter , snow - white egg , raspberry jam and clot cream . Mary always breakfast with he and when they find themselves at the table particularly if there be delicate slice of sizzle ham send forth tempting odor from under a hot silver cover they would look into each other 's eye in desperation . 

 " I think we shall have to eat it all this morning , Mary , " Colin always end by say . " we can send away some of the lunch and a great deal of the dinner . " 

 but they never find they could send away anything and the highly polished condition of the empty plate return to the pantry awaken much comment . 

 " I do wish , " Colin would say also , " I do wish the slice of ham be thick , and one muffin each be not enough for any one . " 

 " it be enough for a person who be go to die , " answer Mary when first she hear this , " but it be not enough for a person who be go to live . I sometimes feel as if I could eat three when those nice fresh heather and gorse smell from the moor come pour in at the open window . " 

 the morning that Dickon after they have be enjoy themselves in the garden for about two hour go behind a big rosebush and bring forth two tin pail and reveal that one be full of rich new milk with cream on the top of it , and that the other hold cottage - make currant bun fold in a clean blue and white napkin , bun so carefully tuck in that they be still hot , there be a riot of surprised joyfulness . what a wonderful thing for Mrs. Sowerby to think of ! what a kind , clever woman she must be ! how good the bun be ! and what delicious fresh milk ! 

 " Magic be in she just as it be in Dickon , " say Colin . " it make she think of way to do thing nice thing . she be a magic person . tell she we be grateful , Dickon extremely grateful . " he be give to use rather grow - up phrase at time . he enjoy they . he like this so much that he improve upon it . 

 " tell she she have be most bounteous and our gratitude be extreme . " 

 and then forget his grandeur he fall to and stuff himself with bun and drank milk out of the pail in copious draught in the manner of any hungry little boy who have be take unusual exercise and breathe in moorland air and whose breakfast be more than two hour behind he . 

 this be the beginning of many agreeable incident of the same kind . they actually awake to the fact that as Mrs. Sowerby have fourteen people to provide food for she might not have enough to satisfy two extra appetite every day . so they ask she to let they send some of their shilling to buy thing . 

 Dickon make the stimulating discovery that in the wood in the park outside the garden where Mary have first find he pip to the wild creature there be a deep little hollow where you could build a sort of tiny oven with stone and roast potato and egg in it . roasted egg be a previously unknown luxury and very hot potato with salt and fresh butter in they be fit for a woodland king besides be deliciously satisfying . you could buy both potato and egg and eat as many as you like without feel as if you be take food out of the mouth of fourteen people . 

 every beautiful morning the Magic be work by the mystic circle under the plum - tree which provide a canopy of thickening green leaf after its brief blossom - time be end . after the ceremony Colin always take his walk exercise and throughout the day he exercise his newly find power at interval . each day he grow strong and could walk more steadily and cover more ground . and each day his belief in the Magic grow strong as well it might . he try one experiment after another as he feel himself gain strength and it be Dickon who show he the good thing of all . 

 " yesterday , " he say one morning after an absence , " I go to Thwaite for mother an ' near th ' blue cow Inn I seed Bob Haworth . he be the strong chap on th ' moor . he be the champion wrestler an ' he can jump high than any other chap an ' throw th ' hammer far . he be go all th ' way to Scotland for th ' sport some year . he be know I ever since I be a little ' un an ' he be a friendly sort an ' I ax he some question . Th ' gentry call he a athlete and I think o ' thee , Mester Colin , and I say , ' how do tha ' make tha ' muscle stick out that way , Bob ? do tha ' do anythin ' extra to make thysel ' so strong ? ' an ' he say ' well , yes , lad , I do . a strong man in a show that come to Thwaite once show I how to exercise my arm an ' leg an ' every muscle in my body . an ' I say , ' could a delicate chap make himself strong with them , Bob ? ' an ' he laugh an ' say , ' art tha ' th ' delicate chap ? ' an ' I say , ' no , but I know a young gentleman that be gettin ' well of a long illness an ' I wish I know some o ' they trick to tell he about . ' I do not   say no name an ' he do not   ask none . he be friendly same as I say an ' he stand up an ' show I good - natured like , an ' I imitate what he do till I know it by heart . " 

 Colin have be listen excitedly . 

 " can you show I ? " he cry . " will you ? " 

 " Aye , to be sure , " Dickon answer , get up . " but he say tha ' mun do them gentle at first an ' be careful not to tire thysel ' . rest in between time an ' take deep breath an ' do not   overdo . " 

 " I will be careful , " say Colin . " show I ! show I ! Dickon , you be the most magic boy in the world ! " 

 Dickon stand up on the grass and slowly go through a carefully practical but simple series of muscle exercise . Colin watch they with widen eye . he could do a few while he be sit down . presently he do a few gently while he stand upon his already steady foot . Mary begin to do they also . soot , who be watch the performance , become much disturbed and leave his branch and hop about restlessly because he could not do they too . 

 from that time the exercise be part of the day 's duty as much as the Magic be . it become possible for both Colin and Mary to do more of they each time they try , and such appetite be the result that but for the basket Dickon put down behind the bush each morning when he arrive they would have be lose . but the little oven in the hollow and Mrs. Sowerby 's bounty be so satisfying that Mrs. Medlock and the nurse and Dr. Craven become mystify again . you can trifle with your breakfast and seem to disdain your dinner if you be full to the brim with roasted egg and potato and richly froth new milk and oatcake and bun and heather honey and clot cream . 

 " they be eat next to nothing , " say the nurse . " they will die of starvation if they can not   be persuade to take some nourishment . and yet see how they look . " 

 " look ! " exclaim Mrs. Medlock indignantly . " eh ! I be moithere to death with they . they be a pair of young Satans . burst their jacket one day and the next turn up their nose at the good meal Cook can tempt they with . not a mouthful of that lovely young fowl and bread sauce do they set a fork into yesterday and the poor woman fair invent a pudding for they and back it be send . she almost cry . she be afraid she will be blame if they starve themselves into their graf . " 

 Dr. Craven come and look at Colin long and carefully , he wear an extremely worried expression when the nurse talk with he and show he the almost untouched tray of breakfast she have save for he to look at but it be even more worried when he sit down by Colin 's sofa and examine he . he have be call to London on business and have not see the boy for nearly two week . when young thing begin to gain health they gain it rapidly . the waxen tinge have leave , Colins skin and a warm rose show through it ; his beautiful eye be clear and the hollow under they and in his cheek and temple have fill out . his once dark , heavy lock have begin to look as if they spring healthily from his forehead and be soft and warm with life . his lip be full and of a normal color . in fact as an imitation of a boy who be a confirm invalid he be a disgraceful sight . Dr. Craven hold his chin in his hand and think he over . 

 " I be sorry to hear that you do not eat anything , " he say . " that will not do . you will lose all you have gain and you have gain amazingly . you eat so well a short time ago . " 

 " I tell you it be an unnatural appetite , " answer Colin . 

 Mary be sit on her stool nearby and she suddenly make a very queer sound which she try so violently to repress that she end by almost choke . 

 " what be the matter ? " say Dr. Craven , turn to look at she . 

 Mary become quite severe in her manner . 

 " it be something between a sneeze and a cough , " she reply with reproachful dignity , " and it get into my throat . " 

 " but , " she say afterward to Colin , " I could not   stop myself . it just burst out because all at once I could not   help remember that last big potato you eat and the way your mouth stretch when you bit through that thick lovely crust with jam and clot cream on it . " 

 " be there any way in which those child can get food secretly ? " Dr. Craven inquire of Mrs. Medlock . 

 " there be no way unless they dig it out of the earth or pick it off the tree , " Mrs. Medlock answer . " they stay out in the ground all day and see no one but each other . and if they want anything different to eat from what be send up to they they need only ask for it . " 

 " well , " say Dr. Craven , ' so long as go without food agree with they we need not disturb ourselves . the boy be a new creature . " 

 " so be the girl , " say Mrs. Medlock . " she be begin to be downright pretty since she be fill out and lose her ugly little sour look . her hair 's grow thick and healthy looking and she be get a bright color . the glum , ill - natured little thing she use to be and now she and Master Colin laugh together like a pair of crazy young one . perhaps they be grow fat on that . " 

 " perhaps they be , " say Dr. Craven . " let they laugh . " 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 the CURTAIN 

 and the secret garden bloom and bloom and every morning reveal new miracle . in the robin 's nest there be Eggs and the robin 's mate sit upon they keep they warm with her feathery little breast and careful wing . at first she be very nervous and the robin himself be indignantly watchful . even Dickon do not go near the close - grow corner in those day , but wait until by the quiet working of some mysterious spell he seem to have convey to the soul of the little pair that in the garden there be nothing which be not quite like themselves nothing which do not understand the wonderfulness of what be happen to they the immense , tender , terrible , heart - break beauty and solemnity of Eggs . if there have be one person in that garden who have not know through all his or her innermost be that if an Egg be take away or hurt the whole world would whirl round and crash through space and come to an end if there have be even one who do not feel it and act accordingly there could have be no happiness even in that golden springtime air . but they all know it and feel it and the robin and his mate know they know it . 

 at first the robin watch Mary and Colin with sharp anxiety . for some mysterious reason he know he need not watch Dickon . the first moment he set his dew - bright black eye on Dickon he know he be not a stranger but a sort of robin without beak or feather . he could speak robin   which be a quite distinct language not to be mistake for any other . to speak robin to a robin be like speak French to a Frenchman . Dickon always speak it to the robin himself , so the queer gibberish he use when he speak to human do not matter in the least . the robin think he speak this gibberish to they because they be not intelligent enough to understand feather speech . his movement also be robin . they never startle one by be sudden enough to seem dangerous or threatening . any robin could understand Dickon , so his presence be not even disturbing . 

 but at the outset it seem necessary to be on guard against the other two . in the first place the boy creature do not come into the garden on his leg . he be push in on a thing with wheel and the skin of wild animal be throw over he . that in itself be doubtful . then when he begin to stand up and move about he do it in a queer unaccustomed way and the other seem to have to help he . the robin use to secrete himself in a bush and watch this anxiously , his head tilt first on one side and then on the other . he think that the slow movement might mean that he be prepare to pounce , as cat do . when cat be prepare to pounce they creep over the ground very slowly . the robin talk this over with his mate a great deal for a few day but after that he decide not to speak of the subject because her terror be so great that he be afraid it might be injurious to the Eggs . 

 when the boy begin to walk by himself and even to move more quickly it be an immense relief . but for a long time or it seem a long time to the robin he be a source of some anxiety . he do not act as the other human do . he seem very fond of walk but he have a way of sit or lie down for a while and then get up in a disconcert manner to begin again . 

 one day the robin remember that when he himself have be make to learn to fly by his parent he have do much the same sort of thing . he have take short flight of a few yard and then have be oblige to rest . so it occur to he that this boy be learn to fly or rather to walk . he mention this to his mate and when he tell she that the Eggs would probably conduct themselves in the same way after they be fledge she be quite comfort and even become eagerly interested and derive great pleasure from watch the boy over the edge of her nest though she always think that the Eggs would be much cleverer and learn more quickly . but then she say indulgently that human be always more clumsy and slow than Eggs and most of they never seem really to learn to fly at all . you never meet they in the air or on tree - top . 

 after a while the boy begin to move about as the other do , but all three of the child at time do unusual thing . they would stand under the tree and move their arm and leg and head about in a way which be neither walk nor run nor sit down . they go through these movement at interval every day and the robin be never able to explain to his mate what they be do or tie to do . he could only say that he be sure that the Eggs would never flap about in such a manner ; but as the boy who could speak robin so fluently be do the thing with they , bird could be quite sure that the action be not of a dangerous nature . of course neither the robin nor his mate have ever hear of the champion wrestler , Bob Haworth , and his exercise for make the muscle stand out like lump . Robins be not like human being ; their muscle be always exercise from the first and so they develop themselves in a natural manner . if you have to fly about to find every meal you eat , your muscle do not become atrophied   atrophy mean waste away through want of use . 

 when the boy be walk and run about and dig and weed like the other , the nest in the corner be brood over by a great peace and content . fear for the Eggs become thing of the past . know that your Eggs be as safe as if they be lock in a bank vault and the fact that you could watch so many curious thing go on make set a most entertaining occupation . on wet day the Eggs ' mother sometimes feel even a little dull because the child do not come into the garden . 

 but even on wet day it could not be say that Mary and Colin be dull . one morning when the rain stream down unceasingly and Colin be begin to feel a little restive , as he be oblige to remain on his sofa because it be not safe to get up and walk about , Mary have an inspiration . 

 " now that I be a real boy , " Colin have say , " my leg and arm and all my body be so full of Magic that I can not   keep they still . they want to be do thing all the time . do you know that when I waken in the morning , Mary , when it be quite early and the bird be just shout outside and everything seem just shout for joy even the tree and thing we can not   really hear I feel as if I must jump out of bed and shout myself . if I do it , just think what would happen ! " 

 Mary giggle inordinately . 

 " the nurse would come run and Mrs. Medlock would come run and they would be sure you have go crazy and they would send for the doctor , " she say . 

 Colin giggle himself . he could see how they would all look how horrify by his outbreak and how amazed to see he stand upright . 

 " I wish my father would come home , " he say . " I want to tell he myself . I be always think about it but we could not   go on like this much long . I can not   stand lie still and pretend , and besides I look too different . I wish it be not   rain today . " 

 it be then Mistress Mary have her inspiration . 

 " Colin , " she begin mysteriously , " do you know how many room there be in this house ? " 

 " about a thousand , I suppose , " he answer . 

 " there be about a hundred no one ever go into , " say Mary . " and one rainy day I go and look into ever so many of they . no one ever know , though Mrs. Medlock nearly find I out . I lose my way when I be come back and I stop at the end of your corridor . that be the second time I hear you cry . " 

 Colin start up on his sofa . 

 " a hundred room no one go into , " he say . " it sound almost like a secret garden . suppose we go and look at they . wheel I in my chair and nobody would know we go . " 

 " that be what I be think , " say Mary . " no one would dare to follow we . there be gallery where you could run . we could do our exercise . there be a little indian room where there be a cabinet full of ivory elephant . there be all sort of room . " 

 " ring the bell , " say Colin . 

 when the nurse come in he give his order . 

 " I want my chair , " he say . " Miss Mary and I be go to look at the part of the house which be not use . John can push I as far as the picture - gallery because there be some stair . then he must go away and leave we alone until I send for he again . " 

 Rainy day lose their terror that morning . when the footman have wheel the chair into the picture - gallery and leave the two together in obedience to order , Colin and Mary look at each other delight . as soon as Mary have make sure that John be really on his way back to his own quarter below stair , Colin get out of his chair . 

 " I be go to run from one end of the gallery to the other , " he say , " and then I be go to jump and then we will do Bob Haworth 's exercise . " 

 and they do all these thing and many other . they look at the portrait and find the plain little girl dress in green brocade and hold the parrot on her finger . 

 " all these , " say Colin , " must be my relation . they live a long time ago . that parrot one , I believe , be one of my great , great , great , great aunt . she look rather like you , Mary not as you look now but as you look when you come here . now you be a great deal fat and well look . " 

 " so be you , " say Mary , and they both laugh . 

 they go to the indian room and amuse themselves with the ivory elephant . they find the rose - color brocade boudoir and the hole in the cushion the mouse have leave , but the mouse have grow up and run away and the hole be empty . they see more room and make more discovery than Mary have make on her first pilgrimage . they find new corridor and corner and flight of step and new old picture they like and weird old thing they do not know the use of . it be a curiously entertaining morning and the feeling of wander about in the same house with other people but at the same time feel as if one be mile away from they be a fascinating thing . 

 " I be glad we come , " Colin say . " I never know I live in such a big queer old place . I like it . we will ramble about every rainy day . we shall always be find new queer corner and thing . " 

 that morning they have find among other thing such good appetite that when they return to Colin 's room it be not possible to send the luncheon away untouched . 

 when the nurse carry the tray down - stair she slap it down on the kitchen dresser so that Mrs. Loomis , the cook , could see the highly polished dish and plate . 

 " look at that ! " she say . " this be a house of mystery , and those two child be the great mystery in it . " 

 " if they keep that up every day , " say the strong young footman John , " there would be small wonder that he weigh twice as much to - day as he do a month ago . I should have to give up my place in time , for fear of do my muscle an injury . " 

 that afternoon Mary notice that something new have happen in Colin 's room . she have notice it the day before but have say nothing because she think the change might have be make by chance . she say nothing today but she sit and look fixedly at the picture over the mantel . she could look at it because the curtain have be draw aside . that be the change she notice . 

 " I know what you want I to tell you , " say Colin , after she have star a few minute . " I always know when you want I to tell you something . you be wonder why the curtain be draw back . I be go to keep it like that . " 

 " why ? " ask Mary . 

 " because it do not   make I angry any more to see her laughing . I waken when it be bright moonlight two night ago and feel as if the Magic be fill the room and make everything so splendid that I could not   lie still . I get up and look out of the window . the room be quite light and there be a patch of moonlight on the curtain and somehow that make I go and pull the cord . she look right down at I as if she be laugh because she be glad I be stand there . it make I like to look at she . I want to see she laugh like that all the time . I think she must have be a sort of magic person perhaps . " 

 " you be so like she now , " say Mary , " that sometimes I think perhaps you be her ghost make into a boy . " 

 that idea seem to impress Colin . he think it over and then answer she slowly . 

 " if I be her ghost my father would be fond of I . " 

 " do you want he to be fond of you ? " inquire Mary . 

 " I use to hate it because he be not fond of I . if he grow fond of I I think I should tell he about the Magic . it might make he more cheerful . " 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 " IT be mother ! " 

 their belief in the Magic be an abide thing . after the morning 's incantation Colin sometimes give they Magic lecture . 

 " I like to do it , " he explain , " because when I grow up and make great scientific discovery I shall be oblige to lecture about they and so this be practise . I can only give short lecture now because I be very young , and besides Ben Weatherstaff would feel as if he be in church and he would go to sleep . " 

 " Th ' good thing about lecturin ' , " say Ben , " be that a chap can get up an ' say aught he please an ' no other chap can answer he back . I would not   be agen ' lecturin ' a bit mysel ' sometimes . " 

 but when Colin hold forth under his tree old Ben fix devour eye on he and keep they there . he look he over with critical affection . it be not so much the lecture which interest he as the leg which look straighter and strong each day , the boyish head which hold itself up so well , the once sharp chin and hollow cheek which have fill and round out and the eye which have begin to hold the light he remember in another pair . sometimes when Colin feel Ben 's earnest gaze mean that he be much impressed he wonder what he be reflect on and once when he have seem quite entrance he question he . 

 " what be you think about , Ben Weatherstaff ? " he ask . 

 " I be thinkin ' " answer Ben , " as I would warrant tha 's , go up three or four pound this week . I be lookin ' at tha ' calve an ' tha ' shoulder . I would like to get thee on a pair o ' scale . " 

 " it be the Magic and and Mrs. Sowerby 's bun and milk and thing , " say Colin . " you see the scientific experiment have succeed . " 

 that morning Dickon be too late to hear the lecture . when he come he be ruddy with run and his funny face look more twinkle than usual . as they have a good deal of weed to do after the rain they fall to work . they always have plenty to do after a warm deep sink rain . the moisture which be good for the flower be also good for the weed which thrust up tiny blade of grass and point of leaf which must be pull up before their root take too firm hold . Colin be as good at weed as any one in these day and he could lecture while he be do it . " the Magic work well when you work , yourself , " he say this morning . " you can feel it in your bone and muscle . I be go to read book about bone and muscle , but I be go to write a book about Magic . I be make it up now . I keep find out thing . " 

 it be not very long after he have say this that he lay down his trowel and stand up on his foot . he have be silent for several minute and they have see that he be think out lecture , as he often do . when he drop his trowel and stand upright it seem to Mary and Dickon as if a sudden strong thought have make he do it . he stretch himself out to his tall height and he throw out his arm exultantly . color glow in his face and his strange eye widen with joyfulness . all at once he have realize something to the full . 

 " Mary ! Dickon ! " he cry . " just look at I ! " 

 they stop their weed and look at he . 

 " do you remember that first morning you bring I in here ? " he demand . 

 Dickon be look at he very hard . be an animal charmer he could see more thing than most people could and many of they be thing he never talk about . he see some of they now in this boy . " Aye , that we do , " he answer . 

 Mary look hard too , but she say nothing . 

 " just this minute , " say Colin , " all at once I remember it myself when I look at my hand dig with the trowel and I have to stand up on my foot to see if it be real . and it be real ! I be well I be well ! " 

 " Aye , that th ' art ! " say Dickon . 

 " I be well ! I be well ! " say Colin again , and his face go quite red all over . 

 he have know it before in a way , he have hop it and feel it and think about it , but just at that minute something have rush all through he a sort of rapturous belief and realization and it have be so strong that he could not help call out . 

 " I shall live forever and ever and ever ! " he cry grandly . " I shall find out thousand and thousand of thing . I shall find out about people and creature and everything that grow like Dickon and I shall never stop make Magic . I be well ! I be well ! I feel I feel as if I want to shout out something something thankful , joyful ! " 

 Ben Weatherstaff , who have be work near a rose - bush , glance round at he . 

 " Tha ' might sing th ' doxology , " he suggest in his dry grunt . he have no opinion of the Doxology and he do not make the suggestion with any particular reverence . 

 but Colin be of an explore mind and he know nothing about the Doxology . 

 " what be that ? " he inquire . 

 " Dickon can sing it for thee , I will warrant , " reply Ben Weatherstaff . 

 Dickon answer with his all - perceive animal charmer 's smile . 

 " they sing it I ' church , " he say . " mother say she believe th ' skylark sing it when they get up I ' th ' mornin ' . " 

 " if she say that , it must be a nice song , " Colin answer . " I have   never be in a church myself . I be always too ill . sing it , Dickon . I want to hear it . " 

 Dickon be quite simple and unaffected about it . he understand what Colin feel well than Colin do himself . he understand by a sort of instinct so natural that he do not know it be understand . he pull off his cap and look round still smile . 

 " Tha ' must take off tha ' cap , " he say to Colin , " an ' so mun tha ' , Ben an ' tha ' mun stand up , tha ' know . " 

 Colin take off his cap and the sun shine on and warm his thick hair as he watch Dickon intently . Ben Weatherstaff scramble up from his knee and bar his head too with a sort of puzzled half - resentful look on his old face as if he do not   know exactly why he be do this remarkable thing . 

 Dickon stand out among the tree and rose - bush and begin to sing in quite a simple matter - of - fact way and in a nice strong boy voice : 

 " praise God from whom all blessing flow , 
 praise he all creature here below , 
 praise he above ye Heavenly Host , 
 Praise Father , Son , and Holy Ghost . 
  amen . " 
 when he have finish , Ben Weatherstaff be stand quite still with his jaw set obstinately but with a disturbed look in his eye fix on Colin . Colin 's face be thoughtful and appreciative . 

 " it be a very nice song , " he say . " I like it . perhaps it mean just what I mean when I want to shout out that I be thankful to the Magic . " he stop and think in a puzzled way . " perhaps they be both the same thing . how can we know the exact name of everything ? sing it again , Dickon . let we try , Mary . I want to sing it , too . it be my song . how do it begin ? ' praise God from whom all blessing flow ' ? " 

 and they sing it again , and Mary and Colin lift their voice as musically as they could and Dickon 's swell quite loud and beautiful and at the second line Ben Weatherstaff raspingly clear his throat and at the third line he join in with such vigor that it seem almost savage and when the " amen " come to an end Mary observe that the very same thing have happen to he which have happen when he find out that Colin be not a cripple his chin be twitch and he be star and wink and his leathery old cheek be wet . 

 " I never seed no sense in th ' doxology afore , " he say hoarsely , " but I may change my mind I ' time . I should say tha'd go up five pound this week Mester Colin five on them ! " 

 Colin be look across the garden at something attract his attention and his expression have become a startled one . 

 " who be come in here ? " he say quickly . " who be it ? " 

 the door in the ivied wall have be push gently open and a woman have enter . she have come in with the last line of their song and she have stand still listen and look at they . with the ivy behind she , the sunlight drift through the tree and dapple her long blue cloak , and her nice fresh face smile across the greenery she be rather like a softly color illustration in one of Colin 's book . she have wonderful affectionate eye which seem to take everything in all of they , even Ben Weatherstaff and the " creature " and every flower that be in bloom . unexpectedly as she have appear , not one of they feel that she be an intruder at all . Dickon 's eye light like lamp . 

 " it be mother that be who it be ! " he cry and go across the grass at a run . 

 Colin begin to move toward she , too , and Mary go with he . they both feel their pulse beat fast . 

 " it be mother ! " Dickon say again when they meet halfway . " I know tha ' want to see she an ' I tell she where th ' door be hide . " 

 Colin hold out his hand with a sort of flushed royal shyness but his eye quite devour her face . 

 " even when I be ill I want to see you , " he say , " you and Dickon and the secret garden . I would never want to see any one or anything before . " 

 the sight of his uplifted face bring about a sudden change in her own . she flush and the corner of her mouth shake and a mist seem to sweep over her eye . 

 " eh ! dear lad ! " she break out tremulously . " eh ! dear lad ! " as if she have not know she be go to say it . she do not say , " Mester Colin , " but just " dear lad " quite suddenly . she might have say it to Dickon in the same way if she have see something in his face which touch she . Colin like it . 

 " be you surprised because I be so well ? " he ask . she put her hand on his shoulder and smile the mist out of her eye . " Aye , that I be ! " she say ; " but tha'rt so like thy mother tha ' make my heart jump . " 

 " do you think , " say Colin a little awkwardly , " that will make my father like I ? " 

 " Aye , for sure , dear lad , " she answer and she give his shoulder a soft quick pat . " he mun come home he mun come home . " 

 " Susan Sowerby , " say Ben Weatherstaff , get close to she . " look at th ' lad 's leg , wilt tha ' ? they be like drumstick I ' stockin ' two month ' ago an ' I hear folk tell as they be bandy an ' knock - kneed both at th ' same time . look at them now ! " 

 Susan Sowerby laugh a comfortable laugh . 

 " they be go to be fine strong lad 's leg in a bit , " she say . " let he go on playin ' an ' workin ' in the garden an ' eatin ' hearty an ' drinkin ' plenty o ' good sweet milk an ' there will not be a fine pair I ' yorkshire , thank God for it . " 

 she put both hand on Mistress Mary 's shoulder and look her little face over in a motherly fashion . 

 " an ' thee , too ! " she say . " Tha'rt grow near as hearty as our ' Lisabeth Ellen . I will warrant tha'rt like thy mother too . our Martha tell I as Mrs. Medlock hear she be a pretty woman . Tha'lt be like a blush rise when tha ' grow up , my little lass , bless thee . " 

 she do not mention that when Martha come home on her " day out " and describe the plain sallow child she have say that she have no confidence whatever in what Mrs. Medlock have hear . " it do not   stand to reason that a pretty woman could be th ' mother o ' such a fou ' little lass , " she have add obstinately . 

 Mary have not have time to pay much attention to her change face . she have only know that she look " different " and seem to have a great deal more hair and that it be grow very fast . but remember her pleasure in look at the Mem Sahib in the past she be glad to hear that she might some day look like she . 

 Susan Sowerby go round their garden with they and be tell the whole story of it and show every bush and tree which have come alive . Colin walk on one side of she and Mary on the other . each of they keep look up at her comfortable rosy face , secretly curious about the delightful feeling she give they a sort of warm , support feeling . it seem as if she understand they as Dickon understand his " creature . " she stoop over the flower and talk about they as if they be child . Soot follow she and once or twice caw at she and fly upon her shoulder as if it be Dickon 's . when they tell she about the robin and the first flight of the young one she laugh a motherly little mellow laugh in her throat . 

 " I suppose learnin ' them to fly be like learnin ' child to walk , but I be fear I should be all in a worrit if mine have wing instead o ' leg , " she say . 

 it be because she seem such a wonderful woman in her nice moorland cottage way that at last she be tell about the Magic . 

 " do you believe in Magic ? " ask Colin after he have explain about indian fakir . " I do hope you do . " 

 " that I do , lad , " she answer . " I never know it by that name but what do th ' name matter ? I warrant they call it a different name I ' France an ' a different one I ' Germany . th ' same thing as set th ' seed swellin ' an ' th ' sun shinin ' make thee a well lad an ' it be th ' Good Thing . it be not   like we poor fool as think it matter if we be call out of our name . Th ' Big Good Thing do not   stop to worrit , bless thee . it go on makin ' world by th ' million world like we . never thee stop believin ' in th ' Big Good Thing an ' knowin ' th ' world 's full of it an ' call it what tha ' like . tha ' wert singin ' to it when I come into th ' garden . " 

 " I feel so joyful , " say Colin , open his beautiful strange eye at she . " suddenly I feel how different I be how strong my arm and leg be , you know and how I could dig and stand and I jump up and want to shout out something to anything that would listen . " 

 " Th ' Magic listen when tha ' sing th ' Doxology . it would ha ' listen to anything tha'd sing . it be th ' joy that matter . eh ! lad , lad what be name to th ' Joy Maker , " and she give his shoulder a quick soft pat again . 

 she have pack a basket which hold a regular feast this morning , and when the hungry hour come and Dickon bring it out from its hiding place , she sit down with they under their tree and watch they devour their food , laugh and quite gloating over their appetite . she be full of fun and make they laugh at all sort of odd thing . she tell they story in broad Yorkshire and teach they new word . she laugh as if she could not help it when they tell she of the increase difficulty there be in pretend that Colin be still a fretful invalid . 

 " you see we can not   help laugh nearly all the time when we be together , " explain Colin . " and it do not   sound ill at all . we try to choke it back but it will burst out and that sound bad than ever . " 

 " there be one thing that come into my mind so often , " say Mary , " and I can scarcely ever hold in when I think of it suddenly . I keep think suppose Colin 's face should get to look like a full moon . it be not   like one yet but he get a tiny bit fatter every day and suppose some morning it should look like one what should we do ! " 

 " bless we all , I can see tha ' have a good bit o ' play actin ' to do , " say Susan Sowerby . " but tha ' will not   have to keep it up much long . Mester Craven'll come home . " 

 " do you think he will ? " ask Colin . " why ? " 

 Susan Sowerby chuckle softly . 

 " I suppose it ' ud nigh break thy heart if he find out before tha ' tell he in tha ' own way , " she say . " Tha 's lay awake night plannin ' it . " 

 " I could not   bear any one else to tell he , " say Colin . " I think about different way every day , I think now I just want to run into his room . " " that would be a fine start for he , " say Susan Sowerby . " I would like to see his face , lad . I would that ! he mun come back that he mun . " 

 one of the thing they talk of be the visit they be to make to her cottage . they plan it all . they be to drive over the moor and lunch out of door among the heather . they would see all the twelve child and Dickon 's garden and would not come back until they be tired . 

 Susan Sowerby get up at last to return to the house and Mrs. Medlock . it be time for Colin to be wheel back also . but before he get into his chair he stand quite close to Susan and fix his eye on she with a kind of bewildered adoration and he suddenly catch hold of the fold of her blue cloak and hold it fast . 

 " you be just what I what I want , " he say . " I wish you be my mother as well as Dickon 's ! " 

 all at once Susan Sowerby bend down and draw he with her warm arm close against the bosom under the blue cloak as if he have be Dickon 's brother . the quick mist sweep over her eye . 

 " eh ! dear lad ! " she say . " thy own mother 's in this ' ere very garden , I do believe . she couldna ' keep out of it . Thy father mun come back to thee he mun ! " 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 in the GARDEN 

 in each century since the beginning of the world wonderful thing have be discover . in the last century more amazing thing be find out than in any century before . in this new century hundred of thing still more astounding will be bring to light . at first people refuse to believe that a strange new thing can be do , then they begin to hope it can be do , then they see it can be do then it be do and all the world wonder why it be not do century ago . one of the new thing people begin to find out in the last century be that thought just mere thought be as powerful as electric battery as good for one as sunlight be , or as bad for one as poison . to let a sad thought or a bad one get into your mind be as dangerous as let a scarlet fever germ get into your body . if you let it stay there after it have get in you may never get over it as long as you live . 

 so long as Mistress Mary 's mind be full of disagreeable thought about her dislike and sour opinion of people and her determination not to be please by or interested in anything , she be a yellow - faced , sickly , bored and wretched child . circumstance , however , be very kind to she , though she be not at all aware of it . they begin to push she about for her own good . when her mind gradually fill itself with robin , and moorland cottage crowd with child , with queer crab old gardener and common little Yorkshire housemaid , with springtime and with secret garden come alive day by day , and also with a moor boy and his " creature , " there be no room leave for the disagreeable thought which affect her liver and her digestion and make she yellow and tired . 

 so long as Colin shut himself up in his room and think only of his fear and weakness and his detestation of people who look at he and reflect hourly on hump and early death , he be a hysterical half - crazy little hypochondriac who know nothing of the sunshine and the spring and also do not know that he could get well and could stand upon his foot if he try to do it . when new beautiful thought begin to push out the old hideous one , life begin to come back to he , his blood run healthily through his vein and strength pour into he like a flood . his scientific experiment be quite practical and simple and there be nothing weird about it at all . much more surprising thing can happen to any one who , when a disagreeable or discouraged thought come into his mind , just have the sense to remember in time and push it out by put in an agreeable determinedly courageous one . two thing can not be in one place . 

 " where , you tend a rose , my lad , 
 a thistle can not grow . " 
 while the secret garden be come alive and two child be come alive with it , there be a man wander about certain far - away beautiful place in the norwegian fiord and the valley and mountain of Switzerland and he be a man who for ten year have keep his mind fill with dark and heart - break thinking . he have not be courageous ; he have never try to put any other thought in the place of the dark one . he have wander by blue lake and think they ; he have lain on mountain - side with sheet of deep blue gentian bloom all about he and flower breath fill all the air and he have think they . a terrible sorrow have fall upon he when he have be happy and he have let his soul fill itself with blackness and have refuse obstinately to allow any rift of light to pierce through . he have forget and desert his home and his duty . when he travel about , darkness so brood over he that the sight of he be a wrong do to other people because it be as if he poison the air about he with gloom . Most stranger think he must be either half mad or a man with some hide crime on his soul . he , be a tall man with a draw face and crooked shoulder and the name he always enter on hotel register be , " Archibald Craven , Misselthwaite Manor , Yorkshire , England . " 

 he have travel far and wide since the day he see Mistress Mary in his study and tell she she might have she " bit of earth . " he have be in the most beautiful place in Europe , though he have remain nowhere more than a few day . he have choose the quiet and remotest spot . he have be on the top of mountain whose head be in the cloud and have look down on other mountain when the sun rise and touch they with such light as make it seem as if the world be just be bear . 

 but the light have never seem to touch himself until one day when he realize that for the first time in ten year a strange thing have happen . he be in a wonderful valley in the Austrian Tyrol and he have be walk alone through such beauty as might have lift , any man 's soul out of shadow . he have walk a long way and it have not lift his . but at last he have feel tired and have throw himself down to rest on a carpet of moss by a stream . it be a clear little stream which run quite merrily along on its narrow way through the luscious damp greenness . sometimes it make a sound rather like very low laughter as it bubble over and round stone . he see bird come and dip their head to drink in it and then flick their wing and fly away . it seem like a thing alive and yet its tiny voice make the stillness seem deeply . the valley be very , very still . 

 as he sit gaze into the clear running of the water , Archibald Craven gradually feel his mind and body both grow quiet , as quiet as the valley itself . he wonder if he be go to sleep , but he be not . he sit and gaze at the sunlit water and his eye begin to see thing grow at its edge . there be one lovely mass of blue forget - I - not grow so close to the stream that its leaf be wet and at these he find himself look as he remember he have look at such thing year ago . he be actually think tenderly how lovely it be and what wonder of blue its hundred of little blossom be . he do not know that just that simple thought be slowly fill his mind fill and fill it until other thing be softly push aside . it be as if a sweet clear spring have begin to rise in a stagnant pool and have rise and rise until at last it sweep the dark water away . but of course he do not think of this himself . he only know that the valley seem to grow quieter and quieter as he sit and star at the bright delicate blueness . he do not know how long he sit there or what be happen to he , but at last he move as if he be awakening and he get up slowly and stand on the moss carpet , draw a long , deep , soft breath and wonder at himself . something seem to have be unbind and release in he , very quietly . 

 " what be it ? " he say , almost in a whisper , and he pass his hand over his forehead . " I almost feel as if I be alive ! " 

 I do not know enough about the wonderfulness of undiscovered thing to be able to explain how this have happen to he . neither do any one else yet . he do not understand at all himself but he remember this strange hour month afterward when he be at Misselthwaite again and he find out quite by accident that on this very day Colin have cry out as he go into the secret garden : 

 " I be go to live forever and ever and ever ! " 

 the singular calmness remain with he the rest of the evening and he sleep a new reposeful sleep ; but it be not with he very long . he do not know that it could be keep . by the next night he have open the door wide to his dark thought and they have come troop and rush back . he leave the valley and go on his wandering way again . but , strange as it seem to he , there be minute sometimes half - hour when , without his knowing why , the black burden seem to lift itself again and he know he be a live man and not a dead one . slowly slowly for no reason that he know of he be " come alive " with the garden . 

 as the golden summer change into the deep golden autumn he go to the Lake of Como . there he find the loveliness of a dream . he spend his day upon the crystal blueness of the lake or he walk back into the soft thick verdure of the hill and tramp until he be tired so that he might sleep . but by this time he have begin to sleep well , he know , and his dream have cease to be a terror to he . 

 " perhaps , " he think , " my body be grow strong . " 

 it be grow strong but because of the rare peaceful hour when his thought be change his soul be slowly grow strong , too . he begin to think of Misselthwaite and wonder if he should not go home . now and then he wonder vaguely about his boy and ask himself what he should feel when he go and stand by the carved four - post bed again and look down at the sharply chisel ivory - white face while it sleep and , the black lash rim so startlingly the close - shut eye . he shrink from it . 

 one marvel of a day he have walk so far that when he return the moon be high and full and all the world be purple shadow and silver . the stillness of lake and shore and wood be so wonderful that he do not go into the villa he live in . he walk down to a little bowered terrace at the water 's edge and sit upon a seat and breathe in all the heavenly scent of the night . he feel the strange calmness steal over he and it grow deep and deep until he fall asleep . 

 he do not know when he fall asleep and when he begin to dream ; his dream be so real that he do not feel as if he be dream . he remember afterward how intensely wide awake and alert he have think he be . he think that as he sit and breathe in the scent of the late rose and listen to the lapping of the water at his foot he hear a voice call . it be sweet and clear and happy and far away . it seem very far , but he hear it as distinctly as if it have be at his very side . 

 " Archie ! Archie ! Archie ! " it say , and then again , sweet and clear than before , " Archie ! Archie ! " 

 he think he spring to his foot not even startle . it be such a real voice and it seem so natural that he should hear it . 

 " Lilias ! Lilias ! " he answer . " Lilias ! where be you ? " 

 " in the garden , " it come back like a sound from a golden flute . " in the garden ! " 

 and then the dream end . but he do not awaken . he sleep soundly and sweetly all through the lovely night . when he do awake at last it be brilliant morning and a servant be stand star at he . he be an italian servant and be accustom , as all the servant of the villa be , to accept without question any strange thing his foreign master might do . no one ever know when he would go out or come in or where he would choose to sleep or if he would roam about the garden or lie in the boat on the lake all night . the man hold a salver with some letter on it and he wait quietly until Mr. Craven take they . when he have go away Mr. Craven sit a few moment hold they in his hand and look at the lake . his strange calm be still upon he and something more a lightness as if the cruel thing which have be do have not happen as he think as if something have change . he be remember the dream the real real dream . 

 " in the garden ! " he say , wonder at himself . " in the garden ! but the door be lock and the key be bury deep . " 

 when he glance at the letter a few minute later he see that the one lie at the top of the rest be an english letter and come from Yorkshire . it be direct in a plain woman 's hand but it be not a hand he know . he open it , scarcely think of the writer , but the first word attract his attention at once . 


 " Dear Sir : 

 I be Susan Sowerby that make bold to speak to you once on the moor . it be about Miss Mary I speak . I will make bold to speak again . please , sir , I would come home if I be you . I think you would be glad to come and if you will excuse I , sir I think your lady would ask you to come if she be here . 

 your obedient servant , 
  Susan Sowerby . " 

 Mr. Craven read the letter twice before he put it back in its envelope . he keep think about the dream . 

 " I will go back to Misselthwaite , " he say . " yes , I will go at once . " 

 and he go through the garden to the villa and order Pitcher to prepare for his return to England . 


 in a few day he be in Yorkshire again , and on his long railroad journey he find himself think of his boy as he have never think in all the ten year past . during those year he have only wish to forget he . now , though he do not intend to think about he , memory of he constantly drift into his mind . he remember the black day when he have rave like a madman because the child be alive and the mother be dead . he have refuse to see it , and when he have go to look at it at last it have be , such a weak wretched thing that everyone have be sure it would die in a few day . but to the surprise of those who take care of it the day pass and it live and then everyone believe it would be a deformed and crippled creature . 

 he have not mean to be a bad father , but he have not feel like a father at all . he have supply doctor and nurse and luxury , but he have shrink from the mere thought of the boy and have bury himself in his own misery . the first time after a year 's absence he return to Misselthwaite and the small miserable look thing languidly and indifferently lift to his face the great gray eye with black lash round they , so like and yet so horribly unlike the happy eye he have adore , he could not bear the sight of they and turn away pale as death . after that he scarcely ever see he except when he be asleep , and all he know of he be that he be a confirmed invalid , with a vicious , hysterical , half - insane temper . he could only be keep from fury dangerous to himself by be give his own way in every detail . 

 all this be not an uplifting thing to recall , but as the train whirl he through mountain pass and golden plain the man who be " come alive " begin to think in a new way and he think long and steadily and deeply . 

 " perhaps I have be all wrong for ten year , " he say to himself . " ten year be a long time . it may be too late to do anything quite too late . what have I be think of ! " 

 of course this be the wrong magic to begin by say " too late . " even Colin could have tell he that . but he know nothing of Magic either black or white . this he have yet to learn . he wonder if Susan Sowerby have take courage and write to he only because the motherly creature have realize that the boy be much bad be fatally ill . if he have not be under the spell of the curious calmness which have take possession of he he would have be more wretched than ever . but the calm have bring a sort of courage and hope with it . instead of give way to thought of the bad he actually find he be try to believe in well thing . 

 " could it be possible that she see that I may be able to do he good and control he ? " he think . " I will go and see she on my way to Misselthwaite . " 

 but when on his way across the moor he stop the carriage at the cottage , seven or eight child who be play about gather in a group and bob seven or eight friendly and polite curtsy tell he that their mother have go to the other side of the moor early in the morning to help a woman who have a new baby . " our Dickon , " they volunteer , be over at the Manor work in one of the garden where he go several day each week . 

 Mr. Craven look over the collection of sturdy little body and round red - cheeked face , each one grin in its own particular way , and he awake to the fact that they be a healthy likable lot . he smile at their friendly grin and take a golden sovereign from his pocket and give it to " our ' Lizabeth Ellen " who be the old . 

 " if you divide that into eight part there will be half a crown for each of , you , " he say . 

 then amid grin and chuckle and bob of curtsy he drive away , leave ecstasy and nudging elbow and little jump of joy behind . 

 the drive across the wonderfulness of the moor be a soothe thing . why do it seem to give he a sense of homecoming which he have be sure he could never feel again that sense of the beauty of land and sky and purple bloom of distance and a warming of the heart at drawing , near to the great old house which have hold those of his blood for six hundred year ? how he have drive away from it the last time , shudder to think of its close room and the boy lie in the four - post bed with the brocade hanging . be it possible that perhaps he might find he change a little for the well and that he might overcome his shrinking from he ? how real that dream have be how wonderful and clear the voice which call back to he , " in the garden in the garden ! " 

 " I will try to find the key , " he say . " I will try to open the door . I must though I do not   know why . " 

 when he arrive at the Manor the servant who receive he with the usual ceremony notice that he look well and that he do not go to the remote room where he usually live attend by Pitcher . he go into the library and send for Mrs. Medlock . she come to he somewhat excited and curious and fluster . 

 " how be Master Colin , Medlock ? " he inquire . " well , sir , " Mrs. Medlock answer , " he be he be different , in a manner of speak . " 

 " bad ? " he suggest . 

 Mrs. Medlock really be flushed . 

 " well , you see , sir , " she try to explain , " neither Dr. Craven , nor the nurse , nor I can exactly make he out . " 

 " why be that ? " 

 " to tell the truth , sir , Master Colin might be well and he might be change for the bad . his appetite , sir , be past understanding and his way " 

 " have he become more more peculiar ? " her master , ask , knit his brow anxiously . 

 " that be it , sir . he be grow very peculiar when you compare he with what he use to be . he use to eat nothing and then suddenly he begin to eat something enormous and then he stop again all at once and the meal be send back just as they use to be . you never know , sir , perhaps , that out of door he never would let himself be take . the thing we have   go through to get he to go out in his chair would leave a body tremble like a leaf . he would throw himself into such a state that Dr. Craven say he could not   be responsible for force he . well , sir , just without warn not long after one of his bad tantrum he suddenly insist on be take out every day by Miss Mary and Susan Sowerby 's boy Dickon that could push his chair . he take a fancy to both Miss Mary and Dickon , and Dickon bring his tame animal , and , if you will credit it , sir , out of door he will stay from morning until night . " 

 " how do he look ? " be the next question . 

 " if he take his food natural , sir , you would think he be put on flesh but we be afraid it may be a sort of bloat . he laugh sometimes in a queer way when he be alone with Miss Mary . he never use to laugh at all . Dr. Craven be come to see you at once , if you will allow he . he never be as puzzle in his life . " 

 " where be Master Colin now ? " Mr. Craven ask . 

 " in the garden , sir . he be always in the garden though not a human creature be allow to go near for fear they will look at he . " 

 Mr. Craven scarcely hear her last word . 

 " in the garden , " he say , and after he have send Mrs. Medlock away he stand and repeat it again and again . " in the garden ! " 

 he have to make an effort to bring himself back to the place he be stand in and when he feel he be on earth again he turn and go out of the room . he take his way , as Mary have do , through the door in the shrubbery and among the laurel and the fountain bed . the fountain be play now and be encircle by bed of brilliant autumn flower . he cross the lawn and turn into the Long Walk by the ivied wall . he do not walk quickly , but slowly , and his eye be on the path . he feel as if he be be draw back to the place he have so long forsaken , and he do not know why . as he draw near to it his step become still more slow . he know where the door be even though the ivy hang thick over it but he do not know exactly where it lie that bury key . 

 so he stop and stand still , look about he , and almost the moment after he have pause he start and listen ask himself if he be walk in a dream . 

 the ivy hang thick over the door , the key be bury under the shrub , no human being have pass that portal for ten lonely year and yet inside the garden there be sound . they be the sound of run scuffle foot seem to chase round and round under the tree , they be strange sound of lower suppress voice exclamation and smother joyous cry . it seem actually like the laughter of young thing , the uncontrollable laughter of child who be try not to be hear but who in a moment or so as their excitement mount would burst forth . what in heaven 's name be he dream of what in heaven 's name do he hear ? be he lose his reason and think he hear thing which be not for human ear ? be it that the far clear voice have mean ? 

 and then the moment come , the uncontrollable moment when the sound forget to hush themselves . the foot run fast and fast they be near the garden door there be quick strong young breathing and a wild outbreak of laugh show which could not be contain and the door in the wall be fling wide open , the sheet of ivy swing back , and a boy burst through it at full speed and , without see the outsider , dash almost into his arm . 

 Mr. Craven have extend they just in time to save he from fall as a result of his unseeing dash against he , and when he hold he away to look at he in amazement at his be there he truly gasp for breath . 

 he be a tall boy and a handsome one . he be glow with life and his running have send splendid color leap to his face . he throw the thick hair back from his forehead and lift a pair of strange gray eye eye full of boyish laughter and rim with black lash like a fringe . it be the eye which make Mr. Craven gasp for breath . " who what ? who ! " he stammer . 

 this be not what Colin have expect this be not what he have plan . he have never think of such a meeting . and yet to come dash out win a race perhaps it be even well . he draw himself up to his very tall . Mary , who have be run with he and have dash through the door too , believe that he manage to make himself look tall than he have ever look before inch tall . 

 " Father , " he say , " I be Colin . you can not   believe it . I scarcely can myself . I be Colin . " 

 like Mrs. Medlock , he do not understand what his father mean when he say hurriedly : 

 " in the garden ! in the garden ! " 

 " yes , " hurry on Colin . " it be the garden that do it and Mary and Dickon and the creature and the Magic . no one know . we keep it to tell you when you come . I be well , I can beat Mary in a race . I be go to be an athlete . " 

 he say it all so like a healthy boy his face flush , his word tumble over each other in his eagerness that Mr. Craven 's soul shake with unbelieving joy . 

 Colin put out his hand and lay it on his father 's arm . 

 " be not   you glad , Father ? " he end . " be not   you glad ? I be go to live forever and ever and ever ! " 

 Mr. Craven put his hand on both the boy 's shoulder and hold he still . he know he dare not even try to speak for a moment . 

 " take I into the garden , my boy , " he say at last . " and tell I all about it . " 

 and so they lead he in . 

 the place be a wilderness of autumn gold and purple and violet blue and flame scarlet and on every side be sheaf of late lily stand together lily which be white or white and ruby . he remember well when the first of they have be plant that just at this season of the year their late glory should reveal themselves . late rose climb and hang and cluster and the sunshine deepen the hue of the yellowing tree make one feel that one , stand in an embowered temple of gold . the newcomer stand silent just as the child have do when they come into its grayness . he look round and round . 

 " I think it would be dead , " he say . 

 " Mary think so at first , " say Colin . " but it come alive . " 

 then they sit down under their tree all but Colin , who want to stand while he tell the story . 

 it be the strange thing he have ever hear , Archibald Craven think , as it be pour forth in headlong boy fashion . mystery and Magic and wild creature , the weird midnight meet the coming of the spring the passion of insult pride which have drag the young Rajah to his foot to defy old Ben Weatherstaff to his face . the odd companionship , the play acting , the great secret so carefully keep . the listener laugh until tear come into his eye and sometimes tear come into his eye when he be not laugh . the Athlete , the Lecturer , the scientific Discoverer be a laughable , lovable , healthy young human thing . 

 " now , " he say at the end of the story , " it need not be a secret any more . I dare say it will frighten they nearly into fit when they see I but I be never go to get into the chair again . I shall walk back with you , Father to the house . " 


 Ben Weatherstaff 's duty rarely take he away from the garden , but on this occasion he make an excuse to carry some vegetable to the kitchen and be invite into the servant ' hall by Mrs. Medlock to drink a glass of beer he be on the spot as he have hop to be when the most dramatic event Misselthwaite Manor have see during the present generation actually take place . one of the window look upon the courtyard give also a glimpse of the lawn . Mrs. Medlock , know Ben have come from the garden , hop that he might have catch sight of his master and even by chance of his meeting with Master Colin . 

 " do you see either of they , Weatherstaff ? " she ask . 

 Ben take his beer - mug from his mouth and wipe his lip with the back of his hand . 

 " Aye , that I do , " he answer with a shrewdly significant air . 

 " both of they ? " suggest Mrs. Medlock . 

 " both of them , " return Ben Weatherstaff . " thank ye kindly , ma'am , I could sup up another mug of it . " 

 " together ? " say Mrs. Medlock , hastily overfill his beer - mug in her excitement . 

 " together , ma'am , " and Ben gulp down half of his new mug at one gulp . 

 " where be Master Colin ? how do he look ? what do they say to each other ? " 

 " I didna ' hear that , " say Ben , " along o ' only bein ' on th ' stepladder lookin , over th ' wall . but I will tell thee this . there be be thing go on outside as you house people know nowt about . an ' what tha'll find out tha'll find out soon . " 

 and it be not two minute before he swallow the last of his beer and wave his mug solemnly toward the window which take in through the shrubbery a piece of the lawn . 

 " look there , " he say , " if tha 's curious . look what be comin ' across th ' grass . " 

 when Mrs. Medlock look she throw up her hand and give a little shriek and every man and woman servant within hearing bolt across the servant ' hall and stand look through the window with their eye almost start out of their head . 

 across the lawn come the Master of Misselthwaite and he look as many of they have never see he . and by his , side with his head up in the air and his eye full of laughter walk as strongly and steadily as any boy in Yorkshire Master Colin . 

