LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY 


 by Frances Hodgson Burnett 





 content 


 I 

 II 

 III 

 IV 

 V 

 VI 

 VII 

 VIII 

 IX 

 x 

 XI 

 XII 

 XIII 

 XIV 

 XV 









 I 

 Cedric himself know nothing whatever about it . it have never be even mention to he . he know that his papa have be an Englishman , because his mamma have tell he so ; but then his papa have die when he be so little a boy that he could not remember very much about he , except that he be big , and have blue eye and a long mustache , and that it be a splendid thing to be carry around the room on his shoulder . since his papa 's death , Cedric have find out that it be good not to talk to his mamma about he . when his father be ill , Cedric have be send away , and when he have return , everything be over ; and his mother , who have be very ill , too , be only just begin to sit in her chair by the window . she be pale and thin , and all the dimple have go from her pretty face , and her eye look large and mournful , and she be dress in black . 
 " Dearest , " say Cedric   his papa have call she that always , and so the little boy have learn to say it , " dear , be my papa well ? " 
 he feel her arm tremble , and so he turn his curly head and look in her face . there be something in it that make he feel that he be go to cry . 
 " Dearest , " he say , " be he well ? " 
 then suddenly his love little heart tell he that he would well put both his arm around her neck and kiss she again and again , and keep his soft cheek close to her ; and he do so , and she lay her face on his shoulder and cry bitterly , hold he as if she could never let he go again . 
 " yes , he be well , " she sob ; " he be quite , quite well , but we we have no one leave but each other . no one at all . " 
 then , little as he be , he understand that his big , handsome young papa would not come back any more ; that he be dead , as he have hear of other people be , although he could not comprehend exactly what strange thing have bring all this sadness about . it be because his mamma always cry when he speak of his papa that he secretly make up his mind it be well not to speak of he very often to she , and he find out , too , that it be well not to let she sit still and look into the fire or out of the window without move or talk . he and his mamma know very few people , and live what might have be think very lonely life , although Cedric do not know it be lonely until he grow old and hear why it be they have no visitor . then he be tell that his mamma be an orphan , and quite alone in the world when his papa have marry she . she be very pretty , and have be live as companion to a rich old lady who be not kind to she , and one day Captain Cedric Errol , who be call at the house , see she run up the stair with tear on her eyelash ; and she look so sweet and innocent and sorrowful that the Captain could not forget she . and after many strange thing have happen , they know each other well and love each other dearly , and be marry , although their marriage bring they the ill - will of several person . the one who be most angry of all , however , be the Captain 's father , who live in England , and be a very rich and important old nobleman , with a very bad temper and a very violent dislike to America and Americans . he have two son old than Captain Cedric ; and it be the law that the elder of these son should inherit the family title and estate , which be very rich and splendid ; if the eld son die , the next one would be heir ; so , though he be a member of such a great family , there be little chance that Captain Cedric would be very rich himself . 
 but it so happen that Nature have give to the young son gift which she have not bestow upon his eld brother . he have a beautiful face and a fine , strong , graceful figure ; he have a bright smile and a sweet , gay voice ; he be brave and generous , and have the kind heart in the world , and seem to have the power to make every one love he . and it be not so with his eld brother ; neither of they be handsome , or very kind , or clever . when they be boy at Eton , they be not popular ; when they be at college , they care nothing for study , and waste both time and money , and make few real friend . the old Earl , their father , be constantly disappoint and humiliate by they ; his heir be no honor to his noble name , and do not promise to end in be anything but a selfish , wasteful , insignificant man , with no manly or noble quality . it be very bitter , the old Earl thought , that the son who be only third , and would have only a very small fortune , should be the one who have all the gift , and all the charm , and all the strength and beauty . sometimes he almost hat the handsome young man because he seem to have the good thing which should have go with the stately title and the magnificent estate ; and yet , in the depth of his proud , stubborn old heart , he could not help care very much for his young son . it be in one of his fit of petulance that he send he off to travel in America ; he think he would send he away for a while , so that he should not be make angry by constantly contrast he with his brother , who be at that time give he a great deal of trouble by their wild way . 
 but , after about six month , he begin to feel lonely , and long in secret to see his son again , so he write to Captain Cedric and order he home . the letter he write cross on its way a letter the Captain have just write to his father , tell of his love for the pretty american girl , and of his intended marriage ; and when the Earl receive that letter he be furiously angry . bad as his temper be , he have never give way to it in his life as he give way to it when he read the Captain 's letter . his valet , who be in the room when it come , think his lordship would have a fit of apoplexy , he be so wild with anger . for an hour he rag like a tiger , and then he sit down and write to his son , and order he never to come near his old home , nor to write to his father or brother again . he tell he he might live as he please , and die where he please , that he should be cut off from his family forever , and that he need never expect help from his father as long as he live . 
 the Captain be very sad when he read the letter ; he be very fond of England , and he dearly love the beautiful home where he have be bear ; he have even love his ill - temper old father , and have sympathize with he in his disappointment ; but he know he need expect no kindness from he in the future . at first he scarcely know what to do ; he have not be bring up to work , and have no business experience , but he have courage and plenty of determination . so he sell his commission in the english army , and after some trouble find a situation in New York , and marry . the change from his old life in England be very great , but he be young and happy , and he hop that hard work would do great thing for he in the future . he have a small house on a quiet street , and his little boy be bear there , and everything be so gay and cheerful , in a simple way , that he be never sorry for a moment that he have marry the rich old lady 's pretty companion just because she be so sweet and he love she and she love he . she be very sweet , indeed , and her little boy be like both she and his father . though he be bear in so quiet and cheap a little home , it seem as if there never have be a more fortunate baby . in the first place , he be always well , and so he never give any one trouble ; in the second place , he have so sweet a temper and way so charming that he be a pleasure to every one ; and in the third place , he be so beautiful to look at that he be quite a picture . instead of be a bald - headed baby , he start in life with a quantity of soft , fine , gold - color hair , which curl up at the end , and go into loose ring by the time he be six month old ; he have big brown eye and long eyelash and a darling little face ; he have so strong a back and such splendid sturdy leg , that at nine month he learn suddenly to walk ; his manner be so good , for a baby , that it be delightful to make his acquaintance . he seem to feel that every one be his friend , and when any one speak to he , when he be in his carriage in the street , he would give the stranger one sweet , serious look with the brown eye , and then follow it with a lovely , friendly smile ; and the consequence be , that there be not a person in the neighborhood of the quiet street where he live even to the groceryman at the corner , who be consider the cross creature alive who be not pleased to see he and speak to he . and every month of his life he grow handsomer and more interesting . 
 when he be old enough to walk out with his nurse , drag a small wagon and wear a short white kilt skirt , and a big white hat set back on his curly yellow hair , he be so handsome and strong and rosy that he attract every one 's attention , and his nurse would come home and tell his mamma story of the lady who have stop their carriage to look at and speak to he , and of how pleased they be when he talk to they in his cheerful little way , as if he have know they always . his great charm be this cheerful , fearless , quaint little way of make friend with people . I think it arise from his have a very confiding nature , and a kind little heart that sympathize with every one , and wish to make every one as comfortable as he like to be himself . it make he very quick to understand the feeling of those about he . perhaps this have grow on he , too , because he have live so much with his father and mother , who be always love and considerate and tender and well - breed . he have never hear an unkind or uncourteous word speak at home ; he have always be love and caress and treat tenderly , and so his childish soul be full of kindness and innocent warm feeling . he have always hear his mamma call by pretty , love name , and so he use they himself when he speak to she ; he have always see that his papa watch over she and take great care of she , and so he learn , too , to be careful of she . 
 so when he know his papa would come back no more , and see how very sad his mamma be , there gradually come into his kind little heart the thought that he must do what he could to make she happy . he be not much more than a baby , but that think be in his mind whenever he climb upon her knee and kiss she and put his curly head on her neck , and when he bring his toy and picture - book to show she , and when he curl up quietly by her side as she use to lie on the sofa . he be not old enough to know of anything else to do , so he do what he could , and be more of a comfort to she than he could have understand . 
 " oh , Mary ! " he hear she say once to her old servant ; " I be sure he be try to help I in his innocent way I know he be . he look at I sometimes with a love , wonder little look , as if he be sorry for I , and then he will come and pet I or show I something . he be such a little man , I really think he know . " 
 as he grow old , he have a great many quaint little way which amuse and interested people greatly . he be so much of a companion for his mother that she scarcely care for any other . they use to walk together and talk together and play together . when he be quite a little fellow , he learn to read ; and after that he use to lie on the hearth - rug , in the evening , and read aloud sometimes story , and sometimes big book such as old people read , and sometimes even the newspaper ; and often at such time Mary , in the kitchen , would hear Mrs. Errol laugh with delight at the quaint thing he say . 
 " and , indade , " say Mary to the groceryman , " nobody cud help laughin ' at the quare little way of he and his ould - fashioned sayin 's ! do not   he come into my kitchen the noight the new Prisident be nominate and shtand afore the fire , lookin ' loike a pictur ' , wid his hand in his shmall pocket , an ' his innocent bit of a face as sayrious as a jedge ? an ' sez he to I : ' Mary , ' sez he , ' I be very much int'ruste in the ' lection , ' sez he . ' I be a ' publican , an ' so be Dearest . be you a ' publican , Mary ? ' ' sorra a bit , ' sez I ; ' I be the bist o ' dimmycrat ! ' an ' he look up at I wid a look that ud go to yer heart , an ' sez he : ' Mary , ' sez he , ' the country will go to ruin . ' an ' nivver a day since thin have he let go by widout argyin ' wid I to change I polytic . " 
 Mary be very fond of he , and very proud of he , too . she have be with his mother ever since he be bear ; and , after his father 's death , have be cook and housemaid and nurse and everything else . she be proud of his graceful , strong little body and his pretty manner , and especially proud of the bright curly hair which wave over his forehead and fall in charming love - lock on his shoulder . she be willing to work early and late to help his mamma make his small suit and keep they in order . 
 " ' ristycratic , be it ? " she would say . " Faith , an ' I would loike to see the choild on Fifth Avey - NOO as look loike he an ' shtep out as handsome as himself . an ' ivvery man , woman , and choild lookin ' afther he in his bit of a black velvet skirt make out of the misthress 's ould gownd ; an ' his little head up , an ' his curly hair flyin ' an ' shinin ' . it be loike a young lord he look . " 
 Cedric do not know that he look like a young lord ; he do not know what a lord be . his great friend be the groceryman at the corner the cross groceryman , who be never cross to he . his name be Mr. Hobbs , and Cedric admire and respect he very much . he think he a very rich and powerful person , he have so many thing in his store , prune and fig and orange and biscuit , and he have a horse and wagon . Cedric be fond of the milkman and the baker and the apple - woman , but he like Mr. Hobbs well of all , and be on term of such intimacy with he that he go to see he every day , and often sit with he quite a long time , discuss the topic of the hour . it be quite surprising how many thing they find to talk about the Fourth of July , for instance . when they begin to talk about the Fourth of July there really seem no end to it . Mr. Hobbs have a very bad opinion of " the British , " and he tell the whole story of the Revolution , relate very wonderful and patriotic story about the villainy of the enemy and the bravery of the revolutionary hero , and he even generously repeat part of the Declaration of Independence . 
 Cedric be so excited that his eye shine and his cheek be red and his curl be all rub and tumble into a yellow mop . he could hardly wait to eat his dinner after he go home , he be so anxious to tell his mamma . it be , perhaps , Mr. Hobbs who give he his first interest in politic . Mr. Hobbs be fond of read the newspaper , and so Cedric hear a great deal about what be go on in Washington ; and Mr. Hobbs would tell he whether the President be do his duty or not . and once , when there be an election , he find it all quite grand , and probably but for Mr. Hobbs and Cedric the country might have be wreck . 
 Mr. Hobbs take he to see a great torchlight procession , and many of the man who carry torch remember afterward a stout man who stand near a lamp - post and hold on his shoulder a handsome little shouting boy , who wave his cap in the air . 
 it be not long after this election , when Cedric be between seven and eight year old , that the very strange thing happen which make so wonderful a change in his life . it be quite curious , too , that the day it happen he have be talk to Mr. Hobbs about England and the Queen , and Mr. Hobbs have say some very severe thing about the aristocracy , be specially indignant against earl and marquis . it have be a hot morning ; and after play soldier with some friend of his , Cedric have go into the store to rest , and have find Mr. Hobbs look very fierce over a piece of the Illustrated London News , which contain a picture of some court ceremony . 
 " ah , " he say , " that be the way they go on now ; but they will get enough of it some day , when those they have   trod on rise and blow them up sky - high , earl and marquis and all ! it be come , and they may look out for it ! " 
 Cedric have perch himself as usual on the high stool and push his hat back , and put his hand in his pocket in delicate compliment to Mr. Hobbs . 
 " do you ever know many marquis , Mr. Hobbs ? " Cedric inquire , " or earl ? " 
 " no , " answer Mr. Hobbs , with indignation ; " I guess not . I would like to catch one of them inside here ; that be all ! I will have no grasp tyrant sittin ' ' round on my cracker - barrel ! " 
 and he be so proud of the sentiment that he look around proudly and mop his forehead . 
 " perhaps they would not   be earl if they know any well , " say Cedric , feel some vague sympathy for their unhappy condition . 
 " would not   they ! " say Mr. Hobbs . " they just glory in it ! it be in them . they be a bad lot . " 
 they be in the midst of their conversation , when Mary appear . 
 cedric think she have come to buy some sugar , perhaps , but she have not . she look almost pale and as if she be excited about something . 
 " come home , darlint , " she say ; " the misthress be wantin ' yez . " 
 Cedric slip down from his stool . 
 " do she want I to go out with she , Mary ? " he ask . " good - morning , Mr. Hobbs . I will see you again . " 
 he be surprised to see Mary star at he in a dumfounded fashion , and he wonder why she keep shake her head . 
 " what be the matter , Mary ? " he say . " be it the hot weather ? " 
 " no , " say Mary ; " but there be strange thing happenin ' to we . " 
 " have the sun give Dearest a headache ? " he inquire anxiously . 
 but it be not that . when he reach his own house there be a coupe stand before the door and some one be in the little parlor talk to his mamma . Mary hurry he upstairs and put on his good summer suit of cream - color flannel , with the red scarf around his waist , and comb out his curly lock . 
 " Lords , be it ? " he hear she say . " an ' the nobility an ' gintry . Och ! bad cess to they ! lord , indade bad luck . " 
 it be really very puzzling , but he feel sure his mamma would tell he what all the excitement mean , so he allow Mary to bemoan herself without ask many question . when he be dress , he run downstairs and go into the parlor . a tall , thin old gentleman with a sharp face be sit in an arm - chair . his mother be stand near by with a pale face , and he see that there be tear in her eye . 
 " oh ! Ceddie ! " she cry out , and run to her little boy and catch he in her arm and kiss he in a frightened , troubled way . " oh ! Ceddie , darling ! " 
 the tall old gentleman rise from his chair and look at Cedric with his sharp eye . he rub his thin chin with his bony hand as he look . 
 he seem not at all displease . 
 " and so , " he say at last , slowly , " and so this be little Lord Fauntleroy . " 




 II 

 there be never a more amazed little boy than Cedric during the week that follow ; there be never so strange or so unreal a week . in the first place , the story his mamma tell he be a very curious one . he be oblige to hear it two or three time before he could understand it . he could not imagine what Mr. Hobbs would think of it . it begin with earl : his grandpapa , whom he have never see , be an earl ; and his eld uncle , if he have not be kill by a fall from his horse , would have be an earl , too , in time ; and after his death , his other uncle would have be an earl , if he have not die suddenly , in Rome , of a fever . after that , his own papa , if he have live , would have be an earl , but , since they all have die and only Cedric be leave , it appear that he be to be an earl after his grandpapa 's death and for the present he be Lord Fauntleroy . 
 he turn quite pale when he be first tell of it . 
 " oh ! dearest ! " he say , " I should rather not be an earl . none of the boy be earl . can not   I not be one ? " 
 but it seem to be unavoidable . and when , that evening , they sit together by the open window look out into the shabby street , he and his mother have a long talk about it . Cedric sit on his footstool , clasp one knee in his favorite attitude and wear a bewildered little face rather red from the exertion of thinking . his grandfather have send for he to come to England , and his mamma think he must go . 
 " because , " she say , look out of the window with sorrowful eye , " I know your papa would wish it to be so , Ceddie . he love his home very much ; and there be many thing to be think of that a little boy can not   quite understand . I should be a selfish little mother if I do not send you . when you be a man , you will see why . " 
 Ceddie shake his head mournfully . 
 " I shall be very sorry to leave Mr. Hobbs , " he say . " I be afraid he will miss I , and I shall miss he . and I shall miss they all . " 
 when Mr. Havisham who be the family lawyer of the Earl of Dorincourt , and who have be send by he to bring Lord Fauntleroy to England come the next day , Cedric hear many thing . but , somehow , it do not console he to hear that he be to be a very rich man when he grow up , and that he would have castle here and castle there , and great park and deep mine and grand estate and tenantry . he be troubled about his friend , Mr. Hobbs , and he go to see he at the store soon after breakfast , in great anxiety of mind . 
 he find he read the morning paper , and he approach he with a grave demeanor . he really feel it would be a great shock to Mr. Hobbs to hear what have befall he , and on his way to the store he have be think how it would be good to break the news . 
 " hello ! " say Mr. Hobbs . " Mornin ' ! " 
 " good - morning , " say Cedric . 
 he do not climb up on the high stool as usual , but sit down on a cracker - box and clasp his knee , and be so silent for a few moment that Mr. Hobbs finally look up inquiringly over the top of his newspaper . 
 " hello ! " he say again . 
 Cedric gather all his strength of mind together . 
 " Mr. Hobbs , " he say , " do you remember what we be talk about yesterday morning ? " 
 " well , " reply Mr. Hobbs , ' seem to I it be England . " 
 " yes , " say Cedric ; " but just when Mary come for I , you know ? " 
 Mr. Hobbs rub the back of his head . 
 " we be mention Queen Victoria and the aristocracy . " 
 " yes , " say Cedric , rather hesitatingly , " and and earl ; do not   you know ? " 
 " why , yes , " return Mr. Hobbs ; " we did touch them up a little ; that be so ! " 
 Cedric flush up to the curly bang on his forehead . nothing so embarrassing as this have ever happen to he in his life . he be a little afraid that it might be a trifle embarrassing to Mr. Hobbs , too . 
 " you say , " he proceed , " that you would not   have they sit ' round on your cracker - barrel . " 
 " so I do ! " return Mr. Hobbs , stoutly . " and I mean it . let them try it that be all ! " 
 " Mr. Hobbs , " say Cedric , " one be sit on this box now ! " 
 Mr. Hobbs almost jump out of his chair . 
 " what ! " he exclaim . 
 " yes , " Cedric announce , with due modesty ; " I be one or I be go to be . I will not   deceive you . " 
 Mr. Hobbs look agitated . he rise up suddenly and go to look at the thermometer . 
 " the mercury 's get into your head ! " he exclaim , turn back to examine his young friend 's countenance . " it be a hot day ! how do you feel ? get any pain ? when do you begin to feel that way ? " 
 he put his big hand on the little boy 's hair . this be more embarrassing than ever . 
 " thank you , " say Ceddie ; " I be all right . there be nothing the matter with my head . I be sorry to say it be true , Mr. Hobbs . that be what Mary come to take I home for . Mr. Havisham be tell my mamma , and he be a lawyer . " 
 Mr. Hobbs sink into his chair and mop his forehead with his handkerchief . 
 " one of we have get a sunstroke ! " he exclaim . 
 " no , " return Cedric , " we have not . we shall have to make the good of it , Mr. Hobbs . Mr. Havisham come all the way from England to tell we about it . my grandpapa send he . " 
 Mr. Hobbs star wildly at the innocent , serious little face before he . 
 " who be your grandfather ? " he ask . 
 Cedric put his hand in his pocket and carefully draw out a piece of paper , on which something be write in his own round , irregular hand . 
 " I could not   easily remember it , so I write it down on this , " he say . and he read aloud slowly : " ' John Arthur Molyneux Errol , Earl of Dorincourt . ' that be his name , and he live in a castle in two or three castle , I think . and my papa , who die , be his young son ; and I should not   have be a lord or an earl if my papa have not   die ; and my papa would not   have be an earl if his two brother have not   die . but they all die , and there be no one but I , no boy , and so I have to be one ; and my grandpapa have send for I to come to England . " 
 Mr. Hobbs seem to grow hotter and hotter . he mop his forehead and his bald spot and breathe hard . he begin to see that something very remarkable have happen ; but when he look at the little boy sit on the cracker - box , with the innocent , anxious expression in his childish eye , and see that he be not change at all , but be simply as he have be the day before , just a handsome , cheerful , brave little fellow in a blue suit and red neck - ribbon , all this information about the nobility bewilder he . he be all the more bewildered because Cedric give it with such ingenuous simplicity , and plainly without realize himself how stupendous it be . 
 " wha what do you say your name be ? " Mr. Hobbs inquire . 
 " it be Cedric Errol , Lord Fauntleroy , " answer Cedric . " that be what Mr. Havisham call I . he say when I go into the room : ' and so this be little Lord Fauntleroy ! ' " 
 " well , " say Mr. Hobbs , " I will be jiggere ! " 
 this be an exclamation he always use when he be very much astonished or excited . he could think of nothing else to say just at that puzzle moment . 
 Cedric feel it to be quite a proper and suitable ejaculation . his respect and affection for Mr. Hobbs be so great that he admire and approve of all his remark . he have not see enough of society as yet to make he realize that sometimes Mr. Hobbs be not quite conventional . he know , of course , that he be different from his mamma , but , then , his mamma be a lady , and he have an idea that lady be always different from gentleman . 
 he look at Mr. Hobbs wistfully . 
 " england be a long way off , be not   it ? " he ask . 
 " it be across the Atlantic Ocean , " Mr. Hobbs answer . 
 " that be the bad of it , " say Cedric . " perhaps I shall not see you again for a long time . I do not   like to think of that , Mr. Hobbs . " 
 " the good of friend must part , " say Mr. Hobbs . 
 " well , " say Cedric , " we have be friend for a great many year , have not   we ? " 
 " ever since you be bear , " Mr. Hobbs answer . " you be about six week old when you be first walk out on this street . " 
 " ah , " remark Cedric , with a sigh , " I never think I should have to be an earl then ! " 
 " you think , " say Mr. Hobbs , " there be no get out of it ? " 
 " I be afraid not , " answer Cedric . " my mamma say that my papa would wish I to do it . but if I have to be an earl , there be one thing I can do : I can try to be a good one . I be not go to be a tyrant . and if there be ever to be another war with America , I shall try to stop it . " 
 his conversation with Mr. Hobbs be a long and serious one . once have get over the first shock , Mr. Hobbs be not so rancorous as might have be expect ; he endeavor to resign himself to the situation , and before the interview be at an end he have ask a great many question . as Cedric could answer but few of they , he endeavor to answer they himself , and , be fairly launch on the subject of earl and marquis and lordly estate , explain many thing in a way which would probably have astonish Mr. Havisham , could that gentleman have hear it . 
 but then there be many thing which astonish Mr. Havisham . he have spend all his life in England , and be not accustomed to american people and american habit . he have be connect professionally with the family of the Earl of Dorincourt for nearly forty year , and he know all about its grand estate and its great wealth and importance ; and , in a cold , business - like way , he feel an interest in this little boy , who , in the future , be to be the master and owner of they all , the future Earl of Dorincourt . he have know all about the old Earl 's disappointment in his elder son and all about his fierce rage at Captain Cedric 's american marriage , and he know how he still hat the gentle little widow and would not speak of she except with bitter and cruel word . he insist that she be only a common american girl , who have entrap his son into marry she because she know he be an earl 's son . the old lawyer himself have more than half believe this be all true . he have see a great many selfish , mercenary people in his life , and he have not a good opinion of Americans . when he have be drive into the cheap street , and his coupe have stop before the cheap , small house , he have feel actually shock . it seem really quite dreadful to think that the future owner of Dorincourt Castle and Wyndham Towers and Chorlworth , and all the other stately splendor , should have be bear and bring up in an insignificant house in a street with a sort of green - grocery at the corner . he wonder what kind of a child he would be , and what kind of a mother he have . he rather shrink from see they both . he have a sort of pride in the noble family whose legal affair he have conduct so long , and it would have annoy he very much to have find himself oblige to manage a woman who would seem to he a vulgar , money - love person , with no respect for her dead husband 's country and the dignity of his name . it be a very old name and a very splendid one , and Mr. Havisham have a great respect for it himself , though he be only a cold , keen , business - like old lawyer . 
 when Mary hand he into the small parlor , he look around it critically . it be plainly furnish , but it have a home - like look ; there be no cheap , common ornament , and no cheap , gaudy picture ; the few adornment on the wall be in good taste and about the room be many pretty thing which a woman 's hand might have make . 
 " not at all bad so far , " he have say to himself ; " but perhaps the Captain 's taste predominate . " but when Mrs. Errol come into the room , he begin to think she herself might have have something to do with it . if he have not be quite a self - contain and stiff old gentleman , he would probably have start when he see she . she look , in the simple black dress , fit closely to her slender figure , more like a young girl than the mother of a boy of seven . she have a pretty , sorrowful , young face , and a very tender , innocent look in her large brown eye , the sorrowful look that have never quite leave her face since her husband have die . Cedric be use to see it there ; the only time he have ever see it fade out have be when he be play with she or talk to she , and have say some old - fashioned thing , or use some long word he have pick up out of the newspaper or in his conversation with Mr. Hobbs . he be fond of use long word , and he be always pleased when they make her laugh , though he could not understand why they be laughable ; they be quite serious matter with he . the lawyer 's experience teach he to read people 's character very shrewdly , and as soon as he see Cedric 's mother he know that the old Earl have make a great mistake in think she a vulgar , mercenary woman . Mr. Havisham have never be marry , he have never even be in love , but he divine that this pretty young creature with the sweet voice and sad eye have marry Captain Errol only because she love he with all her affectionate heart , and that she have never once think it an advantage that he be an earl 's son . and he see he should have no trouble with she , and he begin to feel that perhaps little Lord Fauntleroy might not be such a trial to his noble family , after all . the Captain have be a handsome fellow , and the young mother be very pretty , and perhaps the boy might be well enough to look at . 
 when he first tell Mrs. Errol what he have come for , she turn very pale . 
 " oh ! " she say ; " will he have to be take away from I ? we love each other so much ! he be such a happiness to I ! he be all I have . I have try to be a good mother to he . " and her sweet young voice tremble , and the tear rush into her eye . " you do not know what he have be to I ! " she say . 
 the lawyer clear his throat . 
 " I be oblige to tell you , " he say , " that the Earl of Dorincourt be not be not very friendly toward you . he be an old man , and his prejudice be very strong . he have always especially dislike America and Americans , and be very much enrage by his son 's marriage . I be sorry to be the bearer of so unpleasant a communication , but he be very fixed in his determination not to see you . his plan be that Lord Fauntleroy shall be educate under his own supervision ; that he shall live with he . the Earl be attach to Dorincourt Castle , and spend a great deal of time there . he be a victim to inflammatory gout , and be not fond of London . Lord Fauntleroy will , therefore , be likely to live chiefly at Dorincourt . the Earl offer you as a home Court Lodge , which be situate pleasantly , and be not very far from the castle . he also offer you a suitable income . Lord Fauntleroy will be permit to visit you ; the only stipulation be , that you shall not visit he or enter the park gate . you see you will not be really separate from your son , and I assure you , madam , the term be not so harsh as as they might have be . the advantage of such surrounding and education as Lord Fauntleroy will have , I be sure you must see , will be very great . " 
 he feel a little uneasy lest she should begin to cry or make a scene , as he know some woman would have do . it embarrass and annoy he to see woman cry . 
 but she do not . she go to the window and stand with her face turn away for a few moment , and he see she be try to steady herself . 
 " Captain Errol be very fond of Dorincourt , " she say at last . " he love England , and everything english . it be always a grief to he that he be part from his home . he be proud of his home , and of his name . he would wish I know he would wish that his son should know the beautiful old place , and be bring up in such a way as would be suitable to his future position . " 
 then she come back to the table and stand look up at Mr. Havisham very gently . 
 " my husband would wish it , " she say . " it will be good for my little boy . I know I be sure the Earl would not be so unkind as to try to teach he not to love I ; and I know even if he try that my little boy be too much like his father to be harm . he have a warm , faithful nature , and a true heart . he would love I even if he do not see I ; and so long as we may see each other , I ought not to suffer very much . " 
 " she think very little of herself , " the lawyer think . " she do not make any term for herself . " 
 " Madam , " he say aloud , " I respect your consideration for your son . he will thank you for it when he be a man . I assure you Lord Fauntleroy will be most carefully guard , and every effort will be use to insure his happiness . the Earl of Dorincourt will be as anxious for his comfort and well - being as you yourself could be . " 
 " I hope , " say the tender little mother , in a rather break voice , " that his grandfather will love Ceddie . the little boy have a very affectionate nature ; and he have always be love . " 
 Mr. Havisham clear his throat again . he could not quite imagine the gouty , fiery - temper old Earl love any one very much ; but he know it would be to his interest to be kind , in his irritable way , to the child who be to be his heir . he know , too , that if Ceddie be at all a credit to his name , his grandfather would be proud of he . 
 " Lord Fauntleroy will be comfortable , I be sure , " he reply . " it be with a view to his happiness that the Earl desire that you should be near enough to he to see he frequently . " 
 he do not think it would be discreet to repeat the exact word the Earl have use , which be in fact neither polite nor amiable . 
 Mr. Havisham prefer to express his noble patron 's offer in smooth and more courteous language . 
 he have another slight shock when Mrs. Errol ask Mary to find her little boy and bring he to she , and Mary tell she where he be . 
 " sure I will foind he aisy enough , ma'am , " she say ; " for it be wid Mr. Hobbs he be this minnit , settin ' on his high shtool by the counther an ' talkin ' pollytic , most loikely , or enj'yin ' hisself among the soap an ' candle an ' pertatie , as sinsible an ' shwate as ye plase . " 
 " Mr. Hobbs have know he all his life , " Mrs. Errol say to the lawyer . " he be very kind to Ceddie , and there be a great friendship between they . " 
 remember the glimpse he have catch of the store as he pass it , and have a recollection of the barrel of potato and apple and the various odd and end , Mr. Havisham feel his doubt arise again . in England , gentleman 's son do not make friend of groceryman , and it seem to he a rather singular proceeding . it would be very awkward if the child have bad manner and a disposition to like low company . one of the bitter humiliation of the old Earl 's life have be that his two elder son have be fond of low company . could it be , he think , that this boy share their bad quality instead of his father 's good quality ? 
 he be think uneasily about this as he talk to Mrs. Errol until the child come into the room . when the door open , he actually hesitate a moment before look at Cedric . it would , perhaps , have seem very queer to a great many people who know he , if they could have know the curious sensation that pass through Mr. Havisham when he look down at the boy , who run into his mother 's arm . he experience a revulsion of feeling which be quite exciting . he recognize in an instant that here be one of the fine and handsome little fellow he have ever see . 
 his beauty be something unusual . he have a strong , lithe , graceful little body and a manly little face ; he hold his childish head up , and carry himself with a brave air ; he be so like his father that it be really startling ; he have his father 's golden hair and his mother 's brown eye , but there be nothing sorrowful or timid in they . they be innocently fearless eye ; he look as if he have never fear or doubt anything in his life . 
 " he be the well - breed - look and handsome little fellow I ever see , " be what Mr. Havisham think . what he say aloud be simply , " and so this be little Lord Fauntleroy . " 
 and , after this , the more he see of little Lord Fauntleroy , the more of a surprise he find he . he know very little about child , though he have see plenty of they in England fine , handsome , rosy girl and boy , who be strictly take care of by their tutor and governess , and who be sometimes shy , and sometimes a trifle boisterous , but never very interesting to a ceremonious , rigid old lawyer . perhaps his personal interest in little Lord Fauntleroy 's fortune make he notice Ceddie more than he have notice other child ; but , however that be , he certainly find himself notice he a great deal . 
 Cedric do not know he be be observe , and he only behave himself in his ordinary manner . he shake hand with Mr. Havisham in his friendly way when they be introduce to each other , and he answer all his question with the unhesitate readiness with which he answer Mr. Hobbs . he be neither shy nor bold , and when Mr. Havisham be talk to his mother , the lawyer notice that he listen to the conversation with as much interest as if he have be quite grow up . 
 " he seem to be a very mature little fellow , " Mr. Havisham say to the mother . 
 " I think he be , in some thing , " she answer . " he have always be very quick to learn , and he have live a great deal with grownup people . he have a funny little habit of use long word and expression he have read in book , or have hear other use , but he be very fond of childish play . I think he be rather clever , but he be a very boyish little boy , sometimes . " 
 the next time Mr. Havisham meet he , he see that this last be quite true . as his coupe turn the corner , he catch sight of a group of small boy , who be evidently much excited . two of they be about to run a race , and one of they be his young lordship , and he be shout and make as much noise as the noisy of his companion . he stand side by side with another boy , one little red leg advance a step . 
 " one , to make ready ! " yell the starter . " two , to be steady . three and away ! " 
 Mr. Havisham find himself lean out of the window of his coupe with a curious feeling of interest . he really never remember have see anything quite like the way in which his lordship 's lordly little red leg fly up behind his knickerbocker and tear over the ground as he shoot out in the race at the signal word . he shut his small hand and set his face against the wind ; his bright hair stream out behind . 
 " Hooray , Ced Errol ! " all the boy shout , dance and shriek with excitement . " Hooray , Billy Williams ! Hooray , Ceddie ! Hooray , Billy ! Hooray ! ' Ray ! ' Ray ! " 
 " I really believe he be go to win , " say Mr. Havisham . the way in which the red legs fly and flash up and down , the shriek of the boy , the wild effort of Billy Williams , whose brown leg be not to be despise , as they follow closely in the rear of the red leg , make he feel some excitement . " I really I really can not   help hop he will win ! " he say , with an apologetic sort of cough . at that moment , the wild yell of all go up from the dancing , hop boy . with one last frantic leap the future Earl of Dorincourt have reach the lamp - post at the end of the block and touch it , just two second before Billy Williams fling himself at it , pant . 
 " three cheer for Ceddie Errol ! " yell the little boy . " Hooray for Ceddie Errol ! " 
 Mr. Havisham draw his head in at the window of his coupe and lean back with a dry smile . 
 " Bravo , Lord Fauntleroy ! " he say . 
 as his carriage stop before the door of Mrs. Errol 's house , the victor and the vanquished be come toward it , attend by the clamor crew . Cedric walk by Billy Williams and be speak to he . his elated little face be very red , his curl clung to his hot , moist forehead , his hand be in his pocket . 
 " you see , " he be say , evidently with the intention of make defeat easy for his unsuccessful rival , " I guess I win because my leg be a little long than your . I guess that be it . you see , I be three day old than you , and that give I a ' vantage . I be three day old . " 
 and this view of the case seem to cheer Billy Williams so much that he begin to smile on the world again , and feel able to swagger a little , almost as if he have win the race instead of lose it . somehow , Ceddie Errol have a way of make people feel comfortable . even in the first flush of his triumph , he remember that the person who be beat might not feel so gay as he do , and might like to think that he might have be the winner under different circumstance . 
 that morning Mr. Havisham have quite a long conversation with the winner of the race a conversation which make he smile his dry smile , and rub his chin with his bony hand several time . 
 Mrs. Errol have be call out of the parlor , and the lawyer and Cedric be leave together . at first Mr. Havisham wonder what he should say to his small companion . he have an idea that perhaps it would be good to say several thing which might prepare Cedric for meet his grandfather , and , perhaps , for the great change that be to come to he . he could see that Cedric have not the least idea of the sort of thing he be to see when he reach England , or of the sort of home that wait for he there . he do not even know yet that his mother be not to live in the same house with he . they have think it well to let he get over the first shock before tell he . 
 Mr. Havisham sit in an arm - chair on one side of the open window ; on the other side be another still large chair , and Cedric sit in that and look at Mr. Havisham . he sit well back in the depth of his big seat , his curly head against the cushioned back , his leg cross , and his hand thrust deep into his pocket , in a quite Mr. Hobbs - like way . he have be watch Mr. Havisham very steadily when his mamma have be in the room , and after she be go he still look at he in respectful thoughtfulness . there be a short silence after Mrs. Errol go out , and Cedric seem to be study Mr. Havisham , and Mr. Havisham be certainly study Cedric . he could not make up his mind as to what an elderly gentleman should say to a little boy who win race , and wear short knickerbocker and red stocking on leg which be not long enough to hang over a big chair when he sit well back in it . 
 but Cedric relieve he by suddenly begin the conversation himself . 
 " do you know , " he say , " I do not   know what an earl be ? " 
 " do not   you ? " say Mr. Havisham . 
 " no , " reply Ceddie . " and I think when a boy be go to be one , he ought to know . do not   you ? " 
 " well yes , " answer Mr. Havisham . 
 " would you mind , " say Ceddie respectfully " would you mind ' splaine it to I ? "   sometimes when he use his long word he do not pronounce they quite correctly .   " what make he an earl ? " 
 " a king or queen , in the first place , " say Mr. Havisham . " generally , he be make an earl because he have do some service to his sovereign , or some great deed . " 
 " oh ! " say Cedric ; " that be like the President . " 
 " be it ? " say Mr. Havisham . " be that why your president be elect ? " 
 " yes , " answer Ceddie cheerfully . " when a man be very good and know a great deal , he be elect president . they have torch - light procession and band , and everybody make speech . I use to think I might perhaps be a president , but I never think of be an earl . I do not   know about earl , " he say , rather hastily , lest Mr. Havisham might feel it impolite in he not to have wish to be one , " if I have know about they , I dare say I should have think I should like to be one . " 
 " it be rather different from be a president , " say Mr. Havisham . 
 " be it ? " ask Cedric . " how ? be there no torch - light procession ? " 
 Mr. Havisham cross his own leg and put the tip of his finger carefully together . he think perhaps the time have come to explain matter rather more clearly . 
 " an earl be be a very important person , " he begin . 
 " so be a president ! " put in Ceddie . " the torch - light procession be five mile long , and they shoot up rocket , and the band play ! Mr. Hobbs take I to see they . " 
 " an earl , " Mr. Havisham go on , feel rather uncertain of his ground , " be frequently of very ancient lineage " 
 " what be that ? " ask Ceddie . 
 " of very old family extremely old . " 
 " ah ! " say Cedric , thrust his hand deeply into his pocket . " I suppose that be the way with the apple - woman near the park . I dare say she be of ancient lin - lenage . she be so old it would surprise you how she can stand up . she be a hundred , I should think , and yet she be out there when it rain , even . I be sorry for she , and so be the other boy . Billy Williams once have nearly a dollar , and I ask he to buy five cent ' worth of apple from she every day until he have spend it all . that make twenty day , and he grow tired of apple after a week ; but then it be quite fortunate a gentleman give I fifty cent and I buy apple from she instead . you feel sorry for any one that be so poor and have such ancient lin - lenage . she say hers have go into her bone and the rain make it bad . " 
 Mr. Havisham feel rather at a loss as he look at his companion 's innocent , serious little face . 
 " I be afraid you do not quite understand I , " he explain . " when I say ' ancient lineage ' I do not mean old age ; I mean that the name of such a family have be know in the world a long time ; perhaps for hundred of year person bear that name have be know and speak of in the history of their country . " 
 " like George Washington , " say Ceddie . " I have   hear of he ever since I be bear , and he be know about , long before that . Mr. Hobbs say he will never be forget . that be because of the Declaration of Independence , you know , and the Fourth of July . you see , he be a very brave man . " 
 " the first Earl of Dorincourt , " say Mr. Havisham solemnly , " be create an earl four hundred year ago . " 
 " well , well ! " say Ceddie . " that be a long time ago ! do you tell Dearest that ? it would int'rust she very much . we will tell she when she come in . she always like to hear cur'us thing . what else do an earl do besides be create ? " 
 " a great many of they have help to govern England . some of they have be brave man and have fight in great battle in the old day . " 
 " I should like to do that myself , " say Cedric . " my papa be a soldier , and he be a very brave man as brave as George Washington . perhaps that be because he would have be an earl if he have not   die . I be glad earl be brave . that be a great ' vantage to be a brave man . once I use to be rather afraid of thing in the dark , you know ; but when I think about the soldier in the Revolution and George Washington it cure I . " 
 " there be another advantage in be an earl , sometimes , " say Mr. Havisham slowly , and he fix his shrewd eye on the little boy with a rather curious expression . " some earl have a great deal of money . " 
 he be curious because he wonder if his young friend know what the power of money be . 
 " that be a good thing to have , " say Ceddie innocently . " I wish I have a great deal of money . " 
 " do you ? " say Mr. Havisham . " and why ? " 
 " well , " explain Cedric , " there be so many thing a person can do with money . you see , there be the apple - woman . if I be very rich I should buy she a little tent to put her stall in , and a little stove , and then I should give she a dollar every morning it rain , so that she could afford to stay at home . and then oh ! I would give she a shawl . and , you see , her bone would not   feel so badly . her bone be not like our bone ; they hurt she when she move . it be very painful when your bone hurt you . if I be rich enough to do all those thing for she , I guess her bone would be all right . " 
 " Ahem ! " say Mr. Havisham . " and what else would you do if you be rich ? " 
 " oh ! I would do a great many thing . of course I should buy Dearest all sort of beautiful thing , needle - book and fan and gold thimble and ring , and an encyclopedia , and a carriage , so that she need not   have to wait for the street - car . if she like pink silk dress , I should buy she some , but she like black well . but I would , take she to the big store , and tell she to look ' round and choose for herself . and then Dick " 
 " who be Dick ? " ask Mr. Havisham . 
 " Dick be a boot - black , " say his young lordship , quite warm up in his interest in plan so exciting . " he be one of the nice boot - black you ever know . he stand at the corner of a street down - town . I have   know he for year . once when I be very little , I be walk out with Dearest , and she buy I a beautiful ball that bounce , and I be carry it and it bounce into the middle of the street where the carriage and horse be , and I be so disappointed , I begin to cry I be very little . I have kilt on . and Dick be black a man 's shoe , and he say ' hello ! ' and he run in between the horse and catch the ball for I and wipe it off with his coat and give it to I and say , ' it be all right , young un . ' so Dearest admire he very much , and so do I , and ever since then , when we go down - town , we talk to he . he say ' hello ! ' and I say ' hello ! ' and then we talk a little , and he tell I how trade be . it be be bad lately . " 
 " and what would you like to do for he ? " inquire the lawyer , rub his chin and smile a queer smile . 
 " well , " say Lord Fauntleroy , settle himself in his chair with a business air , " I would buy Jake out . " 
 " and who be Jake ? " Mr. Havisham ask . 
 " he be Dick 's partner , and he be the bad partner a fellow could have ! Dick say so . he be not   a credit to the business , and he be not   square . he cheat , and that make Dick mad . it would make you mad , you know , if you be black boot as hard as you could , and be square all the time , and your partner be not   square at all . People like Dick , but they do not   like Jake , and so sometimes they do not   come twice . so if I be rich , I would buy Jake out and get Dick a ' boss ' sign he say a ' boss ' sign go a long way ; and I would get he some new clothe and new brush , and start he out fair . he say all he want be to start out fair . " 
 there could have be nothing more confiding and innocent than the way in which his small lordship tell his little story , quote his friend Dick 's bit of slang in the most candid good faith . he seem to feel not a shade of a doubt that his elderly companion would be just as interested as he be himself . and in truth Mr. Havisham be begin to be greatly interested ; but perhaps not quite so much in Dick and the apple - woman as in this kind little lordle , whose curly head be so busy , under its yellow thatch , with good - natured plan for his friend , and who seem somehow to have forget himself altogether . 
 " be there anything " he begin . " what would you get for yourself , if you be rich ? " 
 " lot of thing ! " answer Lord Fauntleroy briskly ; " but first I would give Mary some money for Bridget that be her sister , with twelve child , and a husband out of work . she come here and cry , and Dearest give her thing in a basket , and then she cry again , and say : ' Blessin 's be on yez , for a beautiful lady . ' and I think Mr. Hobbs would like a gold watch and chain to remember I by , and a meerschaum pipe . and then I would like to get up a company . " 
 " a company ! " exclaim Mr. Havisham . 
 " like a republican rally , " explain Cedric , become quite excited . " I would have torch and uniform and thing for all the boy and myself , too . and we would march , you know , and drill . that be what I should like for myself , if I be rich . " 
 the door open and Mrs. Errol come in . 
 " I be sorry to have be oblige to leave you so long , " she say to Mr. Havisham ; " but a poor woman , who be in great trouble , come to see I . " 
 " this young gentleman , " say Mr. Havisham , " have be tell I about some of his friend , and what he would do for they if he be rich . " 
 " Bridget be one of his friend , " say Mrs. Errol ; " and it be Bridget to whom I have be talk in the kitchen . she be in great trouble now because her husband have rheumatic fever . " 
 Cedric slip down out of his big chair . 
 " I think I will go and see she , " he say , " and ask she how he be . he be a nice man when he be well . I be oblige to he because he once make I a sword out of wood . he be a very talented man . " 
 he run out of the room , and Mr. Havisham rise from his chair . he seem to have something in his mind which he wish to speak of . 
 he hesitate a moment , and then say , look down at Mrs. Errol : 
 " before I leave Dorincourt Castle , I have an interview with the Earl , in which he give I some instruction . he be desirous that his grandson should look forward with some pleasure to his future life in England , and also to his acquaintance with himself . he say that I must let his lordship know that the change in his life would bring he money and the pleasure child enjoy ; if he express any wish , I be to gratify they , and to tell he that his grand - father have give he what he wish . I be aware that the Earl do not expect anything quite like this ; but if it would give Lord Fauntleroy pleasure to assist this poor woman , I should feel that the Earl would be displeased if he be not gratify . " 
 for the second time , he do not repeat the Earl 's exact word . his lordship have , indeed , say : 
 " make the lad understand that I can give he anything he want . let he know what it be to be the grandson of the Earl of Dorincourt . buy he everything he take a fancy to ; let he have money in his pocket , and tell he his grandfather put it there . " 
 his motif be far from be good , and if he have be deal with a nature less affectionate and warm - hearted than little Lord Fauntleroy 's , great harm might have be do . and Cedric 's mother be too gentle to suspect any harm . she think that perhaps this mean that a lonely , unhappy old man , whose child be dead , wish to be kind to her little boy , and win his love and confidence . and it please she very much to think that Ceddie would be able to help Bridget . it make she happy to know that the very first result of the strange fortune which have befall she little boy be that he could do kind thing for those who need kindness . quite a warm color bloom on her pretty young face . 
 " oh ! " she say , " that be very kind of the Earl ; Cedric will be so glad ! he have always be fond of Bridget and Michael . they be quite deserving . I have often wish I have be able to help they more . Michael be a hard - work man when he be well , but he have be ill a long time and need expensive medicine and warm clothing and nourishing food . he and Bridget will not be wasteful of what be give they . " 
 Mr. Havisham put his thin hand in his breast pocket and draw forth a large pocket - book . there be a queer look in his keen face . the truth be , he be wonder what the Earl of Dorincourt would say when he be tell what be the first wish of his grandson that have be grant . he wonder what the cross , worldly , selfish old nobleman would think of it . 
 " I do not know that you have realize , " he say , " that the Earl of Dorincourt be an exceedingly rich man . he can afford to gratify any caprice . I think it would please he to know that Lord Fauntleroy have be indulge in any fancy . if you will call he back and allow I , I shall give he five pound for these people . " 
 " that would be twenty - five dollar ! " exclaim Mrs. Errol . " it will seem like wealth to they . I can scarcely believe that it be true . " 
 " it be quite true , " say Mr. Havisham , with his dry smile . " a great change have take place in your son 's life , a great deal of power will lie in his hand . " 
 " oh ! " cry his mother . " and he be such a little boy a very little boy . how can I teach he to use it well ? it make I half afraid . my pretty little Ceddie ! " 
 the lawyer slightly clear his throat . it touch his worldly , hard old heart to see the tender , timid look in her brown eye . 
 " I think , madam , " he say , " that if I may judge from my interview with Lord Fauntleroy this morning , the next Earl of Dorincourt will think for other as well as for his noble self . he be only a child yet , but I think he may be trust . " 
 then his mother go for Cedric and bring he back into the parlor . Mr. Havisham hear he talk before he enter the room . 
 " it be infam - natory rheumatism , " he be say , " and that be a kind of rheumatism that be dreadful . and he think about the rent not be pay , and Bridget say that make the inf'ammation bad . and Pat could get a place in a store if he have some clothe . " 
 his little face look quite anxious when he come in . he be very sorry for Bridget . 
 " Dearest say you want I , " he say to Mr. Havisham . " I have   be talk to Bridget . " 
 Mr. Havisham look down at he a moment . he feel a little awkward and undecided . as Cedric 's mother have say , he be a very little boy . 
 " the Earl of Dorincourt " he begin , and then he glance involuntarily at Mrs. Errol . 
 little Lord Fauntleroy 's mother suddenly kneel down by he and put both her tender arm around his childish body . 
 " Ceddie , " she say , " the Earl be your grandpapa , your own papa 's father . he be very , very kind , and he love you and wish you to love he , because the son who be his little boy be dead . he wish you to be happy and to make other people happy . he be very rich , and he wish you to have everything you would like to have . he tell Mr. Havisham so , and give he a great deal of money for you . you can give some to Bridget now ; enough to pay her rent and buy Michael everything . be not   that fine , Ceddie ? be not   he good ? " and she kiss the child on his round cheek , where the bright color suddenly flash up in his excited amazement . 
 he look from his mother to Mr. Havisham . 
 " can I have it now ? " he cry . " can I give it to she this minute ? she be just go . " 
 Mr. Havisham hand he the money . it be in fresh , clean greenback and make a neat roll . 
 Ceddie fly out of the room with it . 
 " Bridget ! " they hear he shout , as he tear into the kitchen . " Bridget , wait a minute ! here be some money . it be for you , and you can pay the rent . my grandpapa give it to I . it be for you and Michael ! " 
 " oh , Master Ceddie ! " cry Bridget , in an awe - stricken voice . " it be twinty - foive dollar be here . where be be the misthress ? " 
 " I think I shall have to go and explain it to she , " Mrs. Errol say . 
 so she , too , go out of the room and Mr. Havisham be leave alone for a while . he go to the window and stand look out into the street reflectively . he be think of the old Earl of Dorincourt , sit in his great , splendid , gloomy library at the castle , gouty and lonely , surround by grandeur and luxury , but not really love by any one , because in all his long life he have never really love any one but himself ; he have be selfish and self - indulgent and arrogant and passionate ; he have care so much for the Earl of Dorincourt and his pleasure that there have be no time for he to think of other people ; all his wealth and power , all the benefit from his noble name and high rank , have seem to he to be thing only to be use to amuse and give pleasure to the Earl of Dorincourt ; and now that he be an old man , all this excitement and self - indulgence have only bring he ill health and irritability and a dislike of the world , which certainly dislike he . in spite of all his splendor , there be never a more unpopular old nobleman than the Earl of Dorincourt , and there could scarcely have be a more lonely one . he could fill his castle with guest if he choose . he could give great dinner and splendid hunt party ; but he know that in secret the people who would accept his invitation be afraid of his frown old face and sarcastic , bite speech . he have a cruel tongue and a bitter nature , and he take pleasure in sneer at people and make they feel uncomfortable , when he have the power to do so , because they be sensitive or proud or timid . 
 Mr. Havisham know his hard , fierce way by heart , and he be think of he as he look out of the window into the narrow , quiet street . and there rise in his mind , in sharp contrast , the picture of the cheery , handsome little fellow sit in the big chair and tell his story of his friend , Dick and the apple - woman , in his generous , innocent , honest way . and he think of the immense income , the beautiful , majestic estate , the wealth , and power for good or evil , which in the course of time would lie in the small , chubby hand little Lord Fauntleroy thrust so deep into his pocket . 
 " it will make a great difference , " he say to himself . " it will make a great difference . " 
 Cedric and his mother come back soon after . Cedric be in high spirit . he sit down in his own chair , between his mother and the lawyer , and fall into one of his quaint attitude , with his hand on his knee . he be glow with enjoyment of Bridget 's relief and rapture . 
 " she cry ! " he say . " she say she be cry for joy ! I never see any one cry for joy before . my grandpapa must be a very good man . I do not   know he be so good a man . it be more more agreeabler to be an earl than I think it be . I be almost glad I be almost quite glad I be go to be one . " 




 III 

 Cedric 's good opinion of the advantage of be an earl increase greatly during the next week . it seem almost impossible for he to realize that there be scarcely anything he might wish to do which he could not do easily ; in fact , I think it may be say that he do not fully realize it at all . but at least he understand , after a few conversation with Mr. Havisham , that he could gratify all his near wish , and he proceed to gratify they with a simplicity and delight which cause Mr. Havisham much diversion . in the week before they sail for England he do many curious thing . the lawyer long after remember the morning they go down - town together to pay a visit to Dick , and the afternoon they so amaze the apple - woman of ancient lineage by stop before her stall and tell she she be to have a tent , and a stove , and a shawl , and a sum of money which seem to she quite wonderful . 
 " for I have to go to England and be a lord , " explain Cedric , sweet - temperedly . " and I should not   like to have your bone on my mind every time it rain . my own bone never hurt , so I think I do not   know how painful a person 's bone can be , but I have   sympathize with you a great deal , and I hope you will be well . " 
 " she be a very good apple - woman , " he say to Mr. Havisham , as they walk away , leave the proprietress of the stall almost gasp for breath , and not at all believe in her great fortune . " once , when I fall down and cut my knee , she give I an apple for nothing . I have   always remember she for it . you know you always remember people who be kind to you . " 
 it have never occur to his honest , simple little mind that there be people who could forget kindness . 
 the interview with Dick be quite exciting . Dick have just be have a great deal of trouble with Jake , and be in low spirit when they see he . his amazement when Cedric calmly announce that they have come to give he what seem a very great thing to he , and would set all his trouble right , almost strike he dumb . Lord Fauntleroy 's manner of announce the object of his visit be very simple and unceremonious . Mr. Havisham be much impressed by its directness as he stand by and listen . the statement that his old friend have become a lord , and be in danger of be an earl if he live long enough , cause Dick to so open his eye and mouth , and start , that his cap fall off . when he pick it up , he utter a rather singular exclamation . Mr. Havisham think it singular , but Cedric have hear it before . 
 " I soy ! " he say , " what be yer givin ' we ? " this plainly embarrass his lordship a little , but he bear himself bravely . 
 " everybody think it not true at first , " he say . " Mr. Hobbs think I would have a sunstroke . I do not   think I be go to like it myself , but I like it well now I be use to it . the one who be the Earl now , he be my grandpapa ; and he want I to do anything I like . he be very kind , if he be an earl ; and he send I a lot of money by Mr. Havisham , and I have   bring some to you to buy Jake out . " 
 and the end of the matter be that Dick actually buy Jake out , and find himself the possessor of the business and some new brush and a most astonishing sign and outfit . he could not believe in his good luck any more easily than the apple - woman of ancient lineage could believe in her ; he walk about like a boot - black in a dream ; he star at his young benefactor and feel as if he might wake up at any moment . he scarcely seem to realize anything until Cedric put out his hand to shake hand with he before go away . 
 " well , good - bye , " he say ; and though he try to speak steadily , there be a little tremble in his voice and he wink his big brown eye . " and I hope trade'll be good . I be sorry I be go away to leave you , but perhaps I shall come back again when I be an earl . and I wish you would write to I , because we be always good friend . and if you write to I , here be where you must send your letter . " and he give he a slip of paper . " and my name be not   Cedric Errol any more ; it be Lord Fauntleroy and and good - bye , Dick . " 
 Dick wink his eye also , and yet they look rather moist about the lash . he be not an educate boot - black , and he would have find it difficult to tell what he feel just then if he have try ; perhaps that be why he do not   try , and only wink his eye and swallow a lump in his throat . 
 " I wish ye be not   go away , " he say in a husky voice . then he wink his eye again . then he look at Mr. Havisham , and touch his cap . " thanky , sir , fur bringin ' he down here an ' fur wot ye've   do , he be he be a queer little feller , " he add . " I have   aller thort a heap of he . he be such a game little feller , an ' an ' such a queer little un . " 
 and when they turn away he stand and look after they in a daze kind of way , and there be still a mist in his eye , and a lump in his throat , as he watch the gallant little figure marching gayly along by the side of its tall , rigid escort . 
 until the day of his departure , his lordship spend as much time as possible with Mr. Hobbs in the store . gloom have settle upon Mr. Hobbs ; he be much depressed in spirit . when his young friend bring to he in triumph the parting gift of a gold watch and chain , Mr. Hobbs find it difficult to acknowledge it properly . he lay the case on his stout knee , and blow his nose violently several time . 
 " there be something write on it , " say Cedric , " inside the case . I tell the man myself what to say . ' from his old friend , Lord Fauntleroy , to Mr. Hobbs . when this you see , remember I . ' I do not   want you to forget I . " 
 Mr. Hobbs blow his nose very loudly again . 
 " I sha'n't   forget you , " he say , speak a trifle huskily , as Dick have speak ; " nor do not   you go and forget I when you get among the british arrystocracy . " 
 " I should not   forget you , whoever I be among , " answer his lordship . " I have   spend my happy hour with you ; at least , some of my happy hour . I hope you will come to see I sometime . I be sure my grandpapa would be very much pleased . perhaps he will write and ask you , when I tell he about you . you you would not   mind his be an earl , would you , I mean you would not   stay away just because he be one , if he invite you to come ? " 
 " I would come to see you , " reply Mr. Hobbs , graciously . 
 so it seem to be agree that if he receive a press invitation from the Earl to come and spend a few month at Dorincourt Castle , he be to lay aside his republican prejudice and pack his valise at once . 
 at last all the preparation be complete ; the day come when the trunk be take to the steamer , and the hour arrive when the carriage stand at the door . then a curious feeling of loneliness come upon the little boy . his mamma have be shut up in her room for some time ; when she come down the stair , her eye look large and wet , and her sweet mouth be tremble . Cedric go to she , and she bend down to he , and he put his arm around she , and they kiss each other . he know something make they both sorry , though he scarcely know what it be ; but one tender little thought rise to his lip . 
 " we like this little house , Dearest , do not   we ? " he say . " we always will like it , will not   we ? " 
 " yes yes , " she answer , in a low , sweet voice . " yes , darling . " 
 and then they go into the carriage and Cedric sit very close to she , and as she look back out of the window , he look at she and stroke her hand and hold it close . 
 and then , it seem almost directly , they be on the steamer in the midst of the wild bustle and confusion ; carriage be drive down and leave passenger ; passenger be get into a state of excitement about baggage which have not arrive and threaten to be too late ; big trunk and case be be bump down and drag about ; sailor be uncoil rope and hurry to and fro ; officer be give order ; lady and gentleman and child and nurse be come on board , some be laugh and look gay , some be silent and sad , here and there two or three be cry and touch their eye with their handkerchief . Cedric find something to interest he on every side ; he look at the pile of rope , at the furled sail , at the tall , tall mast which seem almost to touch the hot blue sky ; he begin to make plan for converse with the sailor and gain some information on the subject of pirate . 
 it be just at the very last , when he be stand lean on the railing of the upper deck and watch the final preparation , enjoy the excitement and the shout of the sailor and wharfman , that his attention be call to a slight bustle in one of the group not far from he . some one be hurriedly force his way through this group and come toward he . it be a boy , with something red in his hand . it be Dick . he come up to cedric quite breathless . 
 " I have   run all the way , " he say . " I have   come down to see ye off . Trade 's be prime ! I buy this for ye out o ' what I make yesterday . ye kin wear it when ye get among the swell . I lose the paper when I be tryin ' to get through they feller downstairs . they do not   want to let I up . it be a hankercher . " 
 he pour it all forth as if in one sentence . a bell rang , and he make a leap away before Cedric have time to speak . 
 " good - bye ! " he pant . " wear it when ye get among the swell . " and he dart off and be go . 
 a few second later they see he struggle through the crowd on the low deck , and rush on shore just before the gang - plank be draw in . he stand on the wharf and wave his cap . 
 Cedric hold the handkerchief in his hand . it be of bright red silk ornament with purple horseshoe and horse ' head . 
 there be a great straining and creaking and confusion . the people on the wharf begin to shout to their friend , and the people on the steamer shout back : 
 " good - bye ! good - bye ! good - bye , old fellow ! " every one seem to be say , " do not   forget we . write when you get to Liverpool . good - bye ! good - bye ! " 
 little Lord Fauntleroy lean forward and wave the red handkerchief . 
 " good - bye , Dick ! " he shout , lustily . " thank you ! good - bye , Dick ! " 
 and the big steamer move away , and the people cheer again , and Cedric 's mother draw the veil over her eye , and on the shore there be leave great confusion ; but Dick see nothing save that bright , childish face and the bright hair that the sun shine on and the breeze lift , and he hear nothing but the hearty childish voice call " good - bye , Dick ! " as little Lord Fauntleroy steam slowly away from the home of his birth to the unknown land of his ancestor . 




 IV 

 it be during the voyage that Cedric 's mother tell he that his home be not to be her ; and when he first understand it , his grief be so great that Mr. Havisham see that the Earl have be wise in make the arrangement that his mother should be quite near he , and see he often ; for it be very plain he could not have bear the separation otherwise . but his mother manage the little fellow so sweetly and lovingly , and make he feel that she would be so near he , that , after a while , he cease to be oppress by the fear of any real parting . 
 " my house be not far from the Castle , Ceddie , " she repeat each time the subject be refer to " a very little way from your , and you can always run in and see I every day , and you will have so many thing to tell I ! and we shall be so happy together ! it be a beautiful place . your papa have often tell I about it . he love it very much ; and you will love it too . " 
 " I should love it well if you be there , " his small lordship say , with a heavy little sigh . 
 he could not but feel puzzle by so strange a state of affair , which could put his " Dearest " in one house and himself in another . 
 the fact be that Mrs. Errol have think it well not to tell he why this plan have be make . 
 " I should prefer he should not be tell , " she say to Mr. Havisham . " he would not really understand ; he would only be shock and hurt ; and I feel sure that his feeling for the Earl will be a more natural and affectionate one if he do not know that his grandfather dislike I so bitterly . he have never see hatred or hardness , and it would be a great blow to he to find out that any one could hate I . he be so love himself , and I be so dear to he ! it be well for he that he should not be tell until he be much old , and it be far well for the Earl . it would make a barrier between they , even though Ceddie be such a child . " 
 so Cedric only know that there be some mysterious reason for the arrangement , some reason which he be not old enough to understand , but which would be explain when he be old . he be puzzle ; but , after all , it be not the reason he care about so much ; and after many talk with his mother , in which she comfort he and place before he the bright side of the picture , the dark side of it gradually begin to fade out , though now and then Mr. Havisham see he sit in some queer little old - fashioned attitude , watch the sea , with a very grave face , and more than once he hear an unchildish sigh rise to his lip . 
 " I do not   like it , " he say once as he be have one of his almost venerable talk with the lawyer . " you do not   know how much I do not   like it ; but there be a great many trouble in this world , and you have to bear they . Mary say so , and I have   hear Mr. Hobbs say it too . and Dearest want I to like to live with my grandpapa , because , you see , all his child be dead , and that be very mournful . it make you sorry for a man , when all his child have die and one be kill suddenly . " 
 one of the thing which always delight the people who make the acquaintance of his young lordship be the sage little air he wear at time when he give himself up to conversation ; combine with his occasionally elderly remark and the extreme innocence and seriousness of his round childish face , it be irresistible . he be such a handsome , blooming , curly - head little fellow , that , when he sit down and nurse his knee with his chubby hand , and converse with much gravity , he be a source of great entertainment to his hearer . gradually Mr. Havisham have begin to derive a great deal of private pleasure and amusement from his society . 
 " and so you be go to try to like the Earl , " he say . 
 " yes , " answer his lordship . " he be my relation , and of course you have to like your relation ; and besides , he be be very kind to I . when a person do so many thing for you , and want you to have everything you wish for , of course you would like he if he be not   your relation ; but when he be your relation and do that , why , you be very fond of he . " 
 " do you think , " suggest Mr. Havisham , " that he will be fond of you ? " 
 " well , " say Cedric , " I think he will , because , you see , I be his relation , too , and I be his boy 's little boy besides , and , well , do not   you see of course he must be fond of I now , or he would not   want I to have everything that I like , and he would not   have send you for I . " 
 " oh ! " remark the lawyer , " that be it , be it ? " 
 " yes , " say Cedric , " that be it . do not   you think that be it , too ? of course a man would be fond of his grandson . " 
 the people who have be seasick have no soon recover from their seasickness , and come on deck to recline in their steamer - chair and enjoy themselves , than every one seem to know the romantic story of little Lord Fauntleroy , and every one take an interest in the little fellow , who run about the ship or walk with his mother or the tall , thin old lawyer , or talk to the sailor . every one like he ; he make friend everywhere . he be ever ready to make friend . when the gentleman walk up and down the deck , and let he walk with they , he step out with a manly , sturdy little tramp , and answer all their joke with much gay enjoyment ; when the lady talk to he , there be always laughter in the group of which he be the center ; when he play with the child , there be always magnificent fun on hand . among the sailor he have the heartiest friend ; he hear miraculous story about pirate and shipwreck and desert island ; he learn to splice rope and rig toy ship , and gain an amount of information concern " tops'l " and " mains'l , " quite surprising . his conversation have , indeed , quite a nautical flavor at time , and on one occasion he raise a shout of laughter in a group of lady and gentleman who be sit on deck , wrap in shawl and overcoat , by say sweetly , and with a very engaging expression : 
 " Shiver my timber , but it be a cold day ! " 
 it surprise he when they laugh . he have pick up this sea - fare remark from an " elderly naval man " of the name of Jerry , who tell he story in which it occur frequently . to judge from his story of his own adventure , Jerry have make some two or three thousand voyage , and have be invariably shipwreck on each occasion on an island densely populate with bloodthirsty cannibal . judging , also , by these same exciting adventure , he have be partially roast and eat frequently and have be scalp some fifteen or twenty time . 
 " that be why he be so bald , " explain Lord Fauntleroy to his mamma . " after you have be scalp several time the hair never grow again . Jerry 's never grow again after that last time , when the King of the Parromachaweekins do it with the knife make out of the skull of the Chief of the Wopslemumpkies . he say it be one of the most serious time he ever have . he be so frightened that his hair stand right straight up when the king flourish his knife , and it never would lie down , and the king wear it that way now , and it look something like a hair - brush . I never hear anything like the asperience Jerry have have ! I should so like to tell Mr. Hobbs about they ! " 
 sometimes , when the weather be very disagreeable and people be keep below deck in the saloon , a party of his grow - up friend would persuade he to tell they some of these " asperience " of Jerry 's , and as he sit relate they with great delight and fervor , there be certainly no more popular voyager on any ocean steamer crossing the Atlantic than little Lord Fauntleroy . he be always innocently and good - naturedly ready to do his small good to add to the general entertainment , and there be a charm in the very unconsciousness of his own childish importance . 
 " Jerry 's story int'rust they very much , " he say to his mamma . " for my part you must excuse I , Dearest but sometimes I should have think they could not   be all quite true , if they have not   happen to Jerry himself ; but as they all happen to Jerry well , it be very strange , you know , and perhaps sometimes he may forget and be a little mistaken , as he be be scalp so often . be scalp a great many time might make a person forgetful . " 
 it be eleven day after he have say good - bye to his friend Dick before he reach Liverpool ; and it be on the night of the twelfth day that the carriage in which he and his mother and Mr. Havisham have drive from the station stop before the gate of Court Lodge . they could not see much of the house in the darkness . cedric only see that there be a drive - way under great arching tree , and after the carriage have roll down this drive - way a short distance , he see an open door and a stream of bright light come through it . 
 Mary have come with they to attend her mistress , and she have reach the house before they . when Cedric jump out of the carriage he see one or two servant stand in the wide , bright hall , and Mary stand in the door - way . 
 Lord Fauntleroy spring at she with a gay little shout . 
 " do you get here , Mary ? " he say . " here 's Mary , Dearest , " and he kiss the maid on her rough red cheek . 
 " I be glad you be here , Mary , " Mrs. Errol say to she in a low voice . " it be such a comfort to I to see you . it take the strangeness away . " and she hold out her little hand , which Mary squeeze encouragingly . she know how this first ' strangeness " must feel to this little mother who have leave her own land and be about to give up her child . 
 the english servant look with curiosity at both the boy and his mother . they have hear all sort of rumor about they both ; they know how angry the old Earl have be , and why Mrs. Errol be to live at the lodge and her little boy at the castle ; they know all about the great fortune he be to inherit , and about the savage old grandfather and his gout and his temper . 
 " he will have no easy time of it , poor little chap , " they have say among themselves . 
 but they do not know what sort of a little lord have come among they ; they do not quite understand the character of the next Earl of Dorincourt . 
 he pull off his overcoat quite as if he be use to do thing for himself , and begin to look about he . he look about the broad hall , at the picture and stag ' antler and curious thing that ornament it . they seem curious to he because he have never see such thing before in a private house . 
 " Dearest , " he say , " this be a very pretty house , be not   it ? I be glad you be go to live here . it be quite a large house . " 
 it be quite a large house compare to the one in the shabby New York street , and it be very pretty and cheerful . Mary lead they upstairs to a bright chintz - hung bedroom where a fire be burn , and a large snow - white persian cat be sleep luxuriously on the white fur hearth - rug . 
 " it be the house - kaper up at the Castle , ma'am , sint she to yez , " explain Mary . " it be herself be a kind - hearted lady an ' have have iverything do to prepar ' fur yez . I see her meself a few minnit , an ' she be fond av the Capt'in , ma'am , an ' graivs fur he ; and she say to say the big cat slapin ' on the rug moight make the room same homeloike to yez . she know Capt'in Errol whin he be a bye an ' a foine handsum ' bye she ses he be , an ' a foine young man wid a plisint word fur every one , great an ' shmall . an ' s I to she , se I : ' he be lift a bye that be loike he , ma'am , fur a foiner little felly niver sthipped in shoe - leather . " ' 
 when they be ready , they go downstairs into another big bright room ; its ceiling be low , and the furniture be heavy and beautifully carve , the chair be deep and have high massive back , and there be queer shelf and cabinet with strange , pretty ornament on they . there be a great tiger - skin before the fire , and an arm - chair on each side of it . the stately white cat have respond to Lord Fauntleroy 's stroking and follow he downstairs , and when he throw himself down upon the rug , she curl herself up grandly beside he as if she intend to make friend . Cedric be so pleased that he put his head down by her , and lie stroke she , not notice what his mother and Mr. Havisham be say . 
 they be , indeed , speak in a rather low tone . Mrs. Errol look a little pale and agitated . 
 " he need not go to - night ? " she say . " he will stay with I to - night ? " 
 " yes , " answer Mr. Havisham in the same low tone ; " it will not be necessary for he to go to - night . I myself will go to the Castle as soon as we have din , and inform the Earl of our arrival . " 
 Mrs. Errol glance down at Cedric . he be lie in a graceful , careless attitude upon the black - and - yellow skin ; the fire shine on his handsome , flushed little face , and on the tumbled , curly hair spread out on the rug ; the big cat be purr in drowsy content , she like the caress touch of the kind little hand on her fur . 
 Mrs. Errol smile faintly . 
 " his lordship do not know all that he be take from I , " she say rather sadly . then she look at the lawyer . " will you tell he , if you please , " she say , " that I should rather not have the money ? " 
 " the money ! " Mr. Havisham exclaim . " you can not mean the income he propose to settle upon you ! " 
 " yes , " she answer , quite simply ; " I think I should rather not have it . I be oblige to accept the house , and I thank he for it , because it make it possible for I to be near my child ; but I have a little money of my own , enough to live simply upon , and I should rather not take the other . as he dislike I so much , I should feel a little as if I be sell Cedric to he . I be give he up only because I love he enough to forget myself for his good , and because his father would wish it to be so . " 
 Mr. Havisham rub his chin . 
 " this be very strange , " he say . " he will be very angry . he will not   understand it . " 
 " I think he will understand it after he think it over , " she say . " I do not really need the money , and why should I accept luxury from the man who hat I so much that he take my little boy from I his son 's child ? " 
 Mr. Havisham look reflective for a few moment . 
 " I will deliver your message , " he say afterward . 
 and then the dinner be bring in and they sit down together , the big cat take a seat on a chair near Cedric 's and purr majestically throughout the meal . 
 when , later in the evening , Mr. Havisham present himself at the Castle , he be take at once to the Earl . he find he sit by the fire in a luxurious easy - chair , his foot on a gout - stool . he look at the lawyer sharply from under his shaggy eyebrow , but Mr. Havisham could see that , in spite of his pretense at calmness , he be nervous and secretly excited . 
 " well , " he say ; " well , Havisham , come back , have you ? what be the news ? " 
 " Lord Fauntleroy and his mother be at Court Lodge , " reply Mr. Havisham . " they bear the voyage very well and be in excellent health . " 
 the Earl make a half - impatient sound and move his hand restlessly . 
 " glad to hear it , " he say brusquely . " so far , so good . make yourself comfortable . have a glass of wine and settle down . what else ? " 
 " his lordship remain with his mother to - night . to - morrow I will bring he to the Castle . " 
 the Earl 's elbow be rest on the arm of his chair ; he put his hand up and shield his eye with it . 
 " well , " he say ; " go on . you know I tell you not to write to I about the matter , and I know nothing whatever about it . what kind of a lad be he ? I do not   care about the mother ; what sort of a lad be he ? " 
 Mr. Havisham drink a little of the glass of port he have pour out for himself , and sit hold it in his hand . 
 " it be rather difficult to judge of the character of a child of seven , " he say cautiously . 
 the Earl 's prejudice be very intense . he look up quickly and utter a rough word . 
 " a fool , be he ? " he exclaim . " or a clumsy cub ? his american blood tell , do it ? " 
 " I do not think it have injure he , my lord , " reply the lawyer in his dry , deliberate fashion . " I do not   know much about child , but I think he rather a fine lad . " 
 his manner of speech be always deliberate and unenthusiastic , but he make it a trifle more so than usual . he have a shrewd fancy that it would be well that the Earl should judge for himself , and be quite unprepared for his first interview with his grandson . 
 " healthy and well - grow ? " ask my lord . 
 " apparently very healthy , and quite well - grow , " reply the lawyer . 
 " straight - limbed and well enough to look at ? " demand the Earl . 
 a very slight smile touch Mr. Havisham 's thin lip . there rise up before his mind 's eye the picture he have leave at Court Lodge , the beautiful , graceful child 's body lie upon the tiger - skin in careless comfort the bright , tumbled hair spread on the rug the bright , rosy boy 's face . 
 " rather a handsome boy , I think , my lord , as boy go , " he say , " though I be scarcely a judge , perhaps . but you will find he somewhat different from most english child , I dare say . " 
 " I have not   a doubt of that , " snarl the Earl , a twinge of gout seize he . " a lot of impudent little beggar , those american child ; I have   hear that often enough . " 
 " it be not exactly impudence in his case , " say Mr. Havisham . " I can scarcely describe what the difference be . he have live more with old people than with child , and the difference seem to be a mixture of maturity and childishness . " 
 " american impudence ! " protest the Earl . " I have   hear of it before . they call it precocity and freedom . beastly , impudent bad manner ; that be what it be ! " 
 Mr. Havisham drink some more port . he seldom argue with his lordly patron , never when his lordly patron 's noble leg be inflame by gout . at such time it be always well to leave he alone . so there be a silence of a few moment . it be Mr. Havisham who break it . 
 " I have a message to deliver from Mrs. Errol , " he remark . 
 " I do not   want any of her message ! " growl his lordship ; " the less I hear of she the well . " 
 " this be a rather important one , " explain the lawyer . " she prefer not to accept the income you propose to settle on she . " 
 the Earl start visibly . 
 " what be that ? " he cry out . " what be that ? " 
 Mr. Havisham repeat his word . 
 " she say it be not necessary , and that as the relation between you be not friendly " 
 " not friendly ! " ejaculate my lord savagely ; " I should say they be not friendly ! I hate to think of she ! a mercenary , sharp - voice American ! I do not   wish to see she . " 
 " my lord , " say Mr. Havisham , " you can scarcely call her mercenary . she have ask for nothing . she do not accept the money you offer she . " 
 " all do for effect ! " snap his noble lordship . " she want to wheedle I into see she . she think I shall admire her spirit . I do not   admire it ! it be only american independence ! I will not   have she live like a beggar at my park gate . as she be the boy 's mother , she have a position to keep up , and she shall keep it up . she shall have the money , whether she like it or not ! " 
 " she will not   spend it , " say Mr. Havisham . 
 " I do not   care whether she spend it or not ! " bluster my lord . " she shall have it send to she . she sha'n't   tell people that she have to live like a pauper because I have do nothing for she ! she want to give the boy a bad opinion of I ! I suppose she have poison his mind against I already ! " 
 " no , " say Mr. Havisham . " I have another message , which will prove to you that she have not do that . " 
 " I do not   want to hear it ! " pant the Earl , out of breath with anger and excitement and gout . 
 but Mr. Havisham deliver it . 
 " she ask you not to let Lord Fauntleroy hear anything which would lead he to understand that you separate he from she because of your prejudice against she . he be very fond of she , and she be convince that it would cause a barrier to exist between you . she say he would not comprehend it , and it might make he fear you in some measure , or at least cause he to feel less affection for you . she have tell he that he be too young to understand the reason , but shall hear it when he be old . she wish that there should be no shadow on your first meeting . " 
 the Earl sink back into his chair . his deep - set fierce old eye gleam under his beetle brow . 
 " come , now ! " he say , still breathlessly . " come , now ! you do not   mean the mother have not   tell he ? " 
 " not one word , my lord , " reply the lawyer coolly . " that I can assure you . the child be prepared to believe you the most amiable and affectionate of grandparent . nothing absolutely nothing have be say to he to give he the slight doubt of your perfection . and as I carry out your command in every detail , while in New York , he certainly regard you as a wonder of generosity . " 
 " he do , eh ? " say the Earl . 
 " I give you my word of honor , " say Mr. Havisham , " that Lord Fauntleroy 's impression of you will depend entirely upon yourself . and if you will pardon the liberty I take in make the suggestion , I think you will succeed well with he if you take the precaution not to speak slightingly of his mother . " 
 " Pooh , pooh ! " say the Earl . " the youngster be only seven year old ! " 
 " he have spend those seven year at his mother 's side , " return Mr. Havisham ; " and she have all his affection . " 




 V 

 it be late in the afternoon when the carriage contain little Lord Fauntleroy and Mr. Havisham drive up the long avenue which lead to the castle . the Earl have give order that his grandson should arrive in time to dine with he ; and for some reason well know to himself , he have also order that the child should be send alone into the room in which he intend to receive he . as the carriage roll up the avenue , Lord Fauntleroy sit lean comfortably against the luxurious cushion , and regard the prospect with great interest . he be , in fact , interested in everything he see . he have be interested in the carriage , with its large , splendid horse and their glitter harness ; he have be interested in the tall coachman and footman , with their resplendent livery ; and he have be especially interested in the coronet on the panel , and have strike up an acquaintance with the footman for the purpose of inquire what it mean . 
 when the carriage reach the great gate of the park , he look out of the window to get a good view of the huge stone lion ornament the entrance . the gate be open by a motherly , rosy - look woman , who come out of a pretty , ivy - cover lodge . two child run out of the door of the house and stand look with round , wide - open eye at the little boy in the carriage , who look at they also . their mother stand courtesye and smile , and the child , on receive a sign from she , make bob little courtesy too . 
 " do she know I ? " ask Lord Fauntleroy . " I think she must think she know I . " and he take off his black velvet cap to she and smile . 
 " how do you do ? " he say brightly . " good - afternoon ! " 
 the woman seem pleased , he think . the smile broaden on her rosy face and a kind look come into her blue eye . 
 " God bless your lordship ! " she say . " God bless your pretty face ! good luck and happiness to your lordship ! welcome to you ! " 
 Lord Fauntleroy wave his cap and nod to she again as the carriage roll by she . 
 " I like that woman , " he say . " she look as if she like boy . I should like to come here and play with her child . I wonder if she have enough to make up a company ? " 
 Mr. Havisham do not tell he that he would scarcely be allow to make playmate of the gate - keeper 's child . the lawyer think there be time enough for give he that information . 
 the carriage roll on and on between the great , beautiful tree which grow on each side of the avenue and stretch their broad , sway branch in an arch across it . cedric have never see such tree , they be so grand and stately , and their branch grow so low down on their huge trunk . he do not then know that Dorincourt Castle be one of the most beautiful in all England ; that its park be one of the broad and fine , and its tree and avenue almost without rival . but he do know that it be all very beautiful . he like the big , broad - branched tree , with the late afternoon sunlight strike golden lance through they . he like the perfect stillness which rest on everything . he feel a great , strange pleasure in the beauty of which he catch glimpse under and between the sweeping bough the great , beautiful space of the park , with still other tree stand sometimes stately and alone , and sometimes in group . now and then they pass place where tall fern grow in mass , and again and again the ground be azure with the bluebell sway in the soft breeze . several time he start up with a laugh of delight as a rabbit leap up from under the greenery and scud away with a twinkle of short white tail behind it . once a covey of partridge rise with a sudden whir and fly away , and then he shout and clap his hand . 
 " it be a beautiful place , be not   it ? " he say to Mr. Havisham . " I never see such a beautiful place . it be pretty even than Central Park . " 
 he be rather puzzle by the length of time they be on their way . 
 " how far be it , " he say , at length , " from the gate to the front door ? " 
 " it be between three and four mile , " answer the lawyer . 
 " that be a long way for a person to live from his gate , " remark his lordship . 
 every few minute he see something new to wonder at and admire . when he catch sight of the deer , some couch in the grass , some stand with their pretty antlered head turn with a half - startle air toward the avenue as the carriage wheel disturb they , he be enchant . 
 " have there be a circus ? " he cry ; " or do they live here always ? whose be they ? " 
 " they live here , " Mr. Havisham tell he . " they belong to the Earl , your grandfather . " 
 it be not long after this that they see the castle . it rise up before they stately and beautiful and gray , the last ray of the sun cast dazzle light on its many window . it have turret and battlement and tower ; a great deal of ivy grow upon its wall ; all the broad , open space about it be lay out in terrace and lawn and bed of brilliant flower . 
 " it be the most beautiful place I ever see ! " say Cedric , his round face flush with pleasure . " it remind any one of a king 's palace . I see a picture of one once in a fairy - book . " 
 he see the great entrance - door throw open and many servant stand in two line look at he . he wonder why they be stand there , and admire their livery very much . he do not know that they be there to do honor to the little boy to whom all this splendor would one day belong , the beautiful castle like the fairy king 's palace , the magnificent park , the grand old tree , the dell full of fern and bluebell where the hare and rabbit play , the dapple , large - eyed deer couching in the deep grass . it be only a couple of week since he have sit with Mr. Hobbs among the potato and can peach , with his leg dangle from the high stool ; it would not have be possible for he to realize that he have very much to do with all this grandeur . at the head of the line of servant there stand an elderly woman in a rich , plain black silk gown ; she have gray hair and wear a cap . as he enter the hall she stand near than the rest , and the child think from the look in her eye that she be go to speak to he . Mr. Havisham , who hold his hand , pause a moment . 
 " this be Lord Fauntleroy , Mrs. Mellon , " he say . " Lord Fauntleroy , this be Mrs. Mellon , who be the housekeeper . " 
 Cedric give she his hand , his eye light up . 
 " be it you who send the cat ? " he say . " I be much oblige to you , ma'am . " 
 Mrs. Mellon 's handsome old face look as pleased as the face of the lodge - keeper 's wife have do . 
 " I should know his lordship anywhere , " she say to Mr. Havisham . " he have the Captain 's face and way . it be a great day , this , sir . " 
 Cedric wonder why it be a great day . he look at Mrs. Mellon curiously . it seem to he for a moment as if there be tear in her eye , and yet it be evident she be not unhappy . she smile down on he . 
 " the cat leave two beautiful kitten here , " she say ; " they shall be send up to your lordship 's nursery . " 
 Mr. Havisham say a few word to she in a low voice . 
 " in the library , sir , " Mrs. Mellon reply . " his lordship be to be take there alone . " 
 a few minute later , the very tall footman in livery , who have escort Cedric to the library door , open it and announce : " Lord Fauntleroy , my lord , " in quite a majestic tone . if he be only a footman , he feel it be rather a grand occasion when the heir come home to his own land and possession , and be usher into the presence of the old Earl , whose place and title he be to take . 
 Cedric cross the threshold into the room . it be a very large and splendid room , with massive carven furniture in it , and shelf upon shelf of book ; the furniture be so dark , and the drapery so heavy , the diamond - pan window be so deep , and it seem such a distance from one end of it to the other , that , since the sun have go down , the effect of it all be rather gloomy . for a moment Cedric think there be nobody in the room , but soon he see that by the fire burn on the wide hearth there be a large easy - chair and that in that chair some one be sit some one who do not at first turn to look at he . 
 but he have attract attention in one quarter at least . on the floor , by the arm - chair , lie a dog , a huge tawny mastiff , with body and limb almost as big as a lion 's ; and this great creature rise majestically and slowly , and march toward the little fellow with a heavy step . 
 then the person in the chair speak . " Dougal , " he call , " come back , sir . " 
 but there be no more fear in little Lord Fauntleroy 's heart than there be unkindness he have be a brave little fellow all his life . he put his hand on the big dog 's collar in the most natural way in the world , and they stray forward together , Dougal sniffing as he go . 
 and then the Earl look up . what Cedric see be a large old man with shaggy white hair and eyebrow , and a nose like an eagle 's beak between his deep , fierce eye . what the Earl see be a graceful , childish figure in a black velvet suit , with a lace collar , and with love - lock wave about the handsome , manly little face , whose eye meet his with a look of innocent good - fellowship . if the Castle be like the palace in a fairy story , it must be own that little Lord Fauntleroy be himself rather like a small copy of the fairy prince , though he be not at all aware of the fact , and perhaps be rather a sturdy young model of a fairy . but there be a sudden glow of triumph and exultation in the fiery old Earl 's heart as he see what a strong , beautiful boy this grandson be , and how unhesitatingly he look up as he stand with his hand on the big dog 's neck . it please the grim old nobleman that the child should show no shyness or fear , either of the dog or of himself . 
 Cedric look at he just as he have look at the woman at the lodge and at the housekeeper , and come quite close to he . 
 " be you the Earl ? " he say . " I be your grandson , you know , that Mr. Havisham bring . I be Lord Fauntleroy . " 
 he hold out his hand because he think it must be the polite and proper thing to do even with earl . " I hope you be very well , " he continue , with the utmost friendliness . " I be very glad to see you . " 
 the Earl shake hand with he , with a curious gleam in his eye ; just at first , he be so astonished that he scarcely know what to say . he star at the picturesque little apparition from under his shaggy brow , and take it all in from head to foot . 
 " glad to see I , be you ? " he say . 
 " yes , " answer Lord Fauntleroy , " very . " 
 there be a chair near he , and he sit down on it ; it be a high - back , rather tall chair , and his foot do not touch the floor when he have settle himself in it , but he seem to be quite comfortable as he sit there , and regard his august relative intently but modestly . 
 " I have   keep wonder what you would look like , " he remark . " I use to lie in my berth in the ship and wonder if you would be anything like my father . " 
 " be I ? " ask the Earl . 
 " well , " Cedric reply , " I be very young when he die , and I may not remember exactly how he look , but I do not   think you be like he . " 
 " you be disappoint , I suppose ? " suggest his grandfather . 
 " oh , no , " respond Cedric politely . " of course you would like any one to look like your father ; but of course you would enjoy the way your grandfather look , even if he be not   like your father . you know how it be yourself about admire your relation . " 
 the Earl lean back in his chair and star . he could not be say to know how it be about admire his relation . he have employ most of his noble leisure in quarrel violently with they , in turn they out of his house , and apply abusive epithet to they ; and they all hat he cordially . 
 " any boy would love his grandfather , " continue Lord Fauntleroy , " especially one that have be as kind to he as you have be . " 
 another queer gleam come into the old nobleman 's eye . 
 " oh ! " he say , " I have be kind to you , have I ? " 
 " yes , " answer Lord Fauntleroy brightly ; " I be ever so much oblige to you about Bridget , and the apple - woman , and Dick . " 
 " Bridget ! " exclaim the Earl . " Dick ! the apple - woman ! " 
 " yes ! " explain Cedric ; " the one you give I all that money for the money you tell Mr. Havisham to give I if I want it . " 
 " ha ! " ejaculate his lordship . " that be it , be it ? the money you be to spend as you like . what do you buy with it ? I should like to hear something about that . " 
 he draw his shaggy eyebrow together and look at the child sharply . he be secretly curious to know in what way the lad have indulge himself . 
 " oh ! " say Lord Fauntleroy , " perhaps you do not   know about Dick and the apple - woman and Bridget . I forget you live such a long way off from they . they be particular friend of mine . and you see Michael have the fever " 
 " who be Michael ? " ask the Earl . 
 " Michael be Bridget 's husband , and they be in great trouble . when a man be sick and can not   work and have twelve child , you know how it be . and Michael have always be a sober man . and Bridget use to come to our house and cry . and the evening Mr. Havisham be there , she be in the kitchen crying , because they have almost nothing to eat and could not   pay the rent ; and I go in to see she , and Mr. Havisham send for I and he say you have give he some money for I . and I run as fast as I could into the kitchen and give it to Bridget ; and that make it all right ; and Bridget could scarcely believe her eye . that be why I be so obliged to you . " 
 " oh ! " say the Earl in his deep voice , " that be one of the thing you do for yourself , be it ? what else ? " 
 Dougal have be sit by the tall chair ; the great dog have take its place there when Cedric sit down . several time it have turn and look up at the boy as if interested in the conversation . Dougal be a solemn dog , who seem to feel altogether too big to take life 's responsibility lightly . the old Earl , who know the dog well , have watch it with secret interest . Dougal be not a dog whose habit it be to make acquaintance rashly , and the Earl wonder somewhat to see how quietly the brute sit under the touch of the childish hand . and , just at this moment , the big dog give little Lord Fauntleroy one more look of dignified scrutiny , and deliberately lay its huge , lion - like head on the boy 's black - velvet knee . 
 the small hand go on stroke this new friend as Cedric answer : 
 " well , there be Dick , " he say . " you would like Dick , he be so square . " 
 this be an americanism the Earl be not prepare for . 
 " what do that mean ? " he inquire . 
 Lord Fauntleroy pause a moment to reflect . he be not very sure himself what it mean . he have take it for grant as mean something very creditable because Dick have be fond of use it . 
 " I think it mean that he would not   cheat any one , " he exclaim ; " or hit a boy who be under his size , and that he black people 's boot very well and make they shine as much as he can . he be a perfessional bootblack . " 
 " and he be one of your acquaintance , be he ? " say the Earl . 
 " he be an old friend of mine , " reply his grandson . " not quite as old as Mr. Hobbs , but quite old . he give I a present just before the ship sail . " 
 he put his hand into his pocket and draw forth a neatly fold red object and open it with an air of affectionate pride . it be the red silk handkerchief with the large purple horse - shoe and head on it . 
 " he give I this , " say his young lordship . " I shall keep it always . you can wear it round your neck or keep it in your pocket . he buy it with the first money he earn after I buy Jake out and give he the new brush . it be a keepsake . I put some poetry in Mr. Hobbs 's watch . it be , ' when this you see , remember I . ' when this I see , I shall always remember Dick . " 
 the sensation of the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorincourt could scarcely be describe . he be not an old nobleman who be very easily bewilder , because he have see a great deal of the world ; but here be something he find so novel that it almost take his lordly breath away , and cause he some singular emotion . he have never care for child ; he have be so occupy with his own pleasure that he have never have time to care for they . his own son have not interest he when they be very young though sometimes he remember have think Cedric 's father a handsome and strong little fellow . he have be so selfish himself that he have miss the pleasure of see unselfishness in other , and he have not know how tender and faithful and affectionate a kind - hearted little child can be , and how innocent and unconscious be its simple , generous impulse . a boy have always seem to he a most objectionable little animal , selfish and greedy and boisterous when not under strict restraint ; his own two eld son have give their tutor constant trouble and annoyance , and of the young one he fancy he have hear few complaint because the boy be of no particular importance . it have never once occur to he that he should like his grandson ; he have send for the little cedric because his pride impel he to do so . if the boy be to take his place in the future , he do not wish his name to be make ridiculous by descend to an uneducated boor . he have be convince the boy would be a clownish fellow if he be bring up in America . he have no feeling of affection for the lad ; his only hope be that he should find he decently well - feature , and with a respectable share of sense ; he have be so disappointed in his other son , and have be make so furious by Captain Errol 's american marriage , that he have never once think that anything creditable could come of it . when the footman have announce Lord Fauntleroy , he have almost dread to look at the boy lest he should find he all that he have fear . it be because of this feeling that he have order that the child should be send to he alone . his pride could not endure that other should see his disappointment if he be to be disappoint . his proud , stubborn old heart therefore have leap within he when the boy come forward with his graceful , easy carriage , his fearless hand on the big dog 's neck . even in the moment when he have hop the most , the Earl have never hop that his grandson would look like that . it seem almost too good to be true that this should be the boy he have dread to see the child of the woman he so dislike this little fellow with so much beauty and such a brave , childish grace ! the Earl 's stern composure be quite shake by this startling surprise . 
 and then their talk begin ; and he be still more curiously move , and more and more puzzled . in the first place , he be so used to see people rather afraid and embarrassed before he , that he have expect nothing else but that his grandson would be timid or shy . but Cedric be no more afraid of the Earl than he have be of Dougal . he be not bold ; he be only innocently friendly , and he be not conscious that there could be any reason why he should be awkward or afraid . the Earl could not help see that the little boy take he for a friend and treat he as one , without have any doubt of he at all . it be quite plain as the little fellow sit there in his tall chair and talk in his friendly way that it have never occur to he that this large , fierce - look old man could be anything but kind to he , and rather pleased to see he there . and it be plain , too , that , in his childish way , he wish to please and interest his grandfather . Cross , and hard - hearted , and worldly as the old Earl be , he could not help feel a secret and novel pleasure in this very confidence . after all , it be not disagreeable to meet some one who do not distrust he or shrink from he , or seem to detect the ugly part of his nature ; some one who look at he with clear , unsuspecting eye , if it be only a little boy in a black velvet suit . 
 so the old man lean back in his chair , and lead his young companion on to tell he still more of himself , and with that odd gleam in his eye watch the little fellow as he talk . Lord Fauntleroy be quite willing to answer all his question and chat on in his genial little way quite composedly . he tell he all about Dick and Jake , and the apple - woman , and Mr. Hobbs ; he describe the Republican Rally in all the glory of its banner and transparency , torch and rocket . in the course of the conversation , he reach the Fourth of July and the Revolution , and be just become enthusiastic , when he suddenly recollect something and stop very abruptly . 
 " what be the matter ? " demand his grandfather . " why do not   you go on ? " 
 Lord Fauntleroy move rather uneasily in his chair . it be evident to the Earl that he be embarrassed by the thought which have just occur to he . 
 " I be just think that perhaps you might not   like it , " he reply . " perhaps some one belong to you might have be there . I forget you be an Englishman . " 
 " you can go on , " say my lord . " no one belong to I be there . you forgot you be an Englishman , too . " 
 " oh ! no , " say Cedric quickly . " I be an American ! " 
 " you be an Englishman , " say the Earl grimly . " your father be an Englishman . " 
 it amuse he a little to say this , but it do not amuse Cedric . the lad have never think of such a development as this . he feel himself grow quite hot up to the root of his hair . 
 " I be bear in America , " he protest . " you have to be an American if you be bear in America . I beg your pardon , " with serious politeness and delicacy , " for contradict you . Mr. Hobbs tell I , if there be another war , you know , I should have to to be an American . " 
 the Earl give a grim half laugh it be short and grim , but it be a laugh . 
 " you would , would you ? " he say . 
 he hat America and Americans , but it amuse he to see how serious and interested this small patriot be . he think that so good an American might make a rather good Englishman when he be a man . 
 they have not time to go very deep into the Revolution again and indeed Lord Fauntleroy feel some delicacy about return to the subject before dinner be announce . 
 Cedric leave his chair and go to his noble kinsman . he look down at his gouty foot . 
 " would you like I to help you ? " he say politely . " you could lean on I , you know . once when Mr. Hobbs hurt his foot with a potato - barrel rolling on it , he use to lean on I . " 
 the big footman almost peril his reputation and his situation by smile . he be an aristocratic footman who have always live in the good of noble family , and he have never smile ; indeed , he would have feel himself a disgraced and vulgar footman if he have allow himself to be lead by any circumstance whatever into such an indiscretion as a smile . but he have a very narrow escape . he only just save himself by star straight over the Earl 's head at a very ugly picture . 
 the Earl look his valiant young relative over from head to foot . 
 " do you think you could do it ? " he ask gruffly . 
 " I think I could , " say Cedric . " I be strong . I be seven , you know . you could lean on your stick on one side , and on I on the other . Dick say I have   a good deal of muscle for a boy that be only seven . " 
 he shut his hand and move it upward to his shoulder , so that the Earl might see the muscle Dick have kindly approve of , and his face be so grave and earnest that the footman find it necessary to look very hard indeed at the ugly picture . 
 " well , " say the Earl , " you may try . " 
 Cedric give he his stick and begin to assist he to rise . usually , the footman do this , and be violently swear at when his lordship have an extra twinge of gout . the Earl be not a very polite person as a rule , and many a time the huge footman about he quake inside their imposing livery . 
 but this evening he do not swear , though his gouty foot give he more twinge than one . he choose to try an experiment . he get up slowly and put his hand on the small shoulder present to he with so much courage . little Lord Fauntleroy make a careful step forward , look down at the gouty foot . 
 " just lean on I , " he say , with encourage good cheer . " I will walk very slowly . " 
 if the Earl have be support by the footman he would have rest less on his stick and more on his assistant 's arm . and yet it be part of his experiment to let his grandson feel his burden as no light weight . it be quite a heavy weight indeed , and after a few step his young lordship 's face grow quite hot , and his heart beat rather fast , but he brace himself sturdily , remember his muscle and Dick 's approval of it . 
 " do not   be afraid of lean on I , " he pant . " I be all right if if it be not   a very long way . " 
 it be not really very far to the dining - room , but it seem rather a long way to Cedric , before they reach the chair at the head of the table . the hand on his shoulder seem to grow heavy at every step , and his face grow red and hotter , and his breath short , but he never think of give up ; he stiffen his childish muscle , hold his head erect , and encourage the Earl as he limp along . 
 " do your foot hurt you very much when you stand on it ? " he ask . " do you ever put it in hot water and mustard ? Mr. Hobbs use to put his in hot water . Arnica be a very nice thing , they tell I . " 
 the big dog stalk slowly beside they , and the big footman follow ; several time he look very queer as he watch the little figure make the very most of all its strength , and bear its burden with such good - will . the Earl , too , look rather queer , once , as he glance sidewise down at the flushed little face . when they enter the room where they be to dine , Cedric see it be a very large and impose one , and that the footman who stand behind the chair at the head of the table star very hard as they come in . 
 but they reach the chair at last . the hand be remove from his shoulder , and the Earl be fairly seat . 
 Cedric take out Dick 's handkerchief and wipe his forehead . 
 " it be a warm night , be not   it ? " he say . " perhaps you need a fire because because of your foot , but it seem just a little warm to I . " 
 his delicate consideration for his noble relative 's feeling be such that he do not wish to seem to intimate that any of his surrounding be unnecessary . 
 " you have be do some rather hard work , " say the Earl . 
 " oh , no ! " say Lord Fauntleroy , " it be not   exactly hard , but I get a little warm . a person will get warm in summer time . " 
 and he rub his damp curl rather vigorously with the gorgeous handkerchief . his own chair be place at the other end of the table , opposite his grandfather 's . it be a chair with arm , and intend for a much large individual than himself ; indeed , everything he have see so far , the great room , with their high ceiling , the massive furniture , the big footman , the big dog , the Earl himself , be all of proportion calculate to make this little lad feel that he be very small , indeed . but that do not trouble he ; he have never think himself very large or important , and he be quite willing to accommodate himself even to circumstance which rather overpower he . 
 perhaps he have never look so little a fellow as when seat now in his great chair , at the end of the table . notwithstanding his solitary existence , the Earl choose to live in some state . he be fond of his dinner , and he din in a formal style . Cedric look at he across a glitter of splendid glass and plate , which to his unaccustomed eye seem quite dazzling . a stranger look on might well have smile at the picture , the great stately room , the big liveried servant , the bright light , the glitter silver and glass , the fierce - look old nobleman at the head of the table and the very small boy at the foot . dinner be usually a very serious matter with the Earl and it be a very serious matter with the cook , if his lordship be not pleased or have an indifferent appetite . to - day , however , his appetite seem a trifle well than usual , perhaps because he have something to think of beside the flavor of the entree and the management of the gravy . his grandson give he something to think of . he keep look at he across the table . he do not say very much himself , but he manage to make the boy talk . he have never imagine that he could be entertain by hear a child talk , but Lord Fauntleroy at once puzzle and amuse he , and he keep remember how he have let the childish shoulder feel his weight just for the sake of try how far the boy 's courage and endurance would go , and it please he to know that his grandson have not quail and have not seem to think even for a moment of give up what he have undertake to do . 
 " you do not   wear your coronet all the time ? " remark Lord Fauntleroy respectfully . 
 " no , " reply the Earl , with his grim smile ; " it be not become to I . " 
 " Mr. Hobbs say you always wear it , " say Cedric ; " but after he think it over , he say he suppose you must sometimes take it off to put your hat on . " 
 " yes , " say the Earl , " I take it off occasionally . " 
 and one of the footman suddenly turn aside and give a singular little cough behind his hand . 
 cedric finish his dinner first , and then he lean back in his chair and take a survey of the room . 
 " you must be very proud of your house , " he say , " it be such a beautiful house . I never see anything so beautiful ; but , of course , as I be only seven , I have not   see much . " 
 " and you think I must be proud of it , do you ? " say the Earl . 
 " I should think any one would be proud of it , " reply Lord Fauntleroy . " I should be proud of it if it be my house . everything about it be beautiful . and the park , and those tree , how beautiful they be , and how the leaf rustle ! " 
 then he pause an instant and look across the table rather wistfully . 
 " it be a very big house for just two people to live in , be not   it ? " he say . 
 " it be quite large enough for two , " answer the Earl . " do you find it too large ? " 
 his little lordship hesitate a moment . 
 " I be only think , " he say , " that if two people live in it who be not very good companion , they might feel lonely sometimes . " 
 " do you think I shall make a good companion ? " inquire the Earl . 
 " yes , " reply Cedric , " I think you will . Mr. Hobbs and I be great friend . he be the good friend I have except Dearest . " 
 the Earl make a quick movement of his bushy eyebrow . 
 " who be Dearest ? " 
 " she be my mother , " say Lord Fauntleroy , in a rather low , quiet little voice . 
 perhaps he be a trifle tired , as his bed - time be near , and perhaps after the excitement of the last few day it be natural he should be tired , so perhaps , too , the feeling of weariness bring to he a vague sense of loneliness in the remembrance that to - night he be not to sleep at home , watch over by the love eye of that " good friend " of his . they have always be " good friend , " this boy and his young mother . he could not help think of she , and the more he think of she the less be he inclined to talk , and by the time the dinner be at an end the Earl see that there be a faint shadow on his face . but cedric bear himself with excellent courage , and when they go back to the library , though the tall footman walk on one side of his master , the Earl 's hand rest on his grandson 's shoulder , though not so heavily as before . 
 when the footman leave they alone , Cedric sit down upon the hearth - rug near Dougal . for a few minute he stroke the dog 's ear in silence and look at the fire . 
 the Earl watch he . the boy 's eye look wistful and thoughtful , and once or twice he give a little sigh . the Earl sit still , and keep his eye fix on his grandson . 
 " Fauntleroy , " he say at last , " what be you think of ? " 
 Fauntleroy look up with a manful effort at a smile . 
 " I be think about Dearest , " he say ; " and and I think I would well get up and walk up and down the room . " 
 he rise up , and put his hand in his small pocket , and begin to walk to and fro . his eye be very bright , and his lip be press together , but he keep his head up and walk firmly . Dougal move lazily and look at he , and then stand up . he walk over to the child , and begin to follow he uneasily . Fauntleroy draw one hand from his pocket and lay it on the dog 's head . 
 " he be a very nice dog , " he say . " he be my friend . he know how I feel . " 
 " how do you feel ? " ask the Earl . 
 it disturb he to see the struggle the little fellow be have with his first feeling of homesickness , but it please he to see that he be make so brave an effort to bear it well . he like this childish courage . 
 " come here , " he say . 
 Fauntleroy go to he . 
 " I never be away from my own house before , " say the boy , with a troubled look in his brown eye . " it make a person feel a strange feeling when he have to stay all night in another person 's castle instead of in his own house . but Dearest be not very far away from I . she tell I to remember that and and I be seven and I can look at the picture she give I . " 
 he put his hand in his pocket , and bring out a small violet velvet - cover case . 
 " this be it , " he say . " you see , you press this spring and it open , and she be in there ! " 
 he have come close to the Earl 's chair , and , as he draw forth the little case , he lean against the arm of it , and against the old man 's arm , too , as confidingly as if child have always lean there . 
 " there she be , " he say , as the case open ; and he look up with a smile . 
 the Earl knit his brow ; he do not wish to see the picture , but he look at it in spite of himself ; and there look up at he from it such a pretty young face a face so like the child 's at his side that it quite startle he . 
 " I suppose you think you be very fond of she , " he say . 
 " yes , " answer Lord Fauntleroy , in a gentle tone , and with simple directness ; " I do think so , and I think it be true . you see , Mr. Hobbs be my friend , and Dick and Bridget and Mary and Michael , they be my friend , too ; but Dearest well , she be my CLOSE friend , and we always tell each other everything . my father leave she to I to take care of , and when I be a man I be go to work and earn money for she . " 
 " what do you think of do ? " inquire his grandfather . 
 his young lordship slip down upon the hearth - rug , and sit there with the picture still in his hand . he seem to be reflect seriously , before he answer . 
 " I do think perhaps I might go into business with Mr. Hobbs , " he say ; " but I should like to be a President . " 
 " we will send you to the House of Lords instead , " say his grandfather . 
 " well , " remark Lord Fauntleroy , " if I couldn't be a President , and if that be a good business , I should not   mind . the grocery business be dull sometimes . " 
 perhaps he be weigh the matter in his mind , for he sit very quiet after this , and look at the fire for some time . 
 the Earl do not speak again . he lean back in his chair and watch he . a great many strange new thought pass through the old nobleman 's mind . Dougal have stretch himself out and go to sleep with his head on his huge paw . there be a long silence . 
 in about half an hour 's time Mr. Havisham be usher in . the great room be very still when he enter . the Earl be still lean back in his chair . he move as Mr. Havisham approach , and hold up his hand in a gesture of warning it seem as if he have scarcely intend to make the gesture as if it be almost involuntary . Dougal be still asleep , and close beside the great dog , sleep also , with his curly head upon his arm , lie little Lord Fauntleroy . 




 VI 

 when Lord Fauntleroy waken in the morning , he have not waken at all when he have be carry to bed the night before , the first sound he be conscious of be the crackling of a wood fire and the murmur of voice . 
 " you will be careful , Dawson , not to say anything about it , " he hear some one say . " he do not know why she be not to be with he , and the reason be to be keep from he . " 
 " if they be his lordship 's order , mem , " another voice answer , " they will have to be kep ' , I suppose . but , if you will excuse the liberty , mem , as it be between ourselves , servant or no servant , all I have to say be , it be a cruel thing , part that poor , pretty , young widdere cre'tur ' from her own flesh and blood , and he such a little beauty and a nobleman bear . James and Thomas , mem , last night in the servant ' hall , they both of them say as they never see anythink in their two life nor yet no other gentleman in livery like that little fellow 's way , as innercent an ' polite an ' interested as if he have be sit there din with his good friend , and the temper of a ' angel , instead of one   if you will excuse I , mem , as it be well know , be enough to curdle your blood in your vein at time . and as to look , mem , when we be ring for , James and I , to go into the library and bring he upstairs , and James lift he up in his arm , what with his little innercent face all red and rosy , and his little head on James 's shoulder and his hair hang down , all curly an ' shinin ' , a pretty , takiner sight you would never wish to see . an ' it be my opinion , my lord be not   blind to it neither , for he look at he , and he say to James , ' see you do not   wake he ! ' he say . " 
 Cedric move on his pillow , and turn over , open his eye . 
 there be two woman in the room . everything be bright and cheerful with gay - flower chintz . there be a fire on the hearth , and the sunshine be stream in through the ivy - entwine window . both woman come toward he , and he see that one of they be Mrs. Mellon , the housekeeper , and the other a comfortable , middle - aged woman , with a face as kind and good - humor as a face could be . 
 " good - morning , my lord , " say Mrs. Mellon . " do you sleep well ? " 
 his lordship rub his eye and smile . 
 " good - morning , " he say . " I do not   know I be here . " 
 " you be carry upstairs when you be asleep , " say the housekeeper . " this be your bedroom , and this be Dawson , who be to take care of you . " 
 Fauntleroy sit up in bed and hold out his hand to Dawson , as he have hold it out to the Earl . 
 " how do you do , ma'am ? " he say . " I be much oblige to you for come to take care of I . " 
 " you can call she Dawson , my lord , " say the housekeeper with a smile . " she be use to be call Dawson . " 
 " MISS Dawson , or MRS . Dawson ? " inquire his lordship . 
 " Just Dawson , my lord , " say Dawson herself , beam all over . " neither Miss nor Missis , bless your little heart ! will you get up now , and let Dawson dress you , and then have your breakfast in the nursery ? " 
 " I learn to dress myself many year ago , thank you , " answer Fauntleroy . " Dearest teach I . ' dearest ' be my mamma . we have only Mary to do all the work , washing and all , and so of course it would not   do to give she so much trouble . I can take my bath , too , pretty well if you will just be kind enough to ' zamine the corner after I be do . " 
 Dawson and the housekeeper exchange glance . 
 " Dawson will do anything you ask she to , " say Mrs. Mellon . 
 " that I will , bless he , " say Dawson , in her comforting , good - humor voice . " he shall dress himself if he like , and I will stand by , ready to help he if he want I . " 
 " thank you , " respond Lord Fauntleroy ; " it be a little hard sometimes about the button , you know , and then I have to ask somebody . " 
 he think Dawson a very kind woman , and before the bath and the dressing be finish they be excellent friend , and he have find out a great deal about she . he have discover that her husband have be a soldier and have be kill in a real battle , and that her son be a sailor , and be away on a long cruise , and that he have see pirate and cannibal and chinese people and Turks , and that he bring home strange shell and piece of coral which Dawson be ready to show at any moment , some of they be in her trunk . all this be very interesting . he also find out that she have take care of little child all her life , and that she have just come from a great house in another part of England , where she have be take care of a beautiful little girl whose name be Lady Gwyneth Vaughn . 
 " and she be a sort of relation of your lordship 's , " say Dawson . " and perhaps sometime you may see she . " 
 " do you think I shall ? " say Fauntleroy . " I should like that . I never know any little girl , but I always like to look at they . " 
 when he go into the adjoining room to take his breakfast , and see what a great room it be , and find there be another adjoining it which Dawson tell he be his also , the feeling that he be very small indeed come over he again so strongly that he confide it to Dawson , as he sit down to the table on which the pretty breakfast service be arrange . 
 " I be a very little boy , " he say rather wistfully , " to live in such a large castle , and have so many big room , do not   you think so ? " 
 " oh ! come ! " say Dawson , " you feel just a little strange at first , that be all ; but you will get over that very soon , and then you will like it here . it be such a beautiful place , you know . " 
 " it be a very beautiful place , of course , " say Fauntleroy , with a little sigh ; " but I should like it well if I do not   miss Dearest so . I always have my breakfast with she in the morning , and put the sugar and cream in her tea for she , and hand she the toast . that make it very sociable , of course . " 
 " oh , well ! " answer Dawson , comfortingly , " you know you can see she every day , and there be no knowing how much you will have to tell she . bless you ! wait till you have   walk about a bit and see thing , the dog , and the stable with all the horse in they . there be one of they I know you will like to see " 
 " be there ? " exclaim Fauntleroy ; " I be very fond of horse . I be very fond of Jim . he be the horse that belong to Mr. Hobbs ' grocery wagon . he be a beautiful horse when he be not   balky . " 
 " well , " say Dawson , " you just wait till you have   see what be in the stable . and , deary I , you have not   look even into the very next room yet ! " 
 " what be there ? " ask Fauntleroy . 
 " wait until you have   have your breakfast , and then you shall see , " say Dawson . 
 at this he naturally begin to grow curious , and he apply himself assiduously to his breakfast . it seem to he that there must be something worth look at , in the next room ; Dawson have such a consequential , mysterious air . 
 " now , then , " he say , slip off his seat a few minute later ; " I have   have enough . can I go and look at it ? " 
 Dawson nod and lead the way , look more mysterious and important than ever . he begin to be very much interested indeed . 
 when she open the door of the room , he stand upon the threshold and look about he in amazement . he do not speak ; he only put his hand in his pocket and stand there flush up to his forehead and look in . 
 he flush up because he be so surprised and , for the moment , excited . to see such a place be enough to surprise any ordinary boy . 
 the room be a large one , too , as all the room seem to be , and it appear to he more beautiful than the rest , only in a different way . the furniture be not so massive and antique as be that in the room he have see downstair ; the drapery and rug and wall be bright ; there be shelf full of book , and on the table be number of toy , beautiful , ingenious thing , such as he have look at with wonder and delight through the shop window in New York . 
 " it look like a boy 's room , " he say at last , catch his breath a little . " whom do they belong to ? " 
 " go and look at they , " say Dawson . " they belong to you ! " 
 " to I ! " he cry ; " to I ? why do they belong to I ? who give they to I ? " and he spring forward with a gay little shout . it seem almost too much to be believe . " it be Grandpapa ! " he say , with his eye as bright as star . " I know it be Grandpapa ! " 
 " yes , it be his lordship , " say Dawson ; " and if you will be a nice little gentleman , and not fret about thing , and will enjoy yourself , and be happy all the day , he will give you anything you ask for . " 
 it be a tremendously exciting morning . there be so many thing to be examine , so many experiment to be try ; each novelty be so absorbing that he could scarcely turn from it to look at the next . and it be so curious to know that all this have be prepare for himself alone ; that , even before he have leave New York , people have come down from London to arrange the room he be to occupy , and have provide the book and plaything most likely to interest he . 
 " do you ever know any one , " he say to Dawson , " who have such a kind grandfather ! " 
 Dawson 's face wear an uncertain expression for a moment . she have not a very high opinion of his lordship the Earl . she have not be in the house many day , but she have be there long enough to hear the old nobleman 's peculiarity discuss very freely in the servant ' hall . 
 " An ' of all the wicious , savage , hill - temper hold fellow it be ever my hill - luck to wear livery hunder , " the tall footman have say , " he be the wiolent and wust by a long shot . " 
 and this particular footman , whose name be Thomas , have also repeat to his companion below stair some of the Earl 's remark to Mr. Havisham , when they have be discuss these very preparation . 
 " give he his own way , and fill his room with toy , " my lord have say . " give he what will amuse he , and he will forget about his mother quickly enough . amuse he , and fill his mind with other thing , and we shall have no trouble . that be boy nature . " 
 so , perhaps , have have this truly amiable object in view , it do not please he so very much to find it do not seem to be exactly this particular boy 's nature . the Earl have pass a bad night and have spend the morning in his room ; but at noon , after he have lunch , he send for his grandson . 
 Fauntleroy answer the summon at once . he come down the broad staircase with a bound step ; the Earl hear he run across the hall , and then the door open and he come in with red cheek and sparkle eye . 
 " I be wait for you to send for I , " he say . " I be ready a long time ago . I be ever so much oblige to you for all those thing ! I be ever so much oblige to you ! I have be play with they all the morning . " 
 " oh ! " say the Earl , " you like they , do you ? " 
 " I like they so much well , I could not   tell you how much ! " say Fauntleroy , his face glow with delight . " there be one that be like baseball , only you play it on a board with black and white peg , and you keep your score with some counter on a wire . I try to teach Dawson , but she could not   quite understand it just at first you see , she never play baseball , be a lady ; and I be afraid I be not   very good at explain it to she . but you know all about it , do not   you ? " 
 " I be afraid I do not , " reply the Earl . " it be an american game , be not   it ? be it something like cricket ? " 
 " I never see cricket , " say Fauntleroy ; " but Mr. Hobbs take I several time to see baseball . it be a splendid game . you get so excited ! would you like I to go and get my game and show it to you ? perhaps it would amuse you and make you forget about your foot . do your foot hurt you very much this morning ? " 
 " More than I enjoy , " be the answer . 
 " then perhaps you could not   forget it , " say the little fellow anxiously . " perhaps it would bother you to be tell about the game . do you think it would amuse you , or do you think it would bother you ? " 
 " go and get it , " say the Earl . 
 it certainly be a novel entertainment this , make a companion of a child who offer to teach he to play game , but the very novelty of it amuse he . there be a smile lurk about the Earl 's mouth when Cedric come back with the box contain the game , in his arm , and an expression of the most eager interest on his face . 
 " may I pull that little table over here to your chair ? " he ask . 
 " Ring for Thomas , " say the Earl . " he will place it for you . " 
 " oh , I can do it myself , " answer Fauntleroy . " it be not very heavy . " 
 " very well , " reply his grandfather . the lurking smile deepen on the old man 's face as he watch the little fellow 's preparation ; there be such an absorbed interest in they . the small table be drag forward and place by his chair , and the game take from its box and arrange upon it . 
 " it be very interesting when you once begin , " say Fauntleroy . " you see , the black peg can be your side and the white one mine . they be man , you know , and once round the field be a home run and count one and these be the out and here be the first base and that be the second and that be the third and that be the home base . " 
 he enter into the detail of explanation with the great animation . he show all the attitude of pitcher and catcher and batter in the real game , and give a dramatic description of a wonderful " hot ball " he have see catch on the glorious occasion on which he have witness a match in company with Mr. Hobbs . his vigorous , graceful little body , his eager gesture , his simple enjoyment of it all , be pleasant to behold . 
 when at last the explanation and illustration be at an end and the game begin in good earnest , the Earl still find himself entertain . his young companion be wholly absorb ; he play with all his childish heart ; his gay little laugh when he make a good throw , his enthusiasm over a " home run , " his impartial delight over his own good luck and his opponent 's , would have give a flavor to any game . 
 if , a week before , any one have tell the Earl of Dorincourt that on that particular morning he would be forget his gout and his bad temper in a child 's game , play with black and white wooden peg , on a gayly paint board , with a curly - head small boy for a companion , he would without doubt have make himself very unpleasant ; and yet he certainly have forget himself when the door open and Thomas announce a visitor . 
 the visitor in question , who be an elderly gentleman in black , and no less a person than the clergyman of the parish , be so startled by the amazing scene which meet his eye , that he almost fall back a pace , and run some risk of collide with Thomas . 
 there be , in fact , no part of his duty that the Reverend Mr. Mordaunt find so decidedly unpleasant as that part which compel he to call upon his noble patron at the Castle . his noble patron , indeed , usually make these visit as disagreeable as it lie in his lordly power to make they . he abhor church and charity , and fly into violent rage when any of his tenantry take the liberty of be poor and ill and need assistance . when his gout be at its bad , he do not hesitate to announce that he would not be bore and irritated by be tell story of their miserable misfortune ; when his gout trouble he less and he be in a somewhat more humane frame of mind , he would perhaps give the rector some money , after have bully he in the most painful manner , and berate the whole parish for its shiftlessness and imbecility . but , whatsoever his mood , he never fail to make as many sarcastic and embarrassing speech as possible , and to cause the Reverend Mr. Mordaunt to wish it be proper and christian - like to throw something heavy at he . during all the year in which Mr. Mordaunt have be in charge of Dorincourt parish , the rector certainly do not remember have see his lordship , of his own free will , do any one a kindness , or , under any circumstance whatever , show that he think of any one but himself . 
 he have call to - day to speak to he of a specially pressing case , and as he have walk up the avenue , he have , for two reason , dread his visit more than usual . in the first place , he know that his lordship have for several day be suffer with the gout , and have be in so villainous a humor that rumor of it have even reach the village carry there by one of the young woman servant , to her sister , who keep a little shop and retailed darning - needle and cotton and peppermint and gossip , as a means of earn an honest living . what Mrs. Dibble do not know about the Castle and its inmate , and the farm - house and their inmate , and the village and its population , be really not worth be talk about . and of course she know everything about the Castle , because her sister , Jane Shorts , be one of the upper housemaid , and be very friendly and intimate with Thomas . 
 " and the way his lordship do go on ! " say Mrs. Dibble , over the counter , " and the way he do use language , Mr. Thomas tell Jane herself , no flesh and blood as be in livery could stand for throw a plate of toast at Mr. Thomas , hisself , he do , not more than two day since , and if it be not   for other thing be agreeable and the society below stair most genteel , warning would have be give within a ' hour ! " 
 and the rector have hear all this , for somehow the Earl be a favorite black sheep in the cottage and farm - house , and his bad behavior give many a good woman something to talk about when she have company to tea . 
 and the second reason be even bad , because it be a new one and have be talk about with the most excited interest . 
 who do not know of the old nobleman 's fury when his handsome son the Captain have marry the american lady ? who do not know how cruelly he have treat the Captain , and how the big , gay , sweet - smile young man , who be the only member of the grand family any one like , have die in a foreign land , poor and unforgiven ? who do not know how fiercely his lordship have hat the poor young creature who have be this son 's wife , and how he have hat the thought of her child and never mean to see the boy until his two son die and leave he without an heir ? and then , who do not know that he have look forward without any affection or pleasure to his grandson 's come , and that he have make up his mind that he should find the boy a vulgar , awkward , pert american lad , more likely to disgrace his noble name than to honor it ? 
 the proud , angry old man think he have keep all his thought secret . he do not suppose any one have dare to guess at , much less talk over what he feel , and dread ; but his servant watch he , and read his face and his ill - humor and fit of gloom , and discuss they in the servant ' hall . and while he think himself quite secure from the common herd , Thomas be tell Jane and the cook , and the butler , and the housemaid and the other footman that it be his opinion that " the hold man be wuss than usual a - thinkin ' hover the Capting 's boy , an ' hanticipatin ' as he will not   be no credit to the fambly . an ' serve he right , " add Thomas ; " hit 's ' be hown fault . wot can he iggspect from a child bring up in pore circumstance in that there low Hamerica ? " 
 and as the Reverend Mr. Mordaunt walk under the great tree , he remember that this questionable little boy have arrive at the Castle only the evening before , and that there be nine chance to one that his lordship 's bad fear be realize , and twenty - two chance to one that if the poor little fellow have disappoint he , the Earl be even now in a tear rage , and ready to vent all his rancor on the first person who call which it appear probable would be his reverend self . 
 Judge then of his amazement when , as Thomas open the library door , his ear be greet by a delighted ring of childish laughter . 
 " that be two out ! " shout an excited , clear little voice . " you see it be two out ! " 
 and there be the Earl 's chair , and the gout - stool , and his foot on it ; and by he a small table and a game on it ; and quite close to he , actually lean against his arm and his ungouty knee , be a little boy with face glow , and eye dance with excitement . " it be two out ! " the little stranger cry . " you have not   any luck that time , have you ? " and then they both recognize at once that some one have come in . 
 the Earl glance around , knit his shaggy eyebrow as he have a trick of do , and when he see who it be , Mr. Mordaunt be still more surprised to see that he look even less disagreeable than usual instead of more so . in fact , he look almost as if he have forget for the moment how disagreeable he be , and how unpleasant he really could make himself when he try . 
 " ah ! " he say , in his harsh voice , but give his hand rather graciously . " good - morning , Mordaunt . I have   find a new employment , you see . " 
 he put his other hand on Cedric 's shoulder , perhaps deep down in his heart there be a stir of gratified pride that it be such an heir he have to present ; there be a spark of something like pleasure in his eye as he move the boy slightly forward . 
 " this be the new Lord Fauntleroy , " he say . " Fauntleroy , this be Mr. Mordaunt , the rector of the parish . " 
 Fauntleroy look up at the gentleman in the clerical garment , and give he his hand . 
 " I be very glad to make your acquaintance , sir , " he say , remember the word he have hear Mr. Hobbs use on one or two occasion when he have be greet a new customer with ceremony . 
 Cedric feel quite sure that one ought to be more than usually polite to a minister . 
 Mr. Mordaunt hold the small hand in his a moment as he look down at the child 's face , smile involuntarily . he like the little fellow from that instant as in fact people always do like he . and it be not the boy 's beauty and grace which most appeal to he ; it be the simple , natural kindliness in the little lad which make any word he utter , however quaint and unexpected , sound pleasant and sincere . as the rector look at Cedric , he forget to think of the Earl at all . nothing in the world be so strong as a kind heart , and somehow this kind little heart , though it be only the heart of a child , seem to clear all the atmosphere of the big gloomy room and make it bright . 
 " I be delighted to make your acquaintance , Lord Fauntleroy , " say the rector . " you make a long journey to come to we . a great many people will be glad to know you make it safely . " 
 " it be a long way , " answer Fauntleroy , " but Dearest , my mother , be with I and I be not   lonely . of course you be never lonely if your mother be with you ; and the ship be beautiful . " 
 " take a chair , Mordaunt , " say the Earl . Mr. Mordaunt sit down . he glance from Fauntleroy to the Earl . 
 " your lordship be greatly to be congratulate , " he say warmly . 
 but the Earl plainly have no intention of show his feeling on the subject . 
 " he be like his father , " he say rather gruffly . " let we hope he will conduct himself more creditably . " and then he add : " well , what be it this morning , Mordaunt ? who be in trouble now ? " 
 this be not as bad as Mr. Mordaunt have expect , but he hesitate a second before he begin . 
 " it be Higgins , " he say ; " Higgins of Edge Farm . he have be very unfortunate . he be ill himself last autumn , and his child have scarlet fever . I can not   say that he be a very good manager , but he have have ill - luck , and of course he be behindhand in many way . he be in trouble about his rent now . Newick tell he if he do not   pay it , he must leave the place ; and of course that would be a very serious matter . his wife be ill , and he come to I yesterday to beg I to see about it , and ask you for time . he think if you would give he time he could catch up again . " 
 " they all think that , " say the Earl , look rather black . 
 Fauntleroy make a movement forward . he have be stand between his grandfather and the visitor , listen with all his might . he have begin to be interested in Higgins at once . he wonder how many child there be , and if the scarlet fever have hurt they very much . his eye be wide open and be fix upon Mr. Mordaunt with intent interest as that gentleman go on with the conversation . 
 " Higgins be a well - mean man , " say the rector , make an effort to strengthen his plea . 
 " he be a bad enough tenant , " reply his lordship . " and he be always behindhand , Newick tell I . " 
 " he be in great trouble now , " say the rector . 
 " he be very fond of his wife and child , and if the farm be take from he they may literally starve . he can not give they the nourishing thing they need . two of the child be leave very low after the fever , and the doctor order for they wine and luxury that Higgins can not afford . " 
 at this Fauntleroy move a step nearer . 
 " that be the way with Michael , " he say . 
 the Earl slightly start . 
 " I forget you ! " he say . " I forgot we have a philanthropist in the room . who be Michael ? " and the gleam of queer amusement come back into the old man 's deep - set eye . 
 " he be Bridget 's husband , who have the fever , " answer Fauntleroy ; " and he could not   pay the rent or buy wine and thing . and you give I that money to help he . " 
 the Earl draw his brow together into a curious frown , which somehow be scarcely grim at all . he glance across at Mr. Mordaunt . 
 " I do not   know what sort of land proprietor he will make , " he say . " I tell Havisham the boy be to have what he want anything he want and what he want , it seem , be money to give to beggar . " 
 " oh ! but they be not   beggar , " say Fauntleroy eagerly . " Michael be a splendid bricklayer ! they all work . " 
 " oh ! " say the Earl , " they be not beggar . they be splendid bricklayer , and bootblack , and apple - woman . " 
 he bend his gaze on the boy for a few second in silence . the fact be that a new thought be come to he , and though , perhaps , it be not prompt by the noble emotion , it be not a bad thought . " come here , " he say , at last . 
 Fauntleroy go and stand as near to he as possible without encroach on the gouty foot . 
 " what would you do in this case ? " his lordship ask . 
 it must be confess that Mr. Mordaunt experience for the moment a curious sensation . be a man of great thoughtfulness , and have spend so many year on the estate of Dorincourt , know the tenantry , rich and poor , the people of the village , honest and industrious , dishonest and lazy , he realize very strongly what power for good or evil would be give in the future to this one small boy stand there , his brown eye wide open , his hand deep in his pocket ; and the thought come to he also that a great deal of power might , perhaps , through the caprice of a proud , self - indulgent old man , be give to he now , and that if his young nature be not a simple and generous one , it might be the bad thing that could happen , not only for other , but for himself . 
 " and what would you do in such a case ? " demand the Earl . 
 Fauntleroy draw a little nearer , and lay one hand on his knee , with the most confiding air of good comradeship . 
 " if I be very rich , " he say , " and not only just a little boy , I should let he stay , and give he the thing for his child ; but then , I be only a boy . " then , after a second 's pause , in which his face brighten visibly , " you can do anything , can not   you ? " he say . 
 " Humph ! " say my lord , star at he . " that be your opinion , be it ? " and he be not displeased either . 
 " I mean you can give any one anything , " say Fauntleroy . " who be Newick ? " 
 " he be my agent , " answer the Earl , " and some of my tenant be not over - fond of he . " 
 " be you go to write he a letter now ? " inquire Fauntleroy . " shall I bring you the pen and ink ? I can take the game off this table . " 
 it plainly have not for an instant occur to he that Newick would be allow to do his bad . 
 the Earl pause a moment , still look at he . " can you write ? " he ask . 
 " yes , " answer Cedric , " but not very well . " 
 " move the thing from the table , " command my lord , " and bring the pen and ink , and a sheet of paper from my desk . " 
 Mr. Mordaunt 's interest begin to increase . Fauntleroy do as he be tell very deftly . in a few moment , the sheet of paper , the big inkstand , and the pen be ready . 
 " there ! " he say gayly , " now you can write it . " 
 " you be to write it , " say the Earl . 
 " I ! " exclaim Fauntleroy , and a flush overspread his forehead . " will it do if I write it ? I do not   always spell quite right when I have not   a dictionary , and nobody tell I . " 
 " it will do , " answer the Earl . " Higgins will not complain of the spelling . I be not the philanthropist ; you be . Dip your pen in the ink . " 
 Fauntleroy take up the pen and dip it in the ink - bottle , then he arrange himself in position , lean on the table . 
 " now , " he inquire , " what must I say ? " 
 " you may say , ' Higgins be not to be interfere with , for the present , ' and sign it , ' fauntleroy , ' " say the Earl . 
 Fauntleroy dip his pen in the ink again , and rest his arm , begin to write . it be rather a slow and serious process , but he give his whole soul to it . after a while , however , the manuscript be complete , and he hand it to his grandfather with a smile slightly ting with anxiety . 
 " do you think it will do ? " he ask . 
 the Earl look at it , and the corner of his mouth twitch a little . 
 " yes , " he answer ; " Higgins will find it entirely satisfactory . " and he hand it to Mr. Mordaunt . 
 what Mr. Mordaunt find write be this : 
 " Dear mr . Newik if you plea mr . higins be not to be intur fear with for the present and oblige . your rispecferly , 
 " FAUNTLEROY . " 
 " Mr. Hobbs always sign his letter that way , " say Fauntleroy ; " and I think I would well say ' please . ' be that exactly the right way to spell ' interfere ' ? " 
 " it be not exactly the way it be spell in the dictionary , " answer the Earl . 
 " I be afraid of that , " say Fauntleroy . " I ought to have ask . you see , that be the way with word of more than one syllable ; you have to look in the dictionary . it be always safest . I will write it over again . " 
 and write it over again he do , make quite an imposing copy , and take precaution in the matter of spelling by consult the Earl himself . 
 " spelling be a curious thing , " he say . " it be so often different from what you expect it to be . I use to think ' please ' be spell p - l - e - e - s , but it be not , you know ; and you would think ' dear ' be spell d - e - r - e , if you do not   inquire . sometimes it almost discourage you . " 
 when Mr. Mordaunt go away , he take the letter with he , and he take something else with he also namely , a pleasanter feeling and a more hopeful one than he have ever carry home with he down that avenue on any previous visit he have make at Dorincourt Castle . 
 when he be go , Fauntleroy , who have accompany he to the door , go back to his grandfather . 
 " may I go to Dearest now ? " he ask . " I think she will be wait for I . " 
 the Earl be silent a moment . 
 " there be something in the stable for you to see first , " he say . " ring the bell . " 
 " if you please , " say Fauntleroy , with his quick little flush . " I be very much oblige ; but I think I would well see it to - morrow . she will be expect I all the time . " 
 " very well , " answer the Earl . " we will order the carriage . " then he add dryly , " it be a pony . " 
 Fauntleroy draw a long breath . 
 " a pony ! " he exclaim . " whose pony be it ? " 
 " your , " reply the Earl . 
 " mine ? " cry the little fellow . " mine like the thing upstairs ? " 
 " yes , " say his grandfather . " would you like to see it ? shall I order it to be bring around ? " 
 Fauntleroy 's cheek grow red and redder . 
 " I never think I should have a pony ! " he say . " I never think that ! how glad Dearest will be . you give I EVERYthing , do not   you ? " 
 " do you wish to see it ? " inquire the Earl . 
 Fauntleroy draw a long breath . " I want to see it , " he say . " I want to see it so much I can hardly wait . but I be afraid there be not   time . " 
 " you must go and see your mother this afternoon ? " ask the Earl . " you think you can not   put it off ? " 
 " why , " say Fauntleroy , ' she have be think about I all the morning , and I have be think about she ! " 
 " oh ! " say the Earl . " you have , have you ? ring the bell . " 
 as they drive down the avenue , under the arch tree , he be rather silent . but Fauntleroy be not . he talk about the pony . what color be it ? how big be it ? what be its name ? what do it like to eat well ? how old be it ? how early in the morning might he get up and see it ? 
 " dearest will be so glad ! " he keep say . " she will be so much oblige to you for be so kind to I ! she know I always like pony so much , but we never think I should have one . there be a little boy on Fifth Avenue who have one , and he use to ride out every morning and we use to take a walk past his house to see he . " 
 he lean back against the cushion and regard the Earl with rapt interest for a few minute and in entire silence . 
 " I think you must be the good person in the world , " he burst forth at last . " you be always do good , be not   you ? and think about other people . Dearest say that be the good kind of goodness ; not to think about yourself , but to think about other people . that be just the way you be , be not   it ? " 
 his lordship be so dumfounde to find himself present in such agreeable color , that he do not know exactly what to say . he feel that he need time for reflection . to see each of his ugly , selfish motif change into a good and generous one by the simplicity of a child be a singular experience . 
 Fauntleroy go on , still regard he with admire eye those great , clear , innocent eye ! 
 " you make so many people happy , " he say . " there be Michael and Bridget and their ten child , and the apple - woman , and Dick , and Mr. Hobbs , and Mr. Higgins and Mrs. Higgins and their child , and Mr. Mordaunt , because of course he be glad , and Dearest and I , about the pony and all the other thing . do you know , I have   count it up on my finger and in my mind , and it be twenty - seven people you have   be kind to . that be a good many twenty - seven ! " 
 " and I be the person who be kind to they be I ? " say the Earl . 
 " why , yes , you know , " answer Fauntleroy . " you make they all happy . do you know , " with some delicate hesitation , " that people be sometimes mistake about earl when they do not   know they . Mr. Hobbs be . I be go to write he , and tell he about it . " 
 " what be Mr. Hobbs 's opinion of earl ? " ask his lordship . 
 " well , you see , the difficulty be , " reply his young companion , " that he do not   know any , and he would only read about they in book . he think you must not   mind it that they be gory tyrant ; and he say he would not   have they hang around his store . but if he have know you , I be sure he would have feel quite different . I shall tell he about you . " 
 " what shall you tell he ? " 
 " I shall tell he , " say Fauntleroy , glow with enthusiasm , " that you be the kind man I ever hear of . and you be always think of other people , and make they happy and and I hope when I grow up , I shall be just like you . " 
 " just like I ! " repeat his lordship , look at the little kindling face . and a dull red creep up under his withered skin , and he suddenly turn his eye away and look out of the carriage window at the great beech - tree , with the sun shin on their glossy , red - brown leaf . 
 " just like you , " say Fauntleroy , add modestly , " if I can . perhaps I be not good enough , but I be go to try . " 
 the carriage roll on down the stately avenue under the beautiful , broad - branched tree , through the space of green shade and lane of golden sunlight . Fauntleroy see again the lovely place where the fern grow high and the bluebell sway in the breeze ; he see the deer , stand or lie in the deep grass , turn their large , startled eye as the carriage pass , and catch glimpse of the brown rabbit as they scurry away . he hear the whir of the partridge and the call and song of the bird , and it all seem even more beautiful to he than before . all his heart be fill with pleasure and happiness in the beauty that be on every side . but the old Earl see and hear very different thing , though he be apparently look out too . he see a long life , in which there have be neither generous deed nor kind thought ; he see year in which a man who have be young and strong and rich and powerful have use his youth and strength and wealth and power only to please himself and kill time as the day and year succeed each other ; he see this man , when the time have be kill and old age have come , solitary and without real friend in the midst of all his splendid wealth ; he see people who dislike or fear he , and people who would flatter and cringe to he , but no one who really care whether he live or die , unless they have something to gain or lose by it . he look out on the broad acre which belong to he , and he know what Fauntleroy do not how far they extend , what wealth they represent , and how many people have home on their soil . and he know , too , another thing Fauntleroy do not , that in all those home , humble or well - to - do , there be probably not one person , however much he envy the wealth and stately name and power , and however willing he would have be to possess they , who would for an instant have think of call the noble owner " good , " or wish , as this simple - soule little boy have , to be like he . 
 and it be not exactly pleasant to reflect upon , even for a cynical , worldly old man , who have be sufficient unto himself for seventy year and who have never deign to care what opinion the world hold of he so long as it do not interfere with his comfort or entertainment . and the fact be , indeed , that he have never before condescend to reflect upon it at all ; and he only do so now because a child have believe he well than he be , and by wish to follow in his illustrious footstep and imitate his example , have suggest to he the curious question whether he be exactly the person to take as a model . 
 Fauntleroy think the Earl 's foot must be hurt he , his brow knit themselves together so , as he look out at the park ; and think this , the considerate little fellow try not to disturb he , and enjoy the tree and the fern and the deer in silence . 
 but at last the carriage , have pass the gate and bowl through the green lane for a short distance , stop . they have reach Court Lodge ; and Fauntleroy be out upon the ground almost before the big footman have time to open the carriage door . 
 the Earl waken from his reverie with a start . 
 " what ! " he say . " be we here ? " 
 " yes , " say Fauntleroy . " let I give you your stick . just lean on I when you get out . " 
 " I be not go to get out , " reply his lordship brusquely . 
 " not not to see Dearest ? " exclaim Fauntleroy with astonished face . 
 " ' Dearest ' will excuse I , " say the Earl dryly . " go to she and tell she that not even a new pony would keep you away . " 
 " she will be disappoint , " say Fauntleroy . " she will want to see you very much . " 
 " I be afraid not , " be the answer . " the carriage will call for you as we come back . tell Jeffries to drive on , Thomas . " 
 Thomas close the carriage door ; and , after a puzzled look , Fauntleroy run up the drive . the Earl have the opportunity as Mr. Havisham once have of see a pair of handsome , strong little leg flash over the ground with astonishing rapidity . evidently their owner have no intention of lose any time . the carriage roll slowly away , but his lordship do not at once lean back ; he still look out . through a space in the tree he could see the house door ; it be wide open . the little figure dash up the step ; another figure a little figure , too , slender and young , in its black gown run to meet it . it seem as if they fly together , as Fauntleroy leap into his mother 's arm , hang about her neck and cover her sweet young face with kiss . 




 VII 

 on the following Sunday morning , Mr. Mordaunt have a large congregation . indeed , he could scarcely remember any Sunday on which the church have be so crowded . People appear upon the scene who seldom do he the honor of come to hear his sermon . 
 there be even people from Hazelton , which be the next parish . there be hearty , sunburned farmer , stout , comfortable , apple - cheek wife in their good bonnet and most gorgeous shawl , and half a dozen child or so to each family . the doctor 's wife be there , with her four daughter . Mrs. Kimsey and Mr. Kimsey , who keep the druggist 's shop , and make pill , and do up powder for everybody within ten mile , sit in their pew ; Mrs. Dibble in her ; Miss Smiff , the village dressmaker , and her friend Miss Perkins , the milliner , sit in theirs ; the doctor 's young man be present , and the druggist 's apprentice ; in fact , almost every family on the county side be represent , in one way or another . 
 in the course of the precede week , many wonderful story have be tell of little Lord Fauntleroy . Mrs. Dibble have be keep so busy attend to customer who come in to buy a pennyworth of needle or a ha'porth of tape and to hear what she have to relate , that the little shop bell over the door have nearly tinkle itself to death over the coming and go . Mrs. Dibble know exactly how his small lordship 's room have be furnish for he , what expensive toy have be buy , how there be a beautiful brown pony await he , and a small groom to attend it , and a little dog - cart , with silver - mount harness . and she could tell , too , what all the servant have say when they have catch glimpse of the child on the night of his arrival ; and how every female below stair have say it be a shame , so it be , to part the poor pretty dear from his mother ; and have all declare their heart come into their mouth when he go alone into the library to see his grandfather , for " there be no knowing how he would be treat , and his lordship 's temper be enough to fluster they with old head on their shoulder , let alone a child . " 
 " but if you will believe I , Mrs. Jennifer , mum , " Mrs. Dibble have say , " fear that child do not know so Mr. Thomas hisself say ; an ' set an ' smile he do , an ' talk to his lordship as if they have be friend ever since his first hour . an ' the Earl so take aback , Mr. Thomas say , that he could not   do nothing but listen and stare from under his eyebrow . an ' it be Mr. Thomas 's opinion , Mrs. Bates , mum , that bad as he be , he be pleased in his secret soul , an ' proud , too ; for a handsomer little fellow , or with well manner , though so old - fashioned , Mr. Thomas say he would never wish to see . " 
 and then there have come the story of Higgins . the Reverend Mr. Mordaunt have tell it at his own dinner table , and the servant who have hear it have tell it in the kitchen , and from there it have spread like wildfire . 
 and on market - day , when Higgins have appear in town , he have be question on every side , and Newick have be question too , and in response have show to two or three people the note sign " Fauntleroy . " 
 and so the farmer ' wife have find plenty to talk of over their tea and their shopping , and they have do the subject full justice and make the most of it . and on Sunday they have either walk to church or have be drive in their gig by their husband , who be perhaps a trifle curious themselves about the new little lord who be to be in time the owner of the soil . 
 it be by no mean the Earl 's habit to attend church , but he choose to appear on this first Sunday it be his whim to present himself in the huge family pew , with Fauntleroy at his side . 
 there be many loiterer in the churchyard , and many lingerer in the lane that morning . there be group at the gate and in the porch , and there have be much discussion as to whether my lord would really appear or not . when this discussion be at its height , one good woman suddenly utter an exclamation . 
 " eh , " she say , " that must be the mother , pretty young thing . " all who hear turn and look at the slender figure in black come up the path . the veil be throw back from her face and they could see how fair and sweet it be , and how the bright hair curl as softly as a child be under the little widow 's cap . 
 she be not think of the people about ; she be think of Cedric , and of his visit to she , and his joy over his new pony , on which he have actually ride to her door the day before , sit very straight and look very proud and happy . but soon she could not help be attract by the fact that she be be look at and that her arrival have create some sort of sensation . she first notice it because an old woman in a red cloak make a bob courtesy to she , and then another do the same thing and say , " God bless you , my lady ! " and one man after another take off his hat as she pass . for a moment she do not understand , and then she realize that it be because she be little Lord Fauntleroy 's mother that they do so , and she flush rather shyly and smile and bow too , and say , " thank you , " in a gentle voice to the old woman who have bless she . to a person who have always live in a bustling , crowded american city this simple deference be very novel , and at first just a little embarrassing ; but after all , she could not help like and be touch by the friendly warm - heartedness of which it seem to speak . she have scarcely pass through the stone porch into the church before the great event of the day happen . the carriage from the Castle , with its handsome horse and tall liveried servant , bowl around the corner and down the green lane . 
 " here they come ! " go from one looker - on to another . 
 and then the carriage draw up , and Thomas step down and open the door , and a little boy , dress in black velvet , and with a splendid mop of bright wave hair , jump out . 
 every man , woman , and child look curiously upon he . 
 " he be the Captain over again ! " say those of the on - looker who remember his father . " he be the Captain 's self , to the life ! " 
 he stand there in the sunlight look up at the Earl , as Thomas help that nobleman out , with the most affectionate interest that could be imagine . the instant he could help , he put out his hand and offer his shoulder as if he have be seven foot high . it be plain enough to every one that however it might be with other people , the Earl of Dorincourt strike no terror into the breast of his grandson . 
 " just lean on I , " they hear he say . " how glad the people be to see you , and how well they all seem to know you ! " 
 " take off your cap , Fauntleroy , " say the Earl . " they be bow to you . " 
 " to I ! " cry Fauntleroy , whip off his cap in a moment , bar his bright head to the crowd and turn shin , puzzle eye on they as he try to bow to every one at once . 
 " God bless your lordship ! " say the courtesying , red - cloak old woman who have speak to his mother ; " long life to you ! " 
 " thank you , ma'am , " say fauntleroy . and then they go into the church , and be look at there , on their way up the aisle to the square , red - cushioned and curtain pew . when Fauntleroy be fairly seat , he make two discovery which please he : the first that , across the church where he could look at she , his mother sit and smile at he ; the second , that at one end of the pew , against the wall , kneel two quaint figure carven in stone , face each other as they kneel on either side of a pillar support two stone missal , their point hand fold as if in prayer , their dress very antique and strange . on the tablet by they be write something of which he could only read the curious word : 
 " here lyeth ye bodye of Gregorye Arthure Fyrst Earle of Dorincourt Allsoe of Alisone Hildegarde hys wyfe . " 
 " may I whisper ? " inquire his lordship , devour by curiosity . 
 " what be it ? " say his grandfather . 
 " who be they ? " 
 " some of your ancestor , " answer the Earl , " who live a few hundred year ago . " 
 " perhaps , " say Lord Fauntleroy , regard they with respect , " perhaps I get my spelling from they . " and then he proceed to find his place in the church service . when the music begin , he stand up and look across at his mother , smile . he be very fond of music , and his mother and he often sing together , so he join in with the rest , his pure , sweet , high voice rise as clear as the song of a bird . he quite forget himself in his pleasure in it . the Earl forget himself a little too , as he sit in his curtain - shield corner of the pew and watch the boy . Cedric stand with the big psalter open in his hand , sing with all his childish might , his face a little uplifted , happily ; and as he sing , a long ray of sunshine creep in and , slant through a golden pane of a stain glass window , brighten the fall hair about his young head . his mother , as she look at he across the church , feel a thrill pass through her heart , and a prayer rise in it too , a prayer that the pure , simple happiness of his childish soul might last , and that the strange , great fortune which have fall to he might bring no wrong or evil with it . there be many soft , anxious thought in her tender heart in those new day . 
 " oh , Ceddie ! " she have say to he the evening before , as she hang over he in say good - night , before he go away ; " oh , Ceddie , dear , I wish for your sake I be very clever and could say a great many wise thing ! but only be good , dear , only be brave , only be kind and true always , and then you will never hurt any one , so long as you live , and you may help many , and the big world may be well because my little child be bear . and that be good of all , Ceddie , it be well than everything else , that the world should be a little well because a man have live even ever so little well , dearest . " 
 and on his return to the Castle , Fauntleroy have repeat her word to his grandfather . 
 " and I think about you when she say that , " he end ; " and I tell she that be the way the world be because you have live , and I be go to try if I could be like you . " 
 " and what do she say to that ? " ask his lordship , a trifle uneasily . 
 " she say that be right , and we must always look for good in people and try to be like it . " 
 perhaps it be this the old man remember as he glance through the divided fold of the red curtain of his pew . many time he look over the people 's head to where his son 's wife sit alone , and he see the fair face the unforgiven dead have love , and the eye which be so like those of the child at his side ; but what his thought be , and whether they be hard and bitter , or soften a little , it would have be hard to discover . 
 as they come out of church , many of those who have attend the service stand wait to see they pass . as they near the gate , a man who stand with his hat in his hand make a step forward and then hesitate . he be a middle - aged farmer , with a careworn face . 
 " well , Higgins , " say the Earl . 
 Fauntleroy turn quickly to look at he . 
 " oh ! " he exclaim , " be it Mr. Higgins ? " 
 " yes , " answer the Earl dryly ; " and I suppose he come to take a look at his new landlord . " 
 " yes , my lord , " say the man , his sunburned face redden . " Mr. Newick tell I his young lordship be kind enough to speak for I , and I think I would like to say a word of thank , if I might be allow . " 
 perhaps he feel some wonder when he see what a little fellow it be who have innocently do so much for he , and who stand there look up just as one of his own less fortunate child might have do apparently not realize his own importance in the least . 
 " I have   a great deal to thank your lordship for , " he say ; " a great deal . I " 
 " oh , " say Fauntleroy ; " I only write the letter . it be my grandfather who do it . but you know how he be about always be good to everybody . be Mrs. Higgins well now ? " 
 Higgins look a trifle take aback . he also be somewhat startled at hear his noble landlord present in the character of a benevolent being , full of engage quality . 
 " I well , yes , your lordship , " he stammer , " the missus be well since the trouble be take off her mind . it be worry break she down . " 
 " I be glad of that , " say Fauntleroy . " my grandfather be very sorry about your child have the scarlet fever , and so be I. he have have child himself . I be his son 's little boy , you know . " 
 Higgins be on the verge of be panic - stricken . he feel it would be the safe and more discreet plan not to look at the Earl , as it have be well know that his fatherly affection for his son have be such that he have see they about twice a year , and that when they have be ill , he have promptly depart for London , because he would not be bore with doctor and nurse . it be a little try , therefore , to his lordship 's nerve to be tell , while he look on , his eye gleam from under his shaggy eyebrow , that he feel an interest in scarlet fever . 
 " you see , Higgins , " break in the Earl with a fine grim smile , " you people have be mistake in I . Lord Fauntleroy understand I . when you want reliable information on the subject of my character , apply to he . get into the carriage , Fauntleroy . " 
 and Fauntleroy jump in , and the carriage roll away down the green lane , and even when it turn the corner into the high road , the Earl be still grimly smile . 




 VIII 

 Lord Dorincourt have occasion to wear his grim smile many a time as the day pass by . indeed , as his acquaintance with his grandson progress , he wear the smile so often that there be moment when it almost lose its grimness . there be no deny that before Lord Fauntleroy have appear on the scene , the old man have be grow very tired of his loneliness and his gout and his seventy year . after so long a life of excitement and amusement , it be not agreeable to sit alone even in the most splendid room , with one foot on a gout - stool , and with no other diversion than fly into a rage , and shout at a frightened footman who hat the sight of he . the old Earl be too clever a man not to know perfectly well that his servant detest he , and that even if he have visitor , they do not come for love of he though some find a sort of amusement in his sharp , sarcastic talk , which spar no one . so long as he have be strong and well , he have go from one place to another , pretend to amuse himself , though he have not really enjoy it ; and when his health begin to fail , he feel tired of everything and shut himself up at Dorincourt , with his gout and his newspaper and his book . but he could not read all the time , and he become more and more " bored , " as he call it . he hat the long night and day , and he grow more and more savage and irritable . and then Fauntleroy come ; and when the Earl see he , fortunately for the little fellow , the secret pride of the grandfather be gratify at the outset . if Cedric have be a less handsome little fellow , the old man might have take so strong a dislike to he that he would not have give himself the chance to see his grandson 's fine quality . but he choose to think that Cedric 's beauty and fearless spirit be the result of the Dorincourt blood and a credit to the Dorincourt rank . and then when he hear the lad talk , and see what a well - breed little fellow he be , notwithstanding his boyish ignorance of all that his new position mean , the old Earl like his grandson more , and actually begin to find himself rather entertain . it have amuse he to give into those childish hand the power to bestow a benefit on poor Higgins . my lord care nothing for poor Higgins , but it please he a little to think that his grandson would be talk about by the country people and would begin to be popular with the tenantry , even in his childhood . then it have gratify he to drive to church with Cedric and to see the excitement and interest cause by the arrival . he know how the people would speak of the beauty of the little lad ; of his fine , strong , straight body ; of his erect bearing , his handsome face , and his bright hair , and how they would say   as the Earl have hear one woman exclaim to another   that the boy be " every inch a lord . " my lord of Dorincourt be an arrogant old man , proud of his name , proud of his rank , and therefore proud to show the world that at last the House of Dorincourt have an heir who be worthy of the position he be to fill . 
 the morning the new pony have be try , the Earl have be so pleased that he have almost forget his gout . when the groom have bring out the pretty creature , which arch its brown , glossy neck and toss its fine head in the sun , the Earl have sit at the open window of the library and have look on while Fauntleroy take his first rid lesson . he wonder if the boy would show sign of timidity . it be not a very small pony , and he have often see child lose courage in make their first essay at rid . 
 Fauntleroy mount in great delight . he have never be on a pony before , and he be in the high spirit . wilkin , the groom , lead the animal by the bridle up and down before the library window . 
 " he be a well pluck un , he be , " Wilkins remark in the stable afterward with many grin . " it be not   no trouble to put HIM up . an ' a old un would not   ha ' sit any straighter when he be up . he se se he to I , ' wilkin , ' he se , ' be I sit up straight ? they sit up straight at the circus , ' se he . an ' I se , ' as straight as a arrer , your lordship ! ' an ' he laugh , as pleased as could be , an ' he se , ' that be right , ' he se , ' you tell I if I do not   sit up straight , Wilkins ! ' " 
 but sit up straight and be lead at a walk be not altogether and completely satisfactory . after a few minute , Fauntleroy speak to his grandfather watch he from the window : 
 " can not   I go by myself ? " he ask ; " and can not   I go fast ? the boy on Fifth Avenue use to trot and canter ! " 
 " do you think you could trot and canter ? " say the Earl . 
 " I should like to try , " answer Fauntleroy . 
 his lordship make a sign to Wilkins , who at the signal bring up his own horse and mount it and take Fauntleroy 's pony by the lead - rein . 
 " now , " say the Earl , " let he trot . " 
 the next few minute be rather exciting to the small equestrian . he find that trotting be not so easy as walk , and the fast the pony trot , the less easy it be . 
 " it j - jolt a g - goo - good deal do - doesn't   it ? " he say to Wilkins . " D - do it j - jolt y - you ? " 
 " no , my lord , " answer Wilkins . " you will get use to it in time . rise in your stirrup . " 
 " I be ri - rise all the t - time , " say Fauntleroy . 
 he be both rise and fall rather uncomfortably and with many shake and bounce . he be out of breath and his face grow red , but he hold on with all his might , and sit as straight as he could . the Earl could see that from his window . when the rider come back within speaking distance , after they have be hide by the tree a few minute , Fauntleroy 's hat be off , his cheek be like poppy , and his lip be set , but he be still trot manfully . 
 " stop a minute ! " say his grandfather . " where be your hat ? " 
 Wilkins touch his . " it fall off , your lordship , " he say , with evident enjoyment . " would not   let I stop to pick it up , my lord . " 
 " not much afraid , be he ? " ask the Earl dryly . 
 " Him , your lordship ! " exclaim Wilkins . " I should not   say as he know what it mean . I have   teach young gen'leman to ride afore , an ' I never see one stick on more determinder . " 
 " tired ? " say the Earl to Fauntleroy . " want to get off ? " 
 " it jolt you more than you think it will , " admit his young lordship frankly . " and it tire you a little , too ; but I do not   want to get off . I want to learn how . as soon as I have   get my breath I want to go back for the hat . " 
 the clever person in the world , if he have undertake to teach Fauntleroy how to please the old man who watch he , could not have teach he anything which would have succeed well . as the pony trot off again toward the avenue , a faint color creep up in the fierce old face , and the eye , under the shaggy brow , gleam with a pleasure such as his lordship have scarcely expect to know again . and he sit and watch quite eagerly until the sound of the horse ' hoof return . when they do come , which be after some time , they come at a fast pace . Fauntleroy 's hat be still off ; Wilkins be carry it for he ; his cheek be red than before , and his hair be fly about his ear , but he come at quite a brisk canter . 
 " there ! " he pant , as they draw up , " I c - cantered . I do not   do it as well as the boy on Fifth Avenue , but I do it , and I staid on ! " 
 he and Wilkins and the pony be close friend after that . scarcely a day pass in which the country people do not see they out together , canter gayly on the highroad or through the green lane . the child in the cottage would run to the door to look at the proud little brown pony with the gallant little figure sit so straight in the saddle , and the young lord would snatch off his cap and swing it at they , and shout , " Hullo ! good - morning ! " in a very unlordly manner , though with great heartiness . sometimes he would stop and talk with the child , and once Wilkins come back to the castle with a story of how Fauntleroy have insist on dismount near the village school , so that a boy who be lame and tired might ride home on his pony . 
 " An ' I be bless , " say Wilkins , in tell the story at the stable , " I be bless if he would hear of anything else ! he would not   let I get down , because he say the boy might not   feel comfortable on a big horse . an ' s he , ' wilkin , ' se he , ' that boy 's lame and I be not , and I want to talk to he , too . ' and up the lad have to get , and my lord trudge alongside of he with his hand in his pocket , and his cap on the back of his head , a - whistle and talk as easy as you please ! and when we come to the cottage , an ' the boy 's mother come out all in a taking to see what be up , he whip off his cap an ' s he , ' I have   bring your son home , ma'am , ' se he , ' because his leg hurt he , and I do not   think that stick be enough for he to lean on ; and I be go to ask my grandfather to have a pair of crutch make for he . ' an ' I be bless if the woman be not   strike all of a heap , as well she might be ! I think I should ' a ' hex - plodid , myself ! " 
 when the Earl hear the story he be not angry , as Wilkins have be half afraid that he would be ; on the contrary , he laugh outright , and call Fauntleroy up to he , and make he tell all about the matter from begin to end , and then he laugh again . and actually , a few day later , the Dorincourt carriage stop in the green lane before the cottage where the lame boy live , and Fauntleroy jump out and walk up to the door , carry a pair of strong , light , new crutch shoulder like a gun , and present they to Mrs. Hartle   the lame boy 's name be Hartle   with these word : " my grandfather 's compliment , and if you please , these be for your boy , and we hope he will get well . " 
 " I say your compliment , " he explain to the Earl when he return to the carriage . " you do not   tell I to , but I think perhaps you forgot . that be right , be not   it ? " 
 and the Earl laugh again , and do not say it be not . in fact , the two be become more intimate every day , and every day Fauntleroy 's faith in his lordship 's benevolence and virtue increase . he have no doubt whatever that his grandfather be the most amiable and generous of elderly gentleman . certainly , he himself find his wish gratify almost before they be utter ; and such gift and pleasure be lavish upon he , that he be sometimes almost bewilder by his own possession . apparently , he be to have everything he want , and to do everything he wish to do . and though this would certainly not have be a very wise plan to pursue with all small boy , his young lordship bear it amazingly well . perhaps , notwithstanding his sweet nature , he might have be somewhat spoil by it , if it have not be for the hour he spend with his mother at Court Lodge . that " good friend " of his watch over he ever closely and tenderly . the two have many long talk together , and he never go back to the Castle with her kiss on his cheek without carry in his heart some simple , pure word worth remember . 
 there be one thing , it be true , which puzzle the little fellow very much . he think over the mystery of it much oftener than any one suppose ; even his mother do not know how often he ponder on it ; the Earl for a long time never suspect that he do so at all . but , be quick to observe , the little boy could not help wonder why it be that his mother and grandfather never seem to meet . he have notice that they never do meet . when the Dorincourt carriage stop at Court Lodge , the Earl never alight , and on the rare occasion of his lordship 's go to church , Fauntleroy be always leave to speak to his mother in the porch alone , or perhaps to go home with she . and yet , every day , fruit and flower be send to Court Lodge from the hot - house at the Castle . but the one virtuous action of the Earl 's which have set he upon the pinnacle of perfection in Cedric 's eye , be what he have do soon after that first Sunday when Mrs. Errol have walk home from church unattended . about a week later , when Cedric be go one day to visit his mother , he find at the door , instead of the large carriage and prance pair , a pretty little brougham and a handsome bay horse . 
 " that be a present from you to your mother , " the Earl say abruptly . " she can not go walk about the country . she need a carriage . the man who drive will take charge of it . it be a present from you . " 
 Fauntleroy 's delight could but feebly express itself . he could scarcely contain himself until he reach the lodge . his mother be gather rose in the garden . he fling himself out of the little brougham and fly to she . 
 " Dearest ! " he cry , " could you believe it ? this be yours ! he say it be a present from I . it be your own carriage to drive everywhere in ! " 
 he be so happy that she do not know what to say . she could not have bear to spoil his pleasure by refuse to accept the gift even though it come from the man who choose to consider himself her enemy . she be oblige to step into the carriage , rose and all , and let herself be take to drive , while Fauntleroy tell her story of his grandfather 's goodness and amiability . they be such innocent story that sometimes she could not help laugh a little , and then she would draw her little boy close to her side and kiss he , feel glad that he could see only good in the old man , who have so few friend . 
 the very next day after that , Fauntleroy write to Mr. Hobbs . he write quite a long letter , and after the first copy be write , he bring it to his grandfather to be inspect . 
 " because , " he say , " it be so uncertain about the spelling . and if you will tell I the mistake , I will write it out again . " 
 this be what he have write : 
 " my dear mr hobbs I want to tell you about my granfarther he be the good earl you ever new it be a mistake about earl be tirent he be not a tirent at all I wish you new he you would be good friend I be sure you would he have the gout in his foot and be a grate sufrer but he be so pashent I love he more every day becaus no one could help love an earl like that who be kind to every one in this world I wish you could talk to he he know everything in the world you can ask he any question but he have never plaid base ball he have give I a pony and a cart and my mamma a bewtifle cariage and I have three room and toy of all kind it would serprise you you would like the castle and the park it be such a large castle you could lose yourself wilkin tell I wilkin be my groom he say there be a dungon under the castle it be so pretty everything in the park would serprise you there be such big tree and there be deer and rabbit and game fly about in the cover my granfarther be very rich but he be not proud and orty as you think earl always be I like to be with he the people be so polite and kind they take of their hat to you and the woman make curtsy and sometimes say god bless you I can ride now but at first it shake I when I trot my granfarther let a poor man stay on his farm when he could not pay his rent and mrs mellon go to take wine and thing to his sick child I should like to see you and I wish dearest could live at the castle but I be very happy when I do not miss she too much and I love my granfarther every one do plee write soon 
 " your afechshnet old frend 
 " Cedric Errol 
 " p s no one be in the dungon my granfarfher never have any one langwishin in there . 
 " p s he be such a good earl he remind I of you he be a unerversle favrit " 
 " do you miss your mother very much ? " ask the Earl when he have finish read this . 
 " yes , " say Fauntleroy , " I miss she all the time . " 
 he go and stand before the Earl and put his hand on his knee , look up at he . 
 " you do not   miss she , do you ? " he say . 
 " I do not   know she , " answer his lordship rather crustily . 
 " I know that , " say Fauntleroy , " and that be what make I wonder . she tell I not to ask you any question , and and I will not , but sometimes I can not   help think , you know , and it make I all puzzle . but I be not go to ask any question . and when I miss she very much , I go and look out of my window to where I see her light shine for I every night through an open place in the tree . it be a long way off , but she put it in her window as soon as it be dark , and I can see it twinkle far away , and I know what it say . " 
 " what do it say ? " ask my lord . 
 " it say , ' good - night , God keep you all the night ! ' just what she use to say when we be together . every night she use to say that to I , and every morning she say , ' God bless you all the day ! ' so you see I be quite safe all the time " 
 " quite , I have no doubt , " say his lordship dryly . and he draw down his beetle eyebrow and look at the little boy so fixedly and so long that Fauntleroy wonder what he could be think of . 




 IX 

 the fact be , his lordship the Earl of Dorincourt think in those day , of many thing of which he have never think before , and all his thought be in one way or another connect with his grandson . his pride be the strong part of his nature , and the boy gratify it at every point . through this pride he begin to find a new interest in life . he begin to take pleasure in show his heir to the world . the world have know of his disappointment in his son ; so there be an agreeable touch of triumph in exhibit this new Lord Fauntleroy , who could disappoint no one . he wish the child to appreciate his own power and to understand the splendor of his position ; he wish that other should realize it too . he make plan for his future . 
 sometimes in secret he actually find himself wish that his own past life have be a well one , and that there have be less in it that this pure , childish heart would shrink from if it know the truth . it be not agreeable to think how the beautiful , innocent face would look if its owner should be make by any chance to understand that his grandfather have be call for many a year " the wicked Earl of Dorincourt . " the thought even make he feel a trifle nervous . he do not wish the boy to find it out . sometimes in this new interest he forget his gout , and after a while his doctor be surprised to find his noble patient 's health grow well than he have expect it ever would be again . perhaps the Earl grow well because the time do not pass so slowly for he , and he have something to think of beside his pain and infirmity . 
 one fine morning , people be amazed to see little Lord Fauntleroy rid his pony with another companion than Wilkins . this new companion ride a tall , powerful gray horse , and be no other than the Earl himself . it be , in fact , Fauntleroy who have suggest this plan . as he have be on the point of mount his pony , he have say rather wistfully to his grandfather : 
 " I wish you be go with I . when I go away I feel lonely because you be leave all by yourself in such a big castle . I wish you could ride too . " 
 and the great excitement have be arouse in the stable a few minute later by the arrival of an order that Selim be to be saddle for the Earl . after that , Selim be saddle almost every day ; and the people become accustomed to the sight of the tall gray horse carry the tall gray old man , with his handsome , fierce , eagle face , by the side of the brown pony which bear little Lord Fauntleroy . and in their ride together through the green lane and pretty country road , the two rider become more intimate than ever . and gradually the old man hear a great deal about " Dearest " and her life . as Fauntleroy trot by the big horse he chat gayly . there could not well have be a bright little comrade , his nature be so happy . it be he who talk the most . the Earl often be silent , listen and watch the joyous , glow face . sometimes he would tell his young companion to set the pony off at a gallop , and when the little fellow dash off , sit so straight and fearless , he would watch he with a gleam of pride and pleasure in his eye ; and when , after such a dash , Fauntleroy come back wave his cap with a laugh shout , he always feel that he and his grandfather be very good friend indeed . 
 one thing that the Earl discover be that his son 's wife do not lead an idle life . it be not long before he learn that the poor people know she very well indeed . when there be sickness or sorrow or poverty in any house , the little brougham often stand before the door . 
 " do you know , " say Fauntleroy once , " they all say , ' God bless you ! ' when they see she , and the child be glad . there be some who go to her house to be teach to sew . she say she feel so rich now that she want to help the poor one . " 
 it have not displease the Earl to find that the mother of his heir have a beautiful young face and look as much like a lady as if she have be a duchess ; and in one way it do not displease he to know that she be popular and belove by the poor . and yet he be often conscious of a hard , jealous pang when he see how she fill her child 's heart and how the boy cling to she as his good beloved . the old man would have desire to stand first himself and have no rival . 
 that same morning he draw up his horse on an elevated point of the moor over which they ride , and make a gesture with his whip , over the broad , beautiful landscape spread before they . 
 " do you know that all that land belong to I ? " he say to Fauntleroy . 
 " do it ? " answer Fauntleroy . " how much it be to belong to one person , and how beautiful ! " 
 " do you know that some day it will all belong to you that and a great deal more ? " 
 " to I ! " exclaim Fauntleroy in rather an awe - stricken voice . " when ? " 
 " when I be dead , " his grandfather answer . 
 " then I do not   want it , " say Fauntleroy ; " I want you to live always . " 
 " that be kind , " answer the Earl in his dry way ; " nevertheless , some day it will all be yours some day you will be the Earl of Dorincourt . " 
 little Lord Fauntleroy sit very still in his saddle for a few moment . he look over the broad moor , the green farm , the beautiful copse , the cottage in the lane , the pretty village , and over the tree to where the turret of the great castle rise , gray and stately . then he give a queer little sigh . 
 " what be you think of ? " ask the Earl . 
 " I be think , " reply Fauntleroy , " what a little boy I be ! and of what Dearest say to I . " 
 " what be it ? " inquire the Earl . 
 " she say that perhaps it be not so easy to be very rich ; that if any one have so many thing always , one might sometimes forget that every one else be not so fortunate , and that one who be rich should always be careful and try to remember . I be talk to she about how good you be , and she say that be such a good thing , because an earl have so much power , and if he care only about his own pleasure and never think about the people who live on his land , they might have trouble that he could help and there be so many people , and it would be such a hard thing . and I be just look at all those house , and think how I should have to find out about the people , when I be an earl . how do you find out about they ? " 
 as his lordship 's knowledge of his tenantry consist in find out which of they pay their rent promptly , and in turn out those who do not , this be rather a hard question . " Newick find out for I , " he say , and he pull his great gray mustache , and look at his small questioner rather uneasily . " we will go home now , " he add ; " and when you be an earl , see to it that you be a well earl than I have be ! " 
 he be very silent as they ride home . he feel it to be almost incredible that he who have never really love any one in his life , should find himself grow so fond of this little fellow , as without doubt he be . at first he have only be pleased and proud of Cedric 's beauty and bravery , but there be something more than pride in his feeling now . he laugh a grim , dry laugh all to himself sometimes , when he think how he like to have the boy near he , how he like to hear his voice , and how in secret he really wish to be like and think well of by his small grandson . 
 " I be an old fellow in my dotage , and I have nothing else to think of , " he would say to himself ; and yet he know it be not that altogether . and if he have allow himself to admit the truth , he would perhaps have find himself oblige to own that the very thing which attract he , in spite of himself , be the quality he have never possess the frank , true , kindly nature , the affectionate trustfulness which could never think evil . 
 it be only about a week after that ride when , after a visit to his mother , Fauntleroy come into the library with a troubled , thoughtful face . he sit down in that high - back chair in which he have sit on the evening of his arrival , and for a while he look at the ember on the hearth . the Earl watch he in silence , wonder what be come . it be evident that Cedric have something on his mind . at last he look up . " do Newick know all about the people ? " he ask . 
 " it be his business to know about they , " say his lordship . " be neglect it have he ? " 
 Contradictory as it may seem , there be nothing which entertain and edify he more than the little fellow 's interest in his tenantry . he have never take any interest in they himself , but it please he well enough that , with all his childish habit of thought and in the midst of all his childish amusement and high spirit , there should be such a quaint seriousness work in the curly head . 
 " there be a place , " say Fauntleroy , look up at he with wide - open , horror - stricken eye " Dearest have see it ; it be at the other end of the village . the house be close together , and almost fall down ; you can scarcely breathe ; and the people be so poor , and everything be dreadful ! often they have fever , and the child die ; and it make they wicked to live like that , and be so poor and miserable ! it be bad than Michael and Bridget ! the rain come in at the roof ! Dearest go to see a poor woman who live there . she would not let I come near she until she have change all her thing . the tear run down her cheek when she tell I about it ! " 
 the tear have come into his own eye , but he smile through they . 
 " I tell she you do not   know , and I would tell you , " he say . he jump down and come and lean against the Earl 's chair . " you can make it all right , " he say , " just as you make it all right for Higgins . you always make it all right for everybody . I tell she you would , and that Newick must have forget to tell you . " 
 the Earl look down at the hand on his knee . Newick have not forget to tell he ; in fact , Newick have speak to he more than once of the desperate condition of the end of the village know as Earl 's Court . he know all about the tumble - down , miserable cottage , and the bad drainage , and the damp wall and break window and leak roof , and all about the poverty , the fever , and the misery . Mr. Mordaunt have paint it all to he in the strong word he could use , and his lordship have use violent language in response ; and , when his gout have be at the bad , he say that the soon the people of Earl 's Court die and be bury by the parish the well it would be , and there be an end of the matter . and yet , as he look at the small hand on his knee , and from the small hand to the honest , earnest , frank - eyed face , he be actually a little ashamed both of Earl 's Court and himself . 
 " what ! " he say ; " you want to make a builder of model cottage of I , do you ? " and he positively put his own hand upon the childish one and stroke it . 
 " those must be pull down , " say Fauntleroy , with great eagerness . " Dearest say so . let we let we go and have they pull down to - morrow . the people will be so glad when they see you ! they will know you have come to help they ! " and his eye shine like star in his glow face . 
 the Earl rise from his chair and put his hand on the child 's shoulder . " let we go out and take our walk on the terrace , " he say , with a short laugh ; " and we can talk it over . " 
 and though he laugh two or three time again , as they walk to and fro on the broad stone terrace , where they walk together almost every fine evening , he seem to be think of something which do not displease he , and still he keep his hand on his small companion 's shoulder . 




 X 

 the truth be that Mrs. Errol have find a great many sad thing in the course of her work among the poor of the little village that appear so picturesque when it be see from the moor - side . everything be not as picturesque , when see near by , as it look from a distance . she have find idleness and poverty and ignorance where there should have be comfort and industry . and she have discover , after a while , that Erleboro be consider to be the bad village in that part of the country . Mr. Mordaunt have tell she a great many of his difficulty and discouragement , and she have find out a great deal by herself . the agent who have manage the property have always be choose to please the Earl , and have care nothing for the degradation and wretchedness of the poor tenant . many thing , therefore , have be neglect which should have be attend to , and matter have go from bad to bad . 
 as to Earl 's Court , it be a disgrace , with its dilapidated house and miserable , careless , sickly people . when first Mrs. Errol go to the place , it make her shudder . such ugliness and slovenliness and want seem bad in a country place than in a city . it seem as if there it might be help . and as she look at the squalid , uncared - for child grow up in the midst of vice and brutal indifference , she think of her own little boy spend his day in the great , splendid castle , guard and serve like a young prince , have no wish ungratified , and know nothing but luxury and ease and beauty . and a bold thought come in her wise little mother - heart . gradually she have begin to see , as have other , that it have be her boy 's good fortune to please the Earl very much , and that he would scarcely be likely to be deny anything for which he express a desire . 
 " the Earl would give he anything , " she say to Mr. Mordaunt . " he would indulge his every whim . why should not that indulgence be use for the good of other ? it be for I to see that this shall come to pass . " 
 she know she could trust the kind , childish heart ; so she tell the little fellow the story of Earl 's Court , feel sure that he would speak of it to his grandfather , and hop that some good result would follow . 
 and strange as it appear to every one , good result do follow . 
 the fact be that the strong power to influence the Earl be his grandson 's perfect confidence in he the fact that Cedric always believe that his grandfather be go to do what be right and generous . he could not quite make up his mind to let he discover that he have no inclination to be generous at all , and that he want his own way on all occasion , whether it be right or wrong . it be such a novelty to be regard with admiration as a benefactor of the entire human race , and the soul of nobility , that he do not enjoy the idea of look into the affectionate brown eye , and say : " I be a violent , selfish old rascal ; I never do a generous thing in my life , and I do not   care about Earl 's Court or the poor people " or something which would amount to the same thing . he actually have learn to be fond enough of that small boy with the mop of yellow love - lock , to feel that he himself would prefer to be guilty of an amiable action now and then . and so though he laugh at himself after some reflection , he send for Newick , and have quite a long interview with he on the subject of the Court , and it be decide that the wretched hovel should be pull down and new house should be build . 
 " it be Lord Fauntleroy who insist on it , " he say dryly ; " he think it will improve the property . you can tell the tenant that it be his idea . " and he look down at his small lordship , who be lie on the hearth - rug playing with Dougal . the great dog be the lad 's constant companion , and follow he about everywhere , stalk solemnly after he when he walk , and trot majestically behind when he ride or drive . 
 of course , both the country people and the town people hear of the propose improvement . at first , many of they would not believe it ; but when a small army of workman arrive and commence pull down the crazy , squalid cottage , people begin to understand that little Lord Fauntleroy have do they a good turn again , and that through his innocent interference the scandal of Earl 's Court have at last be remove . if he have only know how they talk about he and praise he everywhere , and prophesy great thing for he when he grow up , how astonished he would have be ! but he never suspect it . he live his simple , happy , child life , frolic about in the park ; chase the rabbit to their burrow ; lie under the tree on the grass , or on the rug in the library , read wonderful book and talk to the Earl about they , and then tell the story again to his mother ; write long letter to Dick and Mr. Hobbs , who respond in characteristic fashion ; rid out at his grandfather 's side , or with Wilkins as escort . as they ride through the market town , he use to see the people turn and look , and he notice that as they lift their hat their face often brighten very much ; but he think it be all because his grandfather be with he . 
 " they be so fond of you , " he once say , look up at his lordship with a bright smile . " do you see how glad they be when they see you ? I hope they will some day be as fond of I . it must be nice to have everybody like you . " and he feel quite proud to be the grandson of so greatly admire and belove an individual . 
 when the cottage be be build , the lad and his grandfather use to ride over to Earl 's Court together to look at they , and Fauntleroy be full of interest . he would dismount from his pony and go and make acquaintance with the workman , ask they question about building and bricklaying , and tell they thing about America . after two or three such conversation , he be able to enlighten the Earl on the subject of brick - making , as they ride home . 
 " I always like to know about thing like those , " he say , " because you never know what you be come to . " 
 when he leave they , the workman use to talk he over among themselves , and laugh at his odd , innocent speech ; but they like he , and like to see he stand among they , talk away , with his hand in his pocket , his hat push back on his curl , and his small face full of eagerness . " he be a rare un , " they use to say . " an ' a noice little outspoken chap , too . not much o ' th ' bad stock in he . " and they would go home and tell their wife about he , and the woman would tell each other , and so it come about that almost every one talk of , or know some story of , little Lord Fauntleroy ; and gradually almost every one know that the " wicked Earl " have find something he care for at last something which have touch and even warm his hard , bitter old heart . 
 but no one know quite how much it have be warm , and how day by day the old man find himself care more and more for the child , who be the only creature that have ever trust he . he find himself look forward to the time when Cedric would be a young man , strong and beautiful , with life all before he , but have still that kind heart and the power to make friend everywhere , and the Earl wonder what the lad would do , and how he would use his gift . often as he watch the little fellow lie upon the hearth , con some big book , the light shin on the bright young head , his old eye would gleam and his cheek would flush . 
 " the boy can do anything , " he would say to himself , " anything ! " 
 he never speak to any one else of his feeling for Cedric ; when he speak of he to other it be always with the same grim smile . but Fauntleroy soon know that his grandfather love he and always like he to be near near to his chair if they be in the library , opposite to he at table , or by his side when he ride or drive or take his evening walk on the broad terrace . 
 " do you remember , " Cedric say once , look up from his book as he lie on the rug , " do you remember what I say to you that first night about our be good companion ? I do not   think any people could be well companion than we be , do you ? " 
 " we be pretty good companion , I should say , " reply his lordship . " come here . " 
 Fauntleroy scramble up and go to he . 
 " be there anything you want , " the Earl ask ; " anything you have not ? " 
 the little fellow 's brown eye fix themselves on his grandfather with a rather wistful look . 
 " only one thing , " he answer . 
 " what be that ? " inquire the Earl . 
 Fauntleroy be silent a second . he have not think matter over to himself so long for nothing . 
 " what be it ? " my lord repeat . 
 Fauntleroy answer . 
 " it be Dearest , " he say . 
 the old Earl wince a little . 
 " but you see she almost every day , " he say . " be not that enough ? " 
 " I use to see she all the time , " say Fauntleroy . " she use to kiss I when I go to sleep at night , and in the morning she be always there , and we could tell each other thing without wait . " 
 the old eye and the young one look into each other through a moment of silence . then the Earl knit his brow . 
 " do you never forget about your mother ? " he say . 
 " no , " answer Fauntleroy , " never ; and she never forget about I . I should not   forget about you , you know , if I do not   live with you . I should think about you all the more . " 
 " upon my word , " say the Earl , after look at he a moment long , " I believe you would ! " 
 the jealous pang that come when the boy speak so of his mother seem even strong than it have be before ; it be strong because of this old man 's increase affection for the boy . 
 but it be not long before he have other pang , so much hard to face that he almost forget , for the time , he have ever hat his son 's wife at all . and in a strange and startling way it happen . one evening , just before the Earl 's Court cottage be complete , there be a grand dinner party at Dorincourt . there have not be such a party at the Castle for a long time . a few day before it take place , Sir Harry Lorridaile and Lady Lorridaile , who be the Earl 's only sister , actually come for a visit a thing which cause the great excitement in the village and set Mrs. Dibble 's shop - bell tinkle madly again , because it be well know that Lady Lorridaile have only be to Dorincourt once since her marriage , thirty - five year before . she be a handsome old lady with white curl and dimpled , peachy cheek , and she be as good as gold , but she have never approve of her brother any more than do the rest of the world , and have a strong will of her own and not be at all afraid to speak her mind frankly , she have , after several lively quarrel with his lordship , see very little of he since her young day . 
 she have hear a great deal of he that be not pleasant through the year in which they have be separate . she have hear about his neglect of his wife , and of the poor lady 's death ; and of his indifference to his child ; and of the two weak , vicious , unprepossesse eld boy who have be no credit to he or to any one else . those two elder son , Bevis and Maurice , she have never see ; but once there have come to Lorridaile Park a tall , stalwart , beautiful young fellow about eighteen year old , who have tell she that he be her nephew Cedric Errol , and that he have come to see she because he be pass near the place and wish to look at his Aunt Constantia of whom he have hear his mother speak . Lady Lorridaile 's kind heart have warm through and through at the sight of the young man , and she have make he stay with she a week , and pet he , and make much of he and admire he immensely . he be so sweet - temper , light - hearte , spirit a lad , that when he go away , she have hop to see he often again ; but she never do , because the Earl have be in a bad humor when he go back to Dorincourt , and have forbid he ever to go to Lorridaile Park again . but Lady Lorridaile have always remember he tenderly , and though she fear he have make a rash marriage in America , she have be very angry when she hear how he have be cast off by his father and that no one really know where or how he live . at last there come a rumor of his death , and then Bevis have be throw from his horse and kill , and Maurice have die in Rome of the fever ; and soon after come the story of the american child who be to be find and bring home as Lord Fauntleroy . 
 " probably to be ruin as the other be , " she say to her husband , " unless his mother be good enough and have a will of her own to help she to take care of he . " 
 but when she hear that Cedric 's mother have be part from he she be almost too indignant for word . 
 " it be disgraceful , Harry ! " she say . " Fancy a child of that age be take from his mother , and make the companion of a man like my brother ! he will either be brutal to the boy or indulge he until he be a little monster . if I think it would do any good to write " 
 " it would not , Constantia , " say Sir Harry . 
 " I know it would not , " she answer . " I know his lordship the Earl of Dorincourt too well ; but it be outrageous . " 
 not only the poor people and farmer hear about little Lord Fauntleroy ; other know he . he be talk about so much and there be so many story of he of his beauty , his sweet temper , his popularity , and his grow influence over the Earl , his grandfather that rumor of he reach the gentry at their country place and he be hear of in more than one county of England . People talk about he at the dinner table , lady pity his young mother , and wonder if the boy be as handsome as he be say to be , and man who know the Earl and his habit laugh heartily at the story of the little fellow 's belief in his lordship 's amiability . Sir Thomas Asshe of Asshawe Hall , be in Erleboro one day , meet the Earl and his grandson rid together , and stop to shake hand with my lord and congratulate he on his change of look and on his recovery from the gout . " and , d ' ye know , " he say , when he speak of the incident afterward , " the old man look as proud as a turkey - cock ; and upon my word I do not   wonder , for a handsomer , fine lad than his grandson I never see ! as straight as a dart , and sit his pony like a young trooper ! " 
 and so by degree Lady Lorridaile , too , hear of the child ; she hear about Higgins and the lame boy , and the cottage at Earl 's Court , and a score of other thing , and she begin to wish to see the little fellow . and just as she be wonder how it might be bring about , to her utter astonishment , she receive a letter from her brother invite she to come with her husband to Dorincourt . 
 " it seem incredible ! " she exclaim . " I have hear it say that the child have work miracle , and I begin to believe it . they say my brother adore the boy and can scarcely endure to have he out of sight . and he be so proud of he ! actually , I believe he want to show he to we . " and she accept the invitation at once . 
 when she reach Dorincourt Castle with Sir Harry , it be late in the afternoon , and she go to her room at once before see her brother . have dress for dinner , she enter the drawing - room . the Earl be there stand near the fire and look very tall and impose ; and at his side stand a little boy in black velvet , and a large Vandyke collar of rich lace a little fellow whose round bright face be so handsome , and who turn upon her such beautiful , candid brown eye , that she almost utter an exclamation of pleasure and surprise at the sight . 
 as she shake hand with the Earl , she call he by the name she have not use since her girlhood . 
 " what , Molyneux ! " she say , " be this the child ? " 
 " yes , Constantia , " answer the Earl , " this be the boy . Fauntleroy , this be your grand - aunt , Lady Lorridaile . " 
 " how do you do , Grand - Aunt ? " say Fauntleroy . 
 Lady Lorridaile put her hand on his shoulder , and after look down into his upraised face a few second , kiss he warmly . 
 " I be your Aunt Constantia , " she say , " and I love your poor papa , and you be very like he . " 
 " it make I glad when I be tell I be like he , " answer Fauntleroy , " because it seem as if every one like he , just like Dearest , eszackly , Aunt Constantia "   add the two word after a second 's pause . 
 Lady Lorridaile be delighted . she bent and kiss he again , and from that moment they be warm friend . 
 " well , Molyneux , " she say aside to the Earl afterward , " it could not possibly be well than this ! " 
 " I think not , " answer his lordship dryly . " he be a fine little fellow . we be great friend . he believe I to be the most charming and sweet - temper of philanthropist . I will confess to you , Constantia , as you would find it out if I do not , that I be in some slight danger of become rather an old fool about he . " 
 " what do his mother think of you ? " ask Lady Lorridaile , with her usual straightforwardness . 
 " I have not ask she , " answer the Earl , slightly scowl . 
 " well , " say Lady Lorridaile , " I will be frank with you at the outset , Molyneux , and tell you I do not   approve of your course , and that it be my intention to call on Mrs. Errol as soon as possible ; so if you wish to quarrel with I , you have well mention it at once . what I hear of the young creature make I quite sure that her child owe she everything . we be tell even at Lorridaile Park that your poor tenant adore she already . " 
 " they adore HIM , " say the Earl , nod toward Fauntleroy . " as to Mrs. Errol , you will find she a pretty little woman . I be rather in debt to she for give some of her beauty to the boy , and you can go to see she if you like . all I ask be that she will remain at Court Lodge and that you will not ask I to go and see she , " and he scowl a little again . 
 " but he do not   hate she as much as he use to , that be plain enough to I , " her ladyship say to Sir Harry afterward . " and he be a changed man in a measure , and , incredible as it may seem , Harry , it be my opinion that he be be make into a human being , through nothing more nor less than his affection for that innocent , affectionate little fellow . why , the child actually love he lean on his chair and against his knee . his own child would as soon have think of nestle up to a tiger . " 
 the very next day she go to call upon Mrs. Errol . when she return , she say to her brother : 
 " Molyneux , she be the lovely little woman I ever see ! she have a voice like a silver bell , and you may thank she for make the boy what he be . she have give he more than her beauty , and you make a great mistake in not persuade she to come and take charge of you . I shall invite she to Lorridaile . " 
 " she will not leave the boy , " reply the Earl . 
 " I must have the boy too , " say Lady Lorridaile , laugh . 
 but she know Fauntleroy would not be give up to she , and each day she see more clearly how closely those two have grow to each other , and how all the proud , grim old man 's ambition and hope and love center themselves in the child , and how the warm , innocent nature return his affection with most perfect trust and good faith . 
 she know , too , that the prime reason for the great dinner party be the Earl 's secret desire to show the world his grandson and heir , and to let people see that the boy who have be so much speak of and describe be even a fine little speciman of boyhood than rumor have make he . 
 " Bevis and Maurice be such a bitter humiliation to he , " she say to her husband . " every one know it . he actually hat they . his pride have full sway here . " perhaps there be not one person who accept the invitation without feel some curiosity about little Lord Fauntleroy , and wonder if he would be on view . 
 and when the time come he be on view . 
 " the lad have good manner , " say the Earl . " he will be in no one 's way . child be usually idiot or bore , mine be both , but he can actually answer when he be speak to , and be silent when he be not . he be never offensive . " 
 but he be not allow to be silent very long . every one have something to say to he . the fact be they wish to make he talk . the lady pet he and ask he question , and the man ask he question too , and joke with he , as the man on the steamer have do when he cross the Atlantic . Fauntleroy do not quite understand why they laugh so sometimes when he answer they , but he be so used to see people amuse when he be quite serious , that he do not mind . he think the whole evening delightful . the magnificent room be so brilliant with light , there be so many flower , the gentleman seem so gay , and the lady wear such beautiful , wonderful dress , and such sparkling ornament in their hair and on their neck . there be one young lady who , he hear they say , have just come down from London , where she have spend the ' season " ; and she be so charming that he could not keep his eye from she . she be a rather tall young lady with a proud little head , and very soft dark hair , and large eye the color of purple pansy , and the color on her cheek and lip be like that of a rose . she be dress in a beautiful white dress , and have pearl around her throat . there be one strange thing about this young lady . so many gentleman stand near she , and seem anxious to please she , that Fauntleroy think she must be something like a princess . he be so much interested in she that without know it he draw nearer and nearer to she , and at last she turn and speak to he . 
 " come here , Lord Fauntleroy , " she say , smile ; " and tell I why you look at I so . " 
 " I be think how beautiful you be , " his young lordship reply . 
 then all the gentleman laugh outright , and the young lady laugh a little too , and the rose color in her cheek brighten . 
 " ah , Fauntleroy , " say one of the gentleman who have laugh most heartily , " make the most of your time ! when you be old you will not have the courage to say that . " 
 " but nobody could help say it , " say Fauntleroy sweetly . " could you help it ? do not   you think she be pretty , too ? " 
 " we be not allow to say what we think , " say the gentleman , while the rest laugh more than ever . 
 but the beautiful young lady her name be Miss Vivian Herbert put out her hand and draw Cedric to her side , look pretty than before , if possible . 
 " Lord Fauntleroy shall say what he think , " she say ; " and I be much oblige to he . I be sure he think what he say . " and she kiss he on his cheek . 
 " I think you be pretty than any one I ever see , " say Fauntleroy , look at she with innocent , admire eye , " except Dearest . of course , I could not   think any one quite as pretty as Dearest . I think she be the prettiest person in the world . " 
 " I be sure she be , " say Miss Vivian Herbert . and she laugh and kiss his cheek again . 
 she keep he by her side a great part of the evening , and the group of which they be the center be very gay . he do not know how it happen , but before long he be tell they all about America , and the Republican Rally , and Mr. Hobbs and Dick , and in the end he proudly produce from his pocket Dick 's parting gift , the red silk handkerchief . 
 " I put it in my pocket to - night because it be a party , " he say . " I think Dick would like I to wear it at a party . " 
 and queer as the big , flaming , spotted thing be , there be a serious , affectionate look in his eye , which prevent his audience from laugh very much . 
 " you see , I like it , " he say , " because Dick be my friend . " 
 but though he be talk to so much , as the Earl have say , he be in no one 's way . he could be quiet and listen when other talk , and so no one find he tiresome . a slight smile cross more than one face when several time he go and stand near his grandfather 's chair , or sit on a stool close to he , watch he and absorb every word he utter with the most charmed interest . once he stand so near the chair 's arm that his cheek touch the Earl 's shoulder , and his lordship , detect the general smile , smile a little himself . he know what the looker - on be think , and he feel some secret amusement in their seeing what good friend he be with this youngster , who might have be expect to share the popular opinion of he . 
 Mr. Havisham have be expect to arrive in the afternoon , but , strange to say , he be late . such a thing have really never be know to happen before during all the year in which he have be a visitor at Dorincourt Castle . he be so late that the guest be on the point of rise to go in to dinner when he arrive . when he approach his host , the Earl regard he with amazement . he look as if he have be hurry or agitate ; his dry , keen old face be actually pale . 
 " I be detain , " he say , in a low voice to the Earl , " by an extraordinary event . " 
 it be as unlike the methodic old lawyer to be agitate by anything as it be to be late , but it be evident that he have be disturb . at dinner he eat scarcely anything , and two or three time , when he be speak to , he start as if his thought be far away . at dessert , when Fauntleroy come in , he look at he more than once , nervously and uneasily . Fauntleroy note the look and wonder at it . he and Mr. Havisham be on friendly term , and they usually exchange smile . the lawyer seem to have forget to smile that evening . 
 the fact be , he forget everything but the strange and painful news he know he must tell the Earl before the night be over the strange news which he know would be so terrible a shock , and which would change the face of everything . as he look about at the splendid room and the brilliant company , at the people gather together , he know , more that they might see the bright - haired little fellow near the Earl 's chair than for any other reason , as he look at the proud old man and at little Lord Fauntleroy smile at his side , he really feel quite shake , notwithstanding that he be a harden old lawyer . what a blow it be that he must deal they ! 
 he do not exactly know how the long , superb dinner end . he sit through it as if he be in a dream , and several time he see the Earl glance at he in surprise . 
 but it be over at last , and the gentleman join the lady in the drawing - room . they find Fauntleroy sit on the sofa with Miss Vivian Herbert , the great beauty of the last London season ; they have be look at some picture , and he be thank his companion as the door open . 
 " I be ever so much oblige to you for be so kind to I ! " he be say ; " I never be at a party before , and I have   enjoy myself so much ! " 
 he have enjoy himself so much that when the gentleman gather about Miss Herbert again and begin to talk to she , as he listen and try to understand their laugh speech , his eyelid begin to droop . they droop until they cover his eye two or three time , and then the sound of Miss Herbert 's low , pretty laugh would bring he back , and he would open they again for about two second . he be quite sure he be not go to sleep , but there be a large , yellow satin cushion behind he and his head sink against it , and after a while his eyelid droop for the last time . they do not even quite open when , as it seem a long time after , some one kiss he lightly on the cheek . it be Miss Vivian Herbert , who be go away , and she speak to he softly . 
 " good - night , little Lord Fauntleroy , " she say . " sleep well . " 
 and in the morning he do not know that he have try to open his eye and have murmur sleepily , " good - night I be so glad I see you you be so pretty " 
 he only have a very faint recollection of hear the gentleman laugh again and of wonder why they do it . 
 no soon have the last guest leave the room , than Mr. Havisham turn from his place by the fire , and step near the sofa , where he stand look down at the sleep occupant . little Lord Fauntleroy be take his ease luxuriously . one leg cross the other and swing over the edge of the sofa ; one arm be fling easily above his head ; the warm flush of healthful , happy , childish sleep be on his quiet face ; his wave tangle of bright hair stray over the yellow satin cushion . he make a picture well worth look at . 
 as Mr. Havisham look at it , he put his hand up and rub his shaven chin , with a harass countenance . 
 " well , Havisham , " say the Earl 's harsh voice behind he . " what be it ? it be evident something have happen . what be the extraordinary event , if I may ask ? " 
 Mr. Havisham turn from the sofa , still rub his chin . 
 " it be bad news , " he answer , " distressing news , my lord the bad of news . I be sorry to be the bearer of it . " 
 the Earl have be uneasy for some time during the evening , as he glance at Mr. Havisham , and when he be uneasy he be always ill - temper . 
 " why do you look so at the boy ! " he exclaim irritably . " you have be look at he all the evening as if see here now , why should you look at the boy , Havisham , and hang over he like some bird of ill - oman ! what have your news to do with Lord Fauntleroy ? " 
 " my lord , " say Mr. Havisham , " I will waste no word . my news have everything to do with Lord Fauntleroy . and if we be to believe it it be not Lord Fauntleroy who lie sleep before we , but only the son of Captain Errol . and the present Lord Fauntleroy be the son of your son Bevis , and be at this moment in a lodging - house in London . " 
 the Earl clutch the arm of his chair with both his hand until the vein stand out upon they ; the vein stand out on his forehead too ; his fierce old face be almost livid . 
 " what do you mean ! " he cry out . " you be mad ! whose lie be this ? " 
 " if it be a lie , " answer Mr. Havisham , " it be painfully like the truth . a woman come to my chamber this morning . she say your son Bevis marry she six year ago in London . she show I her marriage certificate . they quarrel a year after the marriage , and he pay she to keep away from he . she have a son five year old . she be an American of the low class , an ignorant person , and until lately she do not fully understand what her son could claim . she consult a lawyer and find out that the boy be really Lord Fauntleroy and the heir to the earldom of Dorincourt ; and she , of course , insist on his claim be acknowledge . " 
 there be a movement of the curly head on the yellow satin cushion . a soft , long , sleepy sigh come from the part lip , and the little boy stir in his sleep , but not at all restlessly or uneasily . not at all as if his slumber be disturb by the fact that he be be prove a small impostor and that he be not Lord Fauntleroy at all and never would be the Earl of Dorincourt . he only turn his rosy face more on its side , as if to enable the old man who star at it so solemnly to see it well . 
 the handsome , grim old face be ghastly . a bitter smile fix itself upon it . 
 " I should refuse to believe a word of it , " he say , " if it be not such a low , scoundrelly piece of business that it become quite possible in connection with the name of my son Bevis . it be quite like Bevis . he be always a disgrace to we . always a weak , untruthful , vicious young brute with low taste my son and heir , Bevis , Lord Fauntleroy . the woman be an ignorant , vulgar person , you say ? " 
 " I be oblige to admit that she can scarcely spell her own name , " answer the lawyer . " she be absolutely uneducated and openly mercenary . she care for nothing but the money . she be very handsome in a coarse way , but " 
 the fastidious old lawyer cease speak and give a sort of shudder . 
 the vein on the old Earl 's forehead stand out like purple cord . 
 something else stand out upon it too cold drop of moisture . he take out his handkerchief and sweep they away . his smile grow even more bitter . 
 " and I , " he say , " I object to to the other woman , the mother of this child "   point to the sleep form on the sofa ; " I refuse to recognize she . and yet she could spell her own name . I suppose this be retribution . " 
 suddenly he spring up from his chair and begin to walk up and down the room . fierce and terrible word pour forth from his lip . his rage and hatred and cruel disappointment shake he as a storm shake a tree . his violence be something dreadful to see , and yet Mr. Havisham notice that at the very bad of his wrath he never seem to forget the little sleep figure on the yellow satin cushion , and that he never once speak loud enough to awaken it . 
 " I might have know it , " he say . " they be a disgrace to I from their first hour ! I hat they both ; and they hat I ! Bevis be the bad of the two . I will not believe this yet , though ! I will contend against it to the last . but it be like Bevis it be like he ! " 
 and then he rag again and ask question about the woman , about her proof , and pace the room , turn first white and then purple in his repressed fury . 
 when at last he have learn all there be to be tell , and know the bad , Mr. Havisham look at he with a feeling of anxiety . he look broken and haggard and change . his rage have always be bad for he , but this one have be bad than the rest because there have be something more than rage in it . 
 he come slowly back to the sofa , at last , and stand near it . 
 " if any one have tell I I could be fond of a child , " he say , his harsh voice low and unsteady , " I should not have believe they . I always detest child my own more than the rest . I be fond of this one ; he be fond of I "   with a bitter smile . " I be not popular ; I never be . but he be fond of I . he never be afraid of I he always trust I . he would have fill my place well than I have fill it . I know that . he would have be an honor to the name . " 
 he bend down and stand a minute or so look at the happy , sleep face . his shaggy eyebrow be knit fiercely , and yet somehow he do not seem fierce at all . he put up his hand , push the bright hair back from the forehead , and then turn away and ring the bell . 
 when the large footman appear , he point to the sofa . 
 " take " he say , and then his voice change a little " take Lord Fauntleroy to his room . " 




 XI 

 when Mr. Hobbs 's young friend leave he to go to Dorincourt Castle and become Lord Fauntleroy , and the grocery - man have time to realize that the Atlantic Ocean lie between himself and the small companion who have spend so many agreeable hour in his society , he really begin to feel very lonely indeed . the fact be , Mr. Hobbs be not a clever man nor even a bright one ; he be , indeed , rather a slow and heavy person , and he have never make many acquaintance . he be not mentally energetic enough to know how to amuse himself , and in truth he never do anything of an entertaining nature but read the newspaper and add up his account . it be not very easy for he to add up his account , and sometimes it take he a long time to bring they out right ; and in the old day , little Lord Fauntleroy , who have learn how to add up quite nicely with his finger and a slate and pencil , have sometimes even go to the length of try to help he ; and , then too , he have be so good a listener and have take such an interest in what the newspaper say , and he and Mr. Hobbs have hold such long conversation about the Revolution and the British and the election and the republican party , that it be no wonder his going leave a blank in the grocery store . at first it seem to Mr. Hobbs that Cedric be not really far away , and would come back again ; that some day he would look up from his paper and see the little lad stand in the door - way , in his white suit and red stocking , and with his straw hat on the back of his head , and would hear he say in his cheerful little voice : " hello , Mr. Hobbs ! this be a hot day be not   it ? " but as the day pass on and this do not happen , Mr. Hobbs feel very dull and uneasy . he do not even enjoy his newspaper as much as he use to . he would put the paper down on his knee after read it , and sit and stare at the high stool for a long time . there be some mark on the long leg which make he feel quite dejected and melancholy . they be mark make by the heel of the next Earl of Dorincourt , when he kick and talk at the same time . it seem that even youthful earl kick the leg of thing they sit on ; noble blood and lofty lineage do not prevent it . after look at those mark , Mr. Hobbs would take out his gold watch and open it and stare at the inscription : " from his old friend , Lord Fauntleroy , to Mr. Hobbs . when this you see , remember I . " and after star at it awhile , he would shut it up with a loud snap , and sigh and get up and go and stand in the door - way between the box of potato and the barrel of apple and look up the street . at night , when the store be closed , he would light his pipe and walk slowly along the pavement until he reach the house where Cedric have live , on which there be a sign that read , " this House to let " ; and he would stop near it and look up and shake his head , and puff at his pipe very hard , and after a while walk mournfully back again . 
 this go on for two or three week before any new idea come to he . be slow and ponderous , it always take he a long time to reach a new idea . as a rule , he do not like new idea , but preferred old one . after two or three week , however , during which , instead of get well , matter really grow bad , a novel plan slowly and deliberately dawn upon he . he would go to see Dick . he smoke a great many pipe before he arrive at the conclusion , but finally he do arrive at it . he would go to see Dick . he know all about Dick . Cedric have tell he , and his idea be that perhaps Dick might be some comfort to he in the way of talk thing over . 
 so one day when Dick be very hard at work black a customer 's boot , a short , stout man with a heavy face and a bald head stop on the pavement and star for two or three minute at the bootblack 's sign , which read : 
 " PROFESSOR DICK TIPTON can't be BEAT . " 
 he star at it so long that Dick begin to take a lively interest in he , and when he have put the finishing touch to his customer 's boot , he say : 
 " want a shine , sir ? " 
 the stout man come forward deliberately and put his foot on the rest . 
 " yes , " he say . 
 then when Dick fall to work , the stout man look from Dick to the sign and from the sign to Dick . 
 " where do you get that ? " he ask . 
 " from a friend o ' mine , " say Dick , " a little feller . he guv ' I the whole outfit . he be the good little feller ye ever see . he be in England now . go to be one o ' they lord . " 
 " Lord Lord " ask Mr. Hobbs , with ponderous slowness , " Lord Fauntleroy go to be Earl of Dorincourt ? " 
 Dick almost drop his brush . 
 " why , boss ! " he exclaim , " d ' ye know he yerself ? " 
 " I have   know he , " answer Mr. Hobbs , wipe his warm forehead , " ever since he be bear . we be lifetime acquaintance that be what we be . " 
 it really make he feel quite agitated to speak of it . he pull the splendid gold watch out of his pocket and open it , and show the inside of the case to Dick . 
 " ' when this you see , remember I , ' " he read . " that be his parting keepsake to I . ' I do not   want you to forget I ' those be his word I would ha ' remember he , " he go on , shake his head , " if he have not   give I a thing an ' I have not   see hide nor hair on he again . he be a companion as any man would remember . " 
 " he be the nice little feller I ever see , " say Dick . " an ' as to sand I never see so much sand to a little feller . I think a heap o ' he , I do , an ' we be friend , too we be sort o ' chum from the fust , that little young un an ' I . I grab his ball from under a stage fur he , an ' he never forget it ; an ' he would come down here , he would , with his mother or his nuss and he would holler : ' hello , Dick ! ' at I , as friendly as if he be six foot high , when he warn't   knee high to a grasshopper , and be dress in gal 's clo'es . he be a gay little chap , and when you be down on your luck , it do you good to talk to he . " 
 " that be so , " say Mr. Hobbs . " it be a pity to make a earl out of HIM . he would have shine in the grocery business or dry good either ; he would have shine ! " and he shake his head with deep regret than ever . 
 it prove that they have so much to say to each other that it be not possible to say it all at one time , and so it be agree that the next night Dick should make a visit to the store and keep Mr. Hobbs company . the plan please Dick well enough . he have be a street waif nearly all his life , but he have never be a bad boy , and he have always have a private yearning for a more respectable kind of existence . since he have be in business for himself , he have make enough money to enable he to sleep under a roof instead of out in the street , and he have begin to hope he might reach even a high plane , in time . so , to be invite to call on a stout , respectable man who own a corner store , and even have a horse and wagon , seem to he quite an event . 
 " do you know anything about earl and castle ? " Mr. Hobbs inquire . " I would like to know more of the particklar . " 
 " there be a story about some on them in the Penny Story Gazette , " say Dick . " it be call the ' crime of a Coronet ; or , the revenge of the Countess May . ' it be a boss thing , too . some of we boy be takin ' it to read . " 
 " bring it up when you come , " say Mr. Hobbs , " an ' I will pay for it . bring all you can find that have any earl in them . if there be not   earl , markises'll do , or dook though he never make mention of any dook or markise . we do go over coronet a little , but I never happen to see any . I guess they do not   keep them ' round here . " 
 " Tiffany would have them if anybody do , " say Dick , " but I do not   know as I would know one if I see it . " 
 Mr. Hobbs do not explain that he would not have know one if he see it . he merely shake his head ponderously . 
 " I s'pose there be very little call for them , " he say , and that end the matter . 
 this be the beginning of quite a substantial friendship . when Dick go up to the store , Mr. Hobbs receive he with great hospitality . he give he a chair tilt against the door , near a barrel of apple , and after his young visitor be seat , he make a jerk at they with the hand in which he hold his pipe , say : 
 " help yerself . " 
 then he look at the story paper , and after that they read and discuss the british aristocracy ; and Mr. Hobbs smoke his pipe very hard and shake his head a great deal . he shake it most when he point out the high stool with the mark on its leg . 
 " there be his very kick , " he say impressively ; " his very kick . I sit and look at them by the hour . this be a world of up an ' it be a world of down . why , he would set there , an ' eat cracker out of a box , an ' apple out of a barrel , an ' pitch his core into the street ; an ' now he be a lord a - livin ' in a castle . they be a lord 's kick ; they will be a earl 's kick some day . sometimes I say to myself , say I , ' well , I will be jiggere ! ' " 
 he seem to derive a great deal of comfort from his reflection and Dick 's visit . before Dick go home , they have a supper in the small back - room ; they have cracker and cheese and sardine , and other can thing out of the store , and Mr. Hobbs solemnly open two bottle of ginger ale , and pour out two glass , propose a toast . 
 " here be to HIM ! " he say , lift his glass , " an ' may he teach them a lesson earl an ' markise an ' dook an ' all ! " 
 after that night , the two see each other often , and Mr. Hobbs be much more comfortable and less desolate . they read the Penny Story Gazette , and many other interesting thing , and gain a knowledge of the habit of the nobility and gentry which would have surprise those despise class if they have realize it . one day Mr. Hobbs make a pilgrimage to a book store down town , for the express purpose of add to their library . he go to the clerk and lean over the counter to speak to he . 
 " I want , " he say , " a book about earl . " 
 " what ! " exclaim the clerk . 
 " a book , " repeat the grocery - man , " about earl . " 
 " I be afraid , " say the clerk , look rather queer , " that we have not   what you want . " 
 " have not ? " say Mr. Hobbs , anxiously . " well , say markise then or dook . " 
 " I know of no such book , " answer the clerk . 
 Mr. Hobbs be much disturbed . he look down on the floor , then he look up . 
 " none about female earl ? " he inquire . 
 " I be afraid not , " say the clerk with a smile . 
 " well , " exclaim Mr. Hobbs , " I will be jiggere ! " 
 he be just go out of the store , when the clerk call he back and ask he if a story in which the nobility be chief character would do . Mr. Hobbs say it would if he could not get an entire volume devote to earl . so the clerk sell he a book call " the Tower of London , " write by Mr. Harrison Ainsworth , and he carry it home . 
 when Dick come they begin to read it . it be a very wonderful and exciting book , and the scene be lay in the reign of the famous English queen who be call by some people Bloody Mary . and as Mr. Hobbs hear of Queen Mary 's deed and the habit she have of chop people 's head off , put they to the torture , and burn they alive , he become very much excited . he take his pipe out of his mouth and star at Dick , and at last he be oblige to mop the perspiration from his brow with his red pocket handkerchief . 
 " why , he be not   safe ! " he say . " he be not   safe ! if the woman folk can sit up on their throne an ' give the word for thing like that to be do , who be to know what be happen to he this very minute ? he be no more safe than nothing ! just let a woman like that get mad , an ' no one be safe ! " 
 " well , " say Dick , though he look rather anxious himself ; " ye see this ' ere un be not   the one that be bossin ' thing now . I know her name 's victory , an ' this un here in the book , her name 's Mary . " 
 " so it be , " say Mr. Hobbs , still mop his forehead ; ' so it be . an ' the newspaper be not sayin ' anything about any rack , thumb - screw , or stake - burnin 's , but still it do not   seem as if ' t be safe for he over there with those queer folk . why , they tell I they do not   keep the fourth o ' July ! " 
 he be privately uneasy for several day ; and it be not until he receive Fauntleroy 's letter and have read it several time , both to himself and to Dick , and have also read the letter Dick get about the same time , that he become compose again . 
 but they both find great pleasure in their letter . they read and re - read they , and talk they over and enjoy every word of they . and they spend day over the answer they send and read they over almost as often as the letter they have receive . 
 it be rather a labor for Dick to write his . all his knowledge of reading and write he have gain during a few month , when he have live with his eld brother , and have go to a night - school ; but , be a sharp boy , he have make the most of that brief education , and have spell out thing in newspaper since then , and practice writing with bit of chalk on pavement or wall or fence . he tell Mr. Hobbs all about his life and about his eld brother , who have be rather good to he after their mother die , when Dick be quite a little fellow . their father have die some time before . the brother 's name be Ben , and he have take care of Dick as well as he could , until the boy be old enough to sell newspaper and run errand . they have live together , and as he grow old Ben have manage to get along until he have quite a decent place in a store . 
 " and then , " exclaim Dick with disgust , " bl if he do not   go an ' marry a gal ! just go and get spoony an ' have not   any more sense leave ! marry she , an ' set up housekeepin ' in two back room . an ' a hefty un she be , a regular tiger - cat . she would tear thing to piece when she get mad , and she be mad all the time . have a baby just like she , yell day ' n ' night ! an ' if I do not   have to ' tend it ! an ' when it scream , she would fire thing at I . she fire a plate at I one day , an ' hit the baby cut its chin . Doctor say he would carry the mark till he die . a nice mother she be ! Crackey ! but do not   we have a time Ben ' n ' mehself ' n ' the young un . she be mad at Ben because he do not   make money fast ; ' n ' at last he go out West with a man to set up a cattle ranch . an ' have not   be go a week ' fore one night , I get home from sellin ' my paper , ' n ' the room wus lock up ' n ' empty , ' n ' the woman o ' the house , she tell I Minna would go show a clean pair o ' heel . some un else say she would go across the water to be nuss to a lady as have a little baby , too . never hear a word of she since nuther have Ben . if I would ha ' bin he , I would not   ha ' fret a bit ' n ' I guess he do not . but he think a heap o ' she at the start . tell you , he be spoon on she . she be a daisy - lookin ' gal , too , when she be dress up ' n ' not mad . she have big black eye ' n ' black hair down to her knee ; she would make it into a rope as big as your arm , and twist it ' round ' n ' ' round her head ; ' n ' I tell you her eye would snap ! folk use to say she be part Itali - un say her mother or father would come from there , ' n ' it make her queer . I tell ye , she be one of them she be ! " 
 he often tell Mr. Hobbs story of she and of his brother Ben , who , since his go out West , have write once or twice to Dick . 
 Ben 's luck have not be good , and he have wander from place to place ; but at last he have settle on a ranch in California , where he be at work at the time when Dick become acquainted with Mr. Hobbs . 
 " that gal , " say Dick one day , ' she take all the grit out o ' he . I could not   help feelin ' sorry for he sometimes . " 
 they be sit in the store door - way together , and Mr. Hobbs be fill his pipe . 
 " he ought not   to ' ve   marry , " he say solemnly , as he rise to get a match . " woman I never could see any use in them myself . " 
 as he take the match from its box , he stop and look down on the counter . 
 " why ! " he say , " if here be not   a letter ! I do not   see it before . the postman must have lay it down when I be not   noticin ' , or the newspaper slip over it . " 
 he pick it up and look at it carefully . 
 " it be from HIM ! " he exclaim . " that be the very one it be from ! " 
 he forget his pipe altogether . he go back to his chair quite excited and take his pocket - knife and open the envelope . 
 " I wonder what news there be this time , " he say . 
 and then he unfold the letter and read as follow : 
 " dorincourt CASTLE " my dear Mr. Hobbs 
 " I write this in a great hury becaus I have something curous to tell you I know you will be very mutch suprise my dear frend when I tel you . it be all a mistake and I be not a lord and I shall not have to be an earl there be a lady whitch be marid to my uncle bevis who be dead and she have a little boy and he be lord fauntleroy becaus that be the way it be in England the earl eld son little boy be the earl if every body else be dead I mean if his far and grandfarther be dead my grandfarther be not dead but my uncle bevis be and so his boy be lord Fauntleroy and I be not becaus my papa be the young son and my name be Cedric Errol like it be when I be in New York and all the thing will belong to the other boy I think at first I should have to give he my pony and cart but my grandfarther say I need not my grandfarther be very sorry and I think he do not like the lady but preap he think dear and I be sorry because I shall not be an earl I would like to be an earl now well than I thout I would at first becaus this be a beautifle castle and I like every body so and when you be rich you can do so many thing I be not rich now becaus when your papa be only the young son he be not very rich I be go to learn to work so that I can take care of dearest I have be ask Wilkins about groom horse preap I might be a groom or a coachman . the lady bring she little boy to the castle and my grandfarther and Mr. Havisham talk to she I think she be angry she talk loud and my grandfarther be angry too I never see he angry before I wish it do not make they all mad I thort I would tell you and Dick right away becaus you would be intrust so no more at present with love from 
 " your old frend 
 " CEDRIC ERROL   not lord Fauntleroy . " 
 Mr. Hobbs fall back in his chair , the letter drop on his knee , his pen - knife slip to the floor , and so do the envelope . 
 " well ! " he ejaculate , " I be jiggere ! " 
 he be so dumfounde that he actually change his exclamation . it have always be his habit to say , " I will be jiggere , " but this time he say , " I be jiggere . " perhaps he really be jiggere . there be no knowing . 
 " well , " say Dick , " the whole thing 's bust up , have not   it ? " 
 " Bust ! " say Mr. Hobbs . " it be my opinion it be a put - up job o ' the british ristycrat to rob he of his right because he be an American . they have   have a spite agin we ever since the Revolution , an ' they be takin ' it out on he . I tell you he be not   safe , an ' see what be happen ! like as not , the whole gover'ment 's get together to rob he of his lawful ownin 's . " 
 he be very much agitated . he have not approve of the change in his young friend 's circumstance at first , but lately he have become more reconciled to it , and after the receipt of Cedric 's letter he have perhaps even feel some secret pride in his young friend 's magnificence . he might not have a good opinion of earl , but he know that even in America money be consider rather an agreeable thing , and if all the wealth and grandeur be to go with the title , it must be rather hard to lose it . 
 " they be try to rob he ! " he say , " that be what they be do , and folk that have money ought to look after he . " 
 and he keep Dick with he until quite a late hour to talk it over , and when that young man leave , he go with he to the corner of the street ; and on his way back he stop opposite the empty house for some time , star at the " to let , " and smoke his pipe , in much disturbance of mind . 




 XII 

 a very few day after the dinner party at the Castle , almost everybody in England who read the newspaper at all know the romantic story of what have happen at Dorincourt . it make a very interesting story when it be tell with all the detail . there be the little american boy who have be bring to England to be Lord Fauntleroy , and who be say to be so fine and handsome a little fellow , and to have already make people fond of he ; there be the old Earl , his grandfather , who be so proud of his heir ; there be the pretty young mother who have never be forgive for marry Captain Errol ; and there be the strange marriage of Bevis , the dead Lord Fauntleroy , and the strange wife , of whom no one know anything , suddenly appear with her son , and say that he be the real Lord Fauntleroy and must have his right . all these thing be talk about and write about , and cause a tremendous sensation . and then there come the rumor that the Earl of Dorincourt be not satisfied with the turn affair have take , and would perhaps contest the claim by law , and the matter might end with a wonderful trial . 
 there never have be such excitement before in the county in which Erleboro be situate . on market - day , people stand in group and talk and wonder what would be do ; the farmer ' wife invite one another to tea that they might tell one another all they have hear and all they think and all they think other people think . they relate wonderful anecdote about the Earl 's rage and his determination not to acknowledge the new Lord Fauntleroy , and his hatred of the woman who be the claimant 's mother . but , of course , it be Mrs. Dibble who could tell the most , and who be more in demand than ever . 
 " An ' a bad lookout it be , " she say . " an ' if you be to ask I , ma'am , I should say as it be a judgment on he for the way he be treat that sweet young cre'tur ' as he part from her child , for he be get that fond of he an ' that set on he an ' that proud of he as he be a'most drive mad by what be happen . an ' what be more , this new one 's no lady , as his little lordship 's ma be . she be a bold - faced , black - eyed thing , as Mr. Thomas say no gentleman in livery ' u'd bemean hisself to be give order by ; and let she come into the house , he say , an ' he go out of it . an ' the boy do not   no more compare with the other one than nothing you could mention . an ' mercy know what be go to come of it all , an ' where it be to end , an ' you might have knock I down with a feather when Jane bring the news . " 
 in fact there be excitement everywhere at the Castle : in the library , where the Earl and Mr. Havisham sit and talk ; in the servant ' hall , where Mr. Thomas and the butler and the other man and woman servant gossip and exclaim at all time of the day ; and in the stable , where Wilkins go about his work in a quite depressed state of mind , and groom the brown pony more beautifully than ever , and say mournfully to the coachman that he " never teach a young gen'leman to ride as take to it more nat'ral , or be a well - pluck one than he be . he be a one as it be some pleasure to ride behind . " 
 but in the midst of all the disturbance there be one person who be quite calm and untroubled . that person be the little Lord Fauntleroy who be say not to be Lord Fauntleroy at all . when first the state of affair have be explain to he , he have feel some little anxiousness and perplexity , it be true , but its foundation be not in baffled ambition . 
 while the Earl tell he what have happen , he have sit on a stool hold on to his knee , as he so often do when he be listen to anything interesting ; and by the time the story be finish he look quite sober . 
 " it make I feel very queer , " he say ; " it make I feel queer ! " 
 the Earl look at the boy in silence . it make he feel queer , too queer than he have ever feel in his whole life . and he feel more queer still when he see that there be a troubled expression on the small face which be usually so happy . 
 " will they take Dearest 's house from she and her carriage ? " Cedric ask in a rather unsteady , anxious little voice . 
 " no ! " say the Earl decidedly in quite a loud voice , in fact . " they can take nothing from she . " 
 " ah ! " say Cedric , with evident relief . " can not   they ? " 
 then he look up at his grandfather , and there be a wistful shade in his eye , and they look very big and soft . 
 " that other boy , " he say rather tremulously " he will have to to be your boy now as I be will not   he ? " 
 " no ! " answer the Earl and he say it so fiercely and loudly that Cedric quite jump . 
 " no ? " he exclaim , in wonderment . " will not   he ? I think " 
 he stand up from his stool quite suddenly . 
 " shall I be your boy , even if I be not go to be an earl ? " he say . " shall I be your boy , just as I be before ? " and his flushed little face be all alight with eagerness . 
 how the old Earl do look at he from head to foot , to be sure ! how his great shaggy brow do draw themselves together , and how queerly his deep eye shine under they how very queerly ! 
 " my boy ! " he say and , if you will believe it , his very voice be queer , almost shaky and a little broken and hoarse , not at all what you would expect an Earl 's voice to be , though he speak more decidedly and peremptorily even than before , " yes , you will be my boy as long as I live ; and , by George , sometimes I feel as if you be the only boy I have ever have . " 
 Cedric 's face turn red to the root of his hair ; it turn red with relief and pleasure . he put both his hand deep into his pocket and look squarely into his noble relative 's eye . 
 " do you ? " he say . " well , then , I do not   care about the earl part at all . I do not   care whether I be an earl or not . I think you see , I think the one that be go to be the Earl would have to be your boy , too , and and I could not   be . that be what make I feel so queer . " 
 the Earl put his hand on his shoulder and draw he nearer . 
 " they shall take nothing from you that I can hold for you , " he say , draw his breath hard . " I will not   believe yet that they can take anything from you . you be make for the place , and well , you may fill it still . but whatever come , you shall have all that I can give you all ! " 
 it scarcely seem as if he be speak to a child , there be such determination in his face and voice ; it be more as if he be make a promise to himself and perhaps he be . 
 he have never before know how deep a hold upon he his fondness for the boy and his pride in he have take . he have never see his strength and good quality and beauty as he seem to see they now . to his obstinate nature it seem impossible more than impossible to give up what he have so set his heart upon . and he have determine that he would not give it up without a fierce struggle . 
 within a few day after she have see Mr. Havisham , the woman who claim to be Lady Fauntleroy present herself at the Castle , and bring her child with she . she be send away . the Earl would not see she , she be tell by the footman at the door ; his lawyer would attend to her case . it be Thomas who give the message , and who express his opinion of she freely afterward , in the servant ' hall . he " hop , " he say , " as he have wear livery in ' igh famblie long enough to know a lady when he see one , an ' if that be a lady he be no judge o ' female . " 
 " the one at the Lodge , " add Thomas loftily , " ' merican or no ' Merican , she be one o ' the right sort , as any gentleman ' u'd reckinize with all a heye . I remark it myself to Henery when fust we call there . " 
 the woman drive away ; the look on her handsome , common face half frightened , half fierce . Mr. Havisham have notice , during his interview with she , that though she have a passionate temper , and a coarse , insolent manner , she be neither so clever nor so bold as she mean to be ; she seem sometimes to be almost overwhelm by the position in which she have place herself . it be as if she have not expect to meet with such opposition . 
 " she be evidently , " the lawyer say to Mrs. Errol , " a person from the low walk of life . she be uneducated and untraine in everything , and quite unused to meet people like ourselves on any term of equality . she do not know what to do . her visit to the Castle quite cow she . she be infuriate , but she be cow . the Earl would not receive she , but I advise he to go with I to the Dorincourt Arms , where she be stay . when she see he enter the room , she turn white , though she fly into a rage at once , and threaten and demand in one breath . " 
 the fact be that the Earl have stalk into the room and stand , look like a venerable aristocratic giant , star at the woman from under his beetle brow , and not condescend a word . he simply star at she , take she in from head to foot as if she be some repulsive curiosity . he let she talk and demand until she be tired , without himself utter a word , and then he say : 
 " you say you be my eld son 's wife . if that be true , and if the proof you offer be too much for we , the law be on your side . in that case , your boy be Lord Fauntleroy . the matter will be sift to the bottom , you may rest assure . if your claim be prove , you will be provide for . I want to see nothing of either you or the child so long as I live . the place will unfortunately have enough of you after my death . you be exactly the kind of person I should have expect my son Bevis to choose . " 
 and then he turn his back upon she and stalk out of the room as he have stalk into it . 
 not many day after that , a visitor be announce to Mrs. Errol , who be write in her little morning room . the maid , who bring the message , look rather excited ; her eye be quite round with amazement , in fact , and be young and inexperienced , she regard her mistress with nervous sympathy . 
 " it be the Earl hisself , ma'am ! " she say in tremulous awe . 
 when Mrs. Errol enter the drawing - room , a very tall , majestic - look old man be stand on the tiger - skin rug . he have a handsome , grim old face , with an aquiline profile , a long white mustache , and an obstinate look . 
 " Mrs. Errol , I believe ? " he say . 
 " Mrs. Errol , " she answer . 
 " I be the Earl of Dorincourt , " he say . 
 he pause a moment , almost unconsciously , to look into her uplifted eye . they be so like the big , affectionate , childish eye he have see uplifted to his own so often every day during the last few month , that they give he a quite curious sensation . 
 " the boy be very like you , " he say abruptly . 
 " it have be often say so , my lord , " she reply , " but I have be glad to think he like his father also . " 
 as Lady Lorridaile have tell he , her voice be very sweet , and her manner be very simple and dignified . she do not seem in the least troubled by his sudden coming . 
 " yes , " say the Earl , " he be like my son too . " he put his hand up to his big white mustache and pull it fiercely . " do you know , " he say , " why I have come here ? " 
 " I have see Mr. Havisham , " Mrs. Errol begin , " and he have tell I of the claim which have be make " 
 " I have come to tell you , " say the Earl , " that they will be investigate and contest , if a contest can be make . I have come to tell you that the boy shall be defend with all the power of the law . his right " 
 the soft voice interrupt he . 
 " he must have nothing that be not his by right , even if the law can give it to he , " she say . 
 " unfortunately the law can not , " say the Earl . " if it could , it should . this outrageous woman and her child " 
 " perhaps she care for he as much as I care for Cedric , my lord , " say little Mrs. Errol . " and if she be your eld son 's wife , her son be Lord Fauntleroy , and mine be not . " 
 she be no more afraid of he than Cedric have be , and she look at he just as Cedric would have look , and he , have be an old tyrant all his life , be privately pleased by it . People so seldom dare to differ from he that there be an entertaining novelty in it . 
 " I suppose , " he say , scowl slightly , " that you would much prefer that he should not be the Earl of Dorincourt . " 
 her fair young face flush . 
 " it be a very magnificent thing to be the Earl of Dorincourt , my lord , " she say . " I know that , but I care most that he should be what his father be brave and just and true always . " 
 " in strike contrast to what his grandfather be , eh ? " say his lordship sardonically . 
 " I have not have the pleasure of know his grandfather , " reply Mrs. Errol , " but I know my little boy believe " she stop short a moment , look quietly into his face , and then she add , " I know that Cedric love you . " 
 " would he have love I , " say the Earl dryly , " if you have tell he why I do not receive you at the Castle ? " 
 " no , " answer Mrs. Errol , " I think not . that be why I do not wish he to know . " 
 " well , " say my lord brusquely , " there be few woman who would not have tell he . " 
 he suddenly begin to walk up and down the room , pull his great mustache more violently than ever . 
 " yes , he be fond of I , " he say , " and I be fond of he . I can not   say I ever be fond of anything before . I be fond of he . he please I from the first . I be an old man , and be tired of my life . he have give I something to live for . I be proud of he . I be satisfied to think of his take his place some day as the head of the family . " 
 he come back and stand before Mrs. Errol . 
 " I be miserable , " he say . " miserable ! " 
 he look as if he be . even his pride could not keep his voice steady or his hand from shake . for a moment it almost seem as if his deep , fierce eye have tear in they . " perhaps it be because I be miserable that I have come to you , " he say , quite glare down at she . " I use to hate you ; I have be jealous of you . this wretched , disgraceful business have change that . after see that repulsive woman who call herself the wife of my son Bevis , I actually feel it would be a relief to look at you . I have be an obstinate old fool , and I suppose I have treat you badly . you be like the boy , and the boy be the first object in my life . I be miserable , and I come to you merely because you be like the boy , and he care for you , and I care for he . treat I as well as you can , for the boy 's sake . " 
 he say it all in his harsh voice , and almost roughly , but somehow he seem so broken down for the time that Mrs. Errol be touch to the heart . she get up and move an arm - chair a little forward . 
 " I wish you would sit down , " she say in a soft , pretty , sympathetic way . " you have be so much troubled that you be very tired , and you need all your strength . " 
 it be just as new to he to be speak to and care for in that gentle , simple way as it be to be contradict . he be remind of " the boy " again , and he actually do as she ask he . perhaps his disappointment and wretchedness be good discipline for he ; if he have not be wretched he might have continue to hate she , but just at present he find she a little soothing . almost anything would have seem pleasant by contrast with Lady Fauntleroy ; and this one have so sweet a face and voice , and a pretty dignity when she speak or move . very soon , through the quiet magic of these influence , he begin to feel less gloomy , and then he talk still more . 
 " whatever happen , " he say , " the boy shall be provide for . he shall be take care of , now and in the future . " 
 before he go away , he glance around the room . 
 " do you like the house ? " he demand . 
 " very much , " she answer . 
 " this be a cheerful room , " he say . " may I come here again and talk this matter over ? " 
 " as often as you wish , my lord , " she reply . 
 and then he go out to his carriage and drive away , Thomas and Henry almost stricken dumb upon the box at the turn affair have take . 




 xiii 

 of course , as soon as the story of Lord Fauntleroy and the difficulty of the Earl of Dorincourt be discuss in the english newspaper , they be discuss in the american newspaper . the story be too interesting to be pass over lightly , and it be talk of a great deal . there be so many version of it that it would have be an edify thing to buy all the paper and compare they . Mr. Hobbs read so much about it that he become quite bewildered . one paper describe his young friend cedric as an infant in arm , another as a young man at Oxford , win all the honor , and distinguish himself by write greek poem ; one say he be engage to a young lady of great beauty , who be the daughter of a duke ; another say he have just be marry ; the only thing , in fact , which be not say be that he be a little boy between seven and eight , with handsome leg and curly hair . one say he be no relation to the Earl of Dorincourt at all , but be a small impostor who have sell newspaper and sleep in the street of New York before his mother impose upon the family lawyer , who come to America to look for the Earl 's heir . then come the description of the new Lord Fauntleroy and his mother . sometimes she be a gypsy , sometimes an actress , sometimes a beautiful spaniard ; but it be always agree that the Earl of Dorincourt be her deadly enemy , and would not acknowledge her son as his heir if he could help it , and as there seem to be some slight flaw in the paper she have produce , it be expect that there would be a long trial , which would be far more interesting than anything ever carry into court before . Mr. Hobbs use to read the paper until his head be in a whirl , and in the evening he and Dick would talk it all over . they find out what an important personage an Earl of Dorincourt be , and what a magnificent income he possess , and how many estate he own , and how stately and beautiful be the Castle in which he live ; and the more they learn , the more excited they became . 
 " seem like something orter be do , " say Mr. Hobbs . " thing like they orter be hold on to earl or no earl . " 
 but there really be nothing they could do but each write a letter to Cedric , contain assurance of their friendship and sympathy . they write those letter as soon as they could after receive the news ; and after have write they , they hand they over to each other to be read . 
 this be what Mr. Hobbs read in Dick 's letter : 
 " DERE FREND : I get ure letter an Mr. Hobbs get his an we be sory u be down on ure luck an we say hold on as long u kin an do not let no one git ahe of u. there be a lot of ole theve wil make al they kin of u ef u do not kepe ure I skin . but this be mosly to say that I ve not forget wot u do fur I an if there be not no well way cum over here an go in pardner with I . bizne be fine an ile see no harm cum to u Enny big feler that trise to cum it over u wil hafter setle it fust with Perfessor Dick Tipton . so no more at present 
 " DICK . " 
 and this be what Dick read in Mr. Hobbs 's letter : 
 " DEAR SIR : Yrs receive and wd say thing look bad . I believe its a put up job and they that s do it ought to be look after sharp . and what I write to say be two thing . I m go to look this thing up . keep quiet and Ill see a lawyer and do all I can and if the bad happen and they earl be too many for we there s a partnership in the grocery business ready for you when yure old enough and a home and a friend in 
 " yrs truly , 
 " SILAS hobb . " 
 " well , " say Mr. Hobbs , " he be pervide for between we , if he be not a earl . " 
 " so he be , " say Dick . " I would ha ' stand by he . Blest if I do not   like that little feller fust - rate . " 
 the very next morning , one of Dick 's customer be rather surprised . he be a young lawyer just begin practice as poor as a very young lawyer can possibly be , but a bright , energetic young fellow , with sharp wit and a good temper . he have a shabby office near Dick 's stand , and every morning Dick black his boot for he , and quite often they be not exactly water - tight , but he always have a friendly word or a joke for Dick . 
 that particular morning , when he put his foot on the rest , he have an illustrate paper in his hand an enterprise paper , with picture in it of conspicuous people and thing . he have just finish look it over , and when the last boot be polish , he hand it over to the boy . 
 " here be a paper for you , Dick , " he say ; " you can look it over when you drop in at Delmonico 's for your breakfast . picture of an english castle in it , and an English earl 's daughter - in - law . fine young woman , too , lot of hair , though she seem to be raise rather a row . you ought to become familiar with the nobility and gentry , Dick . begin on the right Honorable the Earl of Dorincourt and Lady Fauntleroy . hello ! I say , what be the matter ? " 
 the picture he speak of be on the front page , and Dick be star at one of they with his eye and mouth open , and his sharp face almost pale with excitement . 
 " what be to pay , Dick ? " say the young man . " what have paralyze you ? " 
 Dick really do look as if something tremendous have happen . he point to the picture , under which be write : 
 " Mother of Claimant   Lady Fauntleroy . " 
 it be the picture of a handsome woman , with large eye and heavy braid of black hair wound around her head . 
 " she ! " say Dick . " my , I know she well ' n I know you ! " 
 the young man begin to laugh . 
 " where do you meet she , Dick ? " he say . " at Newport ? or when you run over to Paris the last time ? " 
 Dick actually forget to grin . he begin to gather his brush and thing together , as if he have something to do which would put an end to his business for the present . 
 " never mind , " he say . " I know she ! an I have   strike work for this mornin ' . " 
 and in less than five minute from that time he be tear through the street on his way to Mr. Hobbs and the corner store . 
 Mr. Hobbs could scarcely believe the evidence of his sens when he look across the counter and see Dick rush in with the paper in his hand . the boy be out of breath with running ; so much out of breath , in fact , that he could scarcely speak as he throw the paper down on the counter . 
 " hello ! " exclaim Mr. Hobbs . " hello ! what you get there ? " 
 " look at it ! " pant Dick . " look at that woman in the picture ! that be what you look at ! she be not no ' ristocrat , she be not ! " with wither scorn . " she be no lord 's wife . you may eat I , if it be not Minna MINNA ! I would know her anywhere , an ' so have Ben . Jest ax he . " 
 Mr. Hobbs drop into his seat . 
 " I know it be a put - up job , " he say . " I know it ; and they do it on account o ' him bein ' a ' merican ! " 
 " done it ! " cry Dick , with disgust . " she do it , that be who do it . she be aller up to her trick ; an ' I will tell yer wot come to I , the minnit I see her pictur . there be one o ' they paper we see have a letter in it that say something 'bout her boy , an ' it say he have a scar on his chin . put they two together her ' n ' that there scar ! why , that there boy o ' her be not no more a lord than I be ! it be BEN 'S boy , the little chap she hit when she let fly that plate at I . " 
 Professor Dick Tipton have always be a sharp boy , and earn his living in the street of a big city have make he still sharp . he have learn to keep his eye open and his wit about he , and it must be confess he enjoy immensely the excitement and impatience of that moment . if little Lord Fauntleroy could only have look into the store that morning , he would certainly have be interested , even if all the discussion and plan have be intend to decide the fate of some other boy than himself . 
 Mr. Hobbs be almost overwhelmed by his sense of responsibility , and Dick be all alive and full of energy . he begin to write a letter to Ben , and he cut out the picture and inclose it to he , and Mr. Hobbs write a letter to Cedric and one to the Earl . they be in the midst of this letter - writing when a new idea come to Dick . 
 " say , " he say , " the feller that give I the paper , he be a lawyer . let us ax he what we would well do . lawyer know it all . " 
 Mr. Hobbs be immensely impress by this suggestion and Dick 's business capacity . 
 " that be so ! " he reply . " this here call for lawyer . " 
 and leave the store in the care of a substitute , he struggle into his coat and march down - town with Dick , and the two present themselves with their romantic story in Mr. Harrison 's office , much to that young man 's astonishment . 
 if he have not be a very young lawyer , with a very enterprising mind and a great deal of spare time on his hand , he might not have be so readily interested in what they have to say , for it all certainly sound very wild and queer ; but he chance to want something to do very much , and he chance to know Dick , and Dick chance to say his say in a very sharp , tell sort of way . 
 " and , " say Mr. Hobbs , ' say what your time 's worth a ' hour and look into this thing thorough , and i'll pay the damage , Silas Hobbs , corner of Blank street , Vegetables and Fancy Groceries . " 
 " well , " say Mr. Harrison , " it will be a big thing if it turn out all right , and it will be almost as big a thing for I as for Lord Fauntleroy ; and , at any rate , no harm can be do by investigate . it appear there have be some dubiousness about the child . the woman contradict herself in some of her statement about his age , and arouse suspicion . the first person to be write to be Dick 's brother and the Earl of Dorincourt 's family lawyer . " 
 and actually , before the sun go down , two letter have be write and send in two different direction one speed out of New York harbor on a mail steamer on its way to England , and the other on a train carry letter and passenger bind for California . and the first be address to T. Havisham , Esq . , and the second to Benjamin Tipton . 
 and after the store be close that evening , Mr. Hobbs and Dick sit in the back - room and talk together until midnight . 




 XIV 

 it be astonish how short a time it take for very wonderful thing to happen . it have take only a few minute , apparently , to change all the fortune of the little boy dangle his red leg from the high stool in Mr. Hobbs 's store , and to transform he from a small boy , live the simple life in a quiet street , into an english nobleman , the heir to an earldom and magnificent wealth . it have take only a few minute , apparently , to change he from an english nobleman into a penniless little impostor , with no right to any of the splendor he have be enjoy . and , surprising as it may appear , it do not take nearly so long a time as one might have expect , to alter the face of everything again and to give back to he all that he have be in danger of lose . 
 it take the less time because , after all , the woman who have call herself Lady Fauntleroy be not nearly so clever as she be wicked ; and when she have be closely press by Mr. Havisham 's question about her marriage and her boy , she have make one or two blunder which have cause suspicion to be awaken ; and then she have lose her presence of mind and her temper , and in her excitement and anger have betray herself still far . all the mistake she make be about her child . there seem no doubt that she have be marry to Bevis , Lord Fauntleroy , and have quarrel with he and have be pay to keep away from he ; but Mr. Havisham find out that her story of the boy 's be bear in a certain part of London be false ; and just when they all be in the midst of the commotion cause by this discovery , there come the letter from the young lawyer in New York , and Mr. Hobbs 's letter also . 
 what an evening it be when those letter arrive , and when Mr. Havisham and the Earl sit and talk their plan over in the library ! 
 " after my first three meeting with she , " say Mr. Havisham , " I begin to suspect she strongly . it appear to I that the child be old than she say he be , and she make a slip in speak of the date of his birth and then try to patch the matter up . the story these letter bring fit in with several of my suspicion . our good plan will be to cable at once for these two Tiptons , say nothing about they to she , and suddenly confront she with they when she be not expect it . she be only a very clumsy plotter , after all . my opinion be that she will be frighten out of her wit , and will betray herself on the spot . " 
 and that be what actually happen . she be tell nothing , and Mr. Havisham keep she from suspect anything by continue to have interview with she , in which he assure she he be investigate her statement ; and she really begin to feel so secure that her spirit rise immensely and she begin to be as insolent as might have be expect . 
 but one fine morning , as she sit in her sitting - room at the inn call " The Dorincourt Arms , " make some very fine plan for herself , Mr. Havisham be announce ; and when he enter , he be follow by no less than three person one be a sharp - faced boy and one be a big young man and the third be the Earl of Dorincourt . 
 she spring to her foot and actually utter a cry of terror . it break from she before she have time to check it . she have think of these new - comer as be thousand of mile away , when she have ever think of they at all , which she have scarcely do for year . she have never expect to see they again . it must be confess that Dick grin a little when he see she . 
 " hello , Minna ! " he say . 
 the big young man who be Ben stand still a minute and look at she . 
 " do you know she ? " Mr. Havisham ask , glance from one to the other . 
 " yes , " say Ben . " I know she and she know I . " and he turn his back on she and go and stand look out of the window , as if the sight of she be hateful to he , as indeed it be . then the woman , see herself so baffled and expose , lose all control over herself and fly into such a rage as Ben and Dick have often see she in before . Dick grin a trifle more as he watch she and hear the name she call they all and the violent threat she make , but Ben do not turn to look at she . 
 " I can swear to she in any court , " he say to Mr. Havisham , " and I can bring a dozen other who will . her father be a respectable sort of man , though he be low down in the world . her mother be just like herself . she be dead , but he be alive , and he be honest enough to be ashamed of she . he will tell you who she be , and whether she marry I or not . " 
 then he clench his hand suddenly and turn on she . 
 " where be the child ? " he demand . " he be go with I ! he be do with you , and so be I ! " 
 and just as he finish say the word , the door lead into the bedroom open a little , and the boy , probably attract by the sound of the loud voice , look in . he be not a handsome boy , but he have rather a nice face , and he be quite like Ben , his father , as any one could see , and there be the three - cornered scar on his chin . 
 Ben walk up to he and take his hand , and his own be tremble . 
 " yes , " he say , " I could swear to he , too . Tom , " he say to the little fellow , " I be your father ; I have   come to take you away . where be your hat ? " 
 the boy point to where it lie on a chair . it evidently rather please he to hear that he be go away . he have be so accustomed to queer experience that it do not surprise he to be tell by a stranger that he be his father . he object so much to the woman who have come a few month before to the place where he have live since his babyhood , and who have suddenly announce that she be his mother , that he be quite ready for a change . Ben take up the hat and march to the door . 
 " if you want I again , " he say to Mr. Havisham , " you know where to find I . " 
 he walk out of the room , hold the child 's hand and not look at the woman once . she be fairly rave with fury , and the Earl be calmly gaze at she through his eyeglass , which he have quietly place upon his aristocratic , eagle nose . 
 " come , come , my young woman , " say Mr. Havisham . " this will not   do at all . if you do not   want to be lock up , you really must behave yourself . " 
 and there be something so very business - like in his tone that , probably feel that the safe thing she could do would be to get out of the way , she give he one savage look and dash past he into the next room and slam the door . 
 " we shall have no more trouble with she , " say Mr. Havisham . 
 and he be right ; for that very night she leave the Dorincourt Arms and take the train to London , and be see no more . 
 when the Earl leave the room after the interview , he go at once to his carriage . 
 " to Court Lodge , " he say to Thomas . 
 " to Court Lodge , " say Thomas to the coachman as he mount the box ; " an ' you may depend on it , thing be take a uniggspected turn . " 
 when the carriage stop at Court Lodge , Cedric be in the drawing - room with his mother . 
 the Earl come in without be announce . he look an inch or so tall , and a great many year young . his deep eye flash . 
 " where , " he say , " be Lord Fauntleroy ? " 
 Mrs. Errol come forward , a flush rise to her cheek . 
 " be it Lord Fauntleroy ? " she ask . " be it , indeed ! " 
 the Earl put out his hand and grasp her . 
 " yes , " he answer , " it be . " 
 then he put his other hand on Cedric 's shoulder . 
 " Fauntleroy , " he say in his unceremonious , authoritative way , " ask your mother when she will come to we at the Castle . " 
 Fauntleroy fling his arm around his mother 's neck . 
 " to live with we ! " he cry . " to live with we always ! " 
 the Earl look at Mrs. Errol , and Mrs. Errol look at the Earl . 
 his lordship be entirely in earnest . he have make up his mind to waste no time in arrange this matter . he have begin to think it would suit he to make friend with his heir 's mother . 
 " be you quite sure you want I ? " say Mrs. Errol , with her soft , pretty smile . 
 " quite sure , " he say bluntly . " we have always want you , but we be not exactly aware of it . we hope you will come . " 




 XV 

 Ben take his boy and go back to his cattle ranch in California , and he return under very comfortable circumstance . just before his going , Mr. Havisham have an interview with he in which the lawyer tell he that the Earl of Dorincourt wish to do something for the boy who might have turn out to be Lord Fauntleroy , and so he have decide that it would be a good plan to invest in a cattle ranch of his own , and put Ben in charge of it on term which would make it pay he very well , and which would lay a foundation for his son 's future . and so when Ben go away , he go as the prospective master of a ranch which would be almost as good as his own , and might easily become his own in time , as indeed it do in the course of a few year ; and Tom , the boy , grow up on it into a fine young man and be devotedly fond of his father ; and they be so successful and happy that Ben use to say that Tom make up to he for all the trouble he have ever have . 
 but Dick and Mr. Hobbs who have actually come over with the other to see that thing be properly look after do not return for some time . it have be decide at the outset that the Earl would provide for Dick , and would see that he receive a solid education ; and Mr. Hobbs have decide that as he himself have leave a reliable substitute in charge of his store , he could afford to wait to see the festivity which be to celebrate Lord Fauntleroy 's eighth birthday . all the tenantry be invite , and there be to be feast and dancing and game in the park , and bonfire and fire - work in the evening . 
 " just like the Fourth of July ! " say Lord Fauntleroy . " it seem a pity my birthday be not   on the Fourth , do not   it ? for then we could keep they both together . " 
 it must be confess that at first the Earl and Mr. Hobbs be not as intimate as it might have be hop they would become , in the interest of the british aristocracy . the fact be that the Earl have know very few grocery - man , and Mr. Hobbs have not have many very close acquaintance who be earl ; and so in their rare interview conversation do not flourish . it must also be own that Mr. Hobbs have be rather overwhelmed by the splendor Fauntleroy feel it his duty to show he . 
 the entrance gate and the stone lion and the avenue impress Mr. Hobbs somewhat at the beginning , and when he see the Castle , and the flower - garden , and the hot - house , and the terrace , and the peacock , and the dungeon , and the armor , and the great staircase , and the stable , and the liveried servant , he really be quite bewildered . but it be the picture gallery which seem to be the finishing stroke . 
 " something in the manner of a museum ? " he say to Fauntleroy , when he be lead into the great , beautiful room . 
 " n no ! " say Fauntleroy , rather doubtfully . " I do not   think it be a museum . my grandfather say these be my ancestor . " 
 " your aunt 's sister ! " ejaculate Mr. Hobbs . " all of them ? your great - uncle , he must have have a family ! do he raise them all ? " 
 and he sink into a seat and look around he with quite an agitated countenance , until with the great difficulty Lord Fauntleroy manage to explain that the wall be not line entirely with the portrait of the progeny of his great - uncle . 
 he find it necessary , in fact , to call in the assistance of Mrs. Mellon , who know all about the picture , and could tell who paint they and when , and who add romantic story of the lord and lady who be the original . when Mr. Hobbs once understand , and have hear some of these story , he be very much fascinated and like the picture gallery almost well than anything else ; and he would often walk over from the village , where he staid at the Dorincourt Arms , and would spend half an hour or so wandering about the gallery , star at the paint lady and gentleman , who also star at he , and shake his head nearly all the time . 
 " and they be all earl ! " he would say , " er pretty nigh it ! an ' HE be go to be one of them , an ' own it all ! " 
 privately he be not nearly so much disgusted with earl and their mode of life as he have expect to be , and it be to be doubt whether his strictly republican principle be not shake a little by a close acquaintance with castle and ancestor and all the rest of it . at any rate , one day he utter a very remarkable and unexpected sentiment : 
 " I would not   have mind bein ' one of them myself ! " he say which be really a great concession . 
 what a grand day it be when little Lord Fauntleroy 's birthday arrive , and how his young lordship enjoy it ! how beautiful the park look , fill with the throng people dress in their gayest and good , and with the flag fly from the tent and the top of the Castle ! nobody have staid away who could possibly come , because everybody be really glad that little Lord Fauntleroy be to be little Lord Fauntleroy still , and some day be to be the master of everything . every one want to have a look at he , and at his pretty , kind mother , who have make so many friend . and positively every one like the Earl rather well , and feel more amiably toward he because the little boy love and trust he so , and because , also , he have now make friend with and behave respectfully to his heir 's mother . it be say that he be even begin to be fond of she , too , and that between his young lordship and his young lordship 's mother , the Earl might be change in time into quite a well - behave old nobleman , and everybody might be happy and well off . 
 what score and score of people there be under the tree , and in the tent , and on the lawn ! farmer and farmer ' wife in their Sunday suit and bonnet and shawl ; girl and their sweetheart ; child frolic and chase about ; and old dame in red cloak gossip together . at the Castle , there be lady and gentleman who have come to see the fun , and to congratulate the Earl , and to meet Mrs. Errol . Lady Lorredaile and Sir Harry be there , and Sir Thomas Asshe and his daughter , and Mr. Havisham , of course , and then beautiful Miss Vivian Herbert , with the lovely white gown and lace parasol , and a circle of gentleman to take care of she though she evidently like Fauntleroy well than all of they put together . and when he see she and run to she and put his arm around her neck , she put her arm around he , too , and kiss he as warmly as if he have be her own favorite little brother , and she say : 
 " dear little Lord Fauntleroy ! dear little boy ! I be so glad ! I be so glad ! " 
 and afterward she walk about the ground with he , and let he show she everything . and when he take she to where Mr. Hobbs and Dick be , and say to she , " this be my old , old friend Mr. Hobbs , Miss Herbert , and this be my other old friend Dick . I tell they how pretty you be , and I tell they they should see you if you come to my birthday , " she shake hand with they both , and stand and talk to they in her prettiest way , ask they about America and their voyage and their life since they have be in England ; while Fauntleroy stand by , look up at she with adore eye , and his cheek quite flushed with delight because he see that Mr. Hobbs and Dick like she so much . 
 " well , " say Dick solemnly , afterward , ' she be the daisi gal I ever see ! she be well , she be just a daisy , that be what she be , ' n ' no mistake ! " 
 everybody look after she as she pass , and every one look after little Lord Fauntleroy . and the sun shone and the flag flutter and the game be play and the dance dance , and as the gayetie go on and the joyous afternoon pass , his little lordship be simply radiantly happy . 
 the whole world seem beautiful to he . 
 there be some one else who be happy , too , an old man , who , though he have be rich and noble all his life , have not often be very honestly happy . perhaps , indeed , I shall tell you that I think it be because he be rather well than he have be that he be rather happy . he have not , indeed , suddenly become as good as Fauntleroy think he ; but , at least , he have begin to love something , and he have several time find a sort of pleasure in do the kind thing which the innocent , kind little heart of a child have suggest , and that be a beginning . and every day he have be more pleased with his son 's wife . it be true , as the people say , that he be begin to like she too . he like to hear her sweet voice and to see her sweet face ; and as he sit in his arm - chair , he use to watch she and listen as she talk to her boy ; and he hear love , gentle word which be new to he , and he begin to see why the little fellow who have live in a New York side street and know grocery - man and make friend with boot - black , be still so well - breed and manly a little fellow that he make no one ashamed of he , even when fortune change he into the heir to an english earldom , live in an english castle . 
 it be really a very simple thing , after all , it be only that he have live near a kind and gentle heart , and have be teach to think kind thought always and to care for other . it be a very little thing , perhaps , but it be the good thing of all . he know nothing of earl and castle ; he be quite ignorant of all grand and splendid thing ; but he be always lovable because he be simple and loving . to be so be like be bear a king . 
 as the old Earl of Dorincourt look at he that day , move about the park among the people , talk to those he know and make his ready little bow when any one greet he , entertain his friend Dick and Mr. Hobbs , or stand near his mother or Miss Herbert listen to their conversation , the old nobleman be very well satisfied with he . and he have never be well satisfied than he be when they go down to the big tent , where the more important tenant of the Dorincourt estate be sit down to the grand collation of the day . 
 they be drink toast ; and , after they have drink the health of the Earl , with much more enthusiasm than his name have ever be greet with before , they propose the health of " Little Lord Fauntleroy . " and if there have ever be any doubt at all as to whether his lordship be popular or not , it would have be settle that instant . such a clamor of voice , and such a rattle of glass and applause ! they have begin to like he so much , those warm - hearted people , that they forget to feel any restraint before the lady and gentleman from the castle , who have come to see they . they make quite a decent uproar , and one or two motherly woman look tenderly at the little fellow where he stand , with his mother on one side and the Earl on the other , and grow quite moist about the eye , and say to one another : 
 " God bless he , the pretty little dear ! " 
 little Lord Fauntleroy be delighted . he stand and smile , and make bow , and flush rosy red with pleasure up to the root of his bright hair . 
 " be it because they like I , Dearest ? " he say to his mother . " be it , Dearest ? I be so glad ! " 
 and then the Earl put his hand on the child 's shoulder and say to he : 
 " Fauntleroy , say to they that you thank they for their kindness . " 
 Fauntleroy give a glance up at he and then at his mother . 
 " must I ? " he ask just a trifle shyly , and she smile , and so do Miss Herbert , and they both nod . and so he make a little step forward , and everybody look at he such a beautiful , innocent little fellow he be , too , with his brave , trustful face ! and he speak as loudly as he could , his childish voice ring out quite clear and strong . 
 " I be ever so much oblige to you ! " he say , " and I hope you will enjoy my birthday because I have   enjoy it so much and I be very glad I be go to be an earl ; I do not   think at first I should like it , but now I do and I love this place so , and I think it be beautiful and and and when I be an earl , I be go to try to be as good as my grandfather . " 
 and amid the shout and clamor of applause , he step back with a little sigh of relief , and put his hand into the Earl 's and stand close to he , smile and lean against his side . 
 and that would be the very end of my story ; but I must add one curious piece of information , which be that Mr. Hobbs become so fascinated with high life and be so reluctant to leave his young friend that he actually sell his corner store in New York , and settle in the english village of Erlesboro , where he open a shop which be patronize by the Castle and consequently be a great success . and though he and the Earl never become very intimate , if you will believe I , that man Hobbs become in time more aristocratic than his lordship himself , and he read the Court news every morning , and follow all the doing of the House of Lords ! and about ten year after , when Dick , who have finish his education and be go to visit his brother in California , ask the good grocer if he do not wish to return to America , he shake his head seriously . 
 " not to live there , " he say . " not to live there ; I want to be near HIM , an ' sort o ' look after he . it be a good enough country for they that be young an ' stirrin ' but there be fault in it . there be not an auntsister among them nor an earl ! " 
