 
  the INNOCENCE of FATHER BROWN 


 


  the Blue Cross 

 between the silver ribbon of morning and the green glittering 
 ribbon of sea , the boat touch Harwich and let loose a swarm 
 of folk like fly , among whom the man we must follow be 
 by no mean conspicuous - nor wish to be . there be nothing 
 notable about he , except a slight contrast between the holiday 
 gaiety of his clothe and the official gravity of his face . 
 his clothe include a slight , pale grey jacket , a white 
 waistcoat , and a silver straw hat with a grey - blue ribbon . 
 his lean face be dark by contrast , and end in a curt black 
 beard that look spanish and suggest an Elizabethan ruff . 
 he be smoke a cigarette with the seriousness of an idler . 
 there be nothing about he to indicate the fact that the grey 
 jacket cover a loaded revolver , that the white waistcoat cover 
 a police card , or that the straw hat cover one of the most 
 powerful intellect in Europe . for this be Valentin himself , 
 the head of the Paris police and the most famous investigator 
 of the world ; and he be come from Brussels to London to make 
 the great arrest of the century . 

 Flambeau be in England . the police of three country have track 
 the great criminal at last from Ghent to Brussels , from Brussels 
 to the Hook of Holland ; and it be conjecture that he would take some 
 advantage of the unfamiliarity and confusion of the Eucharistic Congress , 
 then take place in London . probably he would travel as some minor 
 clerk or secretary connect with it ; but , of course , Valentin could 
 not be certain ; nobody could be certain about Flambeau . 

 it be many year now since this colossus of crime suddenly 
 cease keep the world in a turmoil ; and when he cease , 
 as they say after the death of Roland , there be a great quiet 
 upon the earth . but in his good day   I mean , of course , 
 his bad   Flambeau be a figure as statuesque and international 
 as the Kaiser . almost every morning the daily paper announce 
 that he have escape the consequence of one extraordinary crime 
 by commit another . he be a Gascon of gigantic stature 
 and bodily daring ; and the wild tale be tell of his 
 outburst of athletic humour ; how he turn the juge d'instruction 
 upside down and stand he on his head , " to clear his mind " ; 
 how he run down the Rue de Rivoli with a policeman under each arm . 
 it be due to he to say that his fantastic physical strength be 
 generally employ in such bloodless though undignified scene ; 
 his real crime be chiefly those of ingenious and wholesale robbery . 
 but each of his theft be almost a new sin , and would 
 make a story by itself . it be he who run the great 
 Tyrolean Dairy Company in London , with no dairy , no cow , 
 no cart , no milk , but with some thousand subscriber . 
 these he serve by the simple operation of move the little milk 
 can outside people 's door to the door of his own customer . 
 it be he who have keep up an unaccountable and close correspondence 
 with a young lady whose whole letter - bag be intercept , 
 by the extraordinary trick of photograph his message 
 infinitesimally small upon the slide of a microscope . 
 a sweeping simplicity , however , mark many of his experiment . 
 it be say that he once repaint all the number in a street 
 in the dead of night merely to divert one traveller into a trap . 
 it be quite certain that he invent a portable pillar - box , 
 which he put up at corner in quiet suburb on the chance of 
 stranger drop postal order into it . lastly , he be know 
 to be a startling acrobat ; despite his huge figure , he could leap 
 like a grasshopper and melt into the tree - top like a monkey . 
 hence the great Valentin , when he set out to find Flambeau , 
 be perfectly aware that his adventure would not end when 
 he have find he . 

 but how be he to find he ? on this the great Valentin 's idea 
 be still in process of settlement . 

 there be one thing which Flambeau , with all his dexterity 
 of disguise , could not cover , and that be his singular height . 
 if Valentin 's quick eye have catch a tall apple - woman , a tall grenadier , 
 or even a tolerably tall duchess , he might have arrest they on the spot . 
 but all along his train there be nobody that could be a disguised Flambeau , 
 any more than a cat could be a disguised giraffe . about the people 
 on the boat he have already satisfy himself ; and the people pick up 
 at Harwich or on the journey limit themselves with certainty to six . 
 there be a short railway official travel up to the terminus , 
 three fairly short market gardener pick up two station afterwards , 
 one very short widow lady go up from a small Essex town , and a very 
 short roman catholic priest go up from a small Essex village . 
 when it come to the last case , Valentin give it up and almost laugh . 
 the little priest be so much the essence of those eastern flat ; 
 he have a face as round and dull as a Norfolk dumple ; he have eye as empty 
 as the North Sea ; he have several brown paper parcel , which he be quite 
 incapable of collect . the Eucharistic Congress have doubtless suck 
 out of their local stagnation many such creature , blind and helpless , 
 like mole disinter . Valentin be a sceptic in the severe style 
 of France , and could have no love for priest . but he could have 
 pity for they , and this one might have provoke pity in anybody . 
 he have a large , shabby umbrella , which constantly fall on the floor . 
 he do not seem to know which be the right end of his return ticket . 
 he explain with a moon - calf simplicity to everybody in the carriage 
 that he have to be careful , because he have something make of real 
 silver " with blue stone " in one of his brown - paper parcel . 
 his quaint blending of Essex flatness with saintly simplicity 
 continuously amuse the Frenchman till the priest arrive   somehow   at 
 Tottenham with all his parcel , and come back for his umbrella . 
 when he do the last , Valentin even have the good nature to warn 
 he not to take care of the silver by tell everybody about it . 
 but to whomever he talk , Valentin keep his eye open for someone else ; 
 he look out steadily for anyone , rich or poor , male or female , 
 who be well up to six foot ; for Flambeau be four inch above it . 

 he alight at Liverpool Street , however , quite conscientiously 
 secure that he have not miss the criminal so far . he then go to 
 Scotland Yard to regularise his position and arrange for help in case 
 of need ; he then light another cigarette and go for a long stroll 
 in the street of London . as he be walk in the street and square 
 beyond Victoria , he pause suddenly and stand . it be a quaint , 
 quiet square , very typical of London , full of an accidental stillness . 
 the tall , flat house round look at once prosperous and uninhabited ; 
 the square of shrubbery in the centre look as desert as a green 
 Pacific islet . one of the four side be much high than the rest , 
 like a dais ; and the line of this side be break by one of London 's 
 admirable accident - a restaurant that look as if it have stray 
 from Soho . it be an unreasonably attractive object , with dwarf 
 plant in pot and long , strip blind of lemon yellow and white . 
 it stand specially high above the street , and in the usual patchwork way 
 of London , a flight of step from the street run up to meet the front 
 door almost as a fire - escape might run up to a first - floor window . 
 Valentin stand and smoke in front of the yellow - white blind and 
 consider they long . 

 the most incredible thing about miracle be that they happen . 
 a few cloud in heaven do come together into the star shape of 
 one human eye . a tree do stand up in the landscape of a doubtful 
 journey in the exact and elaborate shape of a note of interrogation . 
 I have see both these thing myself within the last few day . 
 Nelson do die in the instant of victory ; and a man name Williams 
 do quite accidentally murder a man name Williamson ; it sound like 
 a sort of infanticide . in short , there be in life an element of elfin 
 coincidence which people reckon on the prosaic may perpetually miss . 
 as it have be well express in the paradox of Poe , wisdom should 
 reckon on the unforeseen . 

 Aristide Valentin be unfathomably french ; and the french intelligence 
 be intelligence specially and solely . he be not " a thinking machine " ; 
 for that be a brainless phrase of modern fatalism and materialism . 
 a machine only be a machine because it can not think . but he be a 
 thinking man , and a plain man at the same time . all his wonderful success , 
 that look like conjuring , have be gain by plod logic , by clear 
 and commonplace french thought . the French electrify the world not 
 by start any paradox , they electrify it by carry out a truism . 
 they carry a truism so far - as in the French Revolution . but exactly 
 because Valentin understand reason , he understand the limit of reason . 
 only a man who know nothing of motor talk of motoring without petrol ; 
 only a man who know nothing of reason talk of reasoning without strong , 
 undisputed first principle . here he have no strong first principle . 
 Flambeau have be miss at Harwich ; and if he be in London at all , 
 he might be anything from a tall tramp on Wimbledon Common to a tall 
 toast - master at the Hotel Metropole . in such a naked state of nescience , 
 Valentin have a view and a method of his own . 

 in such case he reckon on the unforeseen . in such case , 
 when he could not follow the train of the reasonable , 
 he coldly and carefully follow the train of the unreasonable . 
 instead of go to the right place - bank , police station , 
 rendezvous - he systematically go to the wrong place ; 
 knock at every empty house , turn down every cul de sac , 
 go up every lane block with rubbish , go round every crescent 
 that lead he uselessly out of the way . he defend this crazy 
 course quite logically . he say that if one have a clue this 
 be the bad way ; but if one have no clue at all it be the good , 
 because there be just the chance that any oddity that catch 
 the eye of the pursuer might be the same that have catch the eye 
 of the pursued . somewhere a man must begin , and it have well 
 be just where another man might stop . something about that 
 flight of step up to the shop , something about the quietude 
 and quaintness of the restaurant , rouse all the detective 's 
 rare romantic fancy and make he resolve to strike at random . 
 he go up the step , and sit down at a table by the window , 
 ask for a cup of black coffee . 

 it be half - way through the morning , and he have not breakfast ; 
 the slight litter of other breakfast stand about on the table 
 to remind he of his hunger ; and add a poached egg to his order , 
 he proceed musingly to shake some white sugar into his coffee , 
 think all the time about Flambeau . he remember how Flambeau 
 have escape , once by a pair of nail scissor , and once by a house on fire ; 
 once by have to pay for an unstamped letter , and once by get people 
 to look through a telescope at a comet that might destroy the world . 
 he think his detective brain as good as the criminal 's , which be true . 
 but he fully realise the disadvantage . " the criminal be the creative artist ; 
 the detective only the critic , " he say with a sour smile , and lift 
 his coffee cup to his lip slowly , and put it down very quickly . 
 he have put salt in it . 

 he look at the vessel from which the silvery powder have come ; 
 it be certainly a sugar - basin ; as unmistakably mean for sugar as a 
 champagne - bottle for champagne . he wonder why they should keep salt in it . 
 he look to see if there be any more orthodox vessel . yes ; there be 
 two salt - cellar quite full . perhaps there be some speciality 
 in the condiment in the salt - cellar . he taste it ; it be sugar . 
 then he look round at the restaurant with a refresh air of interest , 
 to see if there be any other trace of that singular artistic taste 
 which put the sugar in the salt - cellar and the salt in the sugar - basin . 
 except for an odd splash of some dark fluid on one of the white - paper 
 wall , the whole place appear neat , cheerful and ordinary . 
 he ring the bell for the waiter . 

 when that official hurry up , fuzzy - haired and somewhat 
 blear - eyed at that early hour , the detective   who be not without 
 an appreciation of the simple form of humour   ask he to taste 
 the sugar and see if it be up to the high reputation of the hotel . 
 the result be that the waiter yawn suddenly and wake up . 

 " do you play this delicate joke on your customer every morning ? " 
 inquire Valentin . " do change the salt and sugar never pall 
 on you as a jest ? " 

 the waiter , when this irony grow clear , stammeringly assure he 
 that the establishment have certainly no such intention ; it must be 
 a most curious mistake . he pick up the sugar - basin and look at it ; 
 he pick up the salt - cellar and look at that , his face grow 
 more and more bewildered . at last he abruptly excuse himself , 
 and hurry away , return in a few second with the proprietor . 
 the proprietor also examine the sugar - basin and then the salt - cellar ; 
 the proprietor also look bewildered . 

 suddenly the waiter seem to grow inarticulate with a rush of word . 

 " I zink , " he stutter eagerly , " I zink it be those two clergy - man . " 

 " what two clergyman ? " 

 " the two clergyman , " say the waiter , " that throw soup at the wall . " 

 " Threw soup at the wall ? " repeat Valentin , feel sure this must 
 be some singular italian metaphor . 

 " yes , yes , " say the attendant excitedly , and point at the dark 
 splash on the white paper ; " throw it over there on the wall . " 

 Valentin look his query at the proprietor , who come to his rescue 
 with full report . 

 " yes , sir , " he say , " it be quite true , though I do not   suppose it have 
 anything to do with the sugar and salt . two clergyman come in and drank 
 soup here very early , as soon as the shutter be take down . they be 
 both very quiet , respectable people ; one of they pay the bill and go out ; 
 the other , who seem a slow coach altogether , be some minute long 
 get his thing together . but he go at last . only , the instant 
 before he step into the street he deliberately pick up his cup , 
 which he have only half empty , and throw the soup slap on the wall . 
 I be in the back room myself , and so be the waiter ; so I could 
 only rush out in time to find the wall splash and the shop empty . 
 it do not   do any particular damage , but it be confound cheek ; 
 and I try to catch the man in the street . they be too far off though ; 
 I only notice they go round the next corner into Carstairs Street . " 

 the detective be on his foot , hat settle and stick in hand . 
 he have already decide that in the universal darkness of his 
 mind he could only follow the first odd finger that point ; 
 and this finger be odd enough . pay his bill and clash 
 the glass door behind he , he be soon swing round into 
 the other street . 

 it be fortunate that even in such fevere moment his eye be cool 
 and quick . something in a shop - front go by he like a mere flash ; 
 yet he go back to look at it . the shop be a popular greengrocer 
 and fruiterer 's , an array of good set out in the open air and plainly 
 ticket with their name and price . in the two most prominent 
 compartment be two heap , of orange and of nut respectively . 
 on the heap of nut lay a scrap of cardboard , on which be write in bold , 
 blue chalk , " best tangerine orange , two a penny . " on the orange be 
 the equally clear and exact description , " Finest Brazil nut , 4d . a lb . " 
 M. Valentin look at these two placard and fancy he have meet this 
 highly subtle form of humour before , and that somewhat recently . 
 he draw the attention of the red - faced fruiterer , who be look rather 
 sullenly up and down the street , to this inaccuracy in his advertisement . 
 the fruiterer say nothing , but sharply put each card into its proper place . 
 the detective , lean elegantly on his walking - cane , continue to scrutinise 
 the shop . at last he say , " pray excuse my apparent irrelevance , 
 my good sir , but I should like to ask you a question in experimental 
 psychology and the association of idea . " 

 the red - faced shopman regard he with an eye of menace ; 
 but he continue gaily , swing his cane , " why , " he pursue , 
 " why be two ticket wrongly place in a greengrocer 's shop 
 like a shovel hat that have come to London for a holiday ? 
 or , in case I do not make myself clear , what be the mystical 
 association which connect the idea of nut mark as orange 
 with the idea of two clergyman , one tall and the other short ? " 

 the eye of the tradesman stand out of his head like a snail 's ; 
 he really seem for an instant likely to fle himself upon the stranger . 
 at last he stammer angrily : " I do not   know what you ' ave to do with it , 
 but if you be one of their friend , you can tell them from I that I will 
 knock their silly ' ead off , parson or no parson , if they upset 
 my apple again . " 

 " indeed ? " ask the detective , with great sympathy . 
 " do they upset your apple ? " 

 " one of them do , " say the heated shopman ; " roll them all over the street . 
 I would ' ave catch the fool but for havin' to pick them up . " 

 " which way do these parson go ? " ask Valentin . 

 " up that second road on the left - hand side , and then across the square , " 
 say the other promptly . 

 " thank , " reply Valentin , and vanish like a fairy . 
 on the other side of the second square he find a policeman , 
 and say : " this be urgent , constable ; have you see two clergyman 
 in shovel hat ? " 

 the policeman begin to chuckle heavily . " I ' ave , sir ; 
 and if you arst I , one of them be drunk . he stand in the middle 
 of the road that bewilder that - " 

 " which way do they go ? " snap Valentin . 

 " they take one of they yellow bus over there , " answer the man ; 
 " they that go to Hampstead . " 

 Valentin produce his official card and say very rapidly : 
 " call up two of your man to come with I in pursuit , " 
 and cross the road with such contagious energy that the 
 ponderous policeman be move to almost agile obedience . 
 in a minute and a half the french detective be join on 
 the opposite pavement by an inspector and a man in plain clothe . 

 " well , sir , " begin the former , with smile importance , 
 " and what may - ? " 

 Valentin point suddenly with his cane . " I will tell you on 
 the top of that omnibus , " he say , and be dart and dodge 
 across the tangle of the traffic . when all three sank panting 
 on the top seat of the yellow vehicle , the inspector say : 
 " we could go four time as quick in a taxi . " 

 " quite true , " reply their leader placidly , " if we only have an idea 
 of where we be go . " 

 " well , where be you go ? " ask the other , star . 

 Valentin smoke frowningly for a few second ; then , remove his cigarette , 
 he say : " if you know what a man 's doing , get in front of he ; 
 but if you want to guess what he be do , keep behind he . 
 Stray when he stray ; stop when he stop ; travel as slowly as he . 
 then you may see what he see and may act as he act . 
 all we can do be to keep our eye skin for a queer thing . " 

 " what sort of queer thing do you mean ? " ask the inspector . 

 " any sort of queer thing , " answer Valentin , and relapse 
 into obstinate silence . 

 the yellow omnibus crawl up the northern road for what seem 
 like hour on end ; the great detective would not explain far , 
 and perhaps his assistant feel a silent and grow doubt of 
 his errand . perhaps , also , they feel a silent and grow desire 
 for lunch , for the hour creep long past the normal luncheon hour , 
 and the long road of the North London suburb seem to shoot 
 out into length after length like an infernal telescope . 
 it be one of those journey on which a man perpetually feel that now 
 at last he must have come to the end of the universe , and then find 
 he have only come to the beginning of Tufnell Park . London die away 
 in draggle tavern and dreary scrub , and then be unaccountably bear 
 again in blaze high street and blatant hotel . it be like pass 
 through thirteen separate vulgar city all just touch each other . 
 but though the winter twilight be already threaten the road 
 ahead of they , the parisian detective still sit silent and watchful , 
 eye the frontage of the street that slide by on either side . 
 by the time they have leave Camden Town behind , the policeman 
 be nearly asleep ; at least , they give something like a jump 
 as Valentin leapt erect , strike a hand on each man 's shoulder , 
 and shout to the driver to stop . 

 they tumble down the step into the road without realise why they 
 have be dislodge ; when they look round for enlightenment they find 
 Valentin triumphantly point his finger towards a window on the left 
 side of the road . it be a large window , form part of the long 
 facade of a gilt and palatial public - house ; it be the part reserve 
 for respectable dining , and label " Restaurant . " this window , 
 like all the rest along the frontage of the hotel , be of frosted 
 and figured glass ; but in the middle of it be a big , black smash , 
 like a star in the ice . 

 " our cue at last , " cry Valentin , wave his stick ; " the place 
 with the broken window . " 

 " what window ? what cue ? " ask his principal assistant . 
 " why , what proof be there that this have anything to do with they ? " 

 Valentin almost break his bamboo stick with rage . 

 " Proof ! " he cry . " Good God ! the man be look for proof ! 
 why , of course , the chance be twenty to one that it have nothing 
 to do with they . but what else can we do ? do not   you see we must 
 either follow one wild possibility or else go home to bed ? " 
 he bang his way into the restaurant , follow by his companion , 
 and they be soon seat at a late luncheon at a little table , 
 and look at the star of smashed glass from the inside . 
 not that it be very informative to they even then . 

 " got your window break , I see , " say Valentin to the waiter 
 as he pay the bill . 

 " yes , sir , " answer the attendant , bend busily over the change , 
 to which Valentin silently add an enormous tip . the waiter 
 straighten himself with mild but unmistakable animation . 

 " ah , yes , sir , " he say . " very odd thing , that , sir . " 

 " indeed ? " tell we about it , " say the detective with careless curiosity . 

 " well , two gent in black come in , " say the waiter ; " two of 
 those foreign parson that be run about . they have a cheap 
 and quiet little lunch , and one of they pay for it and go out . 
 the other be just go out to join he when I look at my change 
 again and find he would pay I more than three time too much . 
 ` here , ' I say to the chap who be nearly out of the door , 
 ` you have   pay too much . ' ` oh , ' he say , very cool , ` have we ? ' 
 ' yes , ' I say , and pick up the bill to show he . 
 well , that be a knock - out . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask his interlocutor . 

 " well , I would have swear on seven bible that I would put 4s . on that bill . 
 but now I see I would put 14 . , as plain as paint . " 

 " well ? " cry Valentin , move slowly , but with burn eye , " and then ? " 

 " the parson at the door he say all serene , ` sorry to confuse 
 your account , but it will pay for the window . ' ` what window ? ' 
 I say . ` the one I be go to break , ' he say , and smash 
 that bless pane with his umbrella . " 

 all three inquirer make an exclamation ; and the inspector 
 say under his breath , " be we after escape lunatic ? " 
 the waiter go on with some relish for the ridiculous story : 

 " I be so knock silly for a second , I could not   do anything . 
 the man march out of the place and join his friend just round the corner . 
 then they go so quick up Bullock Street that I could not   catch they , 
 though I run round the bar to do it . " 

 " Bullock Street , " say the detective , and shoot up that thoroughfare 
 as quickly as the strange couple he pursue . 

 their journey now take they through bare brick way like tunnel ; 
 street with few light and even with few window ; street that 
 seem build out of the blank back of everything and everywhere . 
 Dusk be deepen , and it be not easy even for the London 
 policeman to guess in what exact direction they be treading . 
 the inspector , however , be pretty certain that they would eventually 
 strike some part of Hampstead Heath . abruptly one bulging 
 gas - light window break the blue twilight like a bull's - eye lantern ; 
 and Valentin stop an instant before a little garish 
 sweetstuff shop . after an instant 's hesitation he go in ; 
 he stand amid the gaudy colour of the confectionery with entire 
 gravity and buy thirteen chocolate cigar with a certain care . 
 he be clearly prepare an opening ; but he do not need one . 

 an angular , elderly young woman in the shop have regard his elegant 
 appearance with a merely automatic inquiry ; but when she see 
 the door behind he block with the blue uniform of the inspector , 
 her eye seem to wake up . 

 " oh , " she say , " if you have   come about that parcel , I have   send 
 it off already . " 

 " Parcel ? " repeat Valentin ; and it be his turn to look inquire . 

 " I mean the parcel the gentleman leave - the clergyman gentleman . " 

 " for goodness ' sake , " say Valentin , lean forward with his first real 
 confession of eagerness , " for Heaven 's sake tell we what happen exactly . " 

 " well , " say the woman a little doubtfully , " the clergyman come 
 in about half an hour ago and buy some peppermint and talk 
 a bit , and then go off towards the heath . but a second after , 
 one of they run back into the shop and say , ` have I leave a parcel ! ' 
 well , I look everywhere and could not   see one ; so he say , ` never mind ; 
 but if it should turn up , please post it to this address , ' 
 and he leave I the address and a shilling for my trouble . 
 and sure enough , though I think I would look everywhere , I find he would 
 leave a brown paper parcel , so I post it to the place he say . 
 I can not   remember the address now ; it be somewhere in Westminster . but as 
 the thing seem so important , I think perhaps the police have 
 come about it . " 

 " so they have , " say Valentin shortly . " be Hampstead Heath near here ? " 

 " straight on for fifteen minute , " say the woman , " and you will come right 
 out on the open . " Valentin spring out of the shop and begin to run . 
 the other detective follow he at a reluctant trot . 

 the street they thread be so narrow and shut in by shadow that 
 when they come out unexpectedly into the void common and vast sky 
 they be startled to find the evening still so light and clear . 
 a perfect dome of peacock - green sank into gold amid the blackening 
 tree and the dark violet distance . the glowing green tint be 
 just deep enough to pick out in point of crystal one or two star . 
 all that be leave of the daylight lie in a golden glitter across 
 the edge of Hampstead and that popular hollow which be call 
 the Vale of Health . the holiday maker who roam this region have 
 not wholly disperse ; a few couple sit shapelessly on bench ; 
 and here and there a distant girl still shriek in one of the swing . 
 the glory of heaven deepen and darken around the sublime vulgarity 
 of man ; and stand on the slope and look across the valley , 
 Valentin behold the thing which he seek . 

 among the black and break group in that distance be one 
 especially black which do not break - a group of two figure 
 clerically clothe . though they seem as small as insect , 
 Valentin could see that one of they be much small than the other . 
 though the other have a student 's stoop and an inconspicuous manner , 
 he could see that the man be well over six foot high . 
 he shut his tooth and go forward , whirl his stick impatiently . 
 by the time he have substantially diminish the distance 
 and magnify the two black figure as in a vast microscope , 
 he have perceive something else ; something which startle he , 
 and yet which he have somehow expect . whoever be the tall priest , 
 there could be no doubt about the identity of the short one . 
 it be his friend of the Harwich train , the stumpy little cure 
 of Essex whom he have warn about his brown paper parcel . 

 now , so far as this go , everything fit in finally and rationally enough . 
 Valentin have learn by his inquiry that morning that a Father Brown 
 from Essex be bring up a silver cross with sapphire , a relic 
 of considerable value , to show some of the foreign priest at 
 the congress . this undoubtedly be the ' silver with blue stone " ; 
 and Father Brown undoubtedly be the little greenhorn in the train . 
 now there be nothing wonderful about the fact that what Valentin have 
 find out Flambeau have also find out ; Flambeau find out everything . 
 also there be nothing wonderful in the fact that when Flambeau hear 
 of a sapphire cross he should try to steal it ; that be the most natural 
 thing in all natural history . and most certainly there be nothing 
 wonderful about the fact that Flambeau should have it all his own way 
 with such a silly sheep as the man with the umbrella and the parcel . 
 he be the sort of man whom anybody could lead on a string to the North Pole ; 
 it be not surprising that an actor like Flambeau , dress as another priest , 
 could lead he to Hampstead Heath . so far the crime seem clear enough ; 
 and while the detective pity the priest for his helplessness , 
 he almost despise Flambeau for condescend to so gullible a victim . 
 but when Valentin think of all that have happen in between , of all 
 that have lead he to his triumph , he rack his brain for the small 
 rhyme or reason in it . what have the stealing of a blue - and - silver 
 cross from a priest from Essex to do with chucking soup at wall paper ? 
 what have it to do with call nuts orange , or with pay 
 for window first and break they afterwards ? he have come to 
 the end of his chase ; yet somehow he have miss the middle of it . 
 when he fail   which be seldom , he have usually grasp the clue , 
 but nevertheless miss the criminal . here he have grasp the criminal , 
 but still he could not grasp the clue . 

 the two figure that they follow be crawl like black fly 
 across the huge green contour of a hill . they be evidently sink 
 in conversation , and perhaps do not notice where they be go ; 
 but they be certainly go to the wilder and more silent height 
 of the heath . as their pursuer gain on they , the latter have 
 to use the undignified attitude of the deer - stalker , to crouch 
 behind clump of tree and even to crawl prostrate in deep grass . 
 by these ungainly ingenuity the hunter even come close 
 enough to the quarry to hear the murmur of the discussion , 
 but no word could be distinguish except the word " reason " 
 recur frequently in a high and almost childish voice . 
 once over an abrupt dip of land and a dense tangle of thicket , 
 the detective actually lose the two figure they be follow . 
 they do not find the trail again for an agonising ten minute , 
 and then it lead round the brow of a great dome of hill overlook 
 an amphitheatre of rich and desolate sunset scenery . under a tree 
 in this commanding yet neglect spot be an old ramshackle wooden seat . 
 on this seat sit the two priest still in serious speech together . 
 the gorgeous green and gold still clung to the darken horizon ; 
 but the dome above be turn slowly from peacock - green to peacock - blue , 
 and the star detach themselves more and more like solid jewel . 
 mutely motioning to his follower , Valentin contrive to creep up 
 behind the big branching tree , and , stand there in deathly silence , 
 hear the word of the strange priest for the first time . 

 after he have listen for a minute and a half , he be grip 
 by a devilish doubt . perhaps he have drag the two english 
 policeman to the waste of a nocturnal heath on an errand no 
 saner than seek fig on its thistle . for the two priest 
 be talk exactly like priest , piously , with learn 
 and leisure , about the most aerial enigma of theology . 
 the little Essex priest speak the more simply , with his round 
 face turn to the strengthen star ; the other talk with 
 his head bow , as if he be not even worthy to look at they . 
 but no more innocently clerical conversation could have be 
 hear in any white italian cloister or black spanish cathedral . 

 the first he hear be the tail of one of Father Brown 's sentence , 
 which end : " ... what they really mean in the Middle Ages 
 by the heaven be incorruptible . " 

 the tall priest nod his bow head and say : 

 " ah , yes , these modern infidel appeal to their reason ; 
 but who can look at those million of world and not feel 
 that there may well be wonderful universe above we where reason 
 be utterly unreasonable ? " 

 " no , " say the other priest ; " reason be always reasonable , 
 even in the last limbo , in the lost borderland of thing . 
 I know that people charge the Church with lower reason , 
 but it be just the other way . alone on earth , the Church make 
 reason really supreme . alone on earth , the Church affirm 
 that God himself be bind by reason . " 

 the other priest raise his austere face to the spangled sky and say : 

 " yet who know if in that infinite universe - ? " 

 " only infinite physically , " say the little priest , turn sharply in 
 his seat , " not infinite in the sense of escape from the law of truth . " 

 Valentin behind his tree be tear his fingernail with silent fury . 
 he seem almost to hear the snigger of the english detective whom he have 
 bring so far on a fantastic guess only to listen to the metaphysical 
 gossip of two mild old parson . in his impatience he lose the equally 
 elaborate answer of the tall cleric , and when he listen again it be 
 again Father Brown who be speak : 

 " Reason and justice grip the remotest and the loneliest star . 
 look at those star . do not   they look as if they be single diamond 
 and sapphire ? well , you can imagine any mad botany or geology 
 you please . think of forest of adamant with leaf of brilliant . 
 think the moon be a blue moon , a single elephantine sapphire . 
 but do not   fancy that all that frantic astronomy would make 
 the small difference to the reason and justice of conduct . 
 on plain of opal , under cliff cut out of pearl , you would still 
 find a notice - board , ` thou shalt not steal . ' " 

 Valentin be just in the act of rise from his rigid and crouch 
 attitude and creep away as softly as might be , fell by the one 
 great folly of his life . but something in the very silence 
 of the tall priest make he stop until the latter speak . 
 when at last he do speak , he say simply , his head bow and his 
 hand on his knee : 

 " well , I think that other world may perhaps rise high than our reason . 
 the mystery of heaven be unfathomable , and I for one can only bow my head . " 

 then , with brow yet bent and without change by the faint 
 shade his attitude or voice , he add : 

 " just hand over that sapphire cross of your , will you ? 
 we be all alone here , and I could pull you to piece like 
 a straw doll . " 

 the utterly unaltered voice and attitude add a strange violence 
 to that shocking change of speech . but the guarder of the relic 
 only seem to turn his head by the small section of the compass . 
 he seem still to have a somewhat foolish face turn to the star . 
 perhaps he have not understand . or , perhaps , he have understand and sit 
 rigid with terror . 

 " yes , " say the tall priest , in the same low voice and in the same 
 still posture , " yes , I be Flambeau . " 

 then , after a pause , he say : 

 " come , will you give I that cross ? " 

 " no , " say the other , and the monosyllable have an odd sound . 

 Flambeau suddenly fling off all his pontifical pretension . 
 the great robber lean back in his seat and laugh low but long . 

 " no , " he cry , " you will not   give it I , you proud prelate . 
 you will not   give it I , you little celibate simpleton . 
 shall I tell you why you will not   give it I ? because I have   get 
 it already in my own breast - pocket . " 

 the small man from Essex turn what seem to be a daze face in the dusk , 
 and say , with the timid eagerness of " the private Secretary " : 

 " are - be you sure ? " 

 Flambeau yell with delight . 

 " really , you be as good as a three - act farce , " he cry . " yes , you turnip , 
 I be quite sure . I have the sense to make a duplicate of the right parcel , 
 and now , my friend , you have   get the duplicate and I have   get the jewel . 
 an old dodge , Father Brown - a very old dodge . " 

 " yes , " say Father Brown , and pass his hand through his hair 
 with the same strange vagueness of manner . " yes , I have   hear 
 of it before . " 

 the colossus of crime lean over to the little rustic priest 
 with a sort of sudden interest . 

 " you have hear of it ? " he ask . " where have you hear of it ? " 

 " well , I must not   tell you his name , of course , " say the little man simply . 
 " he be a penitent , you know . he have live prosperously for about twenty 
 year entirely on duplicate brown paper parcel . and so , you see , 
 when I begin to suspect you , I think of this poor chap 's way of do 
 it at once . " 

 " begin to suspect I ? " repeat the outlaw with increase intensity . 
 " do you really have the gumption to suspect I just because I bring 
 you up to this bare part of the heath ? " 

 " no , no , " say Brown with an air of apology . " you see , 
 I suspect you when we first meet . it be that little bulge up 
 the sleeve where you people have the spiked bracelet . " 

 " how in Tartarus , " cry Flambeau , " do you ever hear of the spiked bracelet ? " 

 " oh , one 's little flock , you know ! " say Father Brown , arch his 
 eyebrow rather blankly . " when I be a curate in Hartlepool , 
 there be three of they with spiked bracelet . so , as I suspect 
 you from the first , do not   you see , I make sure that the cross 
 should go safe , anyhow . I be afraid I watch you , you know . 
 so at last I see you change the parcel . then , do not   you see , 
 I change they back again . and then I leave the right one behind . " 

 " left it behind ? " repeat Flambeau , and for the first time there 
 be another note in his voice beside his triumph . 

 " well , it be like this , " say the little priest , speak in the same 
 unaffected way . " I go back to that sweet - shop and ask if I have 
 leave a parcel , and give they a particular address if it turn up . 
 well , I know I have not ; but when I go away again I do . so , instead of 
 run after I with that valuable parcel , they have send it fly 
 to a friend of mine in Westminster . " then he add rather sadly : 
 " I learn that , too , from a poor fellow in Hartlepool . he use to do it 
 with handbag he steal at railway station , but he be in a monastery now . 
 oh , one get to know , you know , " he add , rub his head again 
 with the same sort of desperate apology . " we can not   help be priest . 
 People come and tell we these thing . " 

 Flambeau tear a brown - paper parcel out of his inner pocket and rent it 
 in piece . there be nothing but paper and stick of lead inside it . 
 he spring to his foot with a gigantic gesture , and cry : 

 " I do not   believe you . I do not   believe a bumpkin like you could 
 manage all that . I believe you have   still get the stuff on you , 
 and if you do not   give it up - why , we be all alone , and I will take 
 it by force ! " 

 " no , " say Father Brown simply , and stand up also , " you will not 
 take it by force . first , because I really have not   still get it . 
 and , second , because we be not alone . " 

 Flambeau stop in his stride forward . 

 " behind that tree , " say Father Brown , point , " be two 
 strong policeman and the great detective alive . 
 how do they come here , do you ask ? why , I bring they , 
 of course ! how do I do it ? why , I will tell you if you like ! 
 Lord bless you , we have to know twenty such thing when we work 
 among the criminal class ! well , I be not   sure you be a thief , 
 and it would never do to make a scandal against one of our own clergy . 
 so I just test you to see if anything would make you show yourself . 
 a man generally make a small scene if he find salt in his coffee ; 
 if he do not , he have some reason for keep quiet . 
 I change the salt and sugar , and you keep quiet . 
 a man generally object if his bill be three time too big . 
 if he pay it , he have some motive for pass unnoticed . 
 I alter your bill , and you pay it . " 

 the world seem wait for Flambeau to leap like a tiger . 
 but he be hold back as by a spell ; he be stunned with 
 the utmost curiosity . 

 " well , " go on Father Brown , with lumber lucidity , " as you 
 would not   leave any track for the police , of course somebody have to . 
 at every place we go to , I take care to do something that would 
 get we talk about for the rest of the day . I do not   do much harm - 
 a splashed wall , spilt apple , a broken window ; but I save the cross , 
 as the cross will always be save . it be at Westminster by now . 
 I rather wonder you do not   stop it with the Donkey 's Whistle . " 

 " with the what ? " ask Flambeau . 

 " I be glad you have   never hear of it , " say the priest , make a face . 
 " it be a foul thing . I be sure you be too good a man for 
 a Whistler . I could not   have counter it even with the Spots myself ; 
 I be not strong enough in the leg . " 

 " what on earth be you talk about ? " ask the other . 

 " well , I do think you would know the spot , " say Father Brown , 
 agreeably surprised . " oh , you can not   have go so very wrong yet ! " 

 " how in blaze do you know all these horror ? " cry Flambeau . 

 the shadow of a smile cross the round , simple face of his clerical opponent . 

 " oh , by be a celibate simpleton , I suppose , " he say . 
 " have it never strike you that a man who do next to nothing but hear 
 man 's real sin be not likely to be wholly unaware of human evil ? 
 but , as a matter of fact , another part of my trade , too , make I 
 sure you be not   a priest . " 

 " what ? " ask the thief , almost gap . 

 " you attack reason , " say Father Brown . " it be bad theology . " 

 and even as he turn away to collect his property , the three policeman come 
 out from under the twilight tree . Flambeau be an artist and a sportsman . 
 he step back and sweep Valentin a great bow . 

 " do not bow to I , mon ami , " say Valentin with silver clearness . 
 " let we both bow to our master . " 

 and they both stand an instant uncover while the little Essex 
 priest blink about for his umbrella . 



  the Secret Garden 

 Aristide Valentin , Chief of the Paris Police , be late for his dinner , 
 and some of his guest begin to arrive before he . these be , however , 
 reassure by his confidential servant , Ivan , the old man with a scar , 
 and a face almost as grey as his moustache , who always sit at a table 
 in the entrance hall - a hall hang with weapon . Valentin 's house be 
 perhaps as peculiar and celebrate as its master . it be an old house , 
 with high wall and tall poplar almost overhang the Seine ; 
 but the oddity - and perhaps the police value - of its architecture be this : 
 that there be no ultimate exit at all except through this front door , 
 which be guard by Ivan and the armoury . the garden be large 
 and elaborate , and there be many exit from the house into the garden . 
 but there be no exit from the garden into the world outside ; all round 
 it run a tall , smooth , unscalable wall with special spike at the top ; 
 no bad garden , perhaps , for a man to reflect in whom some hundred 
 criminal have swear to kill . 

 as Ivan explain to the guest , their host have telephone 
 that he be detain for ten minute . he be , in truth , 
 make some last arrangement about execution and such ugly thing ; 
 and though these duty be rootedly repulsive to he , 
 he always perform they with precision . ruthless in the pursuit 
 of criminal , he be very mild about their punishment . 
 since he have be supreme over French - and largely over European - 
 policial method , his great influence have be honourably use 
 for the mitigation of sentence and the purification of prison . 
 he be one of the great humanitarian french freethinker ; 
 and the only thing wrong with they be that they make mercy 
 even cold than justice . 

 when Valentin arrive he be already dress in black clothe 
 and the red rosette - an elegant figure , his dark beard already 
 streak with grey . he go straight through his house to his study , 
 which open on the ground behind . the garden door of it be open , 
 and after he have carefully lock his box in its official place , 
 he stand for a few second at the open door look out upon the garden . 
 a sharp moon be fight with the fly rag and tatter of a storm , 
 and Valentin regard it with a wistfulness unusual in such 
 scientific nature as his . perhaps such scientific nature have some 
 psychic prevision of the most tremendous problem of their life . 
 from any such occult mood , at least , he quickly recover , for he know 
 he be late , and that his guest have already begin to arrive . 
 a glance at his drawing - room when he enter it be enough to make 
 certain that his principal guest be not there , at any rate . 
 he see all the other pillar of the little party ; he see Lord Galloway , 
 the English Ambassador - a choleric old man with a russet face 
 like an apple , wear the blue ribbon of the Garter . he see 
 Lady Galloway , slim and threadlike , with silver hair and a face 
 sensitive and superior . he see her daughter , Lady Margaret Graham , 
 a pale and pretty girl with an elfish face and copper - colour hair . 
 he see the Duchess of Mont St. Michel , black - eyed and opulent , 
 and with she her two daughter , black - eyed and opulent also . 
 he see Dr. Simon , a typical french scientist , with glass , 
 a pointed brown beard , and a forehead bar with those 
 parallel wrinkle which be the penalty of superciliousness , 
 since they come through constantly elevate the eyebrow . 
 he see Father Brown , of Cobhole , in Essex , whom he have recently meet 
 in England . he see - perhaps with more interest than any of these - 
 a tall man in uniform , who have bow to the Galloways without 
 receive any very hearty acknowledgment , and who now advance alone 
 to pay his respect to his host . this be Commandant O'Brien , of the 
 French Foreign Legion . he be a slim yet somewhat swagger figure , 
 clean - shaven , dark - haired , and blue - eye , and , as seem natural 
 in an officer of that famous regiment of victorious failure and 
 successful suicide , he have an air at once dashing and melancholy . 
 he be by birth an irish gentleman , and in boyhood have know 
 the Galloways - especially Margaret Graham . he have leave his country 
 after some crash of debt , and now express his complete freedom 
 from british etiquette by swing about in uniform , sabre and spur . 
 when he bow to the Ambassador 's family , Lord and Lady Galloway 
 bent stiffly , and Lady Margaret look away . 

 but for whatever old cause such people might be interested in each other , 
 their distinguished host be not specially interested in they . 
 no one of they at least be in his eye the guest of the evening . 
 Valentin be expect , for special reason , a man of world - wide fame , 
 whose friendship he have secure during some of his great detective 
 tour and triumph in the United States . he be expect 
 Julius K. Brayne , that multi - millionaire whose colossal and even 
 crush endowment of small religion have occasion so much easy 
 sport and easy solemnity for the american and english paper . 
 nobody could quite make out whether Mr. Brayne be an atheist 
 or a Mormon or a Christian Scientist ; but he be ready to pour money 
 into any intellectual vessel , so long as it be an untried vessel . 
 one of his hobby be to wait for the American Shakespeare - 
 a hobby more patient than angle . he admire Walt Whitman , 
 but think that Luke P. Tanner , of Paris , Pa. , be more " progressive " 
 than Whitman any day . he like anything that he think " progressive . " 
 he think Valentin " progressive , " thereby do he a grave injustice . 

 the solid appearance of Julius K. Brayne in the room be as decisive 
 as a dinner bell . he have this great quality , which very few 
 of we can claim , that his presence be as big as his absence . 
 he be a huge fellow , as fat as he be tall , clothe in complete 
 evening black , without so much relief as a watch - chain or a ring . 
 his hair be white and well brush back like a German 's ; 
 his face be red , fierce and cherubic , with one dark tuft under 
 the low lip that throw up that otherwise infantile visage 
 with an effect theatrical and even Mephistophelean . not long , 
 however , do that salon merely stare at the celebrate American ; 
 his lateness have already become a domestic problem , and he be 
 send with all speed into the dining - room with Lady Galloway 
 on his arm . 

 except on one point the Galloways be genial and casual enough . 
 so long as Lady Margaret do not take the arm of that adventurer 
 O'Brien , her father be quite satisfied ; and she have not do so , 
 she have decorously go in with Dr. Simon . nevertheless , old Lord Galloway 
 be restless and almost rude . he be diplomatic enough during dinner , 
 but when , over the cigar , three of the young man - Simon the doctor , 
 Brown the priest , and the detrimental O'Brien , the exile in a foreign uniform - 
 all melt away to mix with the lady or smoke in the conservatory , 
 then the english diplomatist grow very undiplomatic indeed . 
 he be sting every sixty second with the thought that the scamp O'Brien 
 might be signal to Margaret somehow ; he do not attempt to imagine how . 
 he be leave over the coffee with Brayne , the hoary Yankee who believe 
 in all religion , and Valentin , the grizzle Frenchman who believe in none . 
 they could argue with each other , but neither could appeal to he . 
 after a time this " progressive " logomachy have reach a crisis 
 of tedium ; Lord Galloway get up also and seek the drawing - room . 
 he lose his way in long passage for some six or eight minute : 
 till he hear the high - pitch , didactic voice of the doctor , and then 
 the dull voice of the priest , follow by general laughter . they also , 
 he think with a curse , be probably argue about ' science and religion . " 
 but the instant he open the salon door he see only one thing - 
 he see what be not there . he see that Commandant O'Brien be absent , 
 and that Lady Margaret be absent too . 

 rise impatiently from the drawing - room , as he have from the dining - room , 
 he stamp along the passage once more . his notion of protect his 
 daughter from the irish - Algerian n'er - do - weel have become something central 
 and even mad in his mind . as he go towards the back of the house , 
 where be Valentin 's study , he be surprised to meet his daughter , 
 who sweep past with a white , scornful face , which be a second enigma . 
 if she have be with O'Brien , where be O'Brien ! if she have not be 
 with O'Brien , where have she be ? with a sort of senile and passionate 
 suspicion he grope his way to the dark back part of the mansion , 
 and eventually find a servant ' entrance that open on to the garden . 
 the moon with her scimitar have now rip up and roll away all 
 the storm - wrack . the argent light light up all four corner of the garden . 
 a tall figure in blue be stride across the lawn towards the study door ; 
 a glint of moonlit silver on his facing pick he out as Commandant O'Brien . 

 he vanish through the french window into the house , 
 leave Lord Galloway in an indescribable temper , at once 
 virulent and vague . the blue - and - silver garden , like a scene 
 in a theatre , seem to taunt he with all that tyrannic 
 tenderness against which his worldly authority be at war . 
 the length and grace of the Irishman 's stride enrage he as if 
 he be a rival instead of a father ; the moonlight madden he . 
 he be trap as if by magic into a garden of troubadour , 
 a Watteau fairyland ; and , willing to shake off such amorous 
 imbecility by speech , he step briskly after his enemy . 
 as he do so he trip over some tree or stone in the grass ; 
 look down at it first with irritation and then a second time 
 with curiosity . the next instant the moon and the tall poplar 
 look at an unusual sight - an elderly english diplomatist 
 run hard and cry or bellowing as he run . 

 his hoarse shout bring a pale face to the study door , the beam glass 
 and worried brow of Dr. Simon , who hear the nobleman 's first clear word . 
 Lord Galloway be cry : " a corpse in the grass - a blood - stain corpse . " 
 O'Brien at last have go utterly out of his mind . 

 " we must tell Valentin at once , " say the doctor , when the other 
 have brokenly describe all that he have dare to examine . 
 " it be fortunate that he be here " ; and even as he speak 
 the great detective enter the study , attract by the cry . 
 it be almost amusing to note his typical transformation ; 
 he have come with the common concern of a host and a gentleman , 
 fear that some guest or servant be ill . when he be tell 
 the gory fact , he turn with all his gravity instantly 
 bright and businesslike ; for this , however abrupt and awful , 
 be his business . 

 " strange , gentleman , " he say as they hurry out into the garden , 
 " that I should have hunt mystery all over the earth , and now one come 
 and settle in my own back - yard . but where be the place ? " they cross 
 the lawn less easily , as a slight mist have begin to rise from the river ; 
 but under the guidance of the shake Galloway they find the body sink 
 in deep grass - the body of a very tall and broad - shoulder man . 
 he lie face downwards , so they could only see that his big shoulder 
 be clothe in black cloth , and that his big head be bald , except for a 
 wisp or two of brown hair that clung to his skull like wet seaweed . 
 a scarlet serpent of blood crawl from under his fallen face . 

 " at least , " say Simon , with a deep and singular intonation , 
 " he be none of our party . " 

 " examine he , doctor , " cry Valentin rather sharply . 
 " he may not be dead . " 

 the doctor bend down . " he be not quite cold , but I be afraid 
 he be dead enough , " he answer . " just help I to lift he up . " 

 they lift he carefully an inch from the ground , and all doubt 
 as to his be really dead be settle at once and frightfully . 
 the head fall away . it have be entirely sunder from the body ; 
 whoever have cut his throat have manage to sever the neck as well . 
 even Valentin be slightly shocked . " he must have be as strong 
 as a gorilla , " he mutter . 

 not without a shiver , though he be use to anatomical abortion , 
 Dr. Simon lift the head . it be slightly slash about 
 the neck and jaw , but the face be substantially unhurt . 
 it be a ponderous , yellow face , at once sink and swollen , 
 with a hawk - like nose and heavy lid - a face of a wicked 
 roman emperor , with , perhaps , a distant touch of a chinese emperor . 
 all present seem to look at it with the cold eye of ignorance . 
 nothing else could be note about the man except that , as they 
 have lift his body , they have see underneath it the white 
 gleam of a shirt - front deface with a red gleam of blood . 
 as Dr. Simon say , the man have never be of their party . 
 but he might very well have be try to join it , for he have 
 come dressed for such an occasion . 

 Valentin go down on his hand and knee and examine with his 
 close professional attention the grass and ground for some 
 twenty yard round the body , in which he be assist less 
 skillfully by the doctor , and quite vaguely by the English lord . 
 nothing reward their grovelling except a few twig , 
 snap or chop into very small length , which Valentin 
 lift for an instant 's examination and then toss away . 

 " twig , " he say gravely ; " twig , and a total stranger with his head cut off ; 
 that be all there be on this lawn . " 

 there be an almost creepy stillness , and then the unnerved Galloway 
 call out sharply : 

 " who be that ! who be that over there by the garden wall ! " 

 a small figure with a foolishly large head draw waveringly near 
 they in the moonlit haze ; look for an instant like a goblin , 
 but turn out to be the harmless little priest whom they have leave 
 in the drawing - room . 

 " I say , " he say meekly , " there be no gate to this garden , 
 do you know . " 

 Valentin 's black brow have come together somewhat crossly , 
 as they do on principle at the sight of the cassock . 
 but he be far too just a man to deny the relevance of the remark . 
 " you be right , " he say . " before we find out how he come 
 to be kill , we may have to find out how he come to be here . 
 now listen to I , gentleman . if it can be do without 
 prejudice to my position and duty , we shall all agree that 
 certain distinguished name might well be keep out of this . 
 there be lady , gentleman , and there be a foreign ambassador . 
 if we must mark it down as a crime , then it must be follow up 
 as a crime . but till then I can use my own discretion . I be the head 
 of the police ; I be so public that I can afford to be private . 
 please Heaven , I will clear everyone of my own guest before I call 
 in my man to look for anybody else . gentleman , upon your honour , 
 you will none of you leave the house till tomorrow at noon ; 
 there be bedroom for all . Simon , I think you know where to find 
 my man , Ivan , in the front hall ; he be a confidential man . 
 tell he to leave another servant on guard and come to I at once . 
 Lord Galloway , you be certainly the good person to tell the lady 
 what have happen , and prevent a panic . they also must stay . 
 Father Brown and I will remain with the body . " 

 when this spirit of the captain speak in Valentin he be 
 obey like a bugle . Dr. Simon go through to the armoury 
 and rout out Ivan , the public detective 's private detective . 
 Galloway go to the drawing - room and tell the terrible news 
 tactfully enough , so that by the time the company assemble 
 there the lady be already startle and already soothe . 
 meanwhile the good priest and the good atheist stand at 
 the head and foot of the dead man motionless in the moonlight , 
 like symbolic statue of their two philosophy of death . 

 Ivan , the confidential man with the scar and the moustache , 
 come out of the house like a cannon ball , and come race 
 across the lawn to Valentin like a dog to his master . 
 his livid face be quite lively with the glow of this domestic 
 detective story , and it be with almost unpleasant eagerness 
 that he ask his master 's permission to examine the remain . 

 " yes ; look , if you like , Ivan , " say Valentin , " but do not   be long . 
 we must go in and thrash this out in the house . " 

 Ivan lift the head , and then almost let it drop . 

 " why , " he gasp , " it be - no , it be not ; it can not   be . 
 do you know this man , sir ? " 

 " no , " say Valentin indifferently ; " we have well go inside . " 

 between they they carry the corpse to a sofa in the study , 
 and then all make their way to the drawing - room . 

 the detective sit down at a desk quietly , and even without hesitation ; 
 but his eye be the iron eye of a judge at assize . he make a few 
 rapid note upon paper in front of he , and then say shortly : 
 " be everybody here ? " 

 " not Mr. Brayne , " say the Duchess of Mont St. Michel , look round . 

 " no , " say Lord Galloway in a hoarse , harsh voice . 
 " and not Mr. Neil O'Brien , I fancy . I see that gentleman 
 walk in the garden when the corpse be still warm . " 

 " Ivan , " say the detective , " go and fetch Commandant O'Brien and 
 Mr. Brayne . Mr. Brayne , I know , be finish a cigar in the dining - room ; 
 Commandant O'Brien , I think , be walk up and down the conservatory . 
 I be not sure . " 

 the faithful attendant flash from the room , and before anyone could stir 
 or speak Valentin go on with the same soldierly swiftness of exposition . 

 " everyone here know that a dead man have be find in the garden , 
 his head cut clean from his body . Dr. Simon , you have examine it . 
 do you think that to cut a man 's throat like that would need great force ? 
 or , perhaps , only a very sharp knife ? " 

 " I should say that it could not be do with a knife at all , " 
 say the pale doctor . 

 " have you any thought , " resume Valentin , " of a tool with which it 
 could be do ? " 

 " speak within modern probability , I really have not , " 
 say the doctor , arch his painful brow . " it be not easy to hack 
 a neck through even clumsily , and this be a very clean cut . 
 it could be do with a battle - axe or an old headsman 's axe , 
 or an old two - handed sword . " 

 " but , good heaven ! " cry the Duchess , almost in hysteric , 
 " there be not   any two - handed sword and battle - axis round here . " 

 Valentin be still busy with the paper in front of he . 
 " tell I , " he say , still write rapidly , " could it have be 
 do with a long french cavalry sabre ? " 

 a low knocking come at the door , which , for some unreasonable reason , 
 curdle everyone 's blood like the knocking in Macbeth . amid that frozen 
 silence Dr. Simon manage to say : " a sabre - yes , I suppose it could . " 

 " thank you , " say Valentin . " come in , Ivan . " 

 the confidential Ivan open the door and usher in Commandant Neil O'Brien , 
 whom he have find at last pace the garden again . 

 the irish officer stand up disorder and defiant on the threshold . 
 " what do you want with I ? " he cry . 

 " please sit down , " say Valentin in pleasant , level tone . 
 " why , you be not   wear your sword . where be it ? " 

 " I leave it on the library table , " say O'Brien , his brogue deepen 
 in his disturbed mood . " it be a nuisance , it be get - " 

 " Ivan , " say Valentin , " please go and get the Commandant 's sword 
 from the library . " then , as the servant vanish , " Lord Galloway 
 say he see you leave the garden just before he find the corpse . 
 what be you do in the garden ? " 

 the Commandant fling himself recklessly into a chair . 
 " oh , " he cry in pure Irish , " admirin ' the moon . 
 commune with Nature , I bhoy . " 

 a heavy silence sank and endure , and at the end of it come again that trivial 
 and terrible knocking . Ivan reappear , carry an empty steel scabbard . 
 " this be all I can find , " he say . 

 " put it on the table , " say Valentin , without look up . 

 there be an inhuman silence in the room , like that sea 
 of inhuman silence round the dock of the condemn murderer . 
 the Duchess 's weak exclamation have long ago die away . 
 Lord Galloway 's swollen hatred be satisfied and even sober . 
 the voice that come be quite unexpected . 

 " I think I can tell you , " cry Lady Margaret , in that clear , 
 quiver voice with which a courageous woman speak publicly . 
 " I can tell you what Mr. O'Brien be do in the garden , 
 since he be bind to silence . he be ask I to marry he . 
 I refuse ; I say in my family circumstance I could give 
 he nothing but my respect . he be a little angry at that ; 
 he do not seem to think much of my respect . I wonder , " she add , 
 with rather a wan smile , " if he will care at all for it now . 
 for I offer it he now . I will swear anywhere that he never do 
 a thing like this . " 

 Lord Galloway have edge up to his daughter , and be 
 intimidate she in what he imagine to be an undertone . 
 " hold your tongue , Maggie , " he say in a thunderous whisper . 
 " why should you shield the fellow ? where be his sword ? 
 where be his confounded cavalry - " 

 he stop because of the singular stare with which his daughter be 
 regard he , a look that be indeed a lurid magnet for the whole group . 

 " you old fool ! " she say in a low voice without pretence of piety , 
 " what do you suppose you be try to prove ? I tell you this 
 man be innocent while with I . but if he be not   innocent , 
 he be still with I . if he murder a man in the garden , 
 who be it who must have see - who must at least have know ? 
 do you hate Neil so much as to put your own daughter - " 

 Lady Galloway scream . everyone else sit tingle at the touch 
 of those satanic tragedy that have be between lover before now . 
 they see the proud , white face of the Scotch aristocrat and her lover , 
 the irish adventurer , like old portrait in a dark house . 
 the long silence be full of formless historical memory of murder 
 husband and poisonous paramour . 

 in the centre of this morbid silence an innocent voice say : 
 " be it a very long cigar ? " 

 the change of thought be so sharp that they have to look round to see 
 who have speak . 

 " I mean , " say little Father Brown , from the corner of the room , 
 " I mean that cigar Mr. Brayne be finish . it seem nearly 
 as long as a walking - stick . " 

 despite the irrelevance there be assent as well as irritation 
 in Valentin 's face as he lift his head . 

 " quite right , " he remark sharply . " Ivan , go and see about Mr. Brayne again , 
 and bring he here at once . " 

 the instant the factotum have close the door , Valentin address the girl 
 with an entirely new earnestness . 

 " Lady Margaret , " he say , " we all feel , I be sure , 
 both gratitude and admiration for your act in rise above 
 your low dignity and explain the Commandant 's conduct . 
 but there be a hiatus still . Lord Galloway , I understand , 
 meet you pass from the study to the drawing - room , and it 
 be only some minute afterwards that he find the garden 
 and the Commandant still walk there . " 

 " you have to remember , " reply Margaret , with a faint irony in her voice , 
 " that I have just refuse he , so we should scarcely have come back 
 arm in arm . he be a gentleman , anyhow ; and he loiter behind - 
 and so get charge with murder . " 

 " in those few moment , " say Valentin gravely , " he might really - " 

 the knock come again , and Ivan put in his scarred face . 

 " Beg pardon , sir , " he say , " but Mr. Brayne have leave the house . " 

 " left ! " cry Valentin , and rise for the first time to his foot . 

 " Gone . scoot . evaporate , " reply Ivan in humorous French . " his hat 
 and coat be go , too , and I will tell you something to cap it all . 
 I run outside the house to find any trace of he , and I find one , 
 and a big trace , too . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Valentin . 

 " I will show you , " say his servant , and reappear with a flash 
 naked cavalry sabre , streak with blood about the point and edge . 
 everyone in the room eye it as if it be a thunderbolt ; 
 but the experienced Ivan go on quite quietly : 

 " I find this , " he say , " fling among the bush fifty yard up the road 
 to Paris . in other word , I find it just where your respectable Mr. Brayne 
 throw it when he run away . " 

 there be again a silence , but of a new sort . Valentin take the sabre , 
 examine it , reflect with unaffected concentration of thought , and then 
 turn a respectful face to O'Brien . " Commandant , " he say , " we trust you 
 will always produce this weapon if it be want for police examination . 
 meanwhile , " he add , slap the steel back in the ring scabbard , 
 " let I return you your sword . " 

 at the military symbolism of the action the audience could hardly 
 refrain from applause . 

 for Neil O'Brien , indeed , that gesture be the turning - point of existence . 
 by the time he be wander in the mysterious garden again in 
 the colour of the morning the tragic futility of his ordinary mien 
 have fall from he ; he be a man with many reason for happiness . 
 Lord Galloway be a gentleman , and have offer he an apology . 
 Lady Margaret be something well than a lady , a woman at least , 
 and have perhaps give he something well than an apology , 
 as they drift among the old flowerbed before breakfast . 
 the whole company be more lighthearted and humane , for though 
 the riddle of the death remain , the load of suspicion be lift off 
 they all , and send fly off to Paris with the strange millionaire - 
 a man they hardly know . the devil be cast out of the house - 
 he have cast himself out . 

 still , the riddle remain ; and when O'Brien throw himself on a garden 
 seat beside Dr. Simon , that keenly scientific person at once resume it . 
 he do not get much talk out of O'Brien , whose thought be 
 on pleasanter thing . 

 " I can not   say it interest I much , " say the Irishman frankly , " especially as 
 it seem pretty plain now . apparently Brayne hat this stranger for 
 some reason ; lure he into the garden , and kill he with my sword . 
 then he flee to the city , toss the sword away as he go . 
 by the way , Ivan tell I the dead man have a Yankee dollar in his pocket . 
 so he be a countryman of Brayne 's , and that seem to clinch it . 
 I do not   see any difficulty about the business . " 

 " there be five colossal difficulty , " say the doctor quietly ; 
 " like high wall within wall . do not   mistake I . I do not 
 doubt that Brayne do it ; his flight , I fancy , prove that . 
 but as to how he do it . first difficulty : why should a man 
 kill another man with a great hulking sabre , when he can almost 
 kill he with a pocket knife and put it back in his pocket ? 
 second difficulty : why be there no noise or outcry ? do a man 
 commonly see another come up wave a scimitar and offer no remark ? 
 third difficulty : a servant watch the front door all the evening ; 
 and a rat can not get into Valentin 's garden anywhere . 
 how do the dead man get into the garden ? fourth difficulty : 
 give the same condition , how do Brayne get out of the garden ? " 

 " and the fifth , " say Neil , with eye fix on the english priest 
 who be come slowly up the path . 

 " be a trifle , I suppose , " say the doctor , " but I think 
 an odd one . when I first see how the head have be slash , 
 I suppose the assassin have strike more than once . 
 but on examination I find many cut across the truncated section ; 
 in other word , they be strike after the head be off . 
 do Brayne hate his foe so fiendishly that he stand sabre 
 his body in the moonlight ? " 

 " horrible ! " say O'Brien , and shudder . 

 the little priest , Brown , have arrive while they be talk , 
 and have wait , with characteristic shyness , till they have finish . 
 then he say awkwardly : 

 " I say , I be sorry to interrupt . but I be send to tell you the news ! " 

 " News ? " repeat Simon , and star at he rather painfully 
 through his glass . 

 " yes , I be sorry , " say Father Brown mildly . " there be be 
 another murder , you know . " 

 both man on the seat spring up , leave it rock . 

 " and , what be strange still , " continue the priest , with his dull eye on 
 the rhododendron , " it be the same disgusting sort ; it be another beheading . 
 they find the second head actually bleed into the river , a few yard 
 along Brayne 's road to Paris ; so they suppose that he - " 

 " Great Heaven ! " cry O'Brien . " be Brayne a monomaniac ? " 

 " there be american vendetta , " say the priest impassively . then he add : 
 " they want you to come to the library and see it . " 

 Commandant O'Brien follow the other towards the inqu , feel 
 decidedly sick . as a soldier , he loathe all this secretive carnage ; 
 where be these extravagant amputation go to stop ? 
 first one head be hack off , and then another ; in this case   he tell 
 himself bitterly   it be not true that two head be well than one . 
 as he cross the study he almost stagger at a shocking coincidence . 
 upon Valentin 's table lie the coloured picture of yet a third bleed head ; 
 and it be the head of Valentin himself . a second glance show he it 
 be only a nationalist paper , call the Guillotine , which every week show 
 one of its political opponent with roll eye and writhing feature 
 just after execution ; for Valentin be an anti - clerical of some note . 
 but O'Brien be an Irishman , with a kind of chastity even in his sin ; 
 and his gorge rise against that great brutality of the intellect which 
 belong only to France . he feel Paris as a whole , from the grotesque 
 on the Gothic church to the gross caricature in the newspaper . 
 he remember the gigantic jest of the Revolution . he see the whole 
 city as one ugly energy , from the sanguinary sketch lie on Valentin 's 
 table up to where , above a mountain and forest of gargoyle , the great 
 devil grin on Notre Dame . 

 the library be long , low , and dark ; what light enter it 
 shoot from under low blind and have still some of the ruddy 
 tinge of morning . Valentin and his servant Ivan be wait 
 for they at the upper end of a long , slightly - slop desk , 
 on which lie the mortal remain , look enormous in the twilight . 
 the big black figure and yellow face of the man find 
 in the garden confront they essentially unchanged . 
 the second head , which have be fish from among the river 
 reed that morning , lie streaming and dripping beside it ; 
 Valentin 's man be still seek to recover the rest of this 
 second corpse , which be suppose to be afloat . Father Brown , 
 who do not seem to share O'Brien 's sensibility in the least , 
 go up to the second head and examine it with his blink care . 
 it be little more than a mop of wet white hair , fringe with 
 silver fire in the red and level morning light ; the face , 
 which seem of an ugly , empurpled and perhaps criminal type , 
 have be much batter against tree or stone as it toss 
 in the water . 

 " good morning , Commandant O'Brien , " say Valentin , with quiet cordiality . 
 " you have hear of Brayne 's last experiment in butchery , I suppose ? " 

 Father Brown be still bend over the head with white hair , 
 and he say , without look up : 

 " I suppose it be quite certain that Brayne cut off this head , too . " 

 " well , it seem common sense , " say Valentin , with his hand in his pocket . 
 " kill in the same way as the other . find within a few yard of the other . 
 and slice by the same weapon which we know he carry away . " 

 " yes , yes ; I know , " reply Father Brown submissively . 
 " yet , you know , I doubt whether Brayne could have cut 
 off this head . " 

 " why not ? " inquire Dr. Simon , with a rational stare . 

 " well , doctor , " say the priest , look up blink , " can a man 
 cut off his own head ? I do not   know . " 

 O'Brien feel an insane universe crash about his ear ; 
 but the doctor spring forward with impetuous practicality 
 and push back the wet white hair . 

 " oh , there be no doubt it be Brayne , " say the priest quietly . 
 " he have exactly that chip in the left ear . " 

 the detective , who have be regard the priest with steady 
 and glitter eye , open his clench mouth and say sharply : 
 " you seem to know a lot about he , Father Brown . " 

 " I do , " say the little man simply . " I have   be about with he 
 for some week . he be think of join our church . " 

 the star of the fanatic spring into Valentin 's eye ; he stride 
 towards the priest with clench hand . " and , perhaps , " 
 he cry , with a blast sneer , " perhaps he be also think 
 of leave all his money to your church . " 

 " perhaps he be , " say Brown stolidly ; " it be possible . " 

 " in that case , " cry Valentin , with a dreadful smile , " you may indeed know 
 a great deal about he . about his life and about his - " 

 Commandant O'Brien lay a hand on Valentin 's arm . 
 " drop that slanderous rubbish , Valentin , " he say , " or there 
 may be more sword yet . " 

 but Valentin   under the steady , humble gaze of the priest 
 have already recover himself . " well , " he say shortly , 
 " people 's private opinion can wait . you gentleman be still 
 bind by your promise to stay ; you must enforce it on yourself - 
 and on each other . Ivan here will tell you anything more you want 
 to know ; I must get to business and write to the authority . 
 we can not   keep this quiet any long . I shall be write in my 
 study if there be any more news . " 

 " be there any more news , Ivan ? " ask Dr. Simon , as the chief 
 of police stride out of the room . 

 " only one more thing , I think , sir , " say Ivan , wrinkle up 
 his grey old face , " but that be important , too , in its way . 
 there be that old buffer you find on the lawn , " and he point without 
 pretence of reverence at the big black body with the yellow head . 
 " we have   find out who he be , anyhow . " 

 " indeed ! " cry the astonished doctor , " and who be he ? " 

 " his name be Arnold Becker , " say the under - detective , " though 
 he go by many alias . he be a wandering sort of scamp , 
 and be know to have be in America ; so that be where Brayne get 
 his knife into he . we do not   have much to do with he ourselves , 
 for he work mostly in Germany . we have   communicate , of course , 
 with the german police . but , oddly enough , there be a twin brother 
 of his , name Louis Becker , whom we have a great deal to do with . 
 in fact , we find it necessary to guillotine he only yesterday . 
 well , it be a rum thing , gentleman , but when I see that fellow 
 flat on the lawn I have the great jump of my life . 
 if I have not   see Louis Becker guillotine with my own eye , 
 I would have swear it be Louis Becker lie there in the grass . 
 then , of course , I remember his twin brother in Germany , 
 and follow up the clue - " 

 the explanatory Ivan stop , for the excellent reason that nobody 
 be listen to he . the Commandant and the doctor be both star 
 at Father Brown , who have spring stiffly to his foot , and be hold 
 his temple tight like a man in sudden and violent pain . 

 " stop , stop , stop ! " he cry ; ' stop talk a minute , for I see half . 
 will God give I strength ? will my brain make the one jump and see all ? 
 Heaven help I ! I use to be fairly good at think . I could paraphrase 
 any page in Aquinas once . will my head split - or will it see ? 
 I see half - I only see half . " 

 he bury his head in his hand , and stand in a sort of rigid torture 
 of thought or prayer , while the other three could only go on star 
 at this last prodigy of their wild twelve hour . 

 when Father Brown 's hand fall they show a face quite fresh 
 and serious , like a child 's . he heave a huge sigh , and say : 
 " let we get this say and do with as quickly as possible . 
 look here , this will be the quick way to convince you 
 all of the truth . " he turn to the doctor . " Dr. Simon , " 
 he say , " you have a strong head - piece , and I hear you this 
 morning ask the five hard question about this business . 
 well , if you will ask they again , I will answer they . " 

 Simon 's pince - nez drop from his nose in his doubt and wonder , 
 but he answer at once . " well , the first question , you know , 
 be why a man should kill another with a clumsy sabre at all 
 when a man can kill with a bodkin ? " 

 " a man can not behead with a bodkin , " say Brown calmly , 
 " and for this murder beheading be absolutely necessary . " 

 " why ? " ask O'Brien , with interest . 

 " and the next question ? " ask Father Brown . 

 " well , why do not   the man cry out or anything ? " ask the doctor ; 
 ' sabre in garden be certainly unusual . " 

 " twig , " say the priest gloomily , and turn to the window which 
 look on the scene of death . " no one see the point of the twig . 
 why should they lie on that lawn   look at it   so far from any tree ? 
 they be not snap off ; they be chop off . 
 the murderer occupy his enemy with some trick with the sabre , 
 show how he could cut a branch in mid - air , or what - not . then , 
 while his enemy bend down to see the result , a silent slash , 
 and the head fall . " 

 " well , " say the doctor slowly , " that seem plausible enough . 
 but my next two question will stump anyone . " 

 the priest still stand look critically out of the window and wait . 

 " you know how all the garden be seal up like an air - tight chamber , " 
 go on the doctor . " well , how do the strange man get into the garden ? " 

 without turn round , the little priest answer : 
 " there never be any strange man in the garden . " 

 there be a silence , and then a sudden cackle of almost childish 
 laughter relieve the strain . the absurdity of Brown 's remark 
 move Ivan to open taunt . 

 " oh ! " he cry ; " then we do not   lug a great fat corpse on to a sofa 
 last night ? he have not   get into the garden , I suppose ? " 

 " get into the garden ? " repeat Brown reflectively . 
 " no , not entirely . " 

 " hang it all , " cry Simon , " a man get into a garden , or he do not . " 

 " not necessarily , " say the priest , with a faint smile . 
 " what be the nest question , doctor ? " 

 " I fancy you be ill , " exclaim Dr. Simon sharply ; " but I will 
 ask the next question if you like . how do Brayne get out 
 of the garden ? " 

 " he do not   get out of the garden , " say the priest , still look 
 out of the window . 

 " do not   get out of the garden ? " explode Simon . 

 " not completely , " say Father Brown . 

 Simon shake his fist in a frenzy of french logic . 
 " a man get out of a garden , or he do not , " he cry . 

 " not always , " say Father Brown . 

 Dr. Simon spring to his foot impatiently . " I have no time 
 to spare on such senseless talk , " he cry angrily . 
 " if you can not   understand a man be on one side of a wall 
 or the other , I will not   trouble you far . " 

 " doctor , " say the cleric very gently , " we have always get on 
 very pleasantly together . if only for the sake of old friendship , 
 stop and tell I your fifth question . " 

 the impatient Simon sink into a chair by the door and say briefly : 
 " the head and shoulder be cut about in a queer way . 
 it seem to be do after death . " 

 " yes , " say the motionless priest , " it be do so as to make you 
 assume exactly the one simple falsehood that you do assume . 
 it be do to make you take for grant that the head belong 
 to the body . " 

 the borderland of the brain , where all the monster be make , 
 move horribly in the Gaelic O'Brien . he feel the chaotic presence of all 
 the horse - man and fish - woman that man 's unnatural fancy have beget . 
 a voice old than his first father seem say in his ear : 
 " keep out of the monstrous garden where grow the tree with double fruit . 
 avoid the evil garden where die the man with two head . " 
 yet , while these shameful symbolic shape pass across the ancient 
 mirror of his irish soul , his frenchified intellect be quite alert , 
 and be watch the odd priest as closely and incredulously as 
 all the rest . 

 Father Brown have turn round at last , and stand against the window , 
 with his face in dense shadow ; but even in that shadow they could 
 see it be pale as ash . nevertheless , he speak quite sensibly , 
 as if there be no gaelic soul on earth . 

 " gentleman , " he say , " you do not find the strange body of Becker 
 in the garden . you do not find any strange body in the garden . 
 in face of Dr. Simon 's rationalism , I still affirm that Becker 
 be only partly present . look here ! "   point to the black bulk 
 of the mysterious corpse   " you never see that man in your life . 
 do you ever see this man ? " 

 he rapidly roll away the bald , yellow head of the unknown , 
 and put in its place the white - man head beside it . 
 and there , complete , unified , unmistakable , lie Julius K. Brayne . 

 " the murderer , " go on Brown quietly , " hack off his enemy 's head and fling 
 the sword far over the wall . but he be too clever to fle the sword only . 
 he fling the head over the wall also . then he have only to clap on another 
 head to the corpse , and   as he insist on a private inquest   you all imagine 
 a totally new man . " 

 " clap on another head ! " say O'Brien star . " what other head ? 
 head do not   grow on garden bush , do they ? " 

 " no , " say Father Brown huskily , and look at his boot ; 
 " there be only one place where they grow . they grow in the 
 basket of the guillotine , beside which the chief of police , 
 Aristide Valentin , be stand not an hour before the murder . 
 oh , my friend , hear I a minute more before you tear I in piece . 
 Valentin be an honest man , if be mad for an arguable cause be honesty . 
 but do you never see in that cold , grey eye of his that he be mad ! 
 he would do anything , anything , to break what he call the superstition 
 of the Cross . he have fight for it and starve for it , and now 
 he have murder for it . Brayne 's crazy million have hitherto 
 be scatter among so many sect that they do little to alter 
 the balance of thing . but Valentin hear a whisper that Brayne , 
 like so many scatter - brain sceptic , be drift to we ; 
 and that be quite a different thing . Brayne would pour supply 
 into the impoverished and pugnacious Church of France ; he would support 
 six nationalist newspaper like the Guillotine . the battle be 
 already balance on a point , and the fanatic take flame at the risk . 
 he resolve to destroy the millionaire , and he do it as one would 
 expect the great of detective to commit his only crime . 
 he abstract the sever head of Becker on some criminological excuse , 
 and take it home in his official box . he have that last argument 
 with Brayne , that Lord Galloway do not hear the end of ; that fail , 
 he lead he out into the seal garden , talk about swordsmanship , 
 use twig and a sabre for illustration , and - " 

 Ivan of the Scar spring up . " you lunatic , " he yell ; 
 " you will go to my master now , if I take you by - " 

 " why , I be go there , " say Brown heavily ; " I must ask he to confess , 
 and all that . " 

 drive the unhappy Brown before they like a hostage or sacrifice , 
 they rush together into the sudden stillness of Valentin 's study . 

 the great detective sit at his desk apparently too occupy to hear their 
 turbulent entrance . they pause a moment , and then something in the look 
 of that upright and elegant back make the doctor run forward suddenly . 
 a touch and a glance show he that there be a small box of pill 
 at Valentin 's elbow , and that Valentin be dead in his chair ; 
 and on the blind face of the suicide be more than the pride of Cato . 



  the Queer Feet 

 if you meet a member of that select club , " the Twelve True Fishermen , " 
 enter the Vernon Hotel for the annual club dinner , you will observe , 
 as he take off his overcoat , that his evening coat be green and not black . 
 if   suppose that you have the star - defy audacity to address such a being 
 you ask he why , he will probably answer that he do it to avoid be 
 mistaken for a waiter . you will then retire crush . but you will leave 
 behind you a mystery as yet unsolved and a tale worth tell . 

 if   to pursue the same vein of improbable conjecture 
 you be to meet a mild , hard - work little priest , 
 name Father Brown , and be to ask he what he think be 
 the most singular luck of his life , he would probably reply 
 that upon the whole his good stroke be at the Vernon Hotel , 
 where he have avert a crime and , perhaps , save a soul , 
 merely by listen to a few footstep in a passage . 
 he be perhaps a little proud of this wild and wonderful 
 guess of his , and it be possible that he might refer to it . 
 but since it be immeasurably unlikely that you will ever rise high 
 enough in the social world to find " the Twelve True Fishermen , " 
 or that you will ever sink low enough among slum and criminal 
 to find Father Brown , I fear you will never hear the story 
 at all unless you hear it from I . 

 the Vernon Hotel at which the Twelve True Fishermen hold their 
 annual dinner be an institution such as can only exist in an 
 oligarchical society which have almost go mad on good manner . 
 it be that topsy - turvy product - an " exclusive " commercial enterprise . 
 that is , it be a thing which pay not by attract people , but actually 
 by turn people away . in the heart of a plutocracy tradesman 
 become cunning enough to be more fastidious than their customer . 
 they positively create difficulty so that their wealthy and 
 weary client may spend money and diplomacy in overcome they . 
 if there be a fashionable hotel in London which no man could 
 enter who be under six foot , society would meekly make up party 
 of six - foot man to dine in it . if there be an expensive 
 restaurant which by a mere caprice of its proprietor be only open 
 on Thursday afternoon , it would be crowd on Thursday afternoon . 
 the Vernon Hotel stand , as if by accident , in the corner of a square 
 in Belgravia . it be a small hotel ; and a very inconvenient one . 
 but its very inconvenience be consider as wall protect 
 a particular class . one inconvenience , in particular , be hold 
 to be of vital importance : the fact that practically only twenty - four 
 people could dine in the place at once . the only big dinner table 
 be the celebrated terrace table , which stand open to the air 
 on a sort of veranda overlook one of the most exquisite old 
 garden in London . thus it happen that even the twenty - four 
 seat at this table could only be enjoy in warm weather ; and this 
 make the enjoyment yet more difficult make it yet more desire . 
 the exist owner of the hotel be a Jew name Lever ; and he make 
 nearly a million out of it , by make it difficult to get into . 
 of course he combine with this limitation in the scope of his enterprise 
 the most careful polish in its performance . the wine and cooking be 
 really as good as any in Europe , and the demeanour of the attendant 
 exactly mirror the fixed mood of the english upper class . 
 the proprietor know all his waiter like the finger on his hand ; 
 there be only fifteen of they all tell . it be much easy to become 
 a Member of Parliament than to become a waiter in that hotel . 
 each waiter be train in terrible silence and smoothness , 
 as if he be a gentleman 's servant . and , indeed , there be generally 
 at least one waiter to every gentleman who din . 

 the club of the Twelve True Fishermen would not have consent to dine 
 anywhere but in such a place , for it insist on a luxurious privacy ; 
 and would have be quite upset by the mere thought that any other club 
 be even din in the same building . on the occasion of their annual 
 dinner the Fishermen be in the habit of expose all their treasure , 
 as if they be in a private house , especially the celebrated set 
 of fish knife and fork which be , as it be , the insignia 
 of the society , each be exquisitely work in silver in the form 
 of a fish , and each load at the hilt with one large pearl . 
 these be always lay out for the fish course , and the fish course 
 be always the most magnificent in that magnificent repast . 
 the society have a vast number of ceremony and observance , but it have 
 no history and no object ; that be where it be so very aristocratic . 
 you do not have to be anything in order to be one of the twelve Fishers ; 
 unless you be already a certain sort of person , you never even hear 
 of they . it have be in existence twelve year . its president be 
 Mr. Audley . its vice - president be the Duke of Chester . 

 if I have in any degree convey the atmosphere of this appalling hotel , 
 the reader may feel a natural wonder as to how I come to know anything 
 about it , and may even speculate as to how so ordinary a person 
 as my friend Father Brown come to find himself in that golden galley . 
 as far as that be concern , my story be simple , or even vulgar . 
 there be in the world a very aged rioter and demagogue who break 
 into the most refined retreat with the dreadful information that 
 all man be brother , and wherever this leveller go on his pale 
 horse it be Father Brown 's trade to follow . one of the waiter , 
 an Italian , have be strike down with a paralytic stroke that afternoon ; 
 and his jewish employer , marvel mildly at such superstition , 
 have consent to send for the near popish priest . 
 with what the waiter confess to Father Brown we be not concern , 
 for the excellent reason that that cleric keep it to himself ; 
 but apparently it involve he in write out a note or statement 
 for the conveying of some message or the righting of some wrong . 
 Father Brown , therefore , with a meek impudence which he would 
 have show equally in Buckingham Palace , ask to be provide 
 with a room and write material . Mr. Lever be tear in two . 
 he be a kind man , and have also that bad imitation of kindness , 
 the dislike of any difficulty or scene . at the same time the presence 
 of one unusual stranger in his hotel that evening be like a speck 
 of dirt on something just clean . there be never any borderland 
 or anteroom in the Vernon Hotel , no people wait in the hall , 
 no customer come in on chance . there be fifteen waiter . 
 there be twelve guest . it would be as startling to find a new guest 
 in the hotel that night as to find a new brother take breakfast 
 or tea in one 's own family . moreover , the priest 's appearance 
 be second - rate and his clothe muddy ; a mere glimpse of he afar 
 off might precipitate a crisis in the club . Mr. Lever at last hit 
 on a plan to cover , since he might not obliterate , the disgrace . 
 when you enter   as you never will   the Vernon Hotel , you pass down 
 a short passage decorate with a few dingy but important picture , 
 and come to the main vestibule and lounge which open on your right 
 into passage lead to the public room , and on your left to a 
 similar passage pointing to the kitchen and office of the hotel . 
 immediately on your left hand be the corner of a glass office , 
 which abut upon the lounge - a house within a house , so to speak , 
 like the old hotel bar which probably once occupy its place . 

 in this office sit the representative of the proprietor   nobody in this place 
 ever appear in person if he could help it , and just beyond the office , 
 on the way to the servant ' quarter , be the gentleman 's cloak room , 
 the last boundary of the gentleman 's domain . but between the office 
 and the cloak room be a small private room without other outlet , 
 sometimes use by the proprietor for delicate and important matter , 
 such as lend a duke a thousand pound or decline to lend he sixpence . 
 it be a mark of the magnificent tolerance of Mr. Lever that he permit 
 this holy place to be for about half an hour profane by a mere priest , 
 scribble away on a piece of paper . the story which Father Brown 
 be write down be very likely a much well story than this one , 
 only it will never be know . I can merely state that it be very nearly 
 as long , and that the last two or three paragraph of it be the least 
 exciting and absorbing . 

 for it be by the time that he have reach these that 
 the priest begin a little to allow his thought to wander 
 and his animal sens , which be commonly keen , to awaken . 
 the time of darkness and dinner be draw on ; his own forget 
 little room be without a light , and perhaps the gathering gloom , 
 as occasionally happen , sharpen the sense of sound . 
 as Father Brown write the last and least essential part of his document , 
 he catch himself write to the rhythm of a recurrent noise outside , 
 just as one sometimes think to the tune of a railway train . 
 when he become conscious of the thing he find what it be : 
 only the ordinary patter of foot pass the door , which in an 
 hotel be no very unlikely matter . nevertheless , he star 
 at the darken ceiling , and listen to the sound . 
 after he have listen for a few second dreamily , he get to his 
 foot and listen intently , with his head a little on one side . 
 then he sit down again and bury his brow in his hand , 
 now not merely listen , but listen and think also . 

 the footstep outside at any give moment be such as one might 
 hear in any hotel ; and yet , take as a whole , there be something 
 very strange about they . there be no other footstep . 
 it be always a very silent house , for the few familiar guest 
 go at once to their own apartment , and the well - train 
 waiter be tell to be almost invisible until they be want . 
 one could not conceive any place where there be less reason 
 to apprehend anything irregular . but these footstep be so odd 
 that one could not decide to call they regular or irregular . 
 Father Brown follow they with his finger on the edge of the table , 
 like a man try to learn a tune on the piano . 

 first , there come a long rush of rapid little step , 
 such as a light man might make in win a walk race . 
 at a certain point they stop and change to a sort of slow , 
 swing stamp , number not a quarter of the step , 
 but occupy about the same time . the moment the last echoing 
 stamp have die away would come again the run or ripple of light , 
 hurrying foot , and then again the thud of the heavy walking . 
 it be certainly the same pair of boot , partly because 
  as have be say   there be no other boot about , and partly 
 because they have a small but unmistakable creak in they . 
 Father Brown have the kind of head that can not help ask question ; 
 and on this apparently trivial question his head almost split . 
 he have see man run in order to jump . he have see man run 
 in order to slide . but why on earth should a man run in order 
 to walk ? or , again , why should he walk in order to run ? 
 yet no other description would cover the antic of this invisible 
 pair of leg . the man be either walk very fast down one - half 
 of the corridor in order to walk very slow down the other half ; 
 or he be walk very slow at one end to have the rapture of walk 
 fast at the other . neither suggestion seem to make much sense . 
 his brain be grow dark and dark , like his room . 

 yet , as he begin to think steadily , the very blackness 
 of his cell seem to make his thought more vivid ; 
 he begin to see as in a kind of vision the fantastic foot 
 caper along the corridor in unnatural or symbolic attitude . 
 be it a heathen religious dance ? or some entirely new kind 
 of scientific exercise ? Father Brown begin to ask himself 
 with more exactness what the step suggest . take the slow 
 step first : it certainly be not the step of the proprietor . 
 man of his type walk with a rapid waddle , or they sit still . 
 it could not be any servant or messenger wait for direction . 
 it do not sound like it . the poor order   in an oligarchy 
 sometimes lurch about when they be slightly drunk , but generally , 
 and especially in such gorgeous scene , they stand or sit 
 in constrain attitude . no ; that heavy yet springy step , 
 with a kind of careless emphasis , not specially noisy , 
 yet not care what noise it make , belong to only one of 
 the animal of this earth . it be a gentleman of western Europe , 
 and probably one who have never work for his living . 

 just as he come to this solid certainty , the step change to 
 the quick one , and run past the door as feverishly as a rat . 
 the listener remark that though this step be much swifter it 
 be also much more noiseless , almost as if the man be walk 
 on tiptoe . yet it be not associate in his mind with secrecy , 
 but with something else - something that he could not remember . 
 he be madden by one of those half - memory that make 
 a man feel half - witte . surely he have hear that strange , 
 swift walk somewhere . suddenly he spring to his foot 
 with a new idea in his head , and walk to the door . 
 his room have no direct outlet on the passage , but let on one side 
 into the glass office , and on the other into the cloak room beyond . 
 he try the door into the office , and find it lock . 
 then he look at the window , now a square pane full of purple 
 cloud cleft by livid sunset , and for an instant he smell evil 
 as a dog smell rat . 

 the rational part of he   whether the wiser or not   regain its supremacy . 
 he remember that the proprietor have tell he that he should lock the door , 
 and would come later to release he . he tell himself that twenty thing 
 he have not think of might explain the eccentric sound outside ; he remind 
 himself that there be just enough light leave to finish his own proper work . 
 bring his paper to the window so as to catch the last stormy evening light , 
 he resolutely plunge once more into the almost complete record . 
 he have write for about twenty minute , bend close and close 
 to his paper in the lessening light ; then suddenly he sit upright . 
 he have hear the strange foot once more . 

 this time they have a third oddity . previously the unknown man have walk , 
 with levity indeed and lightning quickness , but he have walk . 
 this time he run . one could hear the swift , soft , bound step come 
 along the corridor , like the pad of a flee and leap panther . 
 whoever be come be a very strong , active man , in still yet 
 tear excitement . yet , when the sound have sweep up to the office 
 like a sort of whisper whirlwind , it suddenly change again 
 to the old slow , swagger stamp . 

 Father Brown fling down his paper , and , know the office door 
 to be lock , go at once into the cloak room on the other side . 
 the attendant of this place be temporarily absent , probably because 
 the only guest be at dinner and his office be a sinecure . 
 after grope through a grey forest of overcoat , he find that 
 the dim cloak room open on the light corridor in the form 
 of a sort of counter or half - door , like most of the counter 
 across which we have all hand umbrella and receive ticket . 
 there be a light immediately above the semicircular arch of this opening . 
 it throw little illumination on Father Brown himself , who seem 
 a mere dark outline against the dim sunset window behind he . 
 but it throw an almost theatrical light on the man who stand outside 
 the cloak room in the corridor . 

 he be an elegant man in very plain evening dress ; tall , but with an air 
 of not take up much room ; one feel that he could have slide along like a 
 shadow where many small man would have be obvious and obstructive . 
 his face , now fling back in the lamplight , be swarthy and vivacious , 
 the face of a foreigner . his figure be good , his manner good humour 
 and confident ; a critic could only say that his black coat be a shade 
 below his figure and manner , and even bulge and bag in an odd way . 
 the moment he catch sight of Brown 's black silhouette against the sunset , 
 he toss down a scrap of paper with a number and call out with 
 amiable authority : " I want my hat and coat , please ; I find I have to go 
 away at once . " 

 Father Brown take the paper without a word , and obediently go to look 
 for the coat ; it be not the first menial work he have do in his life . 
 he bring it and lay it on the counter ; meanwhile , the strange 
 gentleman who have be feel in his waistcoat pocket , say laugh : 
 " I have not   get any silver ; you can keep this . " and he throw down half 
 a sovereign , and catch up his coat . 

 Father Brown 's figure remain quite dark and still ; but in that instant 
 he have lose his head . his head be always most valuable when he have lose it . 
 in such moment he put two and two together and make four million . 
 often the Catholic Church   which be wed to common sense 
 do not approve of it . often he do not approve of it himself . 
 but it be real inspiration - important at rare crisis - when whosoever 
 shall lose his head the same shall save it . 

 " I think , sir , " he say civilly , " that you have some silver 
 in your pocket . " 

 the tall gentleman star . " hang it , " he cry , " if I choose 
 to give you gold , why should you complain ? " 

 " because silver be sometimes more valuable than gold , " say the priest mildly ; 
 " that be , in large quantity . " 

 the stranger look at he curiously . then he look still more 
 curiously up the passage towards the main entrance . then he look 
 back at Brown again , and then he look very carefully at the window 
 beyond Brown 's head , still colour with the after - glow of the storm . 
 then he seem to make up his mind . he put one hand on the counter , 
 vault over as easily as an acrobat and tower above the priest , 
 put one tremendous hand upon his collar . 

 " stand still , " he say , in a hack whisper . " I do not   want 
 to threaten you , but - " 

 " I do want to threaten you , " say Father Brown , in a voice like a 
 rolling drum , " I want to threaten you with the worm that dieth not , 
 and the fire that be not quench . " 

 " you be a rum sort of cloak - room clerk , " say the other . 

 " I be a priest , Monsieur Flambeau , " say Brown , " and I be ready 
 to hear your confession . " 

 the other stand gasp for a few moment , and then stagger 
 back into a chair . 

 the first two course of the dinner of the Twelve True Fishermen have 
 proceed with placid success . I do not possess a copy of the menu ; 
 and if I do it would not convey anything to anybody . it be write 
 in a sort of super - french employ by cook , but quite unintelligible 
 to Frenchmen . there be a tradition in the club that the hor 
 d'oeuvres should be various and manifold to the point of madness . 
 they be take seriously because they be avowedly useless extra , 
 like the whole dinner and the whole club . there be also a tradition 
 that the soup course should be light and unpretende - a sort 
 of simple and austere vigil for the feast of fish that be to come . 
 the talk be that strange , slight talk which govern the British Empire , 
 which govern it in secret , and yet would scarcely enlighten an 
 ordinary Englishman even if he could overhear it . cabinet minister 
 on both side be allude to by their christian name with a sort 
 of bored benignity . the Radical Chancellor of the Exchequer , 
 whom the whole Tory party be suppose to be curse for his extortion , 
 be praise for his minor poetry , or his saddle in the hunting field . 
 the Tory leader , whom all Liberals be suppose to hate as a tyrant , 
 be discuss and , on the whole , praise - as a Liberal . it seem 
 somehow that politician be very important . and yet , anything seem 
 important about they except their politic . Mr. Audley , the chairman , 
 be an amiable , elderly man who still wear Gladstone collar ; 
 he be a kind of symbol of all that phantasmal and yet fix society . 
 he have never do anything - not even anything wrong . he be not fast ; 
 he be not even particularly rich . he be simply in the thing ; 
 and there be an end of it . no party could ignore he , and if he have 
 wish to be in the Cabinet he certainly would have be put there . 
 the Duke of Chester , the vice - president , be a young and rise politician . 
 that be to say , he be a pleasant youth , with flat , fair hair and a 
 freckle face , with moderate intelligence and enormous estate . in public 
 his appearance be always successful and his principle be simple enough . 
 when he think of a joke he make it , and be call brilliant . 
 when he could not think of a joke he say that this be no time for trifling , 
 and be call able . in private , in a club of his own class , he be 
 simply quite pleasantly frank and silly , like a schoolboy . Mr. Audley , 
 never have be in politic , treat they a little more seriously . 
 sometimes he even embarrass the company by phrase suggest that there 
 be some difference between a Liberal and a Conservative . he himself 
 be a Conservative , even in private life . he have a roll of grey hair 
 over the back of his collar , like certain old - fashioned statesman , 
 and see from behind he look like the man the empire want . 
 see from the front he look like a mild , self - indulgent bachelor , 
 with room in the Albany - which he be . 

 as have be remark , there be twenty - four seat at 
 the terrace table , and only twelve member of the club . 
 thus they could occupy the terrace in the most luxurious style of all , 
 be range along the inner side of the table , with no one opposite , 
 command an uninterrupted view of the garden , the colour 
 of which be still vivid , though evening be close in somewhat 
 luridly for the time of year . the chairman sit in the centre 
 of the line , and the vice - president at the right - hand end of it . 
 when the twelve guest first troop into their seat it be 
 the custom   for some unknown reason   for all the fifteen waiter 
 to stand line the wall like troop present arm to the king , 
 while the fat proprietor stand and bow to the club with 
 radiant surprise , as if he have never hear of they before . 
 but before the first chink of knife and fork this army of 
 retainer have vanish , only the one or two require to collect 
 and distribute the plate dart about in deathly silence . 
 Mr. Lever , the proprietor , of course have disappear in 
 convulsion of courtesy long before . it would be exaggerative , 
 indeed irreverent , to say that he ever positively appear again . 
 but when the important course , the fish course , be be bring on , 
 there be - how shall I put it ? - a vivid shadow , a projection 
 of his personality , which tell that he be hover near . 
 the sacred fish course consist   to the eye of the vulgar 
 in a sort of monstrous pudding , about the size and shape of a 
 wedding cake , in which some considerable number of interesting 
 fish have finally lose the shape which God have give to they . 
 the Twelve True Fishermen take up their celebrated fish knife 
 and fish fork , and approach it as gravely as if every inch 
 of the pudding cost as much as the silver fork it be eat with . 
 so it do , for all I know . this course be deal with in 
 eager and devouring silence ; and it be only when his plate 
 be nearly empty that the young duke make the ritual remark : 
 " they can not   do this anywhere but here . " 

 " nowhere , " say Mr. Audley , in a deep bass voice , turn to 
 the speaker and nod his venerable head a number of time . 
 " nowhere , assuredly , except here . it be represent to I 
 that at the Cafe Anglais - " 

 here he be interrupt and even agitated for a moment 
 by the removal of his plate , but he recapture the valuable 
 thread of his thought . " it be represent to I that the same 
 could be do at the Cafe Anglais . nothing like it , sir , " 
 he say , shake his head ruthlessly , like a hang judge . 
 " nothing like it . " 

 " overrated place , " say a certain Colonel Pound , speak   by the look of he 
 for the first time for some month . 

 " oh , I do not   know , " say the Duke of Chester , who be an optimist , 
 " it be jolly good for some thing . you can not   beat it at - " 

 a waiter come swiftly along the room , and then stop dead . 
 his stoppage be as silent as his tread ; but all those vague 
 and kindly gentleman be so used to the utter smoothness of 
 the unseen machinery which surround and support their life , 
 that a waiter do anything unexpected be a start and a jar . 
 they feel as you and I would feel if the inanimate world disobey - 
 if a chair run away from we . 

 the waiter stand star a few second , while there deepen on every 
 face at table a strange shame which be wholly the product of our time . 
 it be the combination of modern humanitarianism with the horrible modern 
 abyss between the soul of the rich and poor . a genuine historic aristocrat 
 would have throw thing at the waiter , begin with empty bottle , 
 and very probably end with money . a genuine democrat would have ask he , 
 with comrade - like clearness of speech , what the devil he be do . 
 but these modern plutocrat could not bear a poor man near to they , 
 either as a slave or as a friend . that something have go wrong 
 with the servant be merely a dull , hot embarrassment . they do 
 not want to be brutal , and they dread the need to be benevolent . 
 they want the thing , whatever it be , to be over . it be over . 
 the waiter , after stand for some second rigid , like a cataleptic , 
 turn round and run madly out of the room . 

 when he reappear in the room , or rather in the doorway , it be in 
 company with another waiter , with whom he whisper and gesticulate 
 with southern fierceness . then the first waiter go away , 
 leave the second waiter , and reappear with a third waiter . 
 by the time a fourth waiter have join this hurried synod , Mr. Audley 
 feel it necessary to break the silence in the interest of Tact . he use 
 a very loud cough , instead of a presidential hammer , and say : 
 " splendid work young Moocher 's do in Burmah . now , no other nation 
 in the world could have - " 

 a fifth waiter have speed towards he like an arrow , and be whispering 
 in his ear : " so sorry . important ! might the proprietor speak to you ? " 

 the chairman turn in disorder , and with a daze stare see 
 Mr. Lever come towards they with his lumber quickness . 
 the gait of the good proprietor be indeed his usual gait , but his 
 face be by no mean usual . generally it be a genial copper - brown ; 
 now it be a sickly yellow . 

 " you will pardon I , Mr. Audley , " he say , with asthmatic breathlessness . 
 " I have great apprehension . your fish - plate , they be clear away 
 with the knife and fork on they ! " 

 " well , I hope so , " say the chairman , with some warmth . 

 " you see he ? " pant the excited hotel keeper ; " you see the waiter 
 who take they away ? you know he ? " 

 " know the waiter ? " answer Mr. Audley indignantly . " certainly not ! " 

 Mr. Lever open his hand with a gesture of agony . 
 " I never send he , " he say . " I know not when or why he come . 
 I send my waiter to take away the plate , and he find 
 they already away . " 

 Mr. Audley still look rather too bewildered to be really the man 
 the empire want ; none of the company could say anything except the man 
 of wood - Colonel Pound - who seem galvanise into an unnatural life . 
 he rise rigidly from his chair , leave all the rest sitting , 
 screw his eyeglass into his eye , and speak in a raucous undertone 
 as if he have half - forget how to speak . " do you mean , " he say , 
 " that somebody have steal our silver fish service ? " 

 the proprietor repeat the open - handed gesture with even great helplessness 
 and in a flash all the man at the table be on their foot . 

 " be all your waiter here ? " demand the colonel , in his low , harsh accent . 

 " yes ; they be all here . I notice it myself , " cry the young duke , 
 push his boyish face into the inmost ring . " always count them as I come in ; 
 they look so queer stand up against the wall . " 

 " but surely one can not exactly remember , " begin Mr. Audley , 
 with heavy hesitation . 

 " I remember exactly , I tell you , " cry the duke excitedly . 
 " there never have be more than fifteen waiter at this place , 
 and there be no more than fifteen tonight , I will swear ; 
 no more and no less . " 

 the proprietor turn upon he , quake in a kind of palsy of surprise . 
 " you say - you say , " he stammer , " that you see all my fifteen waiter ? " 

 " as usual , " assent the duke . " what be the matter with that ! " 

 " nothing , " say Lever , with a deepening accent , " only you do not . 
 for one of zem be dead upstairs . " 

 there be a shocking stillness for an instant in that room . it may be 
  so supernatural be the word death   that each of those idle man look 
 for a second at his soul , and see it as a small dry pea . one of they - 
 the duke , I think - even say with the idiotic kindness of wealth : 
 " be there anything we can do ? " 

 " he have have a priest , " say the Jew , not untouched . 

 then , as to the clang of doom , they awake to their own position . 
 for a few weird second they have really feel as if the fifteenth 
 waiter might be the ghost of the dead man upstairs . they have be 
 dumb under that oppression , for ghost be to they an embarrassment , 
 like beggar . but the remembrance of the silver break the spell 
 of the miraculous ; break it abruptly and with a brutal reaction . 
 the colonel fling over his chair and stride to the door . 
 " if there be a fifteenth man here , friend , " he say , 
 " that fifteenth fellow be a thief . down at once to the front 
 and back door and secure everything ; then we will talk . 
 the twenty - four pearl of the club be worth recover . " 

 Mr. Audley seem at first to hesitate about whether it be gentlemanly to be 
 in such a hurry about anything ; but , see the duke dash down the stair 
 with youthful energy , he follow with a more mature motion . 

 at the same instant a sixth waiter run into the room , and declare 
 that he have find the pile of fish plate on a sideboard , 
 with no trace of the silver . 

 the crowd of diner and attendant that tumble helter - skelter 
 down the passage divide into two group . Most of the fisherman 
 follow the proprietor to the front room to demand news of any exit . 
 Colonel Pound , with the chairman , the vice - president , 
 and one or two other dart down the corridor lead to 
 the servant ' quarter , as the more likely line of escape . 
 as they do so they pass the dim alcove or cavern of the cloak room , 
 and see a short , black - coat figure , presumably an attendant , 
 stand a little way back in the shadow of it . 

 " Hallo , there ! " call out the duke . " have you see anyone pass ? " 

 the short figure do not answer the question directly , but merely say : 
 " perhaps I have get what you be look for , gentleman . " 

 they pause , waver and wonder , while he quietly go to the back 
 of the cloak room , and come back with both hand full of shin silver , 
 which he lay out on the counter as calmly as a salesman . 
 it take the form of a dozen quaintly shape fork and knife . 

 " you - you - " begin the colonel , quite throw off his balance at last . 
 then he peer into the dim little room and see two thing : 
 first , that the short , black - clothe man be dress like 
 a clergyman ; and , second , that the window of the room behind 
 he be burst , as if someone have pass violently through . 
 " valuable thing to deposit in a cloak room , be not   they ? " 
 remark the clergyman , with cheerful composure . 

 " do - do you steal those thing ? " stammer Mr. Audley , 
 with star eye . 

 " if I do , " say the cleric pleasantly , " at least I be bring 
 they back again . " 

 " but you do not , " say Colonel Pound , still star at the broken window . 

 " to make a clean breast of it , I do not , " say the other , with some humour . 
 and he seat himself quite gravely on a stool . " but you know who do , " 
 say the , colonel . 

 " I do not   know his real name , " say the priest placidly , " but I know something 
 of his fighting weight , and a great deal about his spiritual difficulty . 
 I form the physical estimate when he be try to throttle I , 
 and the moral estimate when he repent . " 

 " oh , I say - repent ! " cry young Chester , with a sort of crow of laughter . 

 Father Brown get to his foot , put his hand behind he . 
 " Odd , be not   it , " he say , " that a thief and a vagabond should repent , 
 when so many who be rich and secure remain hard and frivolous , 
 and without fruit for God or man ? but there , if you will excuse I , 
 you trespass a little upon my province . if you doubt the penitence 
 as a practical fact , there be your knife and fork . 
 you be the Twelve True Fishers , and there be all your silver fish . 
 but he have make I a fisher of man . " 

 " do you catch this man ? " ask the colonel , frown . 

 Father Brown look he full in his frown face . " yes , " he say , 
 " I catch he , with an unseen hook and an invisible line which be long 
 enough to let he wander to the end of the world , and still to bring 
 he back with a twitch upon the thread . " 

 there be a long silence . all the other man present drift 
 away to carry the recover silver to their comrade , or to 
 consult the proprietor about the queer condition of affair . 
 but the grim - faced colonel still sit sideways on the counter , 
 swing his long , lank leg and bite his dark moustache . 

 at last he say quietly to the priest : " he must have be a clever fellow , 
 but I think I know a cleverer . " 

 " he be a clever fellow , " answer the other , " but I be not quite 
 sure of what other you mean . " 

 " I mean you , " say the colonel , with a short laugh . " I do not 
 want to get the fellow jail ; make yourself easy about that . 
 but I would give a good many silver fork to know exactly how you 
 fall into this affair , and how you get the stuff out of he . 
 I reckon you be the most up - to - date devil of the present company . " 

 Father Brown seem rather to like the saturnine candour of the soldier . 
 " well , " he say , smile , " I must not   tell you anything of the man 's identity , 
 or his own story , of course ; but there be no particular reason why I should not 
 tell you of the mere outside fact which I find out for myself . " 

 he hop over the barrier with unexpected activity , and sit beside 
 Colonel Pound , kick his short leg like a little boy on a gate . 
 he begin to tell the story as easily as if he be tell it to an old 
 friend by a Christmas fire . 

 " you see , colonel , " he say , " I be shut up in that small room there 
 do some writing , when I hear a pair of foot in this passage do 
 a dance that be as queer as the dance of death . first come quick , 
 funny little step , like a man walk on tiptoe for a wager ; then come slow , 
 careless , creak step , as of a big man walk about with a cigar . 
 but they be both make by the same foot , I swear , and they come in rotation ; 
 first the run and then the walk , and then the run again . I wonder at 
 first idly and then wildly why a man should act these two part at once . 
 one walk I know ; it be just like your , colonel . it be the walk 
 of a well - feed gentleman wait for something , who stroll about rather 
 because he be physically alert than because he be mentally impatient . 
 I know that I know the other walk , too , but I could not remember what it be . 
 what wild creature have I meet on my travel that tear along on tiptoe 
 in that extraordinary style ? then I hear a clink of plate somewhere ; 
 and the answer stand up as plain as St. Peter 's . it be the walk of a waiter - 
 that walk with the body slant forward , the eye look down , the ball 
 of the toe spurn away the ground , the coat tail and napkin fly . 
 then I think for a minute and a half more . and I believe I see the manner 
 of the crime , as clearly as if I be go to commit it . " 

 Colonel Pound look at he keenly , but the speaker 's mild grey 
 eye be fix upon the ceiling with almost empty wistfulness . 

 " a crime , " he say slowly , " be like any other work of art . 
 do not   look surprised ; crime be by no mean the only work of art 
 that come from an infernal workshop . but every work of art , 
 divine or diabolic , have one indispensable mark - I mean , that the centre 
 of it be simple , however much the fulfilment may be complicate . 
 thus , in Hamlet , let we say , the grotesqueness of the grave - digger , 
 the flower of the mad girl , the fantastic finery of Osric , the pallor 
 of the ghost and the grin of the skull be all oddity in a sort 
 of tangle wreath round one plain tragic figure of a man in black . 
 well , this also , " he say , get slowly down from his seat 
 with a smile , " this also be the plain tragedy of a man in black . 
 yes , " he go on , see the colonel look up in some wonder , 
 " the whole of this tale turn on a black coat . in this , as in Hamlet , 
 there be the rococo excrescence - yourself , let we say . 
 there be the dead waiter , who be there when he could not be there . 
 there be the invisible hand that sweep your table clear of silver 
 and melt into air . but every clever crime be found ultimately on 
 some one quite simple fact - some fact that be not itself mysterious . 
 the mystification come in cover it up , in lead man 's thought 
 away from it . this large and subtle and   in the ordinary course 
 most profitable crime , be build on the plain fact that a gentleman 's 
 evening dress be the same as a waiter 's . all the rest be act , 
 and thunder good acting , too . " 

 " still , " say the colonel , get up and frown at his boot , 
 " I be not sure that I understand . " 

 " Colonel , " say Father Brown , " I tell you that this archangel of 
 impudence who steal your fork walk up and down this passage twenty 
 time in the blaze of all the lamp , in the glare of all the eye . 
 he do not go and hide in dim corner where suspicion might have search 
 for he . he keep constantly on the move in the lighted corridor , 
 and everywhere that he go he seem to be there by right . do not   ask I 
 what he be like ; you have see he yourself six or seven time tonight . 
 you be wait with all the other grand people in the reception 
 room at the end of the passage there , with the terrace just beyond . 
 whenever he come among you gentleman , he come in the lightning style 
 of a waiter , with bent head , flap napkin and fly foot . 
 he shoot out on to the terrace , do something to the table cloth , 
 and shoot back again towards the office and the waiter ' quarter . 
 by the time he have come under the eye of the office clerk and 
 the waiter he have become another man in every inch of his body , 
 in every instinctive gesture . he stroll among the servant with 
 the absent - minded insolence which they have all see in their patron . 
 it be no new thing to they that a swell from the dinner party should pace 
 all part of the house like an animal at the Zoo ; they know that nothing 
 mark the Smart Set more than a habit of walk where one choose . 
 when he be magnificently weary of walk down that particular 
 passage he would wheel round and pace back past the office ; 
 in the shadow of the arch just beyond he be alter as by a blast 
 of magic , and go hurry forward again among the Twelve Fishermen , 
 an obsequious attendant . why should the gentleman look at a chance waiter ? 
 why should the waiter suspect a first - rate walking gentleman ? 
 once or twice he play the cool trick . in the proprietor 's 
 private quarter he call out breezily for a syphon of soda water , 
 say he be thirsty . he say genially that he would carry it himself , 
 and he do ; he carry it quickly and correctly through the thick 
 of you , a waiter with an obvious errand . of course , it could not 
 have be keep up long , but it only have to be keep up till the end 
 of the fish course . 

 " his bad moment be when the waiter stand in a row ; but even 
 then he contrive to lean against the wall just round the corner 
 in such a way that for that important instant the waiter think 
 he a gentleman , while the gentleman think he a waiter . 
 the rest go like wink . if any waiter catch he away 
 from the table , that waiter catch a languid aristocrat . 
 he have only to time himself two minute before the fish be clear , 
 become a swift servant , and clear it himself . he put the plate 
 down on a sideboard , stuff the silver in his breast pocket , 
 give it a bulgy look , and run like a hare   I hear he come 
 till he come to the cloak room . there he have only to be a 
 plutocrat again - a plutocrat call away suddenly on business . 
 he have only to give his ticket to the cloak - room attendant , 
 and go out again elegantly as he have come in . only - only I 
 happen to be the cloak - room attendant . " 

 " what do you do to he ? " cry the colonel , with unusual intensity . 
 " what do he tell you ? " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say the priest immovably , " that be where 
 the story end . " 

 " and the interesting story begin , " mutter Pound . " I think I 
 understand his professional trick . but I do not   seem to have get 
 hold of your . " 

 " I must be go , " say Father Brown . 

 they walk together along the passage to the entrance hall , 
 where they see the fresh , freckle face of the Duke of Chester , 
 who be bound buoyantly along towards they . 

 " come along , Pound , " he cry breathlessly . " I have   be look 
 for you everywhere . the dinner be go again in spanking style , 
 and old Audley have get to make a speech in honour of the fork 
 be save . we want to start some new ceremony , do not   you know , 
 to commemorate the occasion . I say , you really get the good back , 
 what do you suggest ? " 

 " why , " say the colonel , eye he with a certain sardonic approval , 
 " I should suggest that henceforward we wear green coat , instead of black . 
 one never know what mistake may arise when one look so like a waiter . " 

 " oh , hang it all ! " say the young man , " a gentleman never look 
 like a waiter . " 

 " nor a waiter like a gentleman , I suppose , " say Colonel Pound , 
 with the same lowering laughter on his face . " reverend sir , 
 your friend must have be very smart to act the gentleman . " 

 Father Brown button up his commonplace overcoat to the neck , 
 for the night be stormy , and take his commonplace umbrella 
 from the stand . 

 " yes , " he say ; " it must be very hard work to be a gentleman ; 
 but , do you know , I have sometimes think that it may be almost 
 as laborious to be a waiter . " 

 and say " good evening , " he push open the heavy door of 
 that palace of pleasure . the golden gate close behind he , 
 and he go at a brisk walk through the damp , dark street 
 in search of a penny omnibus . 



  the Flying Stars 

 " the most beautiful crime I ever commit , " Flambeau would say in his 
 highly moral old age , " be also , by a singular coincidence , my last . 
 it be commit at Christmas . as an artist I have always attempt 
 to provide crime suitable to the special season or landscape in which I 
 find myself , choose this or that terrace or garden for a catastrophe , 
 as if for a statuary group . thus squire should be swindle in long room 
 panel with oak ; while Jews , on the other hand , should rather find 
 themselves unexpectedly penniless among the light and screen of the 
 Cafe Riche . thus , in England , if I wish to relieve a dean of his rich 
  which be not so easy as you might suppose , I wish to frame he , if I make 
 myself clear , in the green lawn and grey tower of some cathedral town . 
 similarly , in France , when I have get money out of a rich and wicked peasant 
  which be almost impossible , it gratify I to get his indignant head 
 relieve against a grey line of clipped poplar , and those solemn plain 
 of Gaul over which brood the mighty spirit of Millet . 

 " well , my last crime be a Christmas crime , a cheery , cosy , English 
 middle - class crime ; a crime of Charles Dickens . I do it in a good old 
 middle - class house near Putney , a house with a crescent of carriage drive , 
 a house with a stable by the side of it , a house with the name on the two 
 outer gate , a house with a monkey tree . enough , you know the specie . 
 I really think my imitation of Dickens 's style be dexterous and literary . 
 it seem almost a pity I repent the same evening . " 

 Flambeau would then proceed to tell the story from the inside ; 
 and even from the inside it be odd . see from the outside 
 it be perfectly incomprehensible , and it be from the outside 
 that the stranger must study it . from this standpoint the drama 
 may be say to have begin when the front door of the house 
 with the stable open on the garden with the monkey tree , 
 and a young girl come out with bread to feed the bird 
 on the afternoon of Boxing Day . she have a pretty face , 
 with brave brown eye ; but her figure be beyond conjecture , 
 for she be so wrap up in brown fur that it be hard to say 
 which be hair and which be fur . but for the attractive face 
 she might have be a small toddle bear . 

 the winter afternoon be redden towards evening , 
 and already a ruby light be roll over the bloomless bed , 
 fill they , as it be , with the ghost of the dead rose . 
 on one side of the house stand the stable , on the other an alley 
 or cloister of laurel lead to the large garden behind . 
 the young lady , have scatter bread for the bird 
  for the fourth or fifth time that day , because the dog 
 eat it , pass unobutrusively down the lane of laurel 
 and into a glimmering plantation of evergreen behind . 
 here she give an exclamation of wonder , real or ritual , 
 and look up at the high garden wall above she , beheld it 
 fantastically bestride by a somewhat fantastic figure . 

 " oh , do not   jump , Mr. Crook , " she call out in some alarm ; 
 " it be much too high . " 

 the individual rid the party wall like an aerial horse be a tall , 
 angular young man , with dark hair stick up like a hair brush , intelligent 
 and even distinguished lineament , but a sallow and almost alien complexion . 
 this show the more plainly because he wear an aggressive red tie , 
 the only part of his costume of which he seem to take any care . 
 perhaps it be a symbol . he take no notice of the girl 's alarmed adjuration , 
 but leapt like a grasshopper to the ground beside she , where he might 
 very well have break his leg . 

 " I think I be mean to be a burglar , " he say placidly , 
 " and I have no doubt I should have be if I have not   happen 
 to be bear in that nice house next door . I can not   see any harm 
 in it , anyhow . " 

 " how can you say such thing ! " she remonstrate . 

 " well , " say the young man , " if you be bear on the wrong side of the wall , 
 I can not   see that it be wrong to climb over it . " 

 " I never know what you will say or do next , " she say . 

 " I do not   often know myself , " reply Mr. Crook ; " but then I be 
 on the right side of the wall now . " 

 " and which be the right side of the wall ? " ask the young lady , smile . 

 " whichever side you be on , " say the young man name Crook . 

 as they go together through the laurel towards the front garden a motor 
 horn sound thrice , come nearer and nearer , and a car of splendid speed , 
 great elegance , and a pale green colour sweep up to the front door like a 
 bird and stand throb . 

 " Hullo , hullo ! " say the young man with the red tie , 
 " here be somebody bear on the right side , anyhow . I do not   know , 
 Miss Adams , that your Santa Claus be so modern as this . " 

 " oh , that be my godfather , Sir Leopold Fischer . he always come 
 on Boxing Day . " 

 then , after an innocent pause , which unconsciously betray some lack 
 of enthusiasm , Ruby Adams add : 

 " he be very kind . " 

 John Crook , journalist , have hear of that eminent City magnate ; 
 and it be not his fault if the City magnate have not hear of he ; 
 for in certain article in the Clarion or the New Age Sir Leopold 
 have be deal with austerely . but he say nothing and grimly watch 
 the unloading of the motor - car , which be rather a long process . 
 a large , neat chauffeur in green get out from the front , 
 and a small , neat manservant in grey get out from the back , 
 and between they they deposit Sir Leopold on the doorstep and 
 begin to unpack he , like some very carefully protect parcel . 
 rug enough to stock a bazaar , fur of all the beast of the forest , 
 and scarf of all the colour of the rainbow be unwrapped one 
 by one , till they reveal something resemble the human form ; 
 the form of a friendly , but foreign - look old gentleman , 
 with a grey goat - like beard and a beam smile , who rub his 
 big fur glove together . 

 long before this revelation be complete the two big door of the porch 
 have open in the middle , and Colonel Adams   father of the furry 
 young lady   have come out himself to invite his eminent guest inside . 
 he be a tall , sunburnt , and very silent man , who wear a red smoking - cap 
 like a fez , make he look like one of the english Sirdars or Pashas 
 in Egypt . with he be his brother - in - law , lately come from Canada , 
 a big and rather boisterous young gentleman - farmer , with a yellow beard , 
 by name James Blount . with he also be the more insignificant figure 
 of the priest from the neighbouring Roman Church ; for the colonel 's 
 late wife have be a Catholic , and the child , as be common 
 in such case , have be train to follow she . everything seem 
 undistinguished about the priest , even down to his name , which be Brown ; 
 yet the colonel have always find something companionable about he , 
 and frequently ask he to such family gathering . 

 in the large entrance hall of the house there be ample 
 room even for Sir Leopold and the removal of his wrap . 
 Porch and vestibule , indeed , be unduly large in proportion 
 to the house , and form , as it be , a big room with the front 
 door at one end , and the bottom of the staircase at the other . 
 in front of the large hall fire , over which hang the colonel 's sword , 
 the process be complete and the company , include the saturnine Crook , 
 present to Sir Leopold Fischer . that venerable financier , however , 
 still seem struggle with portion of his well - line attire , 
 and at length produce from a very interior tail - coat pocket , 
 a black oval case which he radiantly explain to be his Christmas 
 present for his god - daughter . with an unaffected vain - glory 
 that have something disarm about it he hold out the case 
 before they all ; it fly open at a touch and half - blind they . 
 it be just as if a crystal fountain have spurt in their eye . 
 in a nest of orange velvet lie like three egg , three white and vivid 
 diamond that seem to set the very air on fire all round they . 
 Fischer stand beam benevolently and drink deep of the astonishment 
 and ecstasy of the girl , the grim admiration and gruff thank 
 of the colonel , the wonder of the whole group . 

 " I will put them back now , my dear , " say Fischer , return the case 
 to the tail of his coat . " I have to be careful of them come down . 
 they be the three great african diamond call ` the Flying Stars , ' 
 because they have   be steal so often . all the big criminal be on the track ; 
 but even the rough man about in the street and hotel could hardly have 
 keep their hand off they . I might have lose they on the road here . 
 it be quite possible . " 

 " quite natural , I should say , " growl the man in the red tie . 
 " I should not   blame them if they have take them . when they ask 
 for bread , and you do not   even give they a stone , I think they 
 might take the stone for themselves . " 

 " I will not   have you talk like that , " cry the girl , who be 
 in a curious glow . " you have   only talk like that since you 
 become a horrid what's - his - name . you know what I mean . 
 what do you call a man who want to embrace the chimney - sweep ? " 

 " a saint , " say Father Brown . 

 " I think , " say Sir Leopold , with a supercilious smile , 
 " that Ruby mean a Socialist . " 

 " a radical do not mean a man who live on radish , " 
 remark Crook , with some impatience ; and a Conservative do 
 not mean a man who preserve jam . neither , I assure you , 
 do a socialist mean a man who desire a social evening 
 with the chimney - sweep . a Socialist mean a man who want all 
 the chimney sweep and all the chimney - sweep pay for it . " 

 " but who will not   allow you , " put in the priest in a low voice , 
 " to own your own soot . " 

 Crook look at he with an eye of interest and even respect . 
 " do one want to own soot ? " he ask . 

 " one might , " answer Brown , with speculation in his eye . 
 " I have   hear that gardener use it . and I once make six 
 child happy at Christmas when the conjuror do not   come , 
 entirely with soot - apply externally . " 

 " oh , splendid , " cry Ruby . " oh , I wish you would do it to this company . " 

 the boisterous Canadian , Mr. Blount , be lift his loud voice 
 in applause , and the astonished financier his   in some considerable 
 deprecation , when a knock sound at the double front door . 
 the priest open they , and they show again the front garden of evergreen , 
 monkey - tree and all , now gather gloom against a gorgeous violet sunset . 
 the scene thus frame be so coloured and quaint , like a back scene in a play , 
 that they forget a moment the insignificant figure stand in the door . 
 he be dusty - look and in a fray coat , evidently a common messenger . 
 " any of you gentleman Mr. Blount ? " he ask , and hold forward a 
 letter doubtfully . Mr. Blount start , and stop in his shout of assent . 
 rip up the envelope with evident astonishment he read it ; 
 his face cloud a little , and then clear , and he turn to his 
 brother - in - law and host . 

 " I be sick at be such a nuisance , colonel , " he say , with the cheery 
 colonial convention ; " but would it upset you if an old acquaintance 
 call on I here tonight on business ? in point of fact it be Florian , 
 that famous french acrobat and comic actor ; I know he year ago out West 
  he be a French - canadian by birth , and he seem to have business for I , 
 though I hardly guess what . " 

 " of course , of course , " reply the colonel carelessly - " my dear chap , 
 any friend of your . no doubt he will prove an acquisition . " 

 " he will black his face , if that be what you mean , " cry Blount , laugh . 
 " I do not   doubt he would black everyone else 's eye . I do not   care ; 
 I be not refine . I like the jolly old pantomime where a man sit 
 on his top hat . " 

 " not on mine , please , " say Sir Leopold Fischer , with dignity . 

 " well , well , " observe Crook , airily , " do not   let us quarrel . 
 there be low joke than sit on a top hat . " 

 Dislike of the red - tie youth , bear of his predatory opinion 
 and evident intimacy with the pretty godchild , lead Fischer to say , 
 in his most sarcastic , magisterial manner : " no doubt you 
 have find something much low than sit on a top hat . 
 what be it , pray ? " 

 " let a top hat sit on you , for instance , " say the Socialist . 

 " now , now , now , " cry the canadian farmer with his 
 barbarian benevolence , " do not   let us spoil a jolly evening . 
 what I say be , let us do something for the company tonight . 
 not black face or sit on hat , if you do not   like those - 
 but something of the sort . why could not   we have a proper 
 old English pantomime - clown , columbine , and so on . 
 I see one when I leave England at twelve year old , and it be 
 blaze in my brain like a bonfire ever since . I come back to 
 the old country only last year , and I find the thing 's extinct . 
 nothing but a lot of snivel fairy play . I want a hot 
 poker and a policeman make into sausage , and they give I 
 princess moralise by moonlight , Blue Birds , or something . 
 Blue Beard 's more in my line , and he I like well when he turn 
 into the pantaloon . " 

 " I be all for make a policeman into sausage , " say John Crook . 
 " it be a well definition of Socialism than some recently give . 
 but surely the get - up would be too big a business . " 

 " not a scrap , " cry Blount , quite carry away . 
 " a harlequinade be the quick thing we can do , for two reason . 
 first , one can gag to any degree ; and , second , all the object 
 be household thing - table and towel - horse and wash basket , 
 and thing like that . " 

 " that be true , " admit Crook , nod eagerly and walk about . 
 " but I be afraid I can not   have my policeman 's uniform ? 
 have not   kill a policeman lately . " 

 Blount frown thoughtfully a space , and then smote his thigh . " yes , we can ! " 
 he cry . " I have   get Florian 's address here , and he know every costumier 
 in London . I will phone he to bring a police dress when he come . " 
 and he go bound away to the telephone . 

 " oh , it be glorious , godfather , " cry Ruby , almost dance . 
 " I will be columbine and you shall be pantaloon . " 

 the millionaire hold himself stiff with a sort of heathen solemnity . 
 " I think , my dear , " he say , " you must get someone else for pantaloon . " 

 " I will be pantaloon , if you like , " say Colonel Adams , take his cigar 
 out of his mouth , and speak for the first and last time . 

 " you ought to have a statue , " cry the Canadian , as he come back , 
 radiant , from the telephone . " there , we be all fit . Mr. Crook 
 shall be clown ; he be a journalist and know all the old joke . 
 I can be harlequin , that only want long leg and jump about . 
 my friend Florian ' phone he be bring the police costume ; 
 he be change on the way . we can act it in this very hall , the audience 
 sit on those broad stair opposite , one row above another . 
 these front door can be the back scene , either open or shut . 
 Shut , you see an english interior . open , a moonlit garden . 
 it all go by magic . " and snatch a chance piece of billiard 
 chalk from his pocket , he run it across the hall floor , 
 half - way between the front door and the staircase , to mark the line 
 of the footlight . 

 how even such a banquet of bosh be get ready in the time remain 
 a riddle . but they go at it with that mixture of recklessness 
 and industry that live when youth be in a house ; and youth 
 be in that house that night , though not all may have isolate 
 the two face and heart from which it flame . as always happen , 
 the invention grow wilder and wilder through the very tameness 
 of the bourgeois convention from which it have to create . 
 the columbine look charming in an outstanding skirt that strangely 
 resemble the large lamp - shade in the drawing - room . the clown 
 and pantaloon make themselves white with flour from the cook , 
 and red with rouge from some other domestic , who remain 
  like all true christian benefactor   anonymous . the harlequin , 
 already clothe in silver paper out of cigar box , be , with difficulty , 
 prevent from smash the old victorian lustre chandelier , 
 that he might cover himself with resplendent crystal . 
 in fact he would certainly have do so , have not Ruby unearth 
 some old pantomime paste jewel she have wear at a fancy dress party 
 as the Queen of Diamonds . indeed , her uncle , James Blount , be get 
 almost out of hand in his excitement ; he be like a schoolboy . 
 he put a paper donkey 's head unexpectedly on Father Brown , who bear 
 it patiently , and even find some private manner of move his ear . 
 he even essay to put the paper donkey 's tail to the coat - tail 
 of Sir Leopold Fischer . this , however , be frown down . 
 " Uncle be too absurd , " cry Ruby to Crook , round whose 
 shoulder she have seriously place a string of sausage . 
 " why be he so wild ? " 

 " he be harlequin to your columbine , " say Crook . " I be only the clown 
 who make the old joke . " 

 " I wish you be the harlequin , " she say , and leave the string 
 of sausage swing . 

 Father Brown , though he know every detail do behind the scene , 
 and have even evoke applause by his transformation of a pillow into 
 a pantomime baby , go round to the front and sit among the audience 
 with all the solemn expectation of a child at his first matinee . 
 the spectator be few , relation , one or two local friend , 
 and the servant ; Sir Leopold sit in the front seat , his full and still 
 fur - collared figure largely obscure the view of the little cleric 
 behind he ; but it have never be settle by artistic authority 
 whether the cleric lose much . the pantomime be utterly chaotic , 
 yet not contemptible ; there run through it a rage of improvisation 
 which come chiefly from Crook the clown . commonly he be a clever man , 
 and he be inspire tonight with a wild omniscience , a folly wiser 
 than the world , that which come to a young man who have see 
 for an instant a particular expression on a particular face . 
 he be suppose to be the clown , but he be really almost everything else , 
 the author   so far as there be an author , the prompter , 
 the scene - painter , the scene - shifter , and , above all , the orchestra . 
 at abrupt interval in the outrageous performance he would hurl 
 himself in full costume at the piano and bang out some popular 
 music equally absurd and appropriate . 

 the climax of this , as of all else , be the moment when the two 
 front door at the back of the scene fly open , show the lovely 
 moonlit garden , but show more prominently the famous 
 professional guest ; the great Florian , dress up as a policeman . 
 the clown at the piano play the constabulary chorus in the " Pirates 
 of Penzance , " but it be drown in the deafen applause , 
 for every gesture of the great comic actor be an admirable though 
 restrained version of the carriage and manner of the police . 
 the harlequin leap upon he and hit he over the helmet ; 
 the pianist play " where do you get that hat ? " he face about 
 in admirably simulated astonishment , and then the leap harlequin 
 hit he again   the pianist suggest a few bar of " then we 
 have another one " . then the harlequin rush right into the arm 
 of the policeman and fall on top of he , amid a roar of applause . 
 then it be that the strange actor give that celebrate imitation 
 of a dead man , of which the fame still linger round Putney . it be 
 almost impossible to believe that a live person could 
 appear so limp . 

 the athletic harlequin swing he about like a sack or twisted or toss 
 he like an indian club ; all the time to the most maddeningly ludicrous 
 tune from the piano . when the harlequin heave the comic constable 
 heavily off the floor the clown play " I arise from dream of thee . " 
 when he shuffle he across his back , " with my bundle on my shoulder , " 
 and when the harlequin finally let fall the policeman with a most 
 convincing thud , the lunatic at the instrument strike into a jingling 
 measure with some word which be still believe to have be , " I send 
 a letter to my love and on the way I drop it . " 

 at about this limit of mental anarchy Father Brown 's view be 
 obscure altogether ; for the City magnate in front of he rise to his 
 full height and thrust his hand savagely into all his pocket . 
 then he sit down nervously , still fumble , and then stand up again . 
 for an instant it seem seriously likely that he would stride across 
 the footlight ; then he turn a glare at the clown play the piano ; 
 and then he burst in silence out of the room . 

 the priest have only watch for a few more minute the absurd but not 
 inelegant dance of the amateur harlequin over his splendidly unconscious foe . 
 with real though rude art , the harlequin dance slowly backwards out 
 of the door into the garden , which be full of moonlight and stillness . 
 the vamp dress of silver paper and paste , which have be too glare 
 in the footlight , look more and more magical and silvery as it dance 
 away under a brilliant moon . the audience be close in with a cataract 
 of applause , when Brown feel his arm abruptly touch , and he be ask 
 in a whisper to come into the colonel 's study . 

 he follow his summoner with increase doubt , which be not 
 dispel by a solemn comicality in the scene of the study . 
 there sit Colonel Adams , still unaffectedly dress as a pantaloon , 
 with the knobbed whalebone nod above his brow , but with his poor 
 old eye sad enough to have sober a Saturnalia . Sir Leopold Fischer 
 be lean against the mantelpiece and heave with all the 
 importance of panic . 

 " this be a very painful matter , Father Brown , " say Adams . " the truth be , 
 those diamond we all see this afternoon seem to have vanish from my 
 friend 's tail - coat pocket . and as you - " 

 " as I , " supplement Father Brown , with a broad grin , " be sit 
 just behind he - " 

 " nothing of the sort shall be suggest , " say Colonel Adams , with a firm look 
 at Fischer , which rather imply that some such thing have be suggest . 
 " I only ask you to give I the assistance that any gentleman might give . " 

 " which be turn out his pocket , " say Father Brown , and proceed to do so , 
 display seven and sixpence , a return ticket , a small silver crucifix , 
 a small breviary , and a stick of chocolate . 

 the colonel look at he long , and then say , " do you know , I should 
 like to see the inside of your head more than the inside of your pocket . 
 my daughter be one of your people , I know ; well , she have lately - " 
 and he stop . 

 " she have lately , " cry out old Fischer , " open her father 's 
 house to a cut - throat Socialist , who say openly he would 
 steal anything from a rich man . this be the end of it . 
 here be the rich man - and none the rich . " 

 " if you want the inside of my head you can have it , " say Brown 
 rather wearily . " what it be worth you can say afterwards . 
 but the first thing I find in that disuse pocket be this : 
 that man who mean to steal diamond do not   talk Socialism . they be 
 more likely , " he add demurely , " to denounce it . " 

 both the other shift sharply and the priest go on : 

 " you see , we know these people , more or less . that Socialist would no more 
 steal a diamond than a Pyramid . we ought to look at once to the one man we 
 do not   know . the fellow act the policeman - Florian . where be he exactly 
 at this minute , I wonder . " 

 the pantaloon spring erect and stride out of the room . 
 an interlude ensue , during which the millionaire star at the priest , 
 and the priest at his breviary ; then the pantaloon return and say , 
 with staccato gravity , " the policeman be still lie on the stage . 
 the curtain have go up and down six time ; he be still lie there . " 

 Father Brown drop his book and stand star with a look of blank 
 mental ruin . very slowly a light begin to creep in his grey eye , 
 and then he make the scarcely obvious answer . 

 " please forgive I , colonel , but when do your wife die ? " 

 " Wife ! " reply the star soldier , ' she die this year two month . 
 her brother James arrive just a week too late to see she . " 

 the little priest bound like a rabbit shot . 
 " come on ! " he cry in quite unusual excitement . " come on ! 
 we have   get to go and look at that policeman ! " 

 they rush on to the now curtain stage , break rudely past 
 the columbine and clown   who seem whisper quite contentedly , 
 and Father Brown bend over the prostrate comic policeman . 

 " Chloroform , " he say as he rise ; " I only guess it just now . " 

 there be a startled stillness , and then the colonel say slowly , 
 " please say seriously what all this mean . " 

 Father Brown suddenly shout with laughter , then stop , and only 
 struggle with it for instant during the rest of his speech . 
 " gentleman , " he gasp , " there be not much time to talk . 
 I must run after the criminal . but this great french actor 
 who play the policeman - this clever corpse the harlequin 
 waltz with and dandle and throw about - he be - " his voice 
 again fail he , and he turn his back to run . 

 " he be ? " call Fischer inquiringly . 

 " a real policeman , " say Father Brown , and run away into the dark . 

 there be hollow and bower at the extreme end of that leafy garden , 
 in which the laurel and other immortal shrub show against sapphire sky 
 and silver moon , even in that midwinter , warm colour as of the south . 
 the green gaiety of the wave laurel , the rich purple indigo of the night , 
 the moon like a monstrous crystal , make an almost irresponsible 
 romantic picture ; and among the top branch of the garden tree a strange 
 figure be climb , who look not so much romantic as impossible . 
 he sparkle from head to heel , as if clothe in ten million moon ; the real 
 moon catch he at every movement and set a new inch of he on fire . 
 but he swing , flash and successful , from the short tree in this 
 garden to the tall , ramble tree in the other , and only stop there 
 because a shade have slide under the small tree and have unmistakably 
 call up to he . 

 " well , Flambeau , " say the voice , " you really look like a Flying Star ; 
 but that always mean a Falling Star at last . " 

 the silver , sparkle figure above seem to lean forward in the laurel and , 
 confident of escape , listen to the little figure below . 
  " you never do anything well , Flambeau . it be clever to 
 come from Canada   with a Paris ticket , I suppose   just a week 
 after Mrs. Adams die , when no one be in a mood to ask question . 
 it be cleverer to have mark down the Flying Stars and the very day 
 of Fischer 's coming . but there be no cleverness , but mere genius , 
 in what follow . steal the stone , I suppose , be nothing to you . 
 you could have do it by sleight of hand in a hundred other way besides 
 that pretence of put a paper donkey 's tail to Fischer 's coat . 
 but in the rest you eclipse yourself . " 

 the silvery figure among the green leaf seem to linger as if hypnotise , 
 though his escape be easy behind he ; he be star at the man below . 

 " oh , yes , " say the man below , " I know all about it . 
 I know you not only force the pantomime , but put it to a double use . 
 you be go to steal the stone quietly ; news come by an accomplice 
 that you be already suspect , and a capable police officer 
 be come to rout you up that very night . a common thief would 
 have be thankful for the warning and flee ; but you be a poet . 
 you already have the clever notion of hide the jewel in a blaze 
 of false stage jewellery . now , you see that if the dress be a 
 harlequin 's the appearance of a policeman would be quite in keeping . 
 the worthy officer start from Putney police station to find you , 
 and walk into the queer trap ever set in this world . 
 when the front door open he walk straight on to the stage of a 
 Christmas pantomime , where he could be kick , club , stunned and drug 
 by the dancing harlequin , amid roar of laughter from all the most 
 respectable people in Putney . oh , you will never do anything well . 
 and now , by the way , you might give I back those diamond . " 

 the green branch on which the glitter figure swung , 
 rustle as if in astonishment ; but the voice go on : 

 " I want you to give they back , Flambeau , and I want you to give 
 up this life . there be still youth and honour and humour in you ; 
 do not   fancy they will last in that trade . man may keep a sort 
 of level of good , but no man have ever be able to keep on one 
 level of evil . that road go down and down . the kind man 
 drink and turn cruel ; the frank man kill and lie about it . 
 many a man I have   know start like you to be an honest outlaw , 
 a merry robber of the rich , and end stamp into slime . 
 Maurice Blum start out as an anarchist of principle , 
 a father of the poor ; he end a greasy spy and tale - bearer 
 that both side use and despise . Harry Burke start 
 his free money movement sincerely enough ; now he be sponge 
 on a half - starve sister for endless brandy and soda . 
 Lord Amber go into wild society in a sort of chivalry ; 
 now he be pay blackmail to the low vulture in London . 
 Captain Barillon be the great gentleman - apache before your time ; 
 he die in a madhouse , scream with fear of the " nark " 
 and receiver that have betray he and hunt he down . 
 I know the wood look very free behind you , Flambeau ; I know 
 that in a flash you could melt into they like a monkey . 
 but some day you will be an old grey monkey , Flambeau . you will 
 sit up in your free forest cold at heart and close to death , 
 and the tree - top will be very bare . " 

 everything continue still , as if the small man below 
 hold the other in the tree in some long invisible leash ; 
 and he go on : 

 " your downward step have begin . you use to boast of do 
 nothing mean , but you be do something mean tonight . you be leave 
 suspicion on an honest boy with a good deal against he already ; 
 you be separate he from the woman he love and who love he . 
 but you will do mean thing than that before you die . " 

 three flash diamond fall from the tree to the turf . 
 the small man stoop to pick they up , and when he look up 
 again the green cage of the tree be empty of its silver bird . 

 the restoration of the gem   accidentally pick up by Father Brown , 
 of all people   end the evening in uproarious triumph ; and Sir Leopold , 
 in his height of good humour , even tell the priest that though he himself 
 have broad view , he could respect those whose creed require they 
 to be cloister and ignorant of this world . 



  the Invisible Man 

 in the cool blue twilight of two steep street in Camden Town , the shop 
 at the corner , a confectioner 's , glow like the butt of a cigar . 
 one should rather say , perhaps , like the butt of a firework , for the light 
 be of many colour and some complexity , break up by many mirror 
 and dance on many gilt and gaily - colour cake and sweetmeat . 
 against this one fiery glass be glue the nose of many gutter - snipe , 
 for the chocolate be all wrap in those red and gold and green 
 metallic colour which be almost well than chocolate itself ; 
 and the huge white wedding - cake in the window be somehow at once remote 
 and satisfying , just as if the whole North Pole be good to eat . 
 such rainbow provocation could naturally collect the youth of 
 the neighbourhood up to the age of ten or twelve . but this corner 
 be also attractive to youth at a later stage ; and a young man , 
 not less than twenty - four , be star into the same shop window . 
 to he , also , the shop be of fiery charm , but this attraction be 
 not wholly to be explain by chocolate ; which , however , he be 
 far from despise . 

 he be a tall , burly , red - haired young man , with a resolute 
 face but a listless manner . he carry under his arm a flat , 
 grey portfolio of black - and - white sketch , which he have sell 
 with more or less success to publisher ever since his uncle 
  who be an admiral   have disinherit he for socialism , because of 
 a lecture which he have deliver against that economic theory . 
 his name be John Turnbull Angus . 

 enter at last , he walk through the confectioner 's shop 
 to the back room , which be a sort of pastry - cook restaurant , 
 merely raise his hat to the young lady who be serve there . 
 she be a dark , elegant , alert girl in black , with a high colour 
 and very quick , dark eye ; and after the ordinary interval she 
 follow he into the inner room to take his order . 

 his order be evidently a usual one . " I want , please , " he say 
 with precision , " one halfpenny bun and a small cup of black coffee . " 
 an instant before the girl could turn away he add , " also , I want 
 you to marry I . " 

 the young lady of the shop stiffen suddenly and say , 
 " those be joke I do not   allow . " 

 the red - haired young man lift grey eye of an unexpected gravity . 

 " really and truly , " he say , " it be as serious - as serious as the 
 halfpenny bun . it be expensive , like the bun ; one pay for it . 
 it be indigestible , like the bun . it hurt . " 

 the dark young lady have never take her dark eye off he , 
 but seem to be study he with almost tragic exactitude . 
 at the end of her scrutiny she have something like the shadow 
 of a smile , and she sit down in a chair . 

 " do not   you think , " observe Angus , absently , " that it be rather cruel 
 to eat these halfpenny bun ? they might grow up into penny bun . 
 I shall give up these brutal sport when we be marry . " 

 the dark young lady rise from her chair and walk to the window , 
 evidently in a state of strong but not unsympathetic cogitation . 
 when at last she swing round again with an air of resolution she 
 be bewilder to observe that the young man be carefully lay 
 out on the table various object from the shop - window . they include 
 a pyramid of highly coloured sweet , several plate of sandwich , 
 and the two decanter contain that mysterious port and sherry 
 which be peculiar to pastry - cook . in the middle of this neat 
 arrangement he have carefully let down the enormous load of white 
 sugar cake which have be the huge ornament of the window . 

 " what on earth be you do ? " she ask . 

 " Duty , my dear Laura , " he begin . 

 " oh , for the Lord 's sake , stop a minute , " she cry , " and do not 
 talk to I in that way . I mean , what be all that ? " 

 " a ceremonial meal , Miss Hope . " 

 " and what be that ? " she ask impatiently , point to the mountain of sugar . 

 " the wedding - cake , Mrs. Angus , " he say . 

 the girl march to that article , remove it with some clatter , 
 and put it back in the shop window ; she then return , and , put she 
 elegant elbow on the table , regard the young man not unfavourably 
 but with considerable exasperation . 

 " you do not   give I any time to think , " she say . 

 " I be not such a fool , " he answer ; " that be my christian humility . " 

 she be still look at he ; but she have grow considerably graver 
 behind the smile . 

 " Mr. Angus , " she say steadily , " before there be a minute more of this 
 nonsense I must tell you something about myself as shortly as I can . ' " 

 " delighted , " reply Angus gravely . " you might tell I something 
 about myself , too , while you be about it . " 

 " oh , do hold your tongue and listen , " she say . " it be nothing that I be 
 ashamed of , and it be not   even anything that I be specially sorry about . 
 but what would you say if there be something that be no business of mine 
 and yet be my nightmare ? " 

 " in that case , " say the man seriously , " I should suggest that you 
 bring back the cake . " 

 " well , you must listen to the story first , " say Laura , persistently . 
 " to begin with , I must tell you that my father own the inn call 
 the ` Red Fish ' at Ludbury , and I use to serve people in the bar . " 

 " I have often wonder , " he say , " why there be a kind of a Christian 
 air about this one confectioner 's shop . " 

 " ludbury be a sleepy , grassy little hole in the Eastern Counties , 
 and the only kind of people who ever come to the ` Red Fish ' 
 be occasional commercial traveller , and for the rest , 
 the most awful people you can see , only you have   never see they . 
 I mean little , loungy man , who have just enough to live on 
 and have nothing to do but lean about in bar - room and bet 
 on horse , in bad clothe that be just too good for they . 
 even these wretched young rotter be not very common at our house ; 
 but there be two of they that be a lot too common - 
 common in every sort of way . they both live on money 
 of their own , and be wearisomely idle and over - dress . but 
 yet I be a bit sorry for they , because I half believe they 
 slunk into our little empty bar because each of they have a 
 slight deformity ; the sort of thing that some yokel laugh at . 
 it be not   exactly a deformity either ; it be more an oddity . 
 one of they be a surprisingly small man , something like a dwarf , 
 or at least like a jockey . he be not at all jockeyish to look at , 
 though ; he have a round black head and a well - trim black beard , 
 bright eye like a bird 's ; he jingle money in his pocket ; 
 he jangle a great gold watch chain ; and he never turn up 
 except dress just too much like a gentleman to be one . 
 he be no fool though , though a futile idler ; he be curiously 
 clever at all kind of thing that could not   be the slight use ; 
 a sort of impromptu conjuring ; make fifteen match set fire 
 to each other like a regular firework ; or cut a banana or some 
 such thing into a dancing doll . his name be Isidore Smythe ; 
 and I can see he still , with his little dark face , just come 
 up to the counter , make a jump kangaroo out of five cigar . 

 " the other fellow be more silent and more ordinary ; but somehow 
 he alarm I much more than poor little smythe . he be very 
 tall and slight , and light - haired ; his nose have a high bridge , 
 and he might almost have be handsome in a spectral sort of way ; 
 but he have one of the most appalling squint I have ever see 
 or hear of . when he look straight at you , you do not   know 
 where you be yourself , let alone what he be look at . 
 I fancy this sort of disfigurement embitter the poor chap 
 a little ; for while Smythe be ready to show off his monkey 
 trick anywhere , James Welkin   that be the squint man 's name 
 never do anything except soak in our bar parlour , and go 
 for great walk by himself in the flat , grey country all round . 
 all the same , I think Smythe , too , be a little sensitive 
 about be so small , though he carry it off more smartly . 
 and so it be that I be really puzzle , as well as startle , 
 and very sorry , when they both offer to marry I in the same week . 

 " well , I do what I have   since thought be perhaps a silly thing . 
 but , after all , these freak be my friend in a way ; 
 and I have a horror of their thinking I refuse they for 
 the real reason , which be that they be so impossibly ugly . 
 so I make up some gas of another sort , about never mean 
 to marry anyone who have not   carve his way in the world . 
 I say it be a point of principle with I not to live on money 
 that be just inherit like theirs . two day after I have talk 
 in this well - mean sort of way , the whole trouble begin . 
 the first thing I hear be that both of they have go off to seek 
 their fortune , as if they be in some silly fairy tale . 

 " well , I have   never see either of they from that day to this . 
 but I have   have two letter from the little man call Smythe , 
 and really they be rather exciting . " 

 " ever hear of the other man ? " ask Angus . 

 " no , he never write , " say the girl , after an instant 's hesitation . 
 " Smythe 's first letter be simply to say that he have start out 
 walk with Welkin to London ; but Welkin be such a good walker that 
 the little man drop out of it , and take a rest by the roadside . 
 he happen to be pick up by some travel show , and , partly 
 because he be nearly a dwarf , and partly because he be really 
 a clever little wretch , he get on quite well in the show business , 
 and be soon send up to the Aquarium , to do some trick that I forget . 
 that be his first letter . his second be much more of a startler , 
 and I only get it last week . " 

 the man call Angus empty his coffee - cup and regard she with mild 
 and patient eye . her own mouth take a slight twist of laughter 
 as she resume , " I suppose you have   see on the hoarding all about 
 this ` Smythe 's Silent Service ' ? or you must be the only person that 
 have not . oh , I do not   know much about it , it be some clockwork invention 
 for do all the housework by machinery . you know the sort of thing : 
 ` press a Button - A Butler who never drink . ' ` turn a Handle - Ten Housemaids 
 who never Flirt . ' you must have see the advertisement . 
 well , whatever these machine be , they be make pot of money ; 
 and they be make it all for that little imp whom I know down 
 in Ludbury . I can not   help feel pleased the poor little chap have 
 fall on his foot ; but the plain fact be , I be in terror of his 
 turn up any minute and tell I he be carve his way in the world - 
 as he certainly have . " 

 " and the other man ? " repeat Angus with a sort of obstinate quietude . 

 Laura Hope get to her foot suddenly . " my friend , " she say , 
 " I think you be a witch . yes , you be quite right . 
 I have not see a line of the other man 's writing ; and I have 
 no more notion than the dead of what or where he be . but it be 
 of he that I be frightened . it be he who be all about my path . 
 it be he who have half drive I mad . indeed , I think he have 
 drive I mad ; for I have feel he where he could not have be , 
 and I have hear his voice when he could not have speak . " 

 " well , my dear , " say the young man , cheerfully , " if he be Satan himself , 
 he be do for now you have tell somebody . one go mad all alone , old girl . 
 but when be it you fancy you feel and hear our squint friend ? " 

 " I hear James Welkin laugh as plainly as I hear you speak , " 
 say the girl , steadily . " there be nobody there , for I stand just 
 outside the shop at the corner , and could see down both street at once . 
 I have forget how he laugh , though his laugh be as odd as his squint . 
 I have not think of he for nearly a year . but it be a solemn truth 
 that a few second later the first letter come from his rival . " 

 " do you ever make the spectre speak or squeak , or anything ? " 
 ask Angus , with some interest . 

 Laura suddenly shudder , and then say , with an unshaken 
 voice , " yes . just when I have finish read the second 
 letter from Isidore Smythe announce his success . 
 just then , I hear Welkin say , ` he shall not   have you , though . ' 
 it be quite plain , as if he be in the room . it be awful , 
 I think I must be mad . " 

 " if you really be mad , " say the young man , " you would 
 think you must be sane . but certainly there seem to I 
 to be something a little rum about this unseen gentleman . 
 two head be well than one - I spare you allusion to any 
 other organ and really , if you would allow I , as a sturdy , 
 practical man , to bring back the wedding - cake out of the window - " 

 even as he speak , there be a sort of steely shriek in the street outside , 
 and a small motor , drive at devilish speed , shoot up to the door of the shop 
 and stick there . in the same flash of time a small man in a shiny top hat 
 stand stamp in the outer room . 

 Angus , who have hitherto maintain hilarious ease from motif 
 of mental hygiene , reveal the strain of his soul by stride 
 abruptly out of the inner room and confront the new - comer . 
 a glance at he be quite sufficient to confirm the savage 
 guesswork of a man in love . this very dapper but dwarfish figure , 
 with the spike of black beard carry insolently forward , 
 the clever unrestful eye , the neat but very nervous finger , 
 could be none other than the man just describe to he : 
 Isidore Smythe , who make doll out of banana skin and match - box ; 
 Isidore Smythe , who make million out of undrinking butler 
 and unflirte housemaid of metal . for a moment the two man , 
 instinctively understand each other 's air of possession , 
 look at each other with that curious cold generosity which be 
 the soul of rivalry . 

 Mr. Smythe , however , make no allusion to the ultimate ground 
 of their antagonism , but say simply and explosively , 
 " have Miss Hope see that thing on the window ? " 

 " on the window ? " repeat the star Angus . 

 " there be no time to explain other thing , " say the small 
 millionaire shortly . " there be some tomfoolery go on here 
 that have to be investigate . " 

 he point his polished walking - stick at the window , 
 recently deplete by the bridal preparation of Mr. Angus ; 
 and that gentleman be astonish to see along the front of 
 the glass a long strip of paper paste , which have certainly not 
 be on the window when he look through it some time before . 
 follow the energetic Smythe outside into the street , 
 he find that some yard and a half of stamp paper have be 
 carefully gum along the glass outside , and on this be write 
 in straggly character , " if you marry Smythe , he will die . " 

 " Laura , " say Angus , put his big red head into the shop , 
 " you be not mad . " 

 " it be the writing of that fellow Welkin , " say Smythe gruffly . 
 " I have not   see he for year , but he be always bother I . 
 five time in the last fortnight he be have threatening letter 
 leave at my flat , and I can not   even find out who leave they , 
 let alone if it be Welkin himself . the porter of the flat 
 swear that no suspicious character have be see , and here 
 he have paste up a sort of dado on a public shop window , 
 while the people in the shop - " 

 " quite so , " say Angus modestly , " while the people in the shop 
 be have tea . well , sir , I can assure you I appreciate 
 your common sense in deal so directly with the matter . 
 we can talk about other thing afterwards . the fellow can not 
 be very far off yet , for I swear there be no paper there 
 when I go last to the window , ten or fifteen minute ago . 
 on the other hand , he be too far off to be chase , as we do not 
 even know the direction . if you will take my advice , Mr. Smythe , 
 you will put this at once in the hand of some energetic inquiry man , 
 private rather than public . I know an extremely clever fellow , 
 who have set up in business five minute from here in your car . 
 his name 's Flambeau , and though his youth be a bit stormy , 
 he be a strictly honest man now , and his brain be worth money . 
 he live in Lucknow Mansions , Hampstead . " 

 " that be odd , " say the little man , arch his black eyebrow . 
 " I live , myself , in Himylaya Mansions , round the corner . 
 perhaps you might care to come with I ; I can go to my room 
 and sort out these queer Welkin document , while you run round 
 and get your friend the detective . " 

 " you be very good , " say Angus politely . " well , the soon we 
 act the well . " 

 both man , with a queer kind of impromptu fairness , take the same sort 
 of formal farewell of the lady , and both jump into the brisk little car . 
 as Smythe take the handle and they turn the great corner of the street , 
 Angus be amuse to see a gigantesque poster of " Smythe 's Silent Service , " 
 with a picture of a huge headless iron doll , carry a saucepan with 
 the legend , " a Cook who be never cross . " 

 " I use they in my own flat , " say the little black - bearded man , 
 laugh , " partly for advertisement , and partly for real convenience . 
 honestly , and all above board , those big clockwork doll of mine 
 do bring your coal or claret or a timetable quick than any 
 live servant I have   ever know , if you know which knob to press . 
 but I will never deny , between ourselves , that such servant have 
 their disadvantage , too . 

 " indeed ? " say Angus ; " be there something they can not   do ? " 

 " yes , " reply Smythe coolly ; " they can not   tell I who leave those threaten 
 letter at my flat . " 

 the man 's motor be small and swift like himself ; in fact , 
 like his domestic service , it be of his own invention . if he be 
 an advertising quack , he be one who believe in his own ware . 
 the sense of something tiny and flying be accentuate as they sweep up 
 long white curve of road in the dead but open daylight of evening . 
 soon the white curve come sharp and dizzy ; they be upon 
 ascend spiral , as they say in the modern religion . 
 for , indeed , they be crest a corner of London which be almost 
 as precipitous as Edinburgh , if not quite so picturesque . 
 terrace rise above terrace , and the special tower of flat 
 they seek , rise above they all to almost egyptian height , 
 gilt by the level sunset . the change , as they turn the corner 
 and enter the crescent know as Himylaya Mansions , be as 
 abrupt as the opening of a window ; for they find that pile 
 of flat sit above London as above a green sea of slate . 
 opposite to the mansion , on the other side of the gravel crescent , 
 be a bushy enclosure more like a steep hedge or dyke than a garden , 
 and some way below that run a strip of artificial water , 
 a sort of canal , like the moat of that embowered fortress . 
 as the car sweep round the crescent it pass , at one corner , the stray 
 stall of a man sell chestnut ; and right away at the other end 
 of the curve , Angus could see a dim blue policeman walk slowly . 
 these be the only human shape in that high suburban solitude ; 
 but he have an irrational sense that they express the speechless 
 poetry of London . he feel as if they be figure in a story . 

 the little car shoot up to the right house like a bullet , and shoot out 
 its owner like a bomb shell . he be immediately inquire of a tall 
 commissionaire in shin braid , and a short porter in shirt sleeve , 
 whether anybody or anything have be seek his apartment . 
 he be assure that nobody and nothing have pass these official 
 since his last inquiry ; whereupon he and the slightly bewilder 
 Angus be shoot up in the lift like a rocket , till they reach 
 the top floor . 

 " just come in for a minute , " say the breathless Smythe . " I want 
 to show you those Welkin letter . then you might run round the corner 
 and fetch your friend . " he press a button conceal in the wall , 
 and the door open of itself . 

 it open on a long , commodious ante - room , of which the only 
 arrest feature , ordinarily speak , be the row of tall 
 half - human mechanical figure that stand up on both side 
 like tailor ' dummy . like tailor ' dummy they be headless ; 
 and like tailor ' dummy they have a handsome unnecessary humpiness 
 in the shoulder , and a pigeon - breast protuberance of chest ; 
 but bar this , they be not much more like a human figure than 
 any automatic machine at a station that be about the human height . 
 they have two great hook like arm , for carry tray ; 
 and they be paint pea - green , or vermilion , or black 
 for convenience of distinction ; in every other way they 
 be only automatic machine and nobody would have look 
 twice at they . on this occasion , at least , nobody do . 
 for between the two row of these domestic dummy lay something 
 more interesting than most of the mechanic of the world . 
 it be a white , tattered scrap of paper scrawl with red ink ; 
 and the agile inventor have snatch it up almost as soon 
 as the door fly open . he hand it to Angus without a word . 
 the red ink on it actually be not dry , and the message run , 
 " if you have be to see she today , I shall kill you . " 

 there be a short silence , and then Isidore Smythe say quietly , 
 " would you like a little whiskey ? I rather feel as if I should . " 

 " thank you ; I should like a little Flambeau , " say Angus , gloomily . 
 " this business seem to I to be get rather grave . 
 I be go round at once to fetch he . " 

 " right you be , " say the other , with admirable cheerfulness . 
 " bring he round here as quick as you can . " 

 but as Angus close the front door behind he he see smythe push back 
 a button , and one of the clockwork image glide from its place and slid 
 along a groove in the floor carry a tray with syphon and decanter . 
 there do seem something a trifle weird about leave the little man alone 
 among those dead servant , who be come to life as the door close . 

 six step down from Smythe 's land the man in shirt sleeve be 
 do something with a pail . Angus stop to extract a promise , 
 fortify with a prospective bribe , that he would remain 
 in that place until the return with the detective , and would 
 keep count of any kind of stranger come up those stair . 
 dash down to the front hall he then lay similar charge 
 of vigilance on the commissionaire at the front door , from whom 
 he learn the simplifying circumstance that there be no back door . 
 not content with this , he capture the float policeman 
 and induce he to stand opposite the entrance and watch it ; 
 and finally pause an instant for a pennyworth of chestnut , 
 and an inquiry as to the probable length of the merchant 's stay 
 in the neighbourhood . 

 the chestnut seller , turn up the collar of his coat , tell he 
 he should probably be move shortly , as he think it be go 
 to snow . indeed , the evening be grow grey and bitter , 
 but Angus , with all his eloquence , proceed to nail the chestnut 
 man to his post . 

 " keep yourself warm on your own chestnut , " he say earnestly . 
 " eat up your whole stock ; I will make it worth your while . 
 I will give you a sovereign if you will wait here till I come back , 
 and then tell I whether any man , woman , or child have go 
 into that house where the commissionaire be stand . " 

 he then walk away smartly , with a last look at the besiege tower . 

 " I have   make a ring round that room , anyhow , " he say . 
 " they can not   all four of they be Mr. Welkin 's accomplice . " 

 Lucknow Mansions be , so to speak , on a low platform of that hill 
 of house , of which Himylaya Mansions might be call the peak . 
 Mr. Flambeau 's semi - official flat be on the ground floor , and present 
 in every way a marked contrast to the american machinery and cold hotel - like 
 luxury of the flat of the Silent Service . Flambeau , who be a friend 
 of Angus , receive he in a rococo artistic den behind his office , 
 of which the ornament be sabre , harquebus , eastern curiosity , 
 flask of italian wine , savage cooking - pot , a plumy persian cat , 
 and a small dusty - look roman catholic priest , who look particularly 
 out of place . 

 " this be my friend Father Brown , " say Flambeau . " I have   often 
 want you to meet he . splendid weather , this ; a little cold 
 for southerner like I . " 

 " yes , I think it will keep clear , " say Angus , sit down on 
 a violet - strip eastern ottoman . 

 " no , " say the priest quietly , " it have begin to snow . " 

 and , indeed , as he speak , the first few flake , foresee by the man 
 of chestnut , begin to drift across the darken windowpane . 

 " well , " say Angus heavily . " I be afraid I have   come on business , 
 and rather jumpy business at that . the fact be , Flambeau , within a 
 stone 's throw of your house be a fellow who badly want your help ; 
 he be perpetually be haunt and threaten by an invisible enemy - 
 a scoundrel whom nobody have even see . " as Angus proceed to tell 
 the whole tale of Smythe and Welkin , begin with Laura 's story , 
 and go on with his own , the supernatural laugh at the corner of two 
 empty street , the strange distinct word speak in an empty room , 
 Flambeau grow more and more vividly concerned , and the little 
 priest seem to be leave out of it , like a piece of furniture . 
 when it come to the scribble stamp - paper paste on the window , 
 Flambeau rise , seem to fill the room with his huge shoulder . 

 " if you do not   mind , " he say , " I think you have well tell 
 I the rest on the near road to this man 's house . 
 it strike I , somehow , that there be no time to be lose . " 

 " delighted , " say Angus , rise also , " though he be safe enough 
 for the present , for I have   set four man to watch the only hole 
 to his burrow . " 

 they turn out into the street , the small priest trundling 
 after they with the docility of a small dog . he merely say , 
 in a cheerful way , like one make conversation , " how quick 
 the snow get thick on the ground . " 

 as they thread the steep side street already powder with silver , 
 Angus finish his story ; and by the time they reach the crescent 
 with the tower flat , he have leisure to turn his attention 
 to the four sentinel . the chestnut seller , both before and after 
 receive a sovereign , swear stubbornly that he have watch the door 
 and see no visitor enter . the policeman be even more emphatic . 
 he say he have have experience of crook of all kind , in top hat and in rag ; 
 he be not   so green as to expect suspicious character to look suspicious ; 
 he look out for anybody , and , so help he , there have be nobody . 
 and when all three man gather round the gild commissionaire , who still 
 stand smile astride of the porch , the verdict be more final still . 

 " I have   get a right to ask any man , duke or dustman , what he want 
 in these flat , " say the genial and gold - laced giant , " and I will 
 swear there be be nobody to ask since this gentleman go away . " 

 the unimportant Father Brown , who stand back , look modestly 
 at the pavement , here venture to say meekly , " have nobody 
 be up and down stair , then , since the snow begin to fall ? 
 it begin while we be all round at Flambeau 's . " 

 " nobody be be in here , sir , you can take it from I , " say the official , 
 with beam authority . 

 " then I wonder what that be ? " say the priest , and star at the ground 
 blankly like a fish . 

 the other all look down also ; and Flambeau use a fierce 
 exclamation and a french gesture . for it be unquestionably true 
 that down the middle of the entrance guard by the man in gold lace , 
 actually between the arrogant , stretch leg of that colossus , 
 run a stringy pattern of grey footprint stamp upon the white snow . 

 " God ! " cry Angus involuntarily , " the Invisible Man ! " 

 without another word he turn and dash up the stair , 
 with Flambeau follow ; but Father Brown still stand look 
 about he in the snow - clothe street as if he have lose interest 
 in his query . 

 Flambeau be plainly in a mood to break down the door with his big shoulder ; 
 but the Scotchman , with more reason , if less intuition , fumble about on 
 the frame of the door till he find the invisible button ; and the door 
 swing slowly open . 

 it show substantially the same serrie interior ; the hall 
 have grow dark , though it be still strike here and there 
 with the last crimson shafts of sunset , and one or two of 
 the headless machine have be move from their place for this 
 or that purpose , and stand here and there about the twilit place . 
 the green and red of their coat be all darken in the dusk ; 
 and their likeness to human shape slightly increase 
 by their very shapelessness . but in the middle of they all , 
 exactly where the paper with the red ink have lie , there lie 
 something that look like red ink spill out of its bottle . 
 but it be not red ink . 

 with a french combination of reason and violence Flambeau 
 simply say " Murder ! " and , plunge into the flat , 
 have explore , every corner and cupboard of it in five minute . 
 but if he expect to find a corpse he find none . 
 Isidore Smythe be not in the place , either dead or alive . 
 after the most tearing search the two man meet each other 
 in the outer hall , with streaming face and star eye . 
 " my friend , " say Flambeau , talk French in his excitement , 
 " not only be your murderer invisible , but he make invisible 
 also the murder man . " 

 Angus look round at the dim room full of dummy , and in 
 some celtic corner of his Scotch soul a shudder start . 
 one of the life - size doll stand immediately overshadow the blood 
 stain , summon , perhaps , by the slain man an instant before he fall . 
 one of the high - shoulder hook that serve the thing for arm , 
 be a little lift , and Angus have suddenly the horrid fancy 
 that poor Smythe 's own iron child have strike he down . 
 Matter have rebel , and these machine have kill their master . 
 but even so , what have they do with he ? 

 " eaten he ? " say the nightmare at his ear ; and he sicken 
 for an instant at the idea of rent , human remain absorb 
 and crush into all that acephalous clockwork . 

 he recover his mental health by an emphatic effort , 
 and say to Flambeau , " well , there it be . the poor fellow have 
 evaporate like a cloud and leave a red streak on the floor . 
 the tale do not belong to this world . " 

 " there be only one thing to be do , " say Flambeau , " whether it belong 
 to this world or the other . I must go down and talk to my friend . " 

 they descend , pass the man with the pail , who again asseverate 
 that he have let no intruder pass , down to the commissionaire and the 
 hover chestnut man , who rigidly reassert their own watchfulness . 
 but when Angus look round for his fourth confirmation he could not see it , 
 and call out with some nervousness , " where be the policeman ? " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say Father Brown ; " that be my fault . 
 I just send he down the road to investigate something - 
 that I just think worth investigate . " 

 " well , we want he back pretty soon , " say Angus abruptly , 
 " for the wretched man upstairs have not only be murder , 
 but wipe out . " 

 " how ? " ask the priest . 

 " Father , " say Flambeau , after a pause , " upon my soul I believe 
 it be more in your department than mine . no friend or foe have 
 enter the house , but Smythe be go , as if steal by the fairy . 
 if that be not supernatural , I - " 

 as he speak they be all check by an unusual sight ; the big 
 blue policeman come round the corner of the crescent , run . 
 he come straight up to Brown . 

 " you be right , sir , " he pant , " they have   just find poor Mr. Smythe 's 
 body in the canal down below . " 

 Angus put his hand wildly to his head . " do he run down and 
 drown himself ? " he ask . 

 " he never come down , I will swear , " say the constable , " and he be not 
 drown either , for he die of a great stab over the heart . " 

 " and yet you see no one enter ? " say Flambeau in a grave voice . 

 " let we walk down the road a little , " say the priest . 

 as they reach the other end of the crescent he observe abruptly , 
 " Stupid of I ! I forget to ask the policeman something . 
 I wonder if they find a light brown sack . " 

 " why a light brown sack ? " ask Angus , astonish . 

 " because if it be any other coloured sack , the case must 
 begin over again , " say Father Brown ; " but if it be a light 
 brown sack , why , the case be finish . " 

 " I be pleased to hear it , " say Angus with hearty irony . 
 " it have not   begin , so far as I be concern . " 

 " you must tell we all about it , " say Flambeau with a strange 
 heavy simplicity , like a child . 

 unconsciously they be walk with quicken step down the long 
 sweep of road on the other side of the high crescent , Father Brown 
 lead briskly , though in silence . at last he say with an almost 
 touching vagueness , " well , I be afraid you will think it so prosy . 
 we always begin at the abstract end of thing , and you can not   begin 
 this story anywhere else . 

 " have you ever notice this - that people never answer what you say ? 
 they answer what you mean - or what they think you mean . 
 suppose one lady say to another in a country house , ` be anybody 
 stay with you ? ' the lady do not   answer ` yes ; the butler , 
 the three footman , the parlourmaid , and so on , ' though the 
 parlourmaid may be in the room , or the butler behind her chair . 
 she say ` there be nobody stay with we , ' mean nobody 
 of the sort you mean . but suppose a doctor inquire into 
 an epidemic ask , ` who be stay in the house ? ' then the lady 
 will remember the butler , the parlourmaid , and the rest . 
 all language be use like that ; you never get a question 
 answer literally , even when you get it answer truly . 
 when those four quite honest man say that no man have go into 
 the Mansions , they do not really mean that no man have go into they . 
 they mean no man whom they could suspect of be your man . 
 a man do go into the house , and do come out of it , but they 
 never notice he . " 

 " an invisible man ? " inquire Angus , raise his red eyebrow . 
 " a mentally invisible man , " say Father Brown . 

 a minute or two after he resume in the same unassuming voice , 
 like a man think his way . " of course you can not   think 
 of such a man , until you do think of he . that be where his 
 cleverness come in . but I come to think of he through 
 two or three little thing in the tale Mr. Angus tell we . 
 first , there be the fact that this Welkin go for long walk . 
 and then there be the vast lot of stamp paper on the window . 
 and then , most of all , there be the two thing the young 
 lady say - thing that could not   be true . do not   get annoy , " 
 he add hastily , note a sudden movement of the Scotchman 's head ; 
 ' she think they be true . a person can not   be quite 
 alone in a street a second before she receive a letter . 
 she can not   be quite alone in a street when she start read 
 a letter just receive . there must be somebody pretty near she ; 
 he must be mentally invisible . " 

 " why must there be somebody near she ? " ask Angus . 

 " because , " say Father Brown , " bar carrier - pigeon , somebody must 
 have bring she the letter . " 

 " do you really mean to say , " ask Flambeau , with energy , 
 " that Welkin carry his rival 's letter to his lady ? " 

 " yes , " say the priest . " Welkin carry his rival 's letter to his lady . 
 you see , he have to . " 

 " oh , I can not   stand much more of this , " explode Flambeau . " who be 
 this fellow ? what do he look like ? what be the usual get - up 
 of a mentally invisible man ? " 

 " he be dress rather handsomely in red , blue and gold , " 
 reply the priest promptly with precision , " and in this striking , 
 and even showy , costume he enter Himylaya Mansions under eight 
 human eye ; he kill Smythe in cold blood , and come down into 
 the street again carry the dead body in his arm - " 

 " Reverend sir , " cry Angus , stand still , " be you rave mad , 
 or be I ? " 

 " you be not mad , " say Brown , " only a little unobservant . 
 you have not notice such a man as this , for example . " 

 he take three quick stride forward , and put his hand on the shoulder 
 of an ordinary pass postman who have bustle by they unnoticed 
 under the shade of the tree . 

 " nobody ever notice postman somehow , " he say thoughtfully ; 
 " yet they have passion like other man , and even carry large 
 bag where a small corpse can be stow quite easily . " 

 the postman , instead of turn naturally , have duck and tumble against 
 the garden fence . he be a lean fair - bearded man of very ordinary appearance , 
 but as he turn an alarmed face over his shoulder , all three man be fix 
 with an almost fiendish squint . 
            

 Flambeau go back to his sabre , purple rug and persian cat , have many 
 thing to attend to . John Turnbull Angus go back to the lady at the shop , 
 with whom that imprudent young man contrive to be extremely comfortable . 
 but Father Brown walk those snow - cover hill under the star for many 
 hour with a murderer , and what they say to each other will never be know . 



  the Honour of Israel Gow 

 a stormy evening of olive and silver be close in , as Father Brown , 
 wrap in a grey Scotch plaid , come to the end of a grey Scotch valley 
 and behold the strange castle of Glengyle . it stop one end of the glen 
 or hollow like a blind alley ; and it look like the end of the world . 
 rise in steep roof and spire of seagreen slate in the manner of the old 
 French - Scotch chateaux , it remind an Englishman of the sinister steeple - hat 
 of witch in fairy tale ; and the pine wood that rock round the green 
 turret look , by comparison , as black as numberless flock of raven . 
 this note of a dreamy , almost a sleepy devilry , be no mere fancy from 
 the landscape . for there do rest on the place one of those cloud 
 of pride and madness and mysterious sorrow which lie more heavily on 
 the noble house of Scotland than on any other of the child of man . 
 for Scotland have a double dose of the poison call heredity ; the sense 
 of blood in the aristocrat , and the sense of doom in the Calvinist . 

 the priest have snatch a day from his business at Glasgow to meet his 
 friend Flambeau , the amateur detective , who be at Glengyle Castle with 
 another more formal officer investigate the life and death of the late 
 Earl of Glengyle . that mysterious person be the last representative 
 of a race whose valour , insanity , and violent cunning have make they terrible 
 even among the sinister nobility of their nation in the sixteenth century . 
 none be deep in that labyrinthine ambition , in chamber within chamber 
 of that palace of lie that be build up around Mary Queen of Scots . 

 the rhyme in the country - side attest the motive and the result 
 of their machination candidly : 
  as green sap to the simmer tree 
  be red gold to the Ogilvies . 

 for many century there have never be a decent lord in Glengyle Castle ; 
 and with the victorian era one would have think that all eccentricity 
 be exhaust . the last glengyle , however , satisfy his tribal tradition 
 by do the only thing that be leave for he to do ; he disappear . 
 I do not mean that he go abroad ; by all account he be still in the castle , 
 if he be anywhere . but though his name be in the church register and 
 the big red Peerage , nobody ever see he under the sun . 

 if anyone see he it be a solitary man - servant , something between 
 a groom and a gardener . he be so deaf that the more business - like 
 assume he to be dumb ; while the more penetrating declare he 
 to be half - witte . a gaunt , red - haired labourer , with a dog 
 jaw and chin , but quite blank blue eye , he go by the name of 
 Israel Gow , and be the one silent servant on that desert estate . 
 but the energy with which he dig potato , and the regularity 
 with which he disappear into the kitchen give people an 
 impression that he be provide for the meal of a superior , 
 and that the strange earl be still conceal in the castle . 
 if society need any further proof that he be there , the servant 
 persistently assert that he be not at home . one morning 
 the provost and the minister   for the Glengyles be presbyterian 
 be summon to the castle . there they find that the gardener , 
 groom and cook have add to his many profession that of 
 an undertaker , and have nail up his noble master in a coffin . 
 with how much or how little further inquiry this odd fact be pass , 
 do not as yet very plainly appear ; for the thing have never be legally 
 investigate till Flambeau have go north two or three day before . 
 by then the body of Lord Glengyle   if it be the body   have lie 
 for some time in the little churchyard on the hill . 

 as Father Brown pass through the dim garden and come under the shadow 
 of the chateau , the cloud be thick and the whole air damp and thundery . 
 against the last stripe of the green - gold sunset he see a black human 
 silhouette ; a man in a chimney - pot hat , with a big spade over his shoulder . 
 the combination be queerly suggestive of a sexton ; but when Brown 
 remember the deaf servant who dig potato , he think it natural enough . 
 he know something of the Scotch peasant ; he know the respectability which 
 might well feel it necessary to wear " black " for an official inquiry ; 
 he know also the economy that would not lose an hour 's digging for that . 
 even the man 's start and suspicious stare as the priest go by be consonant 
 enough with the vigilance and jealousy of such a type . 

 the great door be open by Flambeau himself , who have with 
 he a lean man with iron - grey hair and paper in his hand : 
 Inspector Craven from Scotland Yard . the entrance hall be 
 mostly strip and empty ; but the pale , sneer face of one 
 or two of the wicked Ogilvies look down out of black periwig 
 and blacken canvas . 

 follow they into an inner room , Father Brown find that 
 the ally have be seat at a long oak table , of which their 
 end be cover with scribble paper , flank with whisky 
 and cigar . through the whole of its remain length it 
 be occupy by detached object arrange at interval ; 
 object about as inexplicable as any object could be . 
 one look like a small heap of glitter break glass . 
 another look like a high heap of brown dust . a third appear 
 to be a plain stick of wood . 

 " you seem to have a sort of geological museum here , " he say , 
 as he sit down , jerk his head briefly in the direction 
 of the brown dust and the crystalline fragment . 

 " not a geological museum , " reply Flambeau ; ' say a psychological museum . " 

 " oh , for the Lord 's sake , " cry the police detective laughing , 
 " do not   let us begin with such long word . " 

 " do not   you know what psychology mean ? " ask Flambeau with 
 friendly surprise . " psychology mean be off your chump . " 

 " still I hardly follow , " reply the official . 

 " well , " say Flambeau , with decision , " I mean that we have   only find 
 out one thing about Lord Glengyle . he be a maniac . " 

 the black silhouette of Gow with his top hat and spade pass 
 the window , dimly outline against the darken sky . 
 Father Brown star passively at it and answer : 

 " I can understand there must have be something odd about the man , 
 or he would not   have bury himself alive - nor be in such a hurry 
 to bury himself dead . but what make you think it be lunacy ? " 

 " well , " say Flambeau , " you just listen to the list of thing 
 Mr. Craven have find in the house . " 

 " we must get a candle , " say Craven , suddenly . " a storm be get up , 
 and it be too dark to read . " 

 " have you find any candle , " ask Brown smile , " among your oddity ? " 

 Flambeau raise a grave face , and fix his dark eye on his friend . 

 " that be curious , too , " he say . " twenty - five candle , 
 and not a trace of a candlestick . " 

 in the rapidly darken room and rapidly rise wind , Brown go along the 
 table to where a bundle of wax candle lie among the other scrappy exhibit . 
 as he do so he bend accidentally over the heap of red - brown dust ; 
 and a sharp sneeze crack the silence . 

 " Hullo ! " he say , ' snuff ! " 

 he take one of the candle , light it carefully , come back and stick 
 it in the neck of the whisky bottle . the unrestful night air , 
 blow through the crazy window , wave the long flame like a banner . 
 and on every side of the castle they could hear the mile and mile 
 of black pine wood seethe like a black sea around a rock . 

 " I will read the inventory , " begin Craven gravely , pick up one 
 of the paper , " the inventory of what we find loose and unexplained 
 in the castle . you be to understand that the place generally 
 be dismantle and neglect ; but one or two room have plainly 
 be inhabit in a simple but not squalid style by somebody ; 
 somebody who be not the servant Gow . the list be as follow : 

 " first item . a very considerable hoard of precious stone , 
 nearly all diamond , and all of they loose , without any setting whatever . 
 of course , it be natural that the Ogilvies should have family jewel ; 
 but those be exactly the jewel that be almost always set in particular 
 article of ornament . the Ogilvies would seem to have keep theirs 
 loose in their pocket , like copper . 

 " second item . heap and heap of loose snuff , not keep in a horn , 
 or even a pouch , but lie in heap on the mantelpiece , on the sideboard , 
 on the piano , anywhere . it look as if the old gentleman would not take 
 the trouble to look in a pocket or lift a lid . 

 " third item . here and there about the house curious little heap 
 of minute piece of metal , some like steel spring and some in the form 
 of microscopic wheel . as if they have gutte some mechanical toy . 

 " fourth item . the wax candle , which have to be stick in bottle neck 
 because there be nothing else to stick they in . now I wish you to note 
 how very much queerer all this be than anything we anticipate . 
 for the central riddle we be prepare ; we have all see at 
 a glance that there be something wrong about the last earl . 
 we have come here to find out whether he really live here , 
 whether he really die here , whether that red - haired scarecrow 
 who do his burying have anything to do with his dying . 
 but suppose the bad in all this , the most lurid or melodramatic 
 solution you like . suppose the servant really kill the master , 
 or suppose the master be not   really dead , or suppose the master 
 be dress up as the servant , or suppose the servant be bury 
 for the master ; invent what Wilkie Collins ' tragedy you like , 
 and you still have not explain a candle without a candlestick , 
 or why an elderly gentleman of good family should habitually 
 spill snuff on the piano . the core of the tale we could imagine ; 
 it be the fringe that be mysterious . by no stretch of fancy 
 can the human mind connect together snuff and diamond and wax 
 and loose clockwork . " 

 " I think I see the connection , " say the priest . 
 " this Glengyle be mad against the French Revolution . he be 
 an enthusiast for the ancien regime , and be try to re - enact 
 literally the family life of the last Bourbons . he have snuff 
 because it be the eighteenth century luxury ; wax candle , 
 because they be the eighteenth century lighting ; the mechanical 
 bit of iron represent the locksmith hobby of Louis XVI ; 
 the diamond be for the Diamond Necklace of Marie Antoinette . " 

 both the other man be star at he with round eye . 
 " what a perfectly extraordinary notion ! " cry Flambeau . " do you 
 really think that be the truth ? " 

 " I be perfectly sure it be not , " answer Father Brown , " only you 
 say that nobody could connect snuff and diamond and clockwork 
 and candle . I give you that connection off - hand . the real truth , 
 I be very sure , lie deep . " 

 he pause a moment and listen to the wailing of the wind in 
 the turret . then he say , " the late Earl of Glengyle be a thief . 
 he live a second and dark life as a desperate housebreaker . 
 he do not have any candlestick because he only use these 
 candle cut short in the little lantern he carry . the snuff 
 he employ as the fierce french criminal have use pepper : 
 to fle it suddenly in dense mass in the face of a captor or pursuer . 
 but the final proof be in the curious coincidence of the diamond 
 and the small steel wheel . surely that make everything plain to you ? 
 diamond and small steel wheel be the only two instrument 
 with which you can cut out a pane of glass . " 

 the bough of a break pine tree lash heavily in the blast against 
 the windowpane behind they , as if in parody of a burglar , but they 
 do not turn round . their eye be fasten on Father Brown . 

 " diamond and small wheel , " repeat Craven ruminating . 
 " be that all that make you think it the true explanation ? " 

 " I do not   think it the true explanation , " reply the priest placidly ; 
 " but you say that nobody could connect the four thing . 
 the true tale , of course , be something much more humdrum . 
 Glengyle have find , or think he have find , precious stone 
 on his estate . somebody have bamboozle he with those 
 loose brilliant , say they be find in the castle cavern . 
 the little wheel be some diamond - cut affair . 
 he have to do the thing very roughly and in a small way , 
 with the help of a few shepherd or rude fellow on these hill . 
 Snuff be the one great luxury of such Scotch shepherd ; 
 it be the one thing with which you can bribe they . 
 they do not   have candlestick because they do not   want they ; 
 they hold the candle in their hand when they explore the cave . " 

 " be that all ? " ask Flambeau after a long pause . 
 " have we get to the dull truth at last ? " 

 " oh , no , " say Father Brown . 

 as the wind die in the most distant pine wood with a long hoot as of mockery 
 Father Brown , with an utterly impassive face , go on : 

 " I only suggest that because you say one could not plausibly 
 connect snuff with clockwork or candle with bright stone . 
 ten false philosophy will fit the universe ; ten false theory 
 will fit Glengyle Castle . but we want the real explanation 
 of the castle and the universe . but be there no other exhibit ? " 

 Craven laugh , and Flambeau rise smile to his foot and stroll 
 down the long table . 

 " item five , six , seven , etc . , " he say , " and certainly 
 more varied than instructive . a curious collection , 
 not of lead pencil , but of the lead out of lead pencil . 
 a senseless stick of bamboo , with the top rather splinter . 
 it might be the instrument of the crime . only , there be not 
 any crime . the only other thing be a few old missal and 
 little catholic picture , which the Ogilvies keep , I suppose , 
 from the Middle Ages - their family pride be strong than 
 their puritanism . we only put they in the museum because they 
 seem curiously cut about and deface . " 

 the heady tempest without drive a dreadful wrack of cloud across 
 Glengyle and throw the long room into darkness as Father Brown 
 pick up the little illuminated page to examine they . 
 he speak before the drift of darkness have pass ; but it be 
 the voice of an utterly new man . 

 " Mr. Craven , " say he , talk like a man ten year young , " you have get 
 a legal warrant , have not   you , to go up and examine that grave ? the soon 
 we do it the well , and get to the bottom of this horrible affair . 
 if I be you I should start now . " 

 " now , " repeat the astonished detective , " and why now ? " 

 " because this be serious , " answer Brown ; " this be not spilt snuff 
 or loose pebble , that might be there for a hundred reason . 
 there be only one reason I know of for this be do ; and the reason go 
 down to the root of the world . these religious picture be not just 
 dirtied or tear or scrawl over , which might be do in idleness or bigotry , 
 by child or by Protestants . these have be treat very carefully - 
 and very queerly . in every place where the great ornament name of God 
 come in the old illumination it have be elaborately take out . 
 the only other thing that have be remove be the halo round the head 
 of the Child Jesus . therefore , I say , let we get our warrant and our 
 spade and our hatchet , and go up and break open that coffin . " 

 " what do you mean ? " demand the London officer . 

 " I mean , " answer the little priest , and his voice seem to rise slightly 
 in the roar of the gale . " I mean that the great devil of the universe 
 may be sit on the top tower of this castle at this moment , as big 
 as a hundred elephant , and roar like the Apocalypse . there be black 
 magic somewhere at the bottom of this . " 

 " black magic , " repeat Flambeau in a low voice , for he be too enlighten 
 a man not to know of such thing ; " but what can these other thing mean ? " 

 " oh , something damnable , I suppose , " reply Brown impatiently . 
 " how should I know ? how can I guess all their maze down below ? 
 perhaps you can make a torture out of snuff and bamboo . 
 perhaps lunatic lust after wax and steel filing . 
 perhaps there be a madden drug make of lead pencil ! 
 our short cut to the mystery be up the hill to the grave . " 

 his comrade hardly know that they have obey and follow he 
 till a blast of the night wind nearly fling they on their face 
 in the garden . nevertheless they have obey he like automata ; 
 for Craven find a hatchet in his hand , and the warrant in his pocket ; 
 Flambeau be carry the heavy spade of the strange gardener ; 
 Father Brown be carry the little gilt book from which have be 
 tear the name of God . 

 the path up the hill to the churchyard be crooked but short ; 
 only under that stress of wind it seem laborious and long . 
 far as the eye could see , far and far as they mount the slope , 
 be sea beyond sea of pine , now all aslope one way under the wind . 
 and that universal gesture seem as vain as it be vast , as vain as if 
 that wind be whistle about some unpeopled and purposeless planet . 
 through all that infinite growth of grey - blue forest sang , shrill and high , 
 that ancient sorrow that be in the heart of all heathen thing . 
 one could fancy that the voice from the under world of unfathomable 
 foliage be cry of the lost and wander pagan god : 
 god who have go roam in that irrational forest , and who will 
 never find their way back to heaven . 

 " you see , " say Father Brown in low but easy tone , " Scotch people before 
 Scotland exist be a curious lot . in fact , they be a curious lot still . 
 but in the prehistoric time I fancy they really worship demon . 
 that , " he add genially , " be why they jump at the Puritan theology . " 

 " my friend , " say Flambeau , turn in a kind of fury , " what do 
 all that snuff mean ? " 

 " my friend , " reply Brown , with equal seriousness , " there be one 
 mark of all genuine religion : materialism . now , devil - worship be 
 a perfectly genuine religion . " 

 they have come up on the grassy scalp of the hill , one of the few bald 
 spot that stand clear of the crash and roar pine forest . 
 a mean enclosure , partly timber and partly wire , rattle in 
 the tempest to tell they the border of the graveyard . 
 but by the time Inspector Craven have come to the corner of the grave , 
 and Flambeau have plant his spade point downwards and lean on it , 
 they be both almost as shake as the shaky wood and wire . 
 at the foot of the grave grow great tall thistle , grey and silver 
 in their decay . once or twice , when a ball of thistledown break 
 under the breeze and fly past he , Craven jump slightly as if it 
 have be an arrow . 

 Flambeau drive the blade of his spade through the whistle grass 
 into the wet clay below . then he seem to stop and lean on it 
 as on a staff . 

 " go on , " say the priest very gently . " we be only try to find the truth . 
 what be you afraid of ? " 

 " I be afraid of find it , " say Flambeau . 

 the London detective speak suddenly in a high crowing 
 voice that be mean to be conversational and cheery . 
 " I wonder why he really do hide himself like that . 
 something nasty , I suppose ; be he a leper ? " 

 " something bad than that , " say Flambeau . 

 " and what do you imagine , " ask the other , " would be bad than a leper ? " 

 " I do not   imagine it , " say Flambeau . 

 he dig for some dreadful minute in silence , and then say in a choked voice , 
 " I be afraid of his not be the right shape . " 

 " nor be that piece of paper , you know , " say Father Brown quietly , 
 " and we survive even that piece of paper . " 

 Flambeau dig on with a blind energy . but the tempest have shoulder 
 away the choke grey cloud that clung to the hill like smoke and 
 reveal grey field of faint starlight before he clear the shape 
 of a rude timber coffin , and somehow tip it up upon the turf . 
 Craven step forward with his axe ; a thistle - top touch he , 
 and he flinch . then he take a firm stride , and hack and 
 wrench with an energy like Flambeau 's till the lid be tear off , 
 and all that be there lie glimmering in the grey starlight . 

 " bone , " say Craven ; and then he add , " but it be a man , " 
 as if that be something unexpected . 

 " be he , " ask Flambeau in a voice that go oddly up and down , 
 " be he all right ? " 

 " seem so , " say the officer huskily , bend over the obscure and decay 
 skeleton in the box . " wait a minute . " 

 a vast heave go over Flambeau 's huge figure . " and now I come to think 
 of it , " he cry , " why in the name of madness should not   he be all right ? 
 what be it get hold of a man on these cursed cold mountain ? 
 I think it be the black , brainless repetition ; all these forest , and over all 
 an ancient horror of unconsciousness . it be like the dream of an atheist . 
 pine - tree and more pine - tree and million more pine - tree - " 

 " God ! " cry the man by the coffin , " but he have not   get a head . " 

 while the other stand rigid the priest , for the first time , 
 show a leap of startled concern . 

 " no head ! " he repeat . " no head ? " as if he have almost expect 
 some other deficiency . 

 half - witte vision of a headless baby bear to Glengyle , of a headless 
 youth hide himself in the castle , of a headless man pace those ancient 
 hall or that gorgeous garden , pass in panorama through their mind . 
 but even in that stiffen instant the tale take no root in they 
 and seem to have no reason in it . they stand listen to the loud 
 wood and the shriek sky quite foolishly , like exhausted animal . 
 Thought seem to be something enormous that have suddenly slip out 
 of their grasp . 

 " there be three headless man , " say Father Brown , ' stand round 
 this open grave . " 

 the pale detective from London open his mouth to speak , and leave 
 it open like a yokel , while a long scream of wind tear the sky ; 
 then he look at the axe in his hand as if it do not belong to he , 
 and drop it . 

 " Father , " say Flambeau in that infantile and heavy voice he use very seldom , 
 " what be we to do ? " 

 his friend 's reply come with the pent promptitude of a gun go off . 

 " Sleep ! " cry Father Brown . " Sleep . we have come to the end of the way . 
 do you know what sleep be ? do you know that every man who sleep believe 
 in God ? it be a sacrament ; for it be an act of faith and it be a food . 
 and we need a sacrament , if only a natural one . something have fall on we 
 that fall very seldom on man ; perhaps the bad thing that can fall on they . " 

 Craven 's part lip come together to say , " what do you mean ? " 

 the priest have turn his face to the castle as he answer : 
 " we have find the truth ; and the truth make no sense . " 

 he go down the path in front of they with a plunging and reckless step 
 very rare with he , and when they reach the castle again he throw himself 
 upon sleep with the simplicity of a dog . 

 despite his mystic praise of slumber , Father Brown be up early 
 than anyone else except the silent gardener ; and be find smoking 
 a big pipe and watch that expert at his speechless labour 
 in the kitchen garden . towards daybreak the rock storm have end 
 in roar rain , and the day come with a curious freshness . 
 the gardener seem even to have be converse , but at sight 
 of the detective he plant his spade sullenly in a bed and , 
 say something about his breakfast , shift along the line 
 of cabbage and shut himself in the kitchen . " he be a valuable 
 man , that , " say Father Brown . " he do the potato amazingly . 
 still , " he add , with a dispassionate charity , " he have his fault ; 
 which of we have not ? he do not   dig this bank quite regularly . 
 there , for instance , " and he stamp suddenly on one spot . 
 " I be really very doubtful about that potato . " 

 " and why ? " ask Craven , amuse with the little man 's hobby . 

 " I be doubtful about it , " say the other , " because old Gow be doubtful about 
 it himself . he put his spade in methodically in every place but just this . 
 there must be a mighty fine potato just here . " 

 Flambeau pull up the spade and impetuously drive it into the place . 
 he turn up , under a load of soil , something that do not look 
 like a potato , but rather like a monstrous , over - dome mushroom . 
 but it strike the spade with a cold click ; it roll over like a ball , 
 and grin up at they . 

 " the Earl of Glengyle , " say Brown sadly , and look down heavily 
 at the skull . 

 then , after a momentary meditation , he pluck the spade from Flambeau , 
 and , say " we must hide it again , " clamp the skull down in the earth . 
 then he lean his little body and huge head on the great handle 
 of the spade , that stand up stiffly in the earth , and his eye 
 be empty and his forehead full of wrinkle . " if one could 
 only conceive , " he mutter , " the meaning of this last monstrosity . " 
 and lean on the large spade handle , he bury his brow in his hand , 
 as man do in church . 

 all the corner of the sky be brighten into blue and silver ; 
 the bird be chatter in the tiny garden tree ; 
 so loud it seem as if the tree themselves be talk . 
 but the three man be silent enough . 

 " well , I give it all up , " say Flambeau at last boisterously . 
 " my brain and this world do not   fit each other ; and there be an end of it . 
 Snuff , spoil Prayer Books , and the inside of musical box - what - " 

 Brown throw up his bother brow and rap on the spade handle with an 
 intolerance quite unusual with he . " oh , tut , tut , tut , tut ! " he cry . 
 " all that be as plain as a pikestaff . I understand the snuff and clockwork , 
 and so on , when I first open my eye this morning . and since then 
 I have   have it out with old Gow , the gardener , who be neither so deaf nor 
 so stupid as he pretend . there be nothing amiss about the loose item . 
 I be wrong about the torn mass - book , too ; there be no harm in that . but it be 
 this last business . desecrate graf and steal dead man 's head - 
 surely there be harm in that ? surely there be black magic still in that ? 
 that do not   fit in to the quite simple story of the snuff and the candle . " 
 and , stride about again , he smoke moodily . 

 " my friend , " say Flambeau , with a grim humour , " you must 
 be careful with I and remember I be once a criminal . 
 the great advantage of that estate be that I always make up 
 the story myself , and act it as quick as I choose . this detective 
 business of wait about be too much for my french impatience . 
 all my life , for good or evil , I have do thing at the instant ; 
 I always fight duel the next morning ; I always pay bill 
 on the nail ; I never even put off a visit to the dentist - " 

 Father Brown 's pipe fall out of his mouth and break into three piece on 
 the gravel path . he stand roll his eye , the exact picture of an idiot . 
 " Lord , what a turnip I be ! " he keep say . " Lord , what a turnip ! " 
 then , in a somewhat groggy kind of way , he begin to laugh . 

 " the dentist ! " he repeat . " six hour in the spiritual abyss , 
 and all because I never think of the dentist ! such a simple , 
 such a beautiful and peaceful thought ! friend , we have pass 
 a night in hell ; but now the sun be rise , the bird be sing , 
 and the radiant form of the dentist console the world . " 

 " I will get some sense out of this , " cry Flambeau , stride forward , 
 " if I use the torture of the inquisition . " 

 Father Brown repress what appear to be a momentary disposition 
 to dance on the now sunlit lawn and cry quite piteously , like a child , 
 " oh , let I be silly a little . you do not   know how unhappy I have be . 
 and now I know that there have be no deep sin in this business at all . 
 only a little lunacy , perhaps - and who mind that ? " 

 he spin round once more , then face they with gravity . 

 " this be not a story of crime , " he say ; " rather it be the story 
 of a strange and crooked honesty . we be deal with the one 
 man on earth , perhaps , who have take no more than his due . 
 it be a study in the savage living logic that have be the religion 
 of this race . 

 " that old local rhyme about the house of Glengyle - 
  as green sap to the simmer tree 
  be red gold to the Ogilvies - 
 be literal as well as metaphorical . it do not merely 
 mean that the Glengyles seek for wealth ; it be also true 
 that they literally gather gold ; they have a huge collection 
 of ornament and utensil in that metal . they be , in fact , 
 miser whose mania take that turn . in the light of that fact , 
 run through all the thing we find in the castle . 
 diamond without their gold ring ; candle without their 
 gold candlestick ; snuff without the gold snuff - box ; 
 pencil - lead without the gold pencil - case ; a walk stick 
 without its gold top ; clockwork without the gold clock - 
 or rather watch . and , mad as it sound , because the halo 
 and the name of God in the old missal be of real gold ; 
 these also be take away . " 

 the garden seem to brighten , the grass to grow gayer 
 in the strengthen sun , as the crazy truth be tell . 
 Flambeau light a cigarette as his friend go on . 

 " be take away , " continue Father Brown ; " be take away - 
 but not steal . thief would never have leave this mystery . 
 thief would have take the gold snuff - box , snuff and all ; 
 the gold pencil - case , lead and all . we have to deal with a 
 man with a peculiar conscience , but certainly a conscience . 
 I find that mad moralist this morning in the kitchen garden yonder , 
 and I hear the whole story . 

 " the late Archibald Ogilvie be the near approach to a good 
 man ever bear at Glengyle . but his bitter virtue take the turn 
 of the misanthrope ; he mop over the dishonesty of his ancestor , 
 from which , somehow , he generalise a dishonesty of all man . 
 more especially he distrust philanthropy or free - giving ; 
 and he swear if he could find one man who take his exact right 
 he should have all the gold of Glengyle . have deliver this defiance 
 to humanity he shut himself up , without the small expectation 
 of its being answer . one day , however , a deaf and seemingly 
 senseless lad from a distant village bring he a belate telegram ; 
 and Glengyle , in his acrid pleasantry , give he a new farthing . 
 at least he think he have do so , but when he turn over his 
 change he find the new farthing still there and a sovereign gone . 
 the accident offer he vista of sneer speculation . 
 either way , the boy would show the greasy greed of the specie . 
 either he would vanish , a thief steal a coin ; or he would 
 sneak back with it virtuously , a snob seek a reward . 
 in the middle of that night Lord Glengyle be knock up out of his bed - 
 for he live alone - and force to open the door to the deaf idiot . 
 the idiot bring with he , not the sovereign , but exactly nineteen 
 shilling and eleven - pence three - farthing in change . 

 " then the wild exactitude of this action take hold of the mad lord 's brain 
 like fire . he swear he be diogene , that have long seek an honest man , 
 and at last have find one . he make a new will , which I have see . 
 he take the literal youth into his huge , neglect house , and train 
 he up as his solitary servant and - after an odd manner - his heir . 
 and whatever that queer creature understand , he understand 
 absolutely his lord 's two fix idea : first , that the letter 
 of right be everything ; and second , that he himself be to have 
 the gold of Glengyle . so far , that be all ; and that be simple . 
 he have strip the house of gold , and take not a grain that be not gold ; 
 not so much as a grain of snuff . he lift the gold leaf off an 
 old illumination , fully satisfied that he leave the rest unspoilt . 
 all that I understand ; but I could not understand this skull business . 
 I be really uneasy about that human head bury among the potato . 
 it distress I - till Flambeau say the word . 

 " it will be all right . he will put the skull back in the grave , 
 when he have take the gold out of the tooth . " 

 and , indeed , when Flambeau cross the hill that morning , he see 
 that strange being , the just miser , dig at the desecrate grave , 
 the plaid round his throat thrash out in the mountain wind ; 
 the sober top hat on his head . 



  the Wrong Shape 

 Certain of the great road go north out of London continue far 
 into the country a sort of attenuated and interrupt spectre of 
 a street , with great gap in the building , but preserve the line . 
 here will be a group of shop , follow by a fence field or paddock , 
 and then a famous public - house , and then perhaps a market garden 
 or a nursery garden , and then one large private house , and then 
 another field and another inn , and so on . if anyone walk along 
 one of these road he will pass a house which will probably catch 
 his eye , though he may not be able to explain its attraction . 
 it be a long , low house , run parallel with the road , 
 paint mostly white and pale green , with a veranda and sun - blind , 
 and porch cap with those quaint sort of cupola like 
 wooden umbrella that one see in some old - fashioned house . 
 in fact , it be an old - fashioned house , very English and very 
 suburban in the good old wealthy Clapham sense . and yet the house 
 have a look of have be build chiefly for the hot weather . 
 look at its white paint and sun - blind one think vaguely of pugaree 
 and even of palm tree . I can not trace the feeling to its root ; 
 perhaps the place be build by an Anglo - indian . 

 anyone pass this house , I say , would be namelessly fascinate by it ; 
 would feel that it be a place about which some story be to be tell . 
 and he would have be right , as you shall shortly hear . 
 for this be the story - the story of the strange thing that do 
 really happen in it in the Whitsuntide of the year 18 - : 

 anyone pass the house on the Thursday before WhitSunday at 
 about half - past four p.m. would have see the front door open , 
 and Father Brown , of the small church of St. Mungo , come out 
 smoke a large pipe in company with a very tall french friend 
 of his call Flambeau , who be smoke a very small cigarette . 
 these person may or may not be of interest to the reader , 
 but the truth be that they be not the only interesting thing 
 that be display when the front door of the white - and - green house 
 be open . there be further peculiarity about this house , 
 which must be describe to start with , not only that the reader 
 may understand this tragic tale , but also that he may realise 
 what it be that the opening of the door reveal . 

 the whole house be build upon the plan of a t , but a t 
 with a very long cross piece and a very short tail piece . 
 the long cross piece be the frontage that run along in face 
 of the street , with the front door in the middle ; it be two 
 story high , and contain nearly all the important room . 
 the short tail piece , which run out at the back immediately 
 opposite the front door , be one story high , and consist 
 only of two long room , the one lead into the other . 
 the first of these two room be the study in which the celebrate 
 Mr. Quinton write his wild oriental poem and romance . 
 the farth room be a glass conservatory full of tropical 
 blossom of quite unique and almost monstrous beauty , 
 and on such afternoon as these glow with gorgeous sunlight . 
 thus when the hall door be open , many a passer - by literally stop 
 to stare and gasp ; for he look down a perspective of rich apartment 
 to something really like a transformation scene in a fairy play : 
 purple cloud and golden sun and crimson star that be at 
 once scorchingly vivid and yet transparent and far away . 

 Leonard Quinton , the poet , have himself most carefully arrange this effect ; 
 and it be doubtful whether he so perfectly express his personality in any 
 of his poem . for he be a man who drink and bath in colour , who indulge 
 his lust for colour somewhat to the neglect of form - even of good form . 
 this it be that have turn his genius so wholly to eastern art and imagery ; 
 to those bewildering carpet or blind embroidery in which all the colour 
 seem fall into a fortunate chaos , have nothing to typify or to teach . 
 he have attempt , not perhaps with complete artistic success , but with 
 acknowledge imagination and invention , to compose epic and love story 
 reflect the riot of violent and even cruel colour ; tale of tropical 
 heaven of burn gold or blood - red copper ; of eastern hero who ride 
 with twelve - turbane mitre upon elephant paint purple or peacock green ; 
 of gigantic jewel that a hundred negro could not carry , but which burn 
 with ancient and strange - hue fire . 

 in short   to put the matter from the more common point of view , 
 he deal much in eastern heaven , rather bad than most western hell ; 
 in eastern monarchs , whom we might possibly call maniacs ; 
 and in eastern jewel which a Bond Street jeweller   if the hundred 
 staggering negro bring they into his shop   might possibly 
 not regard as genuine . Quinton be a genius , if a morbid one ; 
 and even his morbidity appear more in his life than in his work . 
 in temperament he be weak and waspish , and his health have suffer 
 heavily from oriental experiment with opium . his wife - a handsome , 
 hard - work , and , indeed , over - work woman object to the opium , 
 but object much more to a live indian hermit in white and yellow robe , 
 whom her husband insist on entertain for month together , 
 a Virgil to guide his spirit through the heaven and the hell 
 of the east . 

 it be out of this artistic household that Father Brown and his friend step 
 on to the door - step ; and to judge from their face , they step out of it 
 with much relief . Flambeau have know Quinton in wild student day in Paris , 
 and they have renew the acquaintance for a week - end ; but apart from 
 Flambeau 's more responsible development of late , he do not get on well with 
 the poet now . choke oneself with opium and write little erotic verse 
 on vellum be not his notion of how a gentleman should go to the devil . 
 as the two pause on the door - step , before take a turn in the garden , 
 the front garden gate be throw open with violence , and a young man with a 
 billycock hat on the back of his head tumble up the step in his eagerness . 
 he be a dissipate - look youth with a gorgeous red necktie all awry , 
 as if he have sleep in it , and he keep fidget and lash about with one 
 of those little jointed cane . 

 " I say , " he say breathlessly , " I want to see old Quinton . I must see he . 
 have he go ? " 

 " Mr. Quinton be in , I believe , " say Father Brown , 
 clean his pipe , " but I do not know if you can see he . 
 the doctor be with he at present . " 

 the young man , who seem not to be perfectly sober , stumble into the hall ; 
 and at the same moment the doctor come out of Quinton 's study , 
 shut the door and begin to put on his glove . 

 " see Mr. Quinton ? " say the doctor coolly . " no , I be afraid you 
 can not . in fact , you must not   on any account . nobody must see he ; 
 I have   just give he his sleeping draught . " 

 " no , but look here , old chap , " say the youth in the red tie , 
 try affectionately to capture the doctor by the lapel of his coat . 
 " look here . I be simply sew up , I tell you . I - " 

 " it be no good , Mr. Atkinson , " say the doctor , force he to fall back ; 
 " when you can alter the effect of a drug I will alter my decision , " and , 
 settle on his hat , he step out into the sunlight with the other two . 
 he be a bull - neck , good - temper little man with a small moustache , 
 inexpressibly ordinary , yet give an impression of capacity . 

 the young man in the billycock , who do not seem to be gift 
 with any tact in deal with people beyond the general idea 
 of clutch hold of their coat , stand outside the door , 
 as daze as if he have be throw out bodily , and silently 
 watch the other three walk away together through the garden . 

 " that be a sound , spanking lie I tell just now , " remark the 
 medical man , laugh . " in point of fact , poor Quinton 
 do not   have his sleeping draught for nearly half an hour . 
 but I be not go to have he bother with that little beast , 
 who only want to borrow money that he would not   pay back if he could . 
 he be a dirty little scamp , though he be Mrs. Quinton 's brother , 
 and she be as fine a woman as ever walk . " 

 " yes , " say Father Brown . " she be a good woman . " 

 " so I propose to hang about the garden till the creature have clear off , " 
 go on the doctor , " and then I will go in to Quinton with the medicine . 
 Atkinson can not   get in , because I lock the door . " 

 " in that case , Dr. Harris , " say Flambeau , " we might as well 
 walk round at the back by the end of the conservatory . 
 there be no entrance to it that way , but it be worth see , 
 even from the outside . " 

 " yes , and I might get a squint at my patient , " laugh the doctor , 
 " for he prefer to lie on an ottoman right at the end of the conservatory 
 amid all those blood - red poinsettia ; it would give I the creep . 
 but what be you do ? " 

 Father Brown have stop for a moment , and pick up out of the long grass , 
 where it have almost be wholly hide , a queer , crooked oriental knife , 
 inlay exquisitely in coloured stone and metal . 

 " what be this ? " ask Father Brown , regard it with some disfavour . 

 " oh , Quinton 's , I suppose , " say Dr. Harris carelessly ; 
 " he have all sort of chinese knickknack about the place . 
 or perhaps it belong to that mild Hindoo of his whom he keep 
 on a string . " 

 " what Hindoo ? " ask Father Brown , still star at the dagger 
 in his hand . 

 " oh , some indian conjuror , " say the doctor lightly ; " a fraud , of course . " 

 " you do not   believe in magic ? " ask Father Brown , without look up . 

 " o crickey ! magic ! " say the doctor . 

 " it be very beautiful , " say the priest in a low , dream voice ; 
 " the colour be very beautiful . but it be the wrong shape . " 

 " what for ? " ask Flambeau , star . 

 " for anything . it be the wrong shape in the abstract . do not   you ever 
 feel that about eastern art ? the colour be intoxicatingly lovely ; 
 but the shape be mean and bad - deliberately mean and bad . 
 I have see wicked thing in a Turkey carpet . " 

 " Mon Dieu ! " cry Flambeau , laugh . 

 " they be letter and symbol in a language I do not   know ; but I know they 
 stand for evil word , " go on the priest , his voice grow low and low . 
 " the line go wrong on purpose - like serpent double to escape . " 

 " what the devil be you talk about ? " say the doctor with a loud laugh . 

 Flambeau speak quietly to he in answer . " the Father sometimes 
 get this mystic 's cloud on he , " he say ; " but I give you fair 
 warning that I have never know he to have it except when there 
 be some evil quite near . " 

 " oh , rat ! " say the scientist . 

 " why , look at it , " cry Father Brown , hold out the crooked 
 knife at arm 's length , as if it be some glitter snake . 
 " do not   you see it be the wrong shape ? do not   you see that it have 
 no hearty and plain purpose ? it do not point like a spear . 
 it do not sweep like a scythe . it do not look like a weapon . 
 it look like an instrument of torture . " 

 " well , as you do not   seem to like it , " say the jolly Harris , 
 " it have well be take back to its owner . have not   we 
 come to the end of this confound conservatory yet ? 
 this house be the wrong shape , if you like . " 

 " you do not   understand , " say Father Brown , shake his head . 
 " the shape of this house be quaint - it be even laughable . 
 but there be nothing wrong about it . " 

 as they speak they come round the curve of glass that end the conservatory , 
 an uninterrupted curve , for there be neither door nor window by which to 
 enter at that end . the glass , however , be clear , and the sun still bright , 
 though begin to set ; and they could see not only the flamboyant 
 blossom inside , but the frail figure of the poet in a brown velvet coat lie 
 languidly on the sofa , have , apparently , fall half asleep over a book . 
 he be a pale , slight man , with loose , chestnut hair and a fringe of beard 
 that be the paradox of his face , for the beard make he look less manly . 
 these trait be well known to all three of they ; but even have it not be 
 so , it may be doubt whether they would have look at Quinton just then . 
 their eye be rivet on another object . 

 exactly in their path , immediately outside the round end of 
 the glass building , be stand a tall man , whose drapery fall 
 to his foot in faultless white , and whose bare , brown skull , 
 face , and neck gleam in the set sun like splendid bronze . 
 he be look through the glass at the sleeper , and he be 
 more motionless than a mountain . 

 " who be that ? " cry Father Brown , step back with a hiss 
 intake of his breath . 

 " oh , it be only that Hindoo humbug , " growl Harris ; " but I do not 
 know what the deuce he be do here . " 

 " it look like hypnotism , " say Flambeau , bite his black moustache . 

 " why be you unmedical fellow always talk bosh about hypnotism ? " 
 cry the doctor . " it look a deal more like burglary . " 

 " well , we will speak to it , at any rate , " say Flambeau , who be always 
 for action . one long stride take he to the place where the Indian stand . 
 bow from his great height , which overtop even the Oriental 's , he say 
 with placid impudence : 

 " good evening , sir . do you want anything ? " 

 quite slowly , like a great ship turn into a harbour , the great yellow 
 face turn , and look at last over its white shoulder . they be 
 startled to see that its yellow eyelid be quite seal , as in sleep . 
 " thank you , " say the face in excellent English . " I want nothing . " 
 then , half open the lid , so as to show a slit of opalescent eyeball , 
 he repeat , " I want nothing . " then he open his eye wide with a 
 startling stare , say , " I want nothing , " and go rustle away into 
 the rapidly darken garden . 

 " the Christian be more modest , " mutter Father Brown ; 
 " he want something . " 

 " what on earth be he do ? " ask Flambeau , knit his black 
 brow and lower his voice . 

 " I should like to talk to you later , " say Father Brown . 

 the sunlight be still a reality , but it be the red light of evening , 
 and the bulk of the garden tree and bush grow blacker and blacker 
 against it . they turn round the end of the conservatory , and walk 
 in silence down the other side to get round to the front door . 
 as they go they seem to wake something , as one startle a bird , 
 in the deep corner between the study and the main building ; and again 
 they see the white - rob fakir slide out of the shadow , and slip round 
 towards the front door . to their surprise , however , he have not be alone . 
 they find themselves abruptly pull up and force to banish their 
 bewilderment by the appearance of Mrs. Quinton , with her heavy golden 
 hair and square pale face , advance on they out of the twilight . 
 she look a little stern , but be entirely courteous . 

 " good evening , Dr. Harris , " be all she say . 

 " good evening , Mrs. Quinton , " say the little doctor heartily . 
 " I be just go to give your husband his sleeping draught . " 

 " yes , " she say in a clear voice . " I think it be quite time . " 
 and she smile at they , and go sweep into the house . 

 " that woman 's over - drive , " say Father Brown ; " that be the kind of woman 
 that do her duty for twenty year , and then do something dreadful . " 

 the little doctor look at he for the first time with an eye of interest . 
 " do you ever study medicine ? " he ask . 

 " you have to know something of the mind as well as the body , " 
 answer the priest ; " we have to know something of the body 
 as well as the mind . " 

 " well , " say the doctor , " I think I will go and give Quinton his stuff . " 

 they have turn the corner of the front facade , and be 
 approach the front doorway . as they turn into it 
 they see the man in the white robe for the third time . 
 he come so straight towards the front door that it seem quite 
 incredible that he have not just come out of the study opposite to it . 
 yet they know that the study door be lock . 

 Father Brown and Flambeau , however , keep this weird contradiction 
 to themselves , and Dr. Harris be not a man to waste his thought 
 on the impossible . he permit the omnipresent Asiatic 
 to make his exit , and then step briskly into the hall . 
 there he find a figure which he have already forget . 
 the inane Atkinson be still hang about , hum and poke 
 thing with his knobby cane . the doctor 's face have a spasm of 
 disgust and decision , and he whisper rapidly to his companion : 
 " I must lock the door again , or this rat will get in . 
 but I shall be out again in two minute . " 

 he rapidly unlock the door and lock it again behind he , 
 just balk a blunder charge from the young man in the billycock . 
 the young man throw himself impatiently on a hall chair . 
 Flambeau look at a persian illumination on the wall ; Father Brown , 
 who seem in a sort of daze , dully eye the door . in about four 
 minute the door be open again . Atkinson be quick this time . 
 he spring forward , hold the door open for an instant , and call out : 
 " oh , I say , Quinton , I want - " 

 from the other end of the study come the clear voice of Quinton , 
 in something between a yawn and a yell of weary laughter . 

 " oh , I know what you want . take it , and leave I in peace . 
 I be write a song about peacock . " 

 before the door close half a sovereign come fly through the aperture ; 
 and Atkinson , stumble forward , catch it with singular dexterity . 

 " so that be settle , " say the doctor , and , lock the door savagely , 
 he lead the way out into the garden . 

 " poor Leonard can get a little peace now , " he add to Father Brown ; 
 " he be lock in all by himself for an hour or two . " 

 " yes , " answer the priest ; " and his voice sound jolly enough when we 
 leave he . " then he look gravely round the garden , and see the loose 
 figure of Atkinson stand and jingle the half - sovereign in his pocket , 
 and beyond , in the purple twilight , the figure of the indian sit bolt 
 upright upon a bank of grass with his face turn towards the set sun . 
 then he say abruptly : " where be Mrs. Quinton ! " 

 " she have go up to her room , " say the doctor . " that be her shadow 
 on the blind . " 

 Father Brown look up , and frowningly scrutinise a dark outline 
 at the gas - light window . 

 " yes , " he say , " that be her shadow , " and he walk a yard or two and throw 
 himself upon a garden seat . 

 Flambeau sit down beside he ; but the doctor be one of 
 those energetic people who live naturally on their leg . 
 he walk away , smoking , into the twilight , and the two friend 
 be leave together . 

 " my father , " say Flambeau in French , " what be the matter with you ? " 

 Father Brown be silent and motionless for half a minute , then he say : 
 " superstition be irreligious , but there be something in the air 
 of this place . I think it be that Indian - at least , partly . " 

 he sink into silence , and watch the distant outline of the Indian , 
 who still sit rigid as if in prayer . at first sight he seem motionless , 
 but as Father Brown watch he he see that the man sway ever so slightly 
 with a rhythmic movement , just as the dark tree - top sway ever so slightly 
 in the wind that be creep up the dim garden path and shuffle the fall 
 leave a little . 

 the landscape be grow rapidly dark , as if for a storm , 
 but they could still see all the figure in their various place . 
 Atkinson be lean against a tree with a listless face ; 
 Quinton 's wife be still at her window ; the doctor have go stroll 
 round the end of the conservatory ; they could see his cigar like 
 a will - o'-the - wisp ; and the fakir still sit rigid and yet rock , 
 while the tree above he begin to rock and almost to roar . 
 storm be certainly come . 

 " when that Indian speak to we , " go on Brown in a conversational undertone , 
 " I have a sort of vision , a vision of he and all his universe . 
 yet he only say the same thing three time . when first he say ` I 
 want nothing , ' it mean only that he be impenetrable , that Asia 
 do not give itself away . then he say again , ` I want nothing , ' 
 and I know that he mean that he be sufficient to himself , like a cosmos , 
 that he need no God , neither admit any sin . and when he say 
 the third time , ` I want nothing , ' he say it with blaze eye . 
 and I know that he mean literally what he say ; that nothing be 
 his desire and his home ; that he be weary for nothing as for wine ; 
 that annihilation , the mere destruction of everything or anything - " 

 two drop of rain fall ; and for some reason Flambeau start and look up , 
 as if they have sting he . and the same instant the doctor down by the end 
 of the conservatory begin run towards they , call out something 
 as he run . 

 as he come among they like a bombshell the restless Atkinson 
 happen to be take a turn near to the house front ; 
 and the doctor clutch he by the collar in a convulsive grip . 
 " foul play ! " he cry ; " what have you be do to he , you dog ? " 

 the priest have spring erect , and have the voice of steel of a 
 soldier in command . 

 " no fighting , " he cry coolly ; " we be enough to hold anyone we want to . 
 what be the matter , doctor ? " 

 " thing be not right with Quinton , " say the doctor , quite white . 
 " I could just see he through the glass , and I do not   like the way he be lie . 
 it be not as I leave he , anyhow . " 

 " let we go in to he , " say Father Brown shortly . 
 " you can leave Mr. Atkinson alone . I have have he in sight 
 since we hear Quinton 's voice . " 

 " I will stop here and watch he , " say Flambeau hurriedly . 
 " you go in and see . " 

 the doctor and the priest fly to the study door , unlock it , 
 and fall into the room . in do so they nearly fall over the large 
 mahogany table in the centre at which the poet usually write ; 
 for the place be light only by a small fire keep for the invalid . 
 in the middle of this table lie a single sheet of paper , evidently leave 
 there on purpose . the doctor snatch it up , glance at it , 
 hand it to Father Brown , and cry , " good God , look at that ! " 
 plunge toward the glass room beyond , where the terrible tropic 
 flower still seem to keep a crimson memory of the sunset . 

 Father Brown read the word three time before he put down the paper . 
 the word be : " I die by my own hand ; yet I die murder ! " 
 they be in the quite inimitable , not to say illegible , 
 handwriting of Leonard Quinton . 

 then Father Brown , still keep the paper in his hand , 
 strode towards the conservatory , only to meet his medical 
 friend come back with a face of assurance and collapse . 
 " he be do it , " say Harris . 

 they go together through the gorgeous unnatural beauty of cactus 
 and azalea and find Leonard Quinton , poet and romancer , with his head 
 hang downward off his ottoman and his red curl sweep the ground . 
 into his left side be thrust the queer dagger that they have pick up 
 in the garden , and his limp hand still rest on the hilt . 

 outside the storm have come at one stride , like the night in Coleridge , 
 and garden and glass roof be darken with drive rain . 
 Father Brown seem to be study the paper more than the corpse ; 
 he hold it close to his eye ; and seem try to read it in the twilight . 
 then he hold it up against the faint light , and , as he do so , 
 lightning star at they for an instant so white that the paper look 
 black against it . 

 darkness full of thunder follow , and after the thunder Father Brown 's 
 voice say out of the dark : " Doctor , this paper be the wrong shape . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Doctor Harris , with a frowning stare . 

 " it be not   square , " answer Brown . " it have a sort of edge snip 
 off at the corner . what do it mean ? " 

 " how the deuce should I know ? " growl the doctor . 
 " shall we move this poor chap , do you think ? he be quite dead . " 

 " no , " answer the priest ; " we must leave he as he lie and send 
 for the police . " but he be still scrutinise the paper . 

 as they go back through the study he stop by the table 
 and pick up a small pair of nail scissor . " ah , " he say , 
 with a sort of relief , " this be what he do it with . 
 but yet - " and he knit his brow . 

 " oh , stop fool with that scrap of paper , " say the doctor emphatically . 
 " it be a fad of his . he have hundred of they . he cut all his paper 
 like that , " as he point to a stack of sermon paper still unused on another 
 and small table . Father Brown go up to it and hold up a sheet . 
 it be the same irregular shape . 

 " quite so , " he say . " and here I see the corner that be snip off . " 
 and to the indignation of his colleague he begin to count they . 

 " that be all right , " he say , with an apologetic smile . 
 " twenty - three sheet cut and twenty - two corner cut off they . 
 and as I see you be impatient we will rejoin the other . " 

 " who be to tell his wife ? " ask Dr. Harris . " will you go and tell she now , 
 while I send a servant for the police ? " 

 " as you will , " say Father Brown indifferently . and he go 
 out to the hall door . 

 here also he find a drama , though of a more grotesque sort . 
 it show nothing less than his big friend Flambeau in an attitude 
 to which he have long be unaccustomed , while upon the pathway 
 at the bottom of the step be sprawl with his boot 
 in the air the amiable Atkinson , his billycock hat and walk 
 cane send fly in opposite direction along the path . 
 Atkinson have at length weary of Flambeau 's almost paternal custody , 
 and have endeavour to knock he down , which be by no mean 
 a smooth game to play with the Roi des Apaches , even after 
 that monarch 's abdication . 

 Flambeau be about to leap upon his enemy and secure he once more , 
 when the priest pat he easily on the shoulder . 

 " make it up with Mr. Atkinson , my friend , " he say . 
 " beg a mutual pardon and say ` good night . ' we need not 
 detain he any long . " then , as Atkinson rise somewhat 
 doubtfully and gather his hat and stick and go towards 
 the garden gate , Father Brown say in a more serious voice : 
 " where be that Indian ? " 

 they all three   for the doctor have join they   turn involuntarily 
 towards the dim grassy bank amid the tossing tree purple with twilight , 
 where they have last see the brown man sway in his strange prayer . 
 the Indian be go . 

 " confound he , " cry the doctor , stamp furiously . 
 " now I know that it be that nigger that do it . " 

 " I think you do not   believe in magic , " say Father Brown quietly . 

 " no more I do , " say the doctor , roll his eye . " I only know 
 that I loathe that yellow devil when I think he be a sham wizard . 
 and I shall loathe he more if I come to think he be a real one . " 

 " well , his have escape be nothing , " say Flambeau . " for we 
 could have prove nothing and do nothing against he . 
 one hardly go to the parish constable with a story of suicide 
 impose by witchcraft or auto - suggestion . " 

 meanwhile Father Brown have make his way into the house , 
 and now go to break the news to the wife of the dead man . 

 when he come out again he look a little pale and tragic , 
 but what pass between they in that interview be never know , 
 even when all be know . 

 Flambeau , who be talk quietly with the doctor , 
 be surprised to see his friend reappear so soon at his elbow ; 
 but Brown take no notice , and merely draw the doctor apart . 
 " you have send for the police , have not   you ? " he ask . 

 " yes , " answer Harris . " they ought to be here in ten minute . " 

 " will you do I a favour ? " say the priest quietly . 
 " the truth be , I make a collection of these curious story , 
 which often contain , as in the case of our Hindoo friend , 
 element which can hardly be put into a police report . now , I want 
 you to write out a report of this case for my private use . 
 your be a clever trade , " he say , look the doctor gravely 
 and steadily in the face . " I sometimes think that you know 
 some detail of this matter which you have not think fit 
 to mention . mine be a confidential trade like your , and I 
 will treat anything you write for I in strict confidence . 
 but write the whole . " 

 the doctor , who have be listen thoughtfully with his head a little 
 on one side , look the priest in the face for an instant , and say : 
 " all right , " and go into the study , close the door behind he . 

 " Flambeau , " say Father Brown , " there be a long seat there 
 under the veranda , where we can smoke out of the rain . 
 you be my only friend in the world , and I want to talk to you . 
 or , perhaps , be silent with you . " 

 they establish themselves comfortably in the veranda seat ; 
 Father Brown , against his common habit , accept a good cigar 
 and smoke it steadily in silence , while the rain shriek 
 and rattle on the roof of the veranda . 

 " my friend , " he say at length , " this be a very queer case . 
 a very queer case . " 

 " I should think it be , " say Flambeau , with something like a shudder . 

 " you call it queer , and I call it queer , " say the other , 
 " and yet we mean quite opposite thing . the modern mind always 
 mix up two different idea : mystery in the sense of what 
 be marvellous , and mystery in the sense of what be complicated . 
 that be half its difficulty about miracle . a miracle be startling ; 
 but it be simple . it be simple because it be a miracle . 
 it be power come directly from God   or the devil   instead of 
 indirectly through nature or human will . now , you mean that this 
 business be marvellous because it be miraculous , because it 
 be witchcraft work by a wicked Indian . Understand , I do not 
 say that it be not spiritual or diabolic . Heaven and hell 
 only know by what surround influence strange sin come 
 into the life of man . but for the present my point be this : 
 if it be pure magic , as you think , then it be marvellous ; 
 but it be not mysterious - that be , it be not complicated . 
 the quality of a miracle be mysterious , but its manner be simple . 
 now , the manner of this business have be the reverse of simple . " 

 the storm that have slacken for a little seem to be swell 
 again , and there come heavy movement as of faint thunder . 
 Father Brown let fall the ash of his cigar and go on : 

 " there have be in this incident , " he say , " a twisted , ugly , complex quality 
 that do not belong to the straight bolt either of heaven or hell . 
 as one know the crooked track of a snail , I know the crooked track 
 of a man . " 

 the white lightning open its enormous eye in one wink , 
 the sky shut up again , and the priest go on : 

 " of all these crooked thing , the crookedest be the shape of that piece 
 of paper . it be crooked than the dagger that kill he . " 

 " you mean the paper on which Quinton confess his suicide , " say Flambeau . 

 " I mean the paper on which Quinton write , ` I die by my own hand , ' " 
 answer Father Brown . " the shape of that paper , my friend , 
 be the wrong shape ; the wrong shape , if ever I have see it 
 in this wicked world . " 

 " it only have a corner snip off , " say Flambeau , " and I understand 
 that all Quinton 's paper be cut that way . " 

 " it be a very odd way , " say the other , " and a very bad way , 
 to my taste and fancy . look here , Flambeau , this Quinton - God 
 receive his soul ! - be perhaps a bit of a cur in some way , 
 but he really be an artist , with the pencil as well as the pen . 
 his handwriting , though hard to read , be bold and beautiful . 
 I can not   prove what I say ; I can not   prove anything . 
 but I tell you with the full force of conviction that he could 
 never have cut that mean little piece off a sheet of paper . 
 if he have want to cut down paper for some purpose of fit in , 
 or bind up , or what not , he would have make quite a different 
 slash with the scissor . do you remember the shape ? 
 it be a mean shape . it be a wrong shape . like this . 
 do not   you remember ? " 

 and he wave his burn cigar before he in the darkness , 
 make irregular square so rapidly that Flambeau really 
 seem to see they as fiery hieroglyphic upon the darkness - 
 hieroglyphic such as his friend have speak of , which be undecipherable , 
 yet can have no good meaning . 

 " but , " say Flambeau , as the priest put his cigar in his mouth again 
 and lean back , star at the roof , ' suppose somebody else do use 
 the scissor . why should somebody else , cut piece off his sermon paper , 
 make Quinton commit suicide ? " 

 Father Brown be still lean back and star at the roof , 
 but he take his cigar out of his mouth and say : 
 " Quinton never do commit suicide . " 

 Flambeau star at he . " why , confound it all , " he cry , 
 " then why do he confess to suicide ? " 

 the priest leant forward again , settle his elbow on his knee , 
 look at the ground , and say , in a low , distinct voice : 
 " he never do confess to suicide . " 

 Flambeau lay his cigar down . " you mean , " he say , 
 " that the writing be forge ? " 

 " no , " say Father Brown . " Quinton write it all right . " 

 " well , there you be , " say the aggravated Flambeau ; " Quinton write , 
 ` I die by my own hand , ' with his own hand on a plain piece of paper . " 

 " of the wrong shape , " say the priest calmly . 

 " oh , the shape be damn ! " cry Flambeau . " what have the shape 
 to do with it ? " 

 " there be twenty - three snip paper , " resume Brown unmove , 
 " and only twenty - two piece snip off . therefore one of the piece 
 have be destroy , probably that from the write paper . 
 do that suggest anything to you ? " 

 a light dawn on Flambeau 's face , and he say : 
 " there be something else write by Quinton , some other word . 
 ` they will tell you I die by my own hand , ' or ` do not believe that - ' " 

 " Hotter , as the child say , " say his friend . " but the piece be hardly 
 half an inch across ; there be no room for one word , let alone five . 
 can you think of anything hardly big than a comma which the man with hell 
 in his heart have to tear away as a testimony against he ? " 

 " I can think of nothing , " say Flambeau at last . 

 " what about quotation mark ? " say the priest , and fling his cigar 
 far into the darkness like a shooting star . 

 all word have leave the other man 's mouth , and Father Brown say , 
 like one go back to fundamental : 

 " Leonard Quinton be a romancer , and be write an oriental 
 romance about wizardry and hypnotism . he - " 

 at this moment the door open briskly behind they , and the doctor come 
 out with his hat on . he put a long envelope into the priest 's hand . 

 " that be the document you want , " he say , " and I must be get home . 
 good night . " 

 " good night , " say Father Brown , as the doctor walk briskly to the gate . 
 he have leave the front door open , so that a shaft of gaslight fall upon they . 
 in the light of this Brown open the envelope and read the following word : 



 DEAR FATHER BROWN , - Vicisti Galilee . otherwise , damn your 

 eye , which be very penetrate one . can it be possible that 

 there be something in all that stuff of yours after all ? 


 I be a man who have ever since boyhood believe in Nature and 

 in all natural function and instinct , whether man call they 

 moral or immoral . long before I become a doctor , when I be a 

 schoolboy keep mouse and spider , I believe that to be a good 

 animal be the good thing in the world . but just now I be shake ; 

 I have believe in Nature ; but it seem as if Nature could betray 

 a man . can there be anything in your bosh ? I be really get 

 morbid . 


 I love Quinton 's wife . what be there wrong in that ? nature 

 tell I to , and it be love that make the world go round . I also 

 think quite sincerely that she would be happy with a clean 

 animal like I than with that torment little lunatic . what be 

 there wrong in that ? I be only face fact , like a man of 

 science . she would have be happy . 


 accord to my own creed I be quite free to kill Quinton , 

 which be the good thing for everybody , even himself . 
 but as a 

 healthy animal I have no notion of kill myself . I resolve , 

 therefore , that I would never do it until I see a chance that 

 would leave I scot free . I see that chance this morning . 


 I have be three time , all tell , into Quinton 's study today . 

 the first time I go in he would talk about nothing but the weird 

 tale , call " the Cure of a Saint , " which he be write , which 

 be all about how some indian hermit make an english colonel kill 

 himself by think about he . he show I the last sheet , and 

 even read I the last paragraph , which be something like this : 

 " the conqueror of the Punjab , a mere yellow skeleton , but still 

 gigantic , manage to lift himself on his elbow and gasp in his 

 nephew 's ear : ` I die by my own hand , yet I die murder ! ' " it so 

 happen by one chance out of a hundred , that those last word 

 be write at the top of a new sheet of paper . 
 I leave the room , 

 and go out into the garden intoxicate with a frightful 

 opportunity . 


 we walk round the house ; and two more thing happen in my 

 favour . you suspect an Indian , and you find a dagger which the 

 Indian might most probably use . take the opportunity to stuff 

 it in my pocket I go back to Quinton 's study , lock the door , 

 and give he his sleeping draught . he be against answer 

 Atkinson at all , but I urge he to call out and quiet the fellow , 

 because I want a clear proof that Quinton be alive when I leave 

 the room for the second time . Quinton lie down in the conservatory , 
 and I come through the study . I be a quick man with my hand , and 

 in a minute and a half I have do what I want to do . I have 

 empty all the first part of Quinton 's romance into the fireplace , 

 where it burn to ash . then I see that the quotation mark 

 would not   do , so I snip they off , and to make it seem likeli , 

 snip the whole quire to match . then I come out with the 

 knowledge that Quinton 's confession of suicide lie on the front 

 table , while Quinton lie alive but asleep in the conservatory 

 beyond . 


 the last act be a desperate one ; you can guess it : I pretend 

 to have see Quinton dead and rush to his room . 
 I delay you 

 with the paper , and , be a quick man with my hand , kill 

 Quinton while you be look at his confession of suicide . 
 he 

 be half - asleep , be drug , and I put his own hand on the 

 knife and drive it into his body . the knife be of so queer a 

 shape that no one but an operator could have calculate the angle 

 that would reach his heart . I wonder if you notice this . 


 when I have do it , the extraordinary thing happen . nature 

 desert I . I feel ill . I feel just as if I have do something 

 wrong . I think my brain be break up ; I feel some sort of 

 desperate pleasure in think I have tell the thing to somebody ; 

 that I shall not have to be alone with it if I marry and have 

 child . what be the matter with I ? ... madness ... or can one 

 have remorse , just as if one be in Byron 's poem ! I can not 

 write any more . 

  James Erskine Harris . 




 Father Brown carefully fold up the letter , and put it in his breast 
 pocket just as there come a loud peal at the gate bell , and the wet 
 waterproof of several policeman gleam in the road outside . 



  the Sins of Prince Saradine 

 when Flambeau take his month 's holiday from his office in Westminster 
 he take it in a small sailing - boat , so small that it pass much 
 of its time as a rowing - boat . he take it , moreover , in little 
 river in the eastern county , river so small that the boat 
 look like a magic boat , sail on land through meadow 
 and cornfield . the vessel be just comfortable for two people ; 
 there be room only for necessity , and Flambeau have stock it 
 with such thing as his special philosophy consider necessary . 
 they reduce themselves , apparently , to four essential : 
 tin of salmon , if he should want to eat ; load revolver , 
 if he should want to fight ; a bottle of brandy , presumably in case 
 he should faint ; and a priest , presumably in case he should die . 
 with this light luggage he crawl down the little Norfolk river , 
 intend to reach the Broads at last , but meanwhile delight 
 in the overhang garden and meadow , the mirror mansion 
 or village , linger to fish in the pool and corner , 
 and in some sense hug the shore . 

 like a true philosopher , Flambeau have no aim in his holiday ; 
 but , like a true philosopher , he have an excuse . he have a sort 
 of half purpose , which he take just so seriously that its success 
 would crown the holiday , but just so lightly that its failure 
 would not spoil it . year ago , when he have be a king of thief 
 and the most famous figure in Paris , he have often receive 
 wild communication of approval , denunciation , or even love ; 
 but one have , somehow , stick in his memory . it consist simply 
 of a visit - card , in an envelope with an English postmark . 
 on the back of the card be write in French and in green ink : 
 " if you ever retire and become respectable , come and see I . 
 I want to meet you , for I have meet all the other great man of my time . 
 that trick of your of get one detective to arrest 
 the other be the most splendid scene in french history . " 
 on the front of the card be engrave in the formal fashion , 
 " Prince Saradine , Reed House , Reed Island , Norfolk . " 

 he have not trouble much about the prince then , beyond ascertain that 
 he have be a brilliant and fashionable figure in southern Italy . in his 
 youth , it be say , he have elope with a married woman of high rank ; 
 the escapade be scarcely startling in his social world , but it have clung 
 to man 's mind because of an additional tragedy : the alleged suicide 
 of the insulted husband , who appear to have fling himself over a precipice 
 in Sicily . the prince then live in Vienna for a time , but his more recent 
 year seem to have be pass in perpetual and restless travel . 
 but when Flambeau , like the prince himself , have leave european celebrity 
 and settle in England , it occur to he that he might pay a surprise visit 
 to this eminent exile in the Norfolk Broads . whether he should find the place 
 he have no idea ; and , indeed , it be sufficiently small and forgotten . 
 but , as thing fall out , he find it much soon than he expect . 

 they have moor their boat one night under a bank veil in high 
 grass and short pollard tree . Sleep , after heavy sculling , 
 have come to they early , and by a corresponding accident 
 they awake before it be light . to speak more strictly , 
 they awake before it be daylight ; for a large lemon moon be 
 only just set in the forest of high grass above their head , 
 and the sky be of a vivid violet - blue , nocturnal but bright . 
 both man have simultaneously a reminiscence of childhood , of the elfin 
 and adventurous time when tall weed close over we like wood . 
 stand up thus against the large low moon , the daisy really 
 seem to be giant daisy , the dandelion to be giant dandelion . 
 somehow it remind they of the dado of a nursery wall - paper . 
 the drop of the river - bed suffice to sink they under the root 
 of all shrub and flower and make they gaze upwards at the grass . 
 " by Jove ! " say Flambeau , " it be like be in fairyland . " 

 Father Brown sit bolt upright in the boat and cross himself . 
 his movement be so abrupt that his friend ask he , with a mild stare , 
 what be the matter . 

 " the people who write the mediaeval ballad , " answer the priest , 
 " know more about fairy than you do . it be not   only nice thing 
 that happen in fairyland . " 

 " oh , bosh ! " say Flambeau . " only nice thing could happen under such an 
 innocent moon . I be for push on now and see what do really come . 
 we may die and rot before we ever see again such a moon or such a mood . " 

 " all right , " say Father Brown . " I never say it be always wrong 
 to enter fairyland . I only say it be always dangerous . " 

 they push slowly up the brightening river ; the glow violet 
 of the sky and the pale gold of the moon grow fainter and fainter , 
 amd fade into that vast colourless cosmos that precede the colour 
 of the dawn . when the first faint stripe of red and gold and grey 
 split the horizon from end to end they be break by the black bulk 
 of a town or village which sit on the river just ahead of they . 
 it be already an easy twilight , in which all thing be visible , 
 when they come under the hang roof and bridge of this riverside hamlet . 
 the house , with their long , low , stoop roof , seem to come down 
 to drink at the river , like huge grey and red cattle . the broadening 
 and whiten dawn have already turn to work daylight before they 
 see any living creature on the wharf and bridge of that silent town . 
 eventually they see a very placid and prosperous man in his shirt sleeve , 
 with a face as round as the recently sink moon , and ray of red whisker 
 around the low arc of it , who be lean on a post above the sluggish tide . 
 by an impulse not to be analyse , Flambeau rise to his full height 
 in the sway boat and shout at the man to ask if he know Reed Island 
 or Reed House . the prosperous man 's smile grow slightly more expansive , 
 and he simply point up the river towards the next bend of it . 
 Flambeau go ahead without further speech . 

 the boat take many such grassy corner and follow many such reedy 
 and silent reach of river ; but before the search have become monotonous 
 they have swing round a specially sharp angle and come into the silence 
 of a sort of pool or lake , the sight of which instinctively arrest they . 
 for in the middle of this wide piece of water , fringe on every 
 side with rush , lie a long , low islet , along which run a long , 
 low house or bungalow build of bamboo or some kind of tough tropic cane . 
 the upstanding rod of bamboo which make the wall be pale yellow , 
 the slop rod that make the roof be of dark red or brown , 
 otherwise the long house be a thing of repetition and monotony . 
 the early morning breeze rustle the reed round the island and sing 
 in the strange rib house as in a giant pan - pipe . 

 " by George ! " cry Flambeau ; " here be the place , after all ! 
 here be Reed Island , if ever there be one . here be Reed House , 
 if it be anywhere . I believe that fat man with whisker 
 be a fairy . " 

 " perhaps , " remark Father Brown impartially . " if he be , 
 he be a bad fairy . " 

 but even as he speak the impetuous Flambeau have run his boat 
 ashore in the rattle reed , and they stand in the long , 
 quaint islet beside the odd and silent house . 

 the house stand with its back , as it be , to the river 
 and the only landing - stage ; the main entrance be on 
 the other side , and look down the long island garden . 
 the visitor approach it , therefore , by a small path run 
 round nearly three side of the house , close under the low eave . 
 through three different window on three different side they 
 look in on the same long , well - light room , panel in light wood , 
 with a large number of look - glass , and lay out as for an 
 elegant lunch . the front door , when they come round to it at last , 
 be flank by two turquoise - blue flower pot . it be open 
 by a butler of the dreary type - long , lean , grey and listless - 
 who murmur that Prince Saradine be from home at present , 
 but be expect hourly ; the house be keep ready for he 
 and his guest . the exhibition of the card with the scrawl 
 of green ink awake a flicker of life in the parchment face 
 of the depressed retainer , and it be with a certain shaky 
 courtesy that he suggest that the stranger should remain . 
 " his Highness may be here any minute , " he say , " and would be 
 distressed to have just miss any gentleman he have invite . 
 we have order always to keep a little cold lunch for he 
 and his friend , and I be sure he would wish it to be offer . " 

 move with curiosity to this minor adventure , Flambeau assent gracefully , 
 and follow the old man , who usher he ceremoniously into the long , 
 lightly panel room . there be nothing very notable about it , except the 
 rather unusual alternation of many long , low window with many long , 
 low oblong of look - glass , which give a singular air of lightness and 
 unsubstantialness to the place . it be somehow like lunch out of door . 
 one or two picture of a quiet kind hang in the corner , one a large 
 grey photograph of a very young man in uniform , another a red chalk 
 sketch of two long - haired boy . ask by Flambeau whether the soldierly 
 person be the prince , the butler answer shortly in the negative ; 
 it be the prince 's young brother , Captain Stephen Saradine , he say . 
 and with that the old man seem to dry up suddenly and lose all 
 taste for conversation . 

 after lunch have tail off with exquisite coffee and liqueur , 
 the guest be introduce to the garden , the library , 
 and the housekeeper - a dark , handsome lady , of no little majesty , 
 and rather like a plutonic Madonna . it appear that she 
 and the butler be the only survivor of the prince 's 
 original foreign menage the other servant now in the house 
 be new and collect in Norfolk by the housekeeper . 
 this latter lady go by the name of Mrs. Anthony , but she 
 speak with a slight italian accent , and Flambeau do not doubt 
 that Anthony be a Norfolk version of some more latin name . 
 Mr. Paul , the butler , also have a faintly foreign air , but he be 
 in tongue and training English , as be many of the most polished 
 man - servant of the cosmopolitan nobility . 

 pretty and unique as it be , the place have about it a curious 
 luminous sadness . hour pass in it like day . the long , 
 well - windowe room be full of daylight , but it seem a dead daylight . 
 and through all other incidental noise , the sound of talk , 
 the clink of glass , or the pass foot of servant , they could 
 hear on all side of the house the melancholy noise of the river . 

 " we have take a wrong turning , and come to a wrong place , " say Father Brown , 
 look out of the window at the grey - green sedge and the silver flood . 
 " never mind ; one can sometimes do good by be the right person in 
 the wrong place . " 

 Father Brown , though commonly a silent , be an oddly sympathetic 
 little man , and in those few but endless hour he unconsciously sink 
 deeply into the secret of Reed House than his professional friend . 
 he have that knack of friendly silence which be so essential to gossip ; 
 and say scarcely a word , he probably obtain from his new acquaintance 
 all that in any case they would have tell . the butler indeed be 
 naturally uncommunicative . he betray a sullen and almost animal 
 affection for his master ; who , he say , have be very badly treat . 
 the chief offender seem to be his highness 's brother , whose name 
 alone would lengthen the old man 's lantern jaw and pucker his parrot 
 nose into a sneer . Captain Stephen be a ne'er - do - weel , apparently , 
 and have drain his benevolent brother of hundred and thousand ; 
 force he to fly from fashionable life and live quietly in this retreat . 
 that be all Paul , the butler , would say , and Paul be obviously a partisan . 

 the italian housekeeper be somewhat more communicative , be , 
 as Brown fancy , somewhat less content . her tone about she 
 master be faintly acid ; though not without a certain awe . 
 Flambeau and his friend be stand in the room of the 
 look - glass examine the red sketch of the two boy , 
 when the housekeeper sweep in swiftly on some domestic errand . 
 it be a peculiarity of this glittering , glass - panel place 
 that anyone enter be reflect in four or five mirror at once ; 
 and Father Brown , without turn round , stop in the middle 
 of a sentence of family criticism . but Flambeau , who have his face 
 close up to the picture , be already say in a loud voice , 
 " the brother Saradine , I suppose . they both look innocent enough . 
 it would be hard to say which be the good brother and which the bad . " 
 then , realise the lady 's presence , he turn the conversation 
 with some triviality , and stroll out into the garden . 
 but Father Brown still gaze steadily at the red crayon sketch ; 
 and Mrs. Anthony still gaze steadily at Father Brown . 

 she have large and tragic brown eye , and her olive face glow 
 darkly with a curious and painful wonder - as of one doubtful of a 
 stranger 's identity or purpose . whether the little priest 's coat 
 and creed touch some southern memory of confession , or whether 
 she fancy he know more than he do , she say to he in a low voice 
 as to a fellow plotter , " he be right enough in one way , your friend . 
 he say it would be hard to pick out the good and bad brother . 
 oh , it would be hard , it would be mighty hard , to pick out the good one . " 

 " I do not   understand you , " say Father Brown , and begin to move away . 

 the woman take a step near to he , with thunderous brow and a sort 
 of savage stoop , like a bull lower his horn . 

 " there be not   a good one , " she hiss . " there be badness 
 enough in the captain take all that money , but I do not 
 think there be much goodness in the prince give it . 
 the captain be not the only one with something against he . " 

 a light dawn on the cleric 's avert face , and his mouth form 
 silently the word " blackmail . " even as he do so the woman 
 turn an abrupt white face over her shoulder and almost fall . 
 the door have open soundlessly and the pale Paul stand like a ghost 
 in the doorway . by the weird trick of the reflect wall , 
 it seem as if five Pauls have enter by five door simultaneously . 

 " his highness , " he say , " have just arrive . " 

 in the same flash the figure of a man have pass outside 
 the first window , cross the sunlit pane like a light stage . 
 an instant later he pass at the second window and the many 
 mirror repaint in successive frame the same eagle profile 
 and march figure . he be erect and alert , but his hair be white 
 and his complexion of an odd ivory yellow . he have that short , 
 curved roman nose which generally go with long , lean cheek 
 and chin , but these be partly mask by moustache and imperial . 
 the moustache be much dark than the beard , give an effect 
 slightly theatrical , and he be dress up to the same dash part , 
 have a white top hat , an orchid in his coat , a yellow waistcoat 
 and yellow glove which he flap and swing as he walk . 
 when he come round to the front door they hear the stiff Paul open it , 
 and hear the new arrival say cheerfully , " well , you see I have come . " 
 the stiff Mr. Paul bow and answer in his inaudible manner ; 
 for a few minute their conversation could not be hear . 
 then the butler say , " everything be at your disposal " ; 
 and the glove - flap Prince Saradine come gaily into the room 
 to greet they . they behold once more that spectral scene - 
 five prince enter a room with five door . 

 the prince put the white hat and yellow glove on the table and offer 
 his hand quite cordially . 

 " delighted to see you here , Mr. Flambeau , " he say . " know you 
 very well by reputation , if that be not an indiscreet remark . " 

 " not at all , " answer Flambeau , laugh . " I be not sensitive . 
 very few reputation be gain by unsullied virtue . " 

 the prince flash a sharp look at he to see if the retort 
 have any personal point ; then he laugh also and offer chair 
 to everyone , include himself . 

 " pleasant little place , this , I think , " he say with a detach air . 
 " not much to do , I fear ; but the fishing be really good . " 

 the priest , who be star at he with the grave stare 
 of a baby , be haunt by some fancy that escape definition . 
 he look at the grey , carefully curl hair , yellow white visage , 
 and slim , somewhat foppish figure . these be not unnatural , 
 though perhaps a shade prononce , like the outfit of a figure behind 
 the footlight . the nameless interest lie in something else , 
 in the very framework of the face ; Brown be torment 
 with a half memory of have see it somewhere before . 
 the man look like some old friend of his dress up . 
 then he suddenly remember the mirror , and put his fancy 
 down to some psychological effect of that multiplication 
 of human mask . 

 Prince Saradine distribute his social attention between his 
 guest with great gaiety and tact . find the detective of a 
 sporting turn and eager to employ his holiday , he guide Flambeau 
 and Flambeau 's boat down to the good fishing spot in the stream , 
 and be back in his own canoe in twenty minute to join Father Brown 
 in the library and plunge equally politely into the priest 's more 
 philosophic pleasure . he seem to know a great deal both about 
 the fishing and the book , though of these not the most edifying ; 
 he speak five or six language , though chiefly the slang of each . 
 he have evidently live in varied city and very motley society , 
 for some of his cheerfullest story be about gambling hell 
 and opium den , australian bushranger or italian brigand . 
 Father Brown know that the once - celebrate Saradine have spend his 
 last few year in almost ceaseless travel , but he have not guess 
 that the travel be so disreputable or so amusing . 

 indeed , with all his dignity of a man of the world , 
 Prince Saradine radiate to such sensitive observer as the priest , 
 a certain atmosphere of the restless and even the unreliable . 
 his face be fastidious , but his eye be wild ; he have little 
 nervous trick , like a man shake by drink or drug , and he neither have , 
 nor profess to have , his hand on the helm of household affair . 
 all these be leave to the two old servant , especially to 
 the butler , who be plainly the central pillar of the house . 
 Mr. Paul , indeed , be not so much a butler as a sort of 
 steward or , even , chamberlain ; he din privately , but with almost 
 as much pomp as his master ; he be fear by all the servant ; 
 and he consult with the prince decorously , but somewhat unbendingly - 
 rather as if he be the prince 's solicitor . the sombre housekeeper 
 be a mere shadow in comparison ; indeed , she seem to efface 
 herself and wait only on the butler , and Brown hear no more 
 of those volcanic whisper which have half tell he of the young 
 brother who blackmail the elder . whether the prince be really 
 be thus bleed by the absent captain , he could not be certain , 
 but there be something insecure and secretive about Saradine 
 that make the tale by no mean incredible . 

 when they go once more into the long hall with the window and the mirror , 
 yellow evening be drop over the water and the willowy bank ; 
 and a bittern sound in the distance like an elf upon his dwarfish drum . 
 the same singular sentiment of some sad and evil fairyland cross 
 the priest 's mind again like a little grey cloud . " I wish Flambeau 
 be back , " he mutter . 

 " do you believe in doom ? " ask the restless Prince Saradine suddenly . 

 " no , " answer his guest . " I believe in Doomsday . " 

 the prince turn from the window and star at he in a 
 singular manner , his face in shadow against the sunset . 
 " what do you mean ? " he ask . 

 " I mean that we here be on the wrong side of the tapestry , " 
 answer Father Brown . " the thing that happen here do not 
 seem to mean anything ; they mean something somewhere else . 
 somewhere else retribution will come on the real offender . 
 here it often seem to fall on the wrong person . " 

 the prince make an inexplicable noise like an animal ; 
 in his shadowed face the eye be shin queerly . 
 a new and shrewd thought explode silently in the other 's mind . 
 be there another meaning in Saradine 's blend of brilliancy 
 and abruptness ? be the prince - be he perfectly sane ? 
 he be repeat , " the wrong person - the wrong person , " 
 many more time than be natural in a social exclamation . 

 then Father Brown awake tardily to a second truth . 
 in the mirror before he he could see the silent door 
 standing open , and the silent Mr. Paul stand in it , 
 with his usual pallid impassiveness . 

 " I think it well to announce at once , " he say , with the same stiff 
 respectfulness as of an old family lawyer , " a boat row by six man have 
 come to the landing - stage , and there be a gentleman sit in the stern . " 

 " a boat ! " repeat the prince ; " a gentleman ? " and he rise to his foot . 

 there be a startled silence punctuate only by the odd noise 
 of the bird in the sedge ; and then , before anyone could speak again , 
 a new face and figure pass in profile round the three 
 sunlit window , as the prince have pass an hour or two before . 
 but except for the accident that both outline be aquiline , 
 they have little in common . instead of the new white topper 
 of Saradine , be a black one of antiquated or foreign shape ; 
 under it be a young and very solemn face , clean shaven , 
 blue about its resolute chin , and carry a faint suggestion 
 of the young Napoleon . the association be assist by 
 something old and odd about the whole get - up , as of a man 
 who have never trouble to change the fashion of his father . 
 he have a shabby blue frock coat , a red , soldierly look 
 waistcoat , and a kind of coarse white trouser common among 
 the early Victorians , but strangely incongruous today . 
 from all this old clothe - shop his olive face stand out strangely 
 young and monstrously sincere . 

 " the deuce ! " say Prince Saradine , and clap on his white hat he go 
 to the front door himself , fling it open on the sunset garden . 

 by that time the new - comer and his follower be draw up on the lawn like 
 a small stage army . the six boatman have pull the boat well up on shore , 
 and be guard it almost menacingly , hold their oar erect like spear . 
 they be swarthy man , and some of they wear earring . but one of they 
 stand forward beside the olive - faced young man in the red waistcoat , 
 and carry a large black case of unfamiliar form . 

 " your name , " say the young man , " be Saradine ? " 

 Saradine assent rather negligently . 

 the new - comer have dull , dog - like brown eye , as different as 
 possible from the restless and glitter grey eye of the prince . 
 but once again Father Brown be torture with a sense of have 
 see somewhere a replica of the face ; and once again he remember 
 the repetition of the glass - panel room , and put down the 
 coincidence to that . " confound this crystal palace ! " he mutter . 
 " one see everything too many time . it be like a dream . " 

 " if you be Prince Saradine , " say the young man , " I may tell 
 you that my name be Antonelli . " 

 " Antonelli , " repeat the prince languidly . " somehow I remember the name . " 

 " permit I to present myself , " say the young Italian . 

 with his left hand he politely take off his old - fashioned top - hat ; 
 with his right he catch Prince Saradine so ring a crack 
 across the face that the white top hat roll down the step 
 and one of the blue flower - pot rock upon its pedestal . 

 the prince , whatever he be , be evidently not a coward ; he spring 
 at his enemy 's throat and almost bear he backwards to the grass . 
 but his enemy extricate himself with a singularly inappropriate 
 air of hurried politeness . 

 " that be all right , " he say , pant and in halt English . 
 " I have insult . I will give satisfaction . Marco , open the case . " 

 the man beside he with the earring and the big black case proceed 
 to unlock it . he take out of it two long italian rapier , with splendid 
 steel hilt and blade , which he plant point downwards in the lawn . 
 the strange young man stand face the entrance with his yellow 
 and vindictive face , the two sword stand up in the turf like two 
 cross in a cemetery , and the line of the rank tower behind , 
 give it all an odd appearance of be some barbaric court of justice . 
 but everything else be unchanged , so sudden have be the interruption . 
 the sunset gold still glow on the lawn , and the bittern still boom 
 as announce some small but dreadful destiny . 

 " Prince Saradine , " say the man call Antonelli , 
 " when I be an infant in the cradle you kill my father 
 and steal my mother ; my father be the more fortunate . 
 you do not kill he fairly , as I be go to kill you . 
 you and my wicked mother take he drive to a lonely pass 
 in Sicily , fling he down a cliff , and go on your way . 
 I could imitate you if I choose , but imitate you be too vile . 
 I have follow you all over the world , and you have always 
 flee from I . but this be the end of the world - and of you . 
 I have you now , and I give you the chance you never give my father . 
 choose one of those sword . " 

 Prince Saradine , with contract brow , seem to hesitate 
 a moment , but his ear be still sing with the blow , 
 and he spring forward and snatch at one of the hilt . 
 Father Brown have also spring forward , strive to compose the dispute ; 
 but he soon find his personal presence make matter bad . 
 Saradine be a french freemason and a fierce atheist , 
 and a priest move he by the law of contrary . 
 and for the other man neither priest nor layman move he at all . 
 this young man with the Bonaparte face and the brown eye be 
 something far stern than a puritan - a pagan . he be a simple 
 slayer from the morning of the earth ; a man of the stone age - 
 a man of stone . 

 one hope remain , the summoning of the household ; and Father Brown run back 
 into the house . he find , however , that all the under servant have be give 
 a holiday ashore by the autocrat Paul , and that only the sombre Mrs. Anthony 
 move uneasily about the long room . but the moment she turn a ghastly 
 face upon he , he resolve one of the riddle of the house of mirror . 
 the heavy brown eye of Antonelli be the heavy brown eye of Mrs. Anthony ; 
 and in a flash he see half the story . 

 " your son be outside , " he say without waste word ; 
 " either he or the prince will be kill . where be Mr. Paul ? " 

 " he be at the landing - stage , " say the woman faintly . 
 " he be - he be - signal for help . " 

 " Mrs. Anthony , " say Father Brown seriously , " there be no time 
 for nonsense . my friend have his boat down the river fishing . 
 your son 's boat be guard by your son 's man . there be only this 
 one canoe ; what be Mr. Paul do with it ? " 

 " Santa Maria ! I do not know , " she say ; and swoon all her length 
 on the matted floor . 

 Father Brown lift she to a sofa , fling a pot of water over she , shout 
 for help , and then rush down to the landing - stage of the little island . 
 but the canoe be already in mid - stream , and old Paul be pull and push 
 it up the river with an energy incredible at his year . 

 " I will save my master , " he cry , his eye blaze maniacally . 
 " I will save he yet ! " 

 Father Brown could do nothing but gaze after the boat as it struggle 
 up - stream and pray that the old man might waken the little town in time . 

 " a duel be bad enough , " he mutter , rub up his rough dust - colour hair , 
 " but there be something wrong about this duel , even as a duel . 
 I feel it in my bone . but what can it be ? " 

 as he stand star at the water , a waver mirror of sunset , 
 he hear from the other end of the island garden a small 
 but unmistakable sound - the cold concussion of steel . 
 he turn his head . 

 away on the farth cape or headland of the long islet , on a strip 
 of turf beyond the last rank of rose , the duellist have already 
 cross sword . evening above they be a dome of virgin gold , and , 
 distant as they be , every detail be pick out . they have cast off 
 their coat , but the yellow waistcoat and white hair of Saradine , 
 the red waistcoat and white trouser of Antonelli , glitter in 
 the level light like the colour of the dancing clockwork doll . 
 the two sword sparkle from point to pommel like two diamond pin . 
 there be something frightful in the two figure appear so little 
 and so gay . they look like two butterfly try to pin each 
 other to a cork . 

 Father Brown run as hard as he could , his little leg go 
 like a wheel . but when he come to the field of combat he find 
 he be bear too late and too early - too late to stop the strife , 
 under the shadow of the grim Sicilians lean on their oar , 
 and too early to anticipate any disastrous issue of it . 
 for the two man be singularly well match , the prince use 
 his skill with a sort of cynical confidence , the Sicilian use his 
 with a murderous care . few finer fencing match can ever have be 
 see in crowded amphitheatre than that which tinkle and sparkle 
 on that forget island in the reedy river . the dizzy fight be 
 balance so long that hope begin to revive in the protest priest ; 
 by all common probability Paul must soon come back with the police . 
 it would be some comfort even if Flambeau come back from his fishing , 
 for Flambeau , physically speak , be worth four other man . 
 but there be no sign of Flambeau , and , what be much queerer , 
 no sign of Paul or the police . no other raft or stick be leave 
 to float on ; in that lose island in that vast nameless pool , 
 they be cut off as on a rock in the Pacific . 

 almost as he have the thought the ringing of the rapier quicken 
 to a rattle , the prince 's arm fly up , and the point shoot out behind 
 between his shoulder - blade . he go over with a great whirling movement , 
 almost like one throw the half of a boy 's cart - wheel . the sword fly 
 from his hand like a shooting star , and dive into the distant river . 
 and he himself sink with so earth - shake a subsidence that he break a big 
 rose - tree with his body and shake up into the sky a cloud of red earth - 
 like the smoke of some heathen sacrifice . the Sicilian have make 
 blood - offering to the ghost of his father . 

 the priest be instantly on his knee by the corpse ; but only to make 
 too sure that it be a corpse . as he be still try some last hopeless 
 test he hear for the first time voice from far up the river , 
 and see a police boat shoot up to the landing - stage , with constable 
 and other important people , include the excite Paul . the little 
 priest rise with a distinctly dubious grimace . 

 " now , why on earth , " he mutter , " why on earth could not   he have come before ? " 

 some seven minute later the island be occupy by an invasion of townsfolk 
 and police , and the latter have put their hand on the victorious duellist , 
 ritually remind he that anything he say might be use against he . 

 " I shall not say anything , " say the monomaniac , with a wonderful 
 and peaceful face . " I shall never say anything more . 
 I be very happy , and I only want to be hang . " 

 then he shut his mouth as they lead he away , and it be the strange 
 but certain truth that he never open it again in this world , 
 except to say " guilty " at his trial . 

 Father Brown have star at the suddenly crowd garden , the arrest of 
 the man of blood , the carry away of the corpse after its examination 
 by the doctor , rather as one watch the break - up of some ugly dream ; 
 he be motionless , like a man in a nightmare . he give his name and 
 address as a witness , but decline their offer of a boat to the shore , 
 and remain alone in the island garden , gaze at the broken rose bush 
 and the whole green theatre of that swift and inexplicable tragedy . 
 the light die along the river ; mist rise in the marshy bank ; 
 a few belate bird flit fitfully across . 

 stuck stubbornly in his sub - consciousness   which be an unusually 
 lively one   be an unspeakable certainty that there be something 
 still unexplained . this sense that have clung to he all day could 
 not be fully explain by his fancy about " look - glass land . " 
 somehow he have not see the real story , but some game or masque . 
 and yet people do not get hang or run through the body for the sake 
 of a charade . 

 as he sit on the step of the landing - stage ruminating he grow conscious 
 of the tall , dark streak of a sail come silently down the shin river , 
 and spring to his foot with such a backrush of feeling that he almost weep . 

 " Flambeau ! " he cry , and shake his friend by both hand 
 again and again , much to the astonishment of that sportsman , 
 as he come on shore with his fishing tackle . " Flambeau , " he say , 
 ' so you be not kill ? " 

 " kill ! " repeat the angler in great astonishment . 
 " and why should I be kill ? " 

 " oh , because nearly everybody else be , " say his companion rather wildly . 
 " Saradine get murder , and Antonelli want to be hang , and his 
 mother 's faint , and I , for one , do not   know whether I be in this 
 world or the next . but , thank God , you be in the same one . " 
 and he take the bewildered Flambeau 's arm . 

 as they turn from the landing - stage they come under 
 the eave of the low bamboo house , and look in through one 
 of the window , as they have do on their first arrival . 
 they behold a lamp - light interior well calculate to arrest their eye . 
 the table in the long dining - room have be lay for dinner when 
 Saradine 's destroyer have fall like a stormbolt on the island . 
 and the dinner be now in placid progress , for Mrs. Anthony sit 
 somewhat sullenly at the foot of the table , while at the head of it 
 be Mr. Paul , the major domo , eat and drinking of the good , 
 his bleared , bluish eye stand queerly out of his face , his gaunt 
 countenance inscrutable , but by no mean devoid of satisfaction . 

 with a gesture of powerful impatience , Flambeau rattle at the window , 
 wrench it open , and put an indignant head into the lamp - light room . 

 " well , " he cry . " I can understand you may need some refreshment , 
 but really to steal your master 's dinner while he lie murder 
 in the garden - " 

 " I have steal a great many thing in a long and pleasant life , " 
 reply the strange old gentleman placidly ; " this dinner be one 
 of the few thing I have not steal . this dinner and this house 
 and garden happen to belong to I . " 

 a thought flash across Flambeau 's face . " you mean to say , " 
 he begin , " that the will of Prince Saradine - " 

 " I be Prince Saradine , " say the old man , munch a salt almond . 

 Father Brown , who be look at the bird outside , jump as if he be shoot , 
 and put in at the window a pale face like a turnip . 

 " you be what ? " he repeat in a shrill voice . 

 " Paul , Prince Saradine , a vos ordre , " say the venerable person 
 politely , lift a glass of sherry . " I live here very quietly , 
 be a domestic kind of fellow ; and for the sake of modesty 
 I be call Mr. Paul , to distinguish I from my unfortunate 
 brother Mr. Stephen . he die , I hear , recently - in the garden . 
 of course , it be not my fault if enemy pursue he to this place . 
 it be owe to the regrettable irregularity of his life . 
 he be not a domestic character . " 

 he relapse into silence , and continue to gaze at the opposite 
 wall just above the bow and sombre head of the woman . they see 
 plainly the family likeness that have haunt they in the dead man . 
 then his old shoulder begin to heave and shake a little , 
 as if he be choke , but his face do not alter . 

 " my God ! " cry Flambeau after a pause , " he be laugh ! " 

 " come away , " say Father Brown , who be quite white . 
 " come away from this house of hell . let we get into an 
 honest boat again . " 

 Night have sink on rush and river by the time they have push off from 
 the island , and they go down - stream in the dark , warm themselves 
 with two big cigar that glow like crimson ship ' lantern . Father Brown 
 take his cigar out of his mouth and say : 

 " I suppose you can guess the whole story now ? after all , 
 it be a primitive story . a man have two enemy . he be a wise man . 
 and so he discover that two enemy be well than one . " 

 " I do not follow that , " answer Flambeau . 

 " oh , it be really simple , " rejoin his friend . " Simple , though 
 anything but innocent . both the Saradines be scamp , 
 but the prince , the elder , be the sort of scamp that get to the top , 
 and the young , the captain , be the sort that sink to the bottom . 
 this squalid officer fall from beggar to blackmailer , 
 and one ugly day he get his hold upon his brother , the prince . 
 obviously it be for no light matter , for Prince Paul Saradine 
 be frankly ` fast , ' and have no reputation to lose as to the mere 
 sin of society . in plain fact , it be a hang matter , 
 and Stephen literally have a rope round his brother 's neck . 
 he have somehow discover the truth about the Sicilian affair , 
 and could prove that Paul murder old Antonelli in the mountain . 
 the captain rake in the hush money heavily for ten year , 
 until even the prince 's splendid fortune begin to look 
 a little foolish . 

 " but Prince Saradine bear another burden besides his blood - suck brother . 
 he know that the son of Antonelli , a mere child at the time of the murder , 
 have be train in savage sicilian loyalty , and live only to avenge 
 his father , not with the gibbet   for he lack Stephen 's legal proof , 
 but with the old weapon of vendetta . the boy have practise arm with 
 a deadly perfection , and about the time that he be old enough to use 
 they Prince Saradine begin , as the society paper say , to travel . 
 the fact be that he begin to flee for his life , pass from place to place 
 like a hunt criminal ; but with one relentless man upon his trail . 
 that be Prince Paul 's position , and by no mean a pretty one . 
 the more money he spend on elude Antonelli the less he have to 
 silence Stephen . the more he give to silence Stephen the less chance 
 there be of finally escape Antonelli . then it be that he show 
 himself a great man - a genius like Napoleon . 

 " instead of resist his two antagonist , he surrender 
 suddenly to both of they . he give way like a japanese wrestler , 
 and his foe fall prostrate before he . he give up the race 
 round the world , and he give up his address to young Antonelli ; 
 then he give up everything to his brother . he send Stephen 
 money enough for smart clothe and easy travel , with a letter 
 say roughly : ` this be all I have leave . you have clean I out . 
 I still have a little house in Norfolk , with servant and 
 a cellar , and if you want more from I you must take that . 
 come and take possession if you like , and I will live there quietly 
 as your friend or agent or anything . ' he know that the Sicilian 
 have never see the Saradine brother save , perhaps , in picture ; 
 he know they be somewhat alike , both have grey , pointed beard . 
 then he shave his own face and wait . the trap work . 
 the unhappy captain , in his new clothe , enter the house 
 in triumph as a prince , and walk upon the Sicilian 's sword . 

 " there be one hitch , and it be to the honour of human nature . 
 evil spirit like Saradine often blunder by never expect 
 the virtue of mankind . he take it for grant that the 
 Italian 's blow , when it come , would be dark , violent and nameless , 
 like the blow it avenge ; that the victim would be knife at night , 
 or shoot from behind a hedge , and so die without speech . 
 it be a bad minute for Prince Paul when Antonelli 's chivalry 
 propose a formal duel , with all its possible explanation . 
 it be then that I find he put off in his boat with wild eye . 
 he be flee , bareheade , in an open boat before Antonelli 
 should learn who he be . 

 " but , however agitated , he be not hopeless . he know the adventurer 
 and he know the fanatic . it be quite probable that Stephen , 
 the adventurer , would hold his tongue , through his mere histrionic 
 pleasure in play a part , his lust for cling to his new 
 cosy quarter , his rascal 's trust in luck , and his fine fencing . 
 it be certain that Antonelli , the fanatic , would hold 
 his tongue , and be hang without tell tale of his family . 
 Paul hang about on the river till he know the fight be over . 
 then he rouse the town , bring the police , see his two vanquish 
 enemy take away forever , and sit down smile to his dinner . " 

 " laugh , God help we ! " say Flambeau with a strong shudder . 
 " do they get such idea from Satan ? " 

 " he get that idea from you , " answer the priest . 

 " God forbid ! " ejaculate Flambeau . " from I ! what do you mean ! " 

 the priest pull a visit - card from his pocket and hold it up 
 in the faint glow of his cigar ; it be scrawl with green ink . 

 " do not   you remember his original invitation to you ? " 
 he ask , " and the compliment to your criminal exploit ? 
 ` that trick of your , ' he say , ` of get one detective 
 to arrest the other ' ? he have just copy your trick . 
 with an enemy on each side of he , he slip swiftly out 
 of the way and let they collide and kill each other . " 

 Flambeau tear Prince Saradine 's card from the priest 's hand and rent 
 it savagely in small piece . 

 " there be the last of that old skull and crossbone , " he say as he 
 scatter the piece upon the dark and disappear wave of the stream ; 
 " but I should think it would poison the fish . " 

 the last gleam of white card and green ink be drown and darken ; 
 a faint and vibrant colour as of morning change the sky , and the moon 
 behind the grass grow pale . they drift in silence . 

 " Father , " say Flambeau suddenly , " do you think it be all a dream ? " 

 the priest shake his head , whether in dissent or agnosticism , 
 but remain mute . a smell of hawthorn and of orchard come 
 to they through the darkness , tell they that a wind be awake ; 
 the next moment it sway their little boat and swell their sail , 
 and carry they onward down the wind river to happy place 
 and the home of harmless man . 



  the Hammer of God 

 the little village of Bohun Beacon be perch on a hill so steep that 
 the tall spire of its church seem only like the peak of a small mountain . 
 at the foot of the church stand a smithy , generally red with fire 
 and always litter with hammer and scrap of iron ; opposite to this , 
 over a rude cross of cobbled path , be " the Blue Boar , " the only inn 
 of the place . it be upon this crossway , in the lifting of a leaden 
 and silver daybreak , that two brother meet in the street and speak ; 
 though one be begin the day and the other finish it . 
 the Rev. and Hon . Wilfred Bohun be very devout , and be make his 
 way to some austere exercise of prayer or contemplation at dawn . 
 colonel the Hon . Norman Bohun , his eld brother , be by no mean devout , 
 and be sit in evening dress on the bench outside " the Blue Boar , " 
 drink what the philosophic observer be free to regard either 
 as his last glass on Tuesday or his first on Wednesday . the colonel 
 be not particular . 

 the Bohuns be one of the very few aristocratic family really date from 
 the Middle Ages , and their pennon have actually see Palestine . but it be a 
 great mistake to suppose that such house stand high in chivalric tradition . 
 few except the poor preserve tradition . aristocrat live not in tradition 
 but in fashion . the Bohuns have be mohock under Queen Anne and Mashers 
 under Queen Victoria . but like more than one of the really ancient house , 
 they have rot in the last two century into mere drunkard and 
 dandy degenerate , till there have even come a whisper of insanity . 
 certainly there be something hardly human about the colonel 's wolfish 
 pursuit of pleasure , and his chronic resolution not to go home till 
 morning have a touch of the hideous clarity of insomnia . he be a tall , 
 fine animal , elderly , but with hair still startlingly yellow . he would 
 have look merely blonde and leonine , but his blue eye be sink so deep 
 in his face that they look black . they be a little too close together . 
 he have very long yellow moustache ; on each side of they a fold or 
 furrow from nostril to jaw , so that a sneer seem cut into his face . 
 over his evening clothe he wear a curious pale yellow coat that look 
 more like a very light dressing gown than an overcoat , and on the back 
 of his head be stick an extraordinary broad - brim hat of a bright 
 green colour , evidently some oriental curiosity catch up at random . 
 he be proud of appear in such incongruous attire - proud of the fact 
 that he always make they look congruous . 

 his brother the curate have also the yellow hair and the elegance , 
 but he be button up to the chin in black , and his face 
 be clean - shaven , cultivate , and a little nervous . 
 he seem to live for nothing but his religion ; but there be 
 some who say   notably the blacksmith , who be a Presbyterian 
 that it be a love of gothic architecture rather than of God , 
 and that his haunting of the church like a ghost be only 
 another and purer turn of the almost morbid thirst for beauty 
 which send his brother rag after woman and wine . 
 this charge be doubtful , while the man 's practical piety 
 be indubitable . indeed , the charge be mostly an ignorant 
 misunderstanding of the love of solitude and secret prayer , 
 and be found on his being often find kneeling , not before 
 the altar , but in peculiar place , in the crypt or gallery , 
 or even in the belfry . he be at the moment about to enter 
 the church through the yard of the smithy , but stop and 
 frown a little as he see his brother 's cavernous eye star 
 in the same direction . on the hypothesis that the colonel be 
 interested in the church he do not waste any speculation . 
 there only remain the blacksmith 's shop , and though the blacksmith 
 be a Puritan and none of his people , Wilfred Bohun have hear 
 some scandal about a beautiful and rather celebrated wife . 
 he fling a suspicious look across the shed , and the colonel 
 stand up laugh to speak to he . 

 " good morning , Wilfred , " he say . " like a good landlord I be watch 
 sleeplessly over my people . I be go to call on the blacksmith . " 

 Wilfred look at the ground , and say : " the blacksmith be out . 
 he be over at Greenford . " 

 " I know , " answer the other with silent laughter ; " that be why 
 I be call on he . " 

 " Norman , " say the cleric , with his eye on a pebble in the road , 
 " be you ever afraid of thunderbolt ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask the colonel . " be your hobby meteorology ? " 

 " I mean , " say Wilfred , without look up , " do you ever think that God 
 might strike you in the street ? " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say the colonel ; " I see your hobby be folk - lore . " 

 " I know your hobby be blasphemy , " retort the religious man , 
 sting in the one live place of his nature . " but if you do not 
 fear God , you have good reason to fear man . " 

 the elder raise his eyebrow politely . " fear man ? " he say . 

 " Barnes the blacksmith be the big and strong man 
 for forty mile round , " say the clergyman sternly . 
 " I know you be no coward or weakling , but he could throw you 
 over the wall . " 

 this strike home , be true , and the lower line by mouth and 
 nostril darken and deepen . for a moment he stand with the heavy 
 sneer on his face . but in an instant Colonel Bohun have recover 
 his own cruel good humour and laugh , show two dog - like front 
 tooth under his yellow moustache . " in that case , my dear Wilfred , " 
 he say quite carelessly , " it be wise for the last of the Bohuns 
 to come out partially in armour . " 

 and he take off the queer round hat cover with green , 
 show that it be line within with steel . Wilfred recognise 
 it indeed as a light japanese or chinese helmet tear down from 
 a trophy that hang in the old family hall . 

 " it be the first hat to hand , " explain his brother airily ; 
 " always the near hat - and the near woman . " 

 " the blacksmith be away at Greenford , " say Wilfred quietly ; 
 " the time of his return be unsettled . " 

 and with that he turn and go into the church with bow head , 
 cross himself like one who wish to be quit of an unclean spirit . 
 he be anxious to forget such grossness in the cool twilight of his tall 
 Gothic cloister ; but on that morning it be fat that his still round 
 of religious exercise should be everywhere arrest by small shock . 
 as he enter the church , hitherto always empty at that hour , a kneeling 
 figure rise hastily to its foot and come towards the full daylight 
 of the doorway . when the curate see it he stand still with surprise . 
 for the early worshipper be none other than the village idiot , 
 a nephew of the blacksmith , one who neither would nor could care 
 for the church or for anything else . he be always call " Mad Joe , " 
 and seem to have no other name ; he be a dark , strong , slouch lad , 
 with a heavy white face , dark straight hair , and a mouth always open . 
 as he pass the priest , his moon - calf countenance give no hint of what 
 he have be do or think of . he have never be know to pray before . 
 what sort of prayer be he say now ? extraordinary prayer surely . 

 Wilfred Bohun stand root to the spot long enough to see 
 the idiot go out into the sunshine , and even to see his 
 dissolute brother hail he with a sort of avuncular jocularity . 
 the last thing he see be the colonel throw penny at the open 
 mouth of Joe , with the serious appearance of try to hit it . 

 this ugly sunlit picture of the stupidity and cruelty of the earth send 
 the ascetic finally to his prayer for purification and new thought . 
 he go up to a pew in the gallery , which bring he under 
 a coloured window which he love and always quiet his spirit ; 
 a blue window with an angel carry lily . there he begin to think 
 less about the half - wit , with his livid face and mouth like a fish . 
 he begin to think less of his evil brother , pace like a lean lion 
 in his horrible hunger . he sink deeply and deep into those cold 
 and sweet colour of silver blossom and sapphire sky . 

 in this place half an hour afterwards he be find by Gibbs , 
 the village cobbler , who have be send for he in some haste . 
 he get to his foot with promptitude , for he know that no small 
 matter would have bring Gibbs into such a place at all . 
 the cobbler be , as in many village , an atheist , and his appearance 
 in church be a shade more extraordinary than mad Joe 's . it 
 be a morning of theological enigma . 

 " what be it ? " ask Wilfred Bohun rather stiffly , but put 
 out a trembling hand for his hat . 

 the atheist speak in a tone that , come from he , be quite 
 startlingly respectful , and even , as it be , huskily sympathetic . 

 " you must excuse I , sir , " he say in a hoarse whisper , 
 " but we do not   think it right not to let you know at once . 
 I be afraid a rather dreadful thing have happen , sir . 
 I be afraid your brother - " 

 Wilfred clench his frail hand . " what devilry have he do now ? " 
 he cry in voluntary passion . 

 " why , sir , " say the cobbler , cough , " I be afraid he be 
 do nothing , and will not   do anything . I be afraid he be do for . 
 you have really well come down , sir . " 

 the curate follow the cobbler down a short wind stair which bring they 
 out at an entrance rather high than the street . Bohun see the tragedy 
 in one glance , flat underneath he like a plan . in the yard of the smithy 
 be stand five or six man mostly in black , one in an inspector 's uniform . 
 they include the doctor , the presbyterian minister , and the priest 
 from the roman Catholic chapel , to which the blacksmith 's wife belong . 
 the latter be speak to she , indeed , very rapidly , in an undertone , as she , 
 a magnificent woman with red - gold hair , be sob blindly on a bench . 
 between these two group , and just clear of the main heap of hammer , 
 lie a man in evening dress , spread - eagle and flat on his face . 
 from the height above Wilfred could have swear to every item of his costume 
 and appearance , down to the Bohun ring upon his finger ; but the skull 
 be only a hideous splash , like a star of blackness and blood . 

 Wilfred Bohun give but one glance , and run down the step into 
 the yard . the doctor , who be the family physician , salute he , 
 but he scarcely take any notice . he could only stammer out : 
 " my brother be dead . what do it mean ? what be this horrible mystery ? " 
 there be an unhappy silence ; and then the cobbler , the most 
 outspoken man present , answer : " plenty of horror , sir , " he say ; 
 " but not much mystery . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Wilfred , with a white face . 

 " it be plain enough , " answer Gibbs . " there be only one man 
 for forty mile round that could have strike such a blow as that , 
 and he be the man that have most reason to . " 

 " we must not prejudge anything , " put in the doctor , a tall , black - bearded man , 
 rather nervously ; " but it be competent for I to corroborate what Mr. Gibbs 
 say about the nature of the blow , sir ; it be an incredible blow . 
 Mr. Gibbs say that only one man in this district could have do it . 
 I should have say myself that nobody could have do it . " 

 a shudder of superstition go through the slight figure of the curate . 
 " I can hardly understand , " he say . 

 " Mr. Bohun , " say the doctor in a low voice , " metaphor literally fail I . 
 it be inadequate to say that the skull be smash to bit like an eggshell . 
 fragment of bone be drive into the body and the ground like bullet 
 into a mud wall . it be the hand of a giant . " 

 he be silent a moment , look grimly through his glass ; then he add : 
 " the thing have one advantage - that it clear most people of suspicion 
 at one stroke . if you or I or any normally make man in the country 
 be accuse of this crime , we should be acquit as an infant would 
 be acquit of steal the Nelson column . " 

 " that be what I say , " repeat the cobbler obstinately ; " there be only one 
 man that could have do it , and he be the man that would have do it . 
 where 's Simeon Barnes , the blacksmith ? " 

 " he be over at Greenford , " falter the curate . 

 " more likely over in France , " mutter the cobbler . 

 " no ; he be in neither of those place , " say a small and colourless voice , 
 which come from the little roman priest who have join the group . 
 " as a matter of fact , he be come up the road at this moment . " 

 the little priest be not an interesting man to look at , 
 have stubbly brown hair and a round and stolid face . 
 but if he have be as splendid as Apollo no one would have look 
 at he at that moment . everyone turn round and peer at 
 the pathway which wind across the plain below , along which be 
 indeed walk , at his own huge stride and with a hammer on 
 his shoulder , Simeon the smith . he be a bony and gigantic man , 
 with deep , dark , sinister eye and a dark chin beard . 
 he be walk and talk quietly with two other man ; 
 and though he be never specially cheerful , he seem quite 
 at his ease . 

 " my God ! " cry the atheistic cobbler , " and there be the hammer 
 he do it with . " 

 " no , " say the inspector , a sensible - look man 
 with a sandy moustache , speak for the first time . 
 " there be the hammer he do it with over there by the church wall . 
 we have leave it and the body exactly as they be . " 

 all glanced round and the short priest go across and look down in silence 
 at the tool where it lay . it be one of the small and the light 
 of the hammer , and would not have catch the eye among the rest ; 
 but on the iron edge of it be blood and yellow hair . 

 after a silence the short priest speak without look up , 
 and there be a new note in his dull voice . " Mr. Gibbs be 
 hardly right , " he say , " in say that there be no mystery . 
 there be at least the mystery of why so big a man should attempt 
 so big a blow with so little a hammer . " 

 " oh , never mind that , " cry Gibbs , in a fever . " what be we 
 to do with Simeon Barnes ? " 

 " leave he alone , " say the priest quietly . " he be come here of himself . 
 I know those two man with he . they be very good fellow from Greenford , 
 and they have come over about the presbyterian chapel . " 

 even as he speak the tall smith swung round the corner of the church , 
 and strode into his own yard . then he stand there quite still , 
 and the hammer fall from his hand . the inspector , who have preserve 
 impenetrable propriety , immediately go up to he . 

 " I will not   ask you , Mr. Barnes , " he say , " whether you know anything 
 about what have happen here . you be not bind to say . 
 I hope you do not   know , and that you will be able to prove it . 
 but I must go through the form of arrest you in the King 's 
 name for the murder of Colonel Norman Bohun . " 

 " you be not bind to say anything , " say the cobbler 
 in officious excitement . " they have   get to prove everything . 
 they have not   prove yet that it be Colonel Bohun , with the head 
 all smash up like that . " 

 " that will not   wash , " say the doctor aside to the priest . 
 " that be out of the detective story . I be the colonel 's 
 medical man , and I know his body well than he do . 
 he have very fine hand , but quite peculiar one . 
 the second and third finger be the same length . 
 oh , that be the colonel right enough . " 

 as he glance at the brained corpse upon the ground the iron eye 
 of the motionless blacksmith follow they and rest there also . 

 " be Colonel Bohun dead ? " say the smith quite calmly . 
 " then he be damned . " 

 " do not   say anything ! oh , do not   say anything , " cry the atheist cobbler , 
 dance about in an ecstasy of admiration of the english legal system . 
 for no man be such a legalist as the good Secularist . 

 the blacksmith turn on he over his shoulder the august face 
 of a fanatic . 

 " it be well for you infidel to dodge like fox because the world 's 
 law favour you , " he say ; " but God guard his own in his pocket , 
 as you shall see this day . " 

 then he point to the colonel and say : " when do this dog 
 die in his sin ? " 

 " moderate your language , " say the doctor . 

 " moderate the Bible 's language , and I will moderate mine . 
 when do he die ? " 

 " I see he alive at six o'clock this morning , " stammer Wilfred Bohun . 

 " God be good , " say the smith . " Mr. Inspector , I have not the slight 
 objection to be arrest . it be you who may object to arrest I . 
 I do not   mind leave the court without a stain on my character . 
 you do mind perhaps leave the court with a bad set - back in your career . " 

 the solid inspector for the first time look at the blacksmith 
 with a lively eye ; as do everybody else , except the short , 
 strange priest , who be still look down at the little hammer 
 that have deal the dreadful blow . 

 " there be two man stand outside this shop , " go on the blacksmith 
 with ponderous lucidity , " good tradesman in Greenford whom you 
 all know , who will swear that they see I from before midnight till 
 daybreak and long after in the committee room of our Revival Mission , 
 which sit all night , we save soul so fast . in Greenford itself 
 twenty people could swear to I for all that time . if I be 
 a heathen , Mr. Inspector , I would let you walk on to your downfall . 
 but as a christian man I feel bound to give you your chance , 
 and ask you whether you will hear my alibi now or in court . " 

 the inspector seem for the first time disturb , and say , 
 " of course I should be glad to clear you altogether now . " 

 the smith walk out of his yard with the same long and 
 easy stride , and return to his two friend from Greenford , 
 who be indeed friend of nearly everyone present . each of they 
 say a few word which no one ever think of disbelieve . 
 when they have speak , the innocence of Simeon stand up as solid 
 as the great church above they . 

 one of those silence strike the group which be more strange and 
 insufferable than any speech . madly , in order to make conversation , 
 the curate say to the catholic priest : 

 " you seem very much interested in that hammer , Father Brown . " 

 " yes , I be , " say Father Brown ; " why be it such a small hammer ? " 

 the doctor swing round on he . 

 " by George , that be true , " he cry ; " who would use a little hammer with ten 
 large hammer lie about ? " 

 then he lower his voice in the curate 's ear and say : 
 " only the kind of person that can not   lift a large hammer . 
 it be not a question of force or courage between the sex . 
 it be a question of lift power in the shoulder . a bold woman 
 could commit ten murder with a light hammer and never turn a hair . 
 she could not kill a beetle with a heavy one . " 

 Wilfred Bohun be star at he with a sort of hypnotise horror , 
 while Father Brown listen with his head a little on one side , 
 really interested and attentive . the doctor go on with 
 more hiss emphasis : 

 " why do these idiot always assume that the only person who hat 
 the wife 's lover be the wife 's husband ? nine time out of ten 
 the person who most hat the wife 's lover be the wife . 
 who know what insolence or treachery he have show she - look there ! " 

 he make a momentary gesture towards the red - haired woman on the bench . 
 she have lift her head at last and the tear be dry on her 
 splendid face . but the eye be fix on the corpse with an electric 
 glare that have in it something of idiocy . 

 the Rev. Wilfred Bohun make a limp gesture as if wave away all desire 
 to know ; but Father Brown , dust off his sleeve some ash blow 
 from the furnace , speak in his indifferent way . 

 " you be like so many doctor , " he say ; " your mental science be 
 really suggestive . it be your physical science that be utterly impossible . 
 I agree that the woman want to kill the co - respondent much more than the 
 petitioner do . and I agree that a woman will always pick up a small hammer 
 instead of a big one . but the difficulty be one of physical impossibility . 
 no woman ever bear could have smash a man 's skull out flat like that . " 
 then he add reflectively , after a pause : " these people have not 
 grasp the whole of it . the man be actually wear an iron helmet , 
 and the blow scatter it like broken glass . look at that woman . 
 look at her arm . " 

 Silence hold they all up again , and then the doctor say rather sulkily : 
 " well , I may be wrong ; there be objection to everything . 
 but I stick to the main point . no man but an idiot would pick up 
 that little hammer if he could use a big hammer . " 

 with that the lean and quiver hand of Wilfred Bohun go 
 up to his head and seem to clutch his scanty yellow hair . 
 after an instant they drop , and he cry : " that be the word 
 I want ; you have say the word . " 

 then he continue , master his discomposure : " the word you say be , 
 ` no man but an idiot would pick up the small hammer . ' " 

 " yes , " say the doctor . " well ? " 

 " well , " say the curate , " no man but an idiot do . " 
 the rest star at he with eye arrest and rivet , 
 and he go on in a febrile and feminine agitation . 

 " I be a priest , " he cry unsteadily , " and a priest should be no shedder 
 of blood . I - I mean that he should bring no one to the gallow . 
 and I thank God that I see the criminal clearly now - because he be 
 a criminal who can not be bring to the gallow . " 

 " you will not denounce he ? " inquire the doctor . 

 " he would not be hang if I do denounce he , " 
 answer Wilfred with a wild but curiously happy smile . 
 " when I go into the church this morning I find a madman 
 pray there - that poor Joe , who have be wrong all his life . 
 God know what he pray ; but with such strange folk it be not 
 incredible to suppose that their prayer be all upside down . 
 very likely a lunatic would pray before kill a man . 
 when I last see poor Joe he be with my brother . 
 my brother be mock he . " 

 " by Jove ! " cry the doctor , " this be talk at last . 
 but how do you explain - " 

 the Rev. Wilfred be almost tremble with the excitement of his own 
 glimpse of the truth . " do not   you see ; do not   you see , " he cry feverishly ; 
 " that be the only theory that cover both the queer thing , that answer 
 both the riddle . the two riddle be the little hammer and the big blow . 
 the smith might have strike the big blow , but would not have choose 
 the little hammer . his wife would have choose the little hammer , but she 
 could not have strike the big blow . but the madman might have do both . 
 as for the little hammer - why , he be mad and might have pick up anything . 
 and for the big blow , have you never hear , doctor , that a maniac in his 
 paroxysm may have the strength of ten man ? " 

 the doctor draw a deep breath and then say , " by golly , 
 I believe you have   get it . " 

 Father Brown have fix his eye on the speaker so long 
 and steadily as to prove that his large grey , ox - like eye 
 be not quite so insignificant as the rest of his face . 
 when silence have fall he say with marked respect : 
 " Mr. Bohun , yours be the only theory yet propound which 
 hold water every way and be essentially unassailable . 
 I think , therefore , that you deserve to be tell , 
 on my positive knowledge , that it be not the true one . " 
 and with that the old little man walk away and star again 
 at the hammer . 

 " that fellow seem to know more than he ought to , " whisper the doctor 
 peevishly to Wilfred . " those popish priest be deucedly sly . " 

 " no , no , " say Bohun , with a sort of wild fatigue . " it be the lunatic . 
 it be the lunatic . " 

 the group of the two cleric and the doctor have fall 
 away from the more official group contain the inspector 
 and the man he have arrest . now , however , that their own 
 party have break up , they hear voice from the other . 
 the priest look up quietly and then look down again 
 as he hear the blacksmith say in a loud voice : 

 " I hope I have   convince you , Mr. Inspector . I be a strong man , 
 as you say , but I could not   have fling my hammer bang here 
 from Greenford . my hammer have not   get wing that it should come 
 fly half a mile over hedge and field . " 

 the inspector laugh amicably and say : " no , I think you can be 
 consider out of it , though it be one of the rummi coincidence 
 I ever see . I can only ask you to give we all the assistance 
 you can in find a man as big and strong as yourself . 
 by George ! you might be useful , if only to hold he ! 
 I suppose you yourself have no guess at the man ? " 

 " I may have a guess , " say the pale smith , " but it be not at 
 a man . " then , see the scared eye turn towards his wife 
 on the bench , he put his huge hand on her shoulder and say : 
 " nor a woman either . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask the inspector jocularly . 
 " you do not   think cow use hammer , do you ? " 

 " I think no thing of flesh hold that hammer , " say the blacksmith 
 in a stifle voice ; " mortally speak , I think the man die alone . " 

 Wilfred make a sudden forward movement and peer at he with burn eye . 

 " do you mean to say , barne , " come the sharp voice of the cobbler , 
 " that the hammer jump up of itself and knock the man down ? " 

 " oh , you gentleman may stare and snigger , " cry Simeon ; 
 " you clergyman who tell we on Sunday in what a stillness 
 the Lord smite Sennacherib . I believe that one who walk 
 invisible in every house defend the honour of mine , and lay 
 the defiler dead before the door of it . I believe the force 
 in that blow be just the force there be in earthquake , 
 and no force less . " 

 Wilfred say , with a voice utterly undescribable : 
 " I tell Norman myself to beware of the thunderbolt . " 

 " that agent be outside my jurisdiction , " say the inspector 
 with a slight smile . 

 " you be not outside his , " answer the smith ; ' see you to it , " 
 and , turn his broad back , he go into the house . 

 the shake Wilfred be lead away by Father Brown , who have an easy 
 and friendly way with he . " let we get out of this horrid place , 
 Mr. Bohun , " he say . " may I look inside your church ? I hear it be 
 one of the old in England . we take some interest , you know , " 
 he add with a comical grimace , " in old english church . " 

 Wilfred Bohun do not smile , for humour be never his strong point . 
 but he nod rather eagerly , be only too ready to explain the Gothic 
 splendour to someone more likely to be sympathetic than the Presbyterian 
 blacksmith or the atheist cobbler . 

 " by all mean , " he say ; " let we go in at this side . " and he lead 
 the way into the high side entrance at the top of the flight of step . 
 Father Brown be mount the first step to follow he when he feel a hand 
 on his shoulder , and turn to behold the dark , thin figure of the doctor , 
 his face dark yet with suspicion . 

 " Sir , " say the physician harshly , " you appear to know some secret in this 
 black business . may I ask if you be go to keep they to yourself ? " 

 " why , doctor , " answer the priest , smile quite pleasantly , 
 " there be one very good reason why a man of my trade should keep 
 thing to himself when he be not sure of they , and that be that it 
 be so constantly his duty to keep they to himself when he be sure 
 of they . but if you think I have be discourteously reticent 
 with you or anyone , I will go to the extreme limit of my custom . 
 I will give you two very large hint . " 

 " well , sir ? " say the doctor gloomily . 

 " first , " say Father Brown quietly , " the thing be quite 
 in your own province . it be a matter of physical science . 
 the blacksmith be mistaken , not perhaps in say that the blow 
 be divine , but certainly in say that it come by a miracle . 
 it be no miracle , doctor , except in so far as man be himself 
 a miracle , with his strange and wicked and yet half - heroic heart . 
 the force that smash that skull be a force well know to scientist - 
 one of the most frequently debate of the law of nature . " 

 the doctor , who be look at he with frown intentness , only say : 
 " and the other hint ? " 

 " the other hint be this , " say the priest . " do you remember the blacksmith , 
 though he believe in miracle , talk scornfully of the impossible fairy 
 tale that his hammer have wing and fly half a mile across country ? " 

 " yes , " say the doctor , " I remember that . " 

 " well , " add Father Brown , with a broad smile , " that fairy tale 
 be the near thing to the real truth that have be say today . " 
 and with that he turn his back and stump up the step 
 after the curate . 

 the Reverend Wilfred , who have be wait for he , pale and impatient , 
 as if this little delay be the last straw for his nerve , lead he 
 immediately to his favourite corner of the church , that part of the gallery 
 close to the carve roof and light by the wonderful window with the angel . 
 the little latin priest explore and admire everything exhaustively , 
 talk cheerfully but in a low voice all the time . when in the course 
 of his investigation he find the side exit and the wind stair down 
 which Wilfred have rush to find his brother dead , Father Brown run 
 not down but up , with the agility of a monkey , and his clear voice come 
 from an outer platform above . 

 " come up here , Mr. Bohun , " he call . " the air will do you good . " 

 Bohun follow he , and come out on a kind of stone gallery or balcony 
 outside the building , from which one could see the illimitable plain in 
 which their small hill stand , woode away to the purple horizon and dot 
 with village and farm . clear and square , but quite small beneath they , 
 be the blacksmith 's yard , where the inspector still stand take note 
 and the corpse still lie like a smashed fly . 

 " might be the map of the world , might not   it ? " say Father Brown . 

 " yes , " say Bohun very gravely , and nod his head . 

 immediately beneath and about they the line of the Gothic building plunge 
 outward into the void with a sicken swiftness akin to suicide . 
 there be that element of Titan energy in the architecture of the 
 Middle Ages that , from whatever aspect it be see , it always seem 
 to be rush away , like the strong back of some maddened horse . 
 this church be hew out of ancient and silent stone , bearded with old 
 fungoid and stain with the nest of bird . and yet , when they see it 
 from below , it spring like a fountain at the star ; and when they see it , 
 as now , from above , it pour like a cataract into a voiceless pit . 
 for these two man on the tower be leave alone with the most terrible 
 aspect of Gothic ; the monstrous foreshortening and disproportion , 
 the dizzy perspective , the glimpse of great thing small and small 
 thing great ; a topsy - turvydom of stone in the mid - air . detail of stone , 
 enormous by their proximity , be relieve against a pattern of field 
 and farm , pygmy in their distance . a carved bird or beast at a corner 
 seem like some vast walking or fly dragon waste the pasture 
 and village below . the whole atmosphere be dizzy and dangerous , 
 as if man be uphold in air amid the gyrate wing of colossal genius ; 
 and the whole of that old church , as tall and rich as a cathedral , 
 seem to sit upon the sunlit country like a cloudburst . 

 " I think there be something rather dangerous about stand on these high 
 place even to pray , " say Father Brown . " height be make to be look at , 
 not to be look from . " 

 " do you mean that one may fall over , " ask Wilfred . 

 " I mean that one 's soul may fall if one 's body do not , " 
 say the other priest . 

 " I scarcely understand you , " remark Bohun indistinctly . 

 " look at that blacksmith , for instance , " go on Father Brown calmly ; 
 " a good man , but not a Christian - hard , imperious , unforgiving . well , his 
 Scotch religion be make up by man who pray on hill and high crag , 
 and learn to look down on the world more than to look up at heaven . 
 Humility be the mother of giant . one see great thing from the valley ; 
 only small thing from the peak . " 

 " but he - he do not   do it , " say Bohun tremulously . 

 " no , " say the other in an odd voice ; " we know he do not   do it . " 

 after a moment he resume , look tranquilly out over the plain with 
 his pale grey eye . " I know a man , " he say , " who begin by worship 
 with other before the altar , but who grow fond of high and lonely 
 place to pray from , corner or niche in the belfry or the spire . 
 and once in one of those dizzy place , where the whole world 
 seem to turn under he like a wheel , his brain turn also , 
 and he fancy he be God . so that , though he be a good man , 
 he commit a great crime . " 

 Wilfred 's face be turn away , but his bony hand turn blue 
 and white as they tighten on the parapet of stone . 

 " he think it be give to he to judge the world and strike down 
 the sinner . he would never have have such a thought if he have be kneel 
 with other man upon a floor . but he see all man walk about like insect . 
 he see one especially strut just below he , insolent and evident 
 by a bright green hat - a poisonous insect . " 

 Rooks caw round the corner of the belfry ; but there be no other sound 
 till Father Brown go on . 

 " this also tempt he , that he have in his hand one of the most awful 
 engine of nature ; I mean gravitation , that mad and quicken rush 
 by which all earth 's creature fly back to her heart when release . 
 see , the inspector be strut just below we in the smithy . 
 if I be to toss a pebble over this parapet it would be something 
 like a bullet by the time it strike he . if I be to drop a hammer - 
 even a small hammer - " 

 Wilfred Bohun throw one leg over the parapet , and Father Brown 
 have he in a minute by the collar . 

 " not by that door , " he say quite gently ; " that door lead to hell . " 

 Bohun stagger back against the wall , and star at he with frightful eye . 

 " how do you know all this ? " he cry . " be you a devil ? " 

 " I be a man , " answer Father Brown gravely ; " and therefore have all 
 devil in my heart . listen to I , " he say after a short pause . 
 " I know what you do - at least , I can guess the great part of it . 
 when you leave your brother you be rack with no unrighteous rage , 
 to the extent even that you snatch up a small hammer , half incline 
 to kill he with his foulness on his mouth . recoil , you thrust 
 it under your buttoned coat instead , and rush into the church . 
 you pray wildly in many place , under the angel window , upon the 
 platform above , and a high platform still , from which you could see 
 the colonel 's eastern hat like the back of a green beetle crawl about . 
 then something snap in your soul , and you let God 's thunderbolt fall . " 

 Wilfred put a weak hand to his head , and ask in a low voice : 
 " how do you know that his hat look like a green beetle ? " 

 " oh , that , " say the other with the shadow of a smile , " that be 
 common sense . but hear I far . I say I know all this ; 
 but no one else shall know it . the next step be for you ; I shall 
 take no more step ; I will seal this with the seal of confession . 
 if you ask I why , there be many reason , and only one that concern you . 
 I leave thing to you because you have not yet go very far wrong , 
 as assassin go . you do not help to fix the crime on the smith 
 when it be easy ; or on his wife , when that be easy . you try 
 to fix it on the imbecile because you know that he could not suffer . 
 that be one of the gleam that it be my business to find in assassin . 
 and now come down into the village , and go your own way as free as the wind ; 
 for I have say my last word . " 

 they go down the wind stair in utter silence , and come out 
 into the sunlight by the smithy . Wilfred Bohun carefully unlatche 
 the wooden gate of the yard , and go up to the inspector , say : 
 " I wish to give myself up ; I have kill my brother . " 



  the Eye of Apollo 

 that singular smoky sparkle , at once a confusion and a transparency , which be 
 the strange secret of the Thames , be change more and more from its grey 
 to its glitter extreme as the sun climb to the zenith over Westminster , 
 and two man cross Westminster Bridge . one man be very tall and the other 
 very short ; they might even have be fantastically compare to the arrogant 
 clock - tower of Parliament and the humbler hump shoulder of the Abbey , 
 for the short man be in clerical dress . the official description of 
 the tall man be M. Hercule Flambeau , private detective , and he be go 
 to his new office in a new pile of flat face the Abbey entrance . 
 the official description of the short man be the Reverend J. Brown , 
 attach to St. Francis Xavier 's Church , Camberwell , and he be come 
 from a Camberwell deathbed to see the new office of his friend . 

 the building be american in its sky - scrap altitude , and American 
 also in the oiled elaboration of its machinery of telephone 
 and lift . but it be barely finish and still understaffed ; 
 only three tenant have move in ; the office just above Flambeau 
 be occupy , as also be the office just below he ; the two 
 floor above that and the three floor below be entirely bare . 
 but the first glance at the new tower of flat catch something 
 much more arresting . save for a few relic of scaffold , 
 the one glare object be erect outside the office just above 
 Flambeau 's . it be an enormous gilt effigy of the human eye , 
 surround with ray of gold , and take up as much room as two 
 or three of the office window . 

 " what on earth be that ? " ask Father Brown , and stand still . 
 " oh , a new religion , " say Flambeau , laugh ; " one of those new 
 religion that forgive your sin by say you never have any . 
 rather like Christian Science , I should think . the fact be that 
 a fellow call himself Kalon   I do not   know what his name be , 
 except that it can not   be that   have take the flat just above I . 
 I have two lady typewriter underneath I , and this enthusiastic 
 old humbug on top . he call himself the New Priest of Apollo , 
 and he worship the sun . " 

 " let he look out , " say Father Brown . " the sun be the cruell 
 of all the god . but what do that monstrous eye mean ? " 

 " as I understand it , it be a theory of theirs , " answer Flambeau , 
 " that a man can endure anything if his mind be quite steady . 
 their two great symbol be the sun and the open eye ; 
 for they say that if a man be really healthy he could stare 
 at the sun . " 

 " if a man be really healthy , " say Father Brown , " he would not bother 
 to stare at it . " 

 " well , that be all I can tell you about the new religion , " 
 go on Flambeau carelessly . " it claim , of course , that it 
 can cure all physical disease . " 

 " can it cure the one spiritual disease ? " ask Father Brown , 
 with a serious curiosity . 

 " and what be the one spiritual disease ? " ask Flambeau , smile . 

 " oh , think one be quite well , " say his friend . 

 Flambeau be more interested in the quiet little office below he 
 than in the flamboyant temple above . he be a lucid southerner , 
 incapable of conceive himself as anything but a Catholic or an atheist ; 
 and new religion of a bright and pallid sort be not much in his line . 
 but humanity be always in his line , especially when it be good - look ; 
 moreover , the lady downstairs be character in their way . the office 
 be keep by two sister , both slight and dark , one of they tall and striking . 
 she have a dark , eager and aquiline profile , and be one of those woman whom 
 one always think of in profile , as of the clean - cut edge of some weapon . 
 she seem to cleave her way through life . she have eye of startling 
 brilliancy , but it be the brilliancy of steel rather than of diamond ; 
 and her straight , slim figure be a shade too stiff for its grace . 
 her young sister be like her shorten shadow , a little greyer , 
 paler , and more insignificant . they both wear a business - like black , 
 with little masculine cuff and collar . there be thousand of such curt , 
 strenuous lady in the office of London , but the interest of these lay 
 rather in their real than their apparent position . 

 for Pauline Stacey , the elder , be actually the heiress of a crest and half 
 a county , as well as great wealth ; she have be bring up in castle 
 and garden , before a frigid fierceness   peculiar to the modern woman 
 have drive she to what she consider a harsh and a high existence . 
 she have not , indeed , surrender her money ; in that there would have be 
 a romantic or monkish abandon quite alien to her masterful utilitarianism . 
 she hold her wealth , she would say , for use upon practical social object . 
 part of it she have put into her business , the nucleus of a model 
 typewrite emporium ; part of it be distribute in various league and cause 
 for the advancement of such work among woman . how far Joan , her sister 
 and partner , share this slightly prosaic idealism no one could be very sure . 
 but she follow her leader with a dog - like affection which be somehow 
 more attractive , with its touch of tragedy , than the hard , high spirit 
 of the elder . for Pauline Stacey have nothing to say to tragedy ; 
 she be understand to deny its existence . 

 her rigid rapidity and cold impatience have amuse Flambeau 
 very much on the first occasion of his enter the flat . 
 he have linger outside the lift in the entrance hall wait for 
 the lift - boy , who generally conduct stranger to the various floor . 
 but this bright - eyed falcon of a girl have openly refuse 
 to endure such official delay . she say sharply that she know 
 all about the lift , and be not dependent on boy - or man either . 
 though her flat be only three floor above , she manage in the few 
 second of ascent to give Flambeau a great many of her fundamental 
 view in an off - hand manner ; they be to the general effect that she 
 be a modern work woman and love modern work machinery . 
 her bright black eye blaze with abstract anger against those 
 who rebuke mechanic science and ask for the return of romance . 
 everyone , she say , ought to be able to manage machine , just as 
 she could manage the lift . she seem almost to resent the fact 
 of Flambeau open the lift - door for she ; and that gentleman go 
 up to his own apartment smile with somewhat mingled feeling 
 at the memory of such spit - fire self - dependence . 

 she certainly have a temper , of a snappy , practical sort ; the gesture 
 of her thin , elegant hand be abrupt or even destructive . 
 once Flambeau enter her office on some typewrite business , 
 and find she have just fling a pair of spectacle belong 
 to her sister into the middle of the floor and stamp on they . 
 she be already in the rapid of an ethical tirade about 
 the ' sickly medical notion " and the morbid admission of weakness 
 imply in such an apparatus . she dare her sister to bring 
 such artificial , unhealthy rubbish into the place again . 
 she ask if she be expect to wear wooden leg or false 
 hair or glass eye ; and as she speak her eye sparkle like 
 the terrible crystal . 

 Flambeau , quite bewildered with this fanaticism , could not 
 refrain from ask Miss Pauline   with direct french logic 
 why a pair of spectacle be a more morbid sign of weakness 
 than a lift , and why , if science might help we in the one effort , 
 it might not help we in the other . 

 " that be so different , " say Pauline Stacey , loftily . 
 " Batteries and motor and all those thing be mark of the force 
 of man - yes , Mr. Flambeau , and the force of woman , too ! we shall take 
 our turn at these great engine that devour distance and defy time . 
 that be high and splendid - that be really science . but these nasty prop 
 and plaster the doctor sell - why , they be just badge of poltroonery . 
 doctor stick on leg and arm as if we be bear cripple and sick slave . 
 but I be free - bear , Mr. Flambeau ! People only think they need 
 these thing because they have be train in fear instead of be 
 train in power and courage , just as the silly nurse tell child 
 not to stare at the sun , and so they can not   do it without blink . 
 but why among the star should there be one star I may not see ? 
 the sun be not my master , and I will open my eye and stare at he 
 whenever I choose . " 

 " your eye , " say Flambeau , with a foreign bow , " will dazzle the sun . " 
 he take pleasure in compliment this strange stiff beauty , 
 partly because it throw she a little off her balance . 
 but as he go upstairs to his floor he draw a deep breath 
 and whistle , say to himself : " so she have get into 
 the hand of that conjurer upstairs with his golden eye . " 
 for , little as he know or care about the new religion of Kalon , 
 he have hear of his special notion about sun - gazing . 

 he soon discover that the spiritual bond between the floor above 
 and below he be close and increase . the man who call himself 
 Kalon be a magnificent creature , worthy , in a physical sense , 
 to be the pontiff of Apollo . he be nearly as tall even as Flambeau , 
 and very much well look , with a golden beard , strong blue eye , 
 and a mane fling back like a lion 's . in structure he be the blonde 
 beast of Nietzsche , but all this animal beauty be heighten , 
 brighten and soften by genuine intellect and spirituality . 
 if he look like one of the great Saxon king , he look like one 
 of the king that be also saint . and this despite the cockney 
 incongruity of his surrounding ; the fact that he have an office half - way 
 up a building in Victoria Street ; that the clerk   a commonplace youth 
 in cuff and collar   sit in the outer room , between he and the corridor ; 
 that his name be on a brass plate , and the gilt emblem of his creed 
 hang above his street , like the advertisement of an oculist . 
 all this vulgarity could not take away from the man call Kalon 
 the vivid oppression and inspiration that come from his soul and body . 
 when all be say , a man in the presence of this quack do feel in 
 the presence of a great man . even in the loose jacket - suit of linen 
 that he wear as a workshop dress in his office he be a fascinating 
 and formidable figure ; and when rob in the white vestment and 
 crown with the golden circlet , in which he daily salute the sun , 
 he really look so splendid that the laughter of the street people 
 sometimes die suddenly on their lip . for three time in the day 
 the new sun - worshipper go out on his little balcony , in the face 
 of all Westminster , to say some litany to his shin lord : 
 once at daybreak , once at sunset , and once at the shock of noon . 
 and it be while the shock of noon still shake faintly from the tower 
 of Parliament and parish church that Father Brown , the friend of Flambeau , 
 first look up and see the white priest of Apollo . 

 Flambeau have see quite enough of these daily salutation 
 of Phoebus , and plunge into the porch of the tall building 
 without even look for his clerical friend to follow . 
 but Father Brown , whether from a professional interest in ritual 
 or a strong individual interest in tomfoolery , stop and star 
 up at the balcony of the sun - worshipper , just as he might have 
 stop and star up at a Punch and Judy . Kalon the Prophet 
 be already erect , with argent garment and uplifted hand , 
 and the sound of his strangely penetrate voice could be hear 
 all the way down the busy street utter his solar litany . 
 he be already in the middle of it ; his eye be fix upon 
 the flaming disc . it be doubtful if he see anything or anyone 
 on this earth ; it be substantially certain that he do not 
 see a stunt , round - face priest who , in the crowd below , 
 look up at he with blink eye . that be perhaps the most 
 startling difference between even these two far divide man . 
 Father Brown could not look at anything without blink ; 
 but the priest of Apollo could look on the blaze at noon without 
 a quiver of the eyelid . 

 " o sun , " cry the prophet , " o star that art too great to be allow 
 among the star ! o fountain that flowest quietly in that secret spot 
 that be call space . White Father of all white unwearied thing , 
 white flame and white flower and white peak . Father , who art 
 more innocent than all thy most innocent and quiet child ; 
 primal purity , into the peace of which - " 

 a rush and crash like the reverse rush of a rocket be cleave with 
 a strident and incessant yelling . five people rush into the gate 
 of the mansion as three people rush out , and for an instant 
 they all deafen each other . the sense of some utterly abrupt 
 horror seem for a moment to fill half the street with bad news - 
 bad news that be all the bad because no one know what it be . 
 two figure remain still after the crash of commotion : 
 the fair priest of Apollo on the balcony above , and the ugly 
 priest of Christ below he . 

 at last the tall figure and titanic energy of Flambeau appear 
 in the doorway of the mansion and dominate the little mob . 
 talk at the top of his voice like a fog - horn , he tell somebody or anybody 
 to go for a surgeon ; and as he turn back into the dark and throng 
 entrance his friend Father Brown dip in insignificantly after he . 
 even as he duck and dive through the crowd he could still hear 
 the magnificent melody and monotony of the solar priest still call 
 on the happy god who be the friend of fountain and flower . 

 Father Brown find Flambeau and some six other people stand 
 round the enclose space into which the lift commonly descend . 
 but the lift have not descend . something else have descend ; 
 something that ought to have come by a lift . 

 for the last four minute Flambeau have look down on it ; have see 
 the brained and bleed figure of that beautiful woman who deny 
 the existence of tragedy . he have never have the slight doubt 
 that it be Pauline Stacey ; and , though he have send for a doctor , 
 he have not the slight doubt that she be dead . 

 he could not remember for certain whether he have like she 
 or dislike she ; there be so much both to like and dislike . 
 but she have be a person to he , and the unbearable pathos of detail 
 and habit stab he with all the small dagger of bereavement . 
 he remember she pretty face and priggish speech with a 
 sudden secret vividness which be all the bitterness of death . 
 in an instant like a bolt from the blue , like a thunderbolt 
 from nowhere , that beautiful and defiant body have be dash down 
 the open well of the lift to death at the bottom . be it suicide ? 
 with so insolent an optimist it seem impossible . be it murder ? 
 but who be there in those hardly inhabit flat to murder anybody ? 
 in a rush of raucous word , which he mean to be strong and suddenly 
 find weak , he ask where be that fellow Kalon . a voice , 
 habitually heavy , quiet and full , assure he that Kalon for the last 
 fifteen minute have be away up on his balcony worship his god . 
 when Flambeau hear the voice , and feel the hand of Father Brown , 
 he turn his swarthy face and say abruptly : 

 " then , if he have be up there all the time , who can have do it ? " 

 " perhaps , " say the other , " we might go upstairs and find out . 
 we have half an hour before the police will move . " 

 leave the body of the slain heiress in charge of the surgeon , 
 Flambeau dash up the stair to the typewrite office , 
 find it utterly empty , and then dash up to his own . 
 have enter that , he abruptly return with a new and white 
 face to his friend . 

 " her sister , " he say , with an unpleasant seriousness , " her sister 
 seem to have go out for a walk . " 

 Father Brown nod . " or , she may have go up to the office of 
 that sun man , " he say . " if I be you I should just verify that , 
 and then let we all talk it over in your office . no , " he add suddenly , 
 as if remember something , ' shall I ever get over that stupidity of mine ? 
 of course , in their office downstairs . " 

 Flambeau star ; but he follow the little father downstair 
 to the empty flat of the Staceys , where that impenetrable 
 pastor take a large red - leather chair in the very entrance , 
 from which he could see the stair and landing , and wait . 
 he do not wait very long . in about four minute three 
 figure descend the stair , alike only in their solemnity . 
 the first be Joan Stacey , the sister of the dead woman - 
 evidently she have be upstairs in the temporary temple of Apollo ; 
 the second be the priest of Apollo himself , his litany finish , 
 sweep down the empty stair in utter magnificence - 
 something in his white robe , beard and parted hair have the look 
 of Dore 's Christ leave the Pretorium ; the third be Flambeau , 
 black browed and somewhat bewildered . 

 Miss Joan Stacey , dark , with a draw face and hair prematurely touch 
 with grey , walk straight to her own desk and set out her paper with 
 a practical flap . the mere action rally everyone else to sanity . 
 if Miss Joan Stacey be a criminal , she be a cool one . 
 Father Brown regard she for some time with an odd little smile , 
 and then , without take his eye off she , address himself 
 to somebody else . 

 " Prophet , " he say , presumably address Kalon , " I wish you would tell 
 I a lot about your religion . " 

 " I shall be proud to do it , " say Kalon , incline his still crown head , 
 " but I be not sure that I understand . " 

 " why , it be like this , " say Father Brown , in his frankly doubtful way : 
 " we be teach that if a man have really bad first principle , 
 that must be partly his fault . but , for all that , we can make 
 some difference between a man who insult his quite clear conscience 
 and a man with a conscience more or less clouded with sophistry . 
 now , do you really think that murder be wrong at all ? " 

 " be this an accusation ? " ask Kalon very quietly . 

 " no , " answer Brown , equally gently , " it be the speech for the defence . " 

 in the long and startled stillness of the room the prophet of Apollo 
 slowly rise ; and really it be like the rise of the sun . 
 he fill that room with his light and life in such a manner that a man 
 feel he could as easily have fill Salisbury Plain . his robed form 
 seem to hang the whole room with classic drapery ; his epic gesture 
 seem to extend it into grander perspective , till the little black 
 figure of the modern cleric seem to be a fault and an intrusion , 
 a round , black blot upon some splendour of Hellas . 

 " we meet at last , Caiaphas , " say the prophet . 
 " your church and mine be the only reality on this earth . 
 I adore the sun , and you the darkening of the sun ; you be 
 the priest of the dying and I of the live God . your present 
 work of suspicion and slander be worthy of your coat and creed . 
 all your church be but a black police ; you be only spy 
 and detective seek to tear from man confession of guilt , 
 whether by treachery or torture . you would convict man of crime , 
 I would convict they of innocence . you would convince they of sin , 
 I would convince they of virtue . 

 " reader of the book of evil , one more word before I blow away 
 your baseless nightmare for ever . not even faintly could you 
 understand how little I care whether you can convict I or no . 
 the thing you call disgrace and horrible hanging be to I no 
 more than an ogre in a child 's toy - book to a man once grow up . 
 you say you be offer the speech for the defence . 
 I care so little for the cloudland of this life that I will offer 
 you the speech for the prosecution . there be but one thing 
 that can be say against I in this matter , and I will say 
 it myself . the woman that be dead be my love and my bride ; 
 not after such manner as your tin chapel call lawful , 
 but by a law purer and sterner than you will ever understand . 
 she and I walk another world from your , and trod palace 
 of crystal while you be plod through tunnel and corridor 
 of brick . well , I know that policeman , theological and otherwise , 
 always fancy that where there have be love there must soon be hatre ; 
 so there you have the first point make for the prosecution . 
 but the second point be strong ; I do not grudge it you . 
 not only be it true that Pauline love I , but it be also true that this 
 very morning , before she die , she write at that table a will leave 
 I and my new church half a million . Come , where be the handcuff ? 
 do you suppose I care what foolish thing you do with I ? 
 penal servitude will only be like wait for she at a wayside station . 
 the gallow will only be go to she in a headlong car . " 

 he speak with the brain - shake authority of an orator , 
 and Flambeau and Joan Stacey star at he in amazed admiration . 
 Father Brown 's face seem to express nothing but extreme distress ; 
 he look at the ground with one wrinkle of pain across his forehead . 
 the prophet of the sun lean easily against the mantelpiece and resume : 

 " in a few word I have put before you the whole case against I - 
 the only possible case against I . in few word still I 
 will blow it to piece , so that not a trace of it remain . 
 as to whether I have commit this crime , the truth be in one sentence : 
 I could not have commit this crime . Pauline Stacey fall 
 from this floor to the ground at five minute past twelve . 
 a hundred people will go into the witness - box and say that I 
 be stand out upon the balcony of my own room above from just 
 before the stroke of noon to a quarter - past - the usual period 
 of my public prayer . my clerk   a respectable youth from Clapham , 
 with no sort of connection with I   will swear that he sit in my outer 
 office all the morning , and that no communication pass through . 
 he will swear that I arrive a full ten minute before the hour , 
 fifteen minute before any whisper of the accident , and that I 
 do not leave the office or the balcony all that time . 
 no one ever have so complete an alibi ; I could subpoena 
 half Westminster . I think you have well put the handcuff away again . 
 the case be at an end . 

 " but last of all , that no breath of this idiotic suspicion 
 remain in the air , I will tell you all you want to know . 
 I believe I do know how my unhappy friend come by her death . 
 you can , if you choose , blame I for it , or my faith and 
 philosophy at least ; but you certainly can not lock I up . 
 it be well known to all student of the high truth 
 that certain adept and illuminati have in history attain 
 the power of levitation - that be , of be self - sustain upon 
 the empty air . it be but a part of that general conquest 
 of matter which be the main element in our occult wisdom . 
 Poor Pauline be of an impulsive and ambitious temper . 
 I think , to tell the truth , she think herself somewhat deeply 
 in the mystery than she be ; and she have often say to I , 
 as we go down in the lift together , that if one 's will be 
 strong enough , one could float down as harmlessly as a feather . 
 I solemnly believe that in some ecstasy of noble thought she 
 attempt the miracle . her will , or faith , must have fail 
 she at the crucial instant , and the low law of matter have 
 its horrible revenge . there be the whole story , gentleman , 
 very sad and , as you think , very presumptuous and wicked , 
 but certainly not criminal or in any way connect with I . 
 in the short - hand of the police - court , you have well call 
 it suicide . I shall always call it heroic failure for the advance 
 of science and the slow scaling of heaven . " 

 it be the first time Flambeau have ever see Father Brown vanquish . 
 he still sit look at the ground , with a painful and corrugated brow , 
 as if in shame . it be impossible to avoid the feeling which the prophet 's 
 wing word have fan , that here be a sullen , professional suspecter 
 of man overwhelm by a prouder and purer spirit of natural liberty 
 and health . at last he say , blink as if in bodily distress : 
 " well , if that be so , sir , you need do no more than take the testamentary 
 paper you speak of and go . I wonder where the poor lady leave it . " 

 " it will be over there on her desk by the door , I think , " say Kalon , 
 with that massive innocence of manner that seem to acquit he wholly . 
 " she tell I specially she would write it this morning , and I actually 
 see her writing as I go up in the lift to my own room . " 

 " be her door open then ? " ask the priest , with his eye on the corner 
 of the matting . 

 " yes , " say Kalon calmly . 

 " ah ! it have be open ever since , " say the other , and resume his silent 
 study of the mat . 

 " there be a paper over here , " say the grim Miss Joan , in a somewhat 
 singular voice . she have pass over to her sister 's desk by 
 the doorway , and be hold a sheet of blue foolscap in her hand . 
 there be a sour smile on her face that seem unfit for such a scene 
 or occasion , and Flambeau look at she with a darken brow . 

 Kalon the prophet stand away from the paper with that loyal 
 unconsciousness that have carry he through . but Flambeau take 
 it out of the lady 's hand , and read it with the utmost amazement . 
 it do , indeed , begin in the formal manner of a will , but after 
 the word " I give and bequeath all of which I die possess " 
 the writing abruptly stop with a set of scratch , and there 
 be no trace of the name of any legatee . Flambeau , in wonder , 
 hand this truncated testament to his clerical friend , who glance 
 at it and silently give it to the priest of the sun . 

 an instant afterwards that pontiff , in his splendid sweeping drapery , 
 have cross the room in two great stride , and be tower over Joan Stacey , 
 his blue eye stand from his head . 

 " what monkey trick have you be play here ? " he cry . 
 " that be not all Pauline write . " 

 they be startled to hear he speak in quite a new voice , 
 with a Yankee shrillness in it ; all his grandeur and good English 
 have fall from he like a cloak . 

 " that be the only thing on her desk , " say Joan , and confront 
 he steadily with the same smile of evil favour . 

 of a sudden the man break out into blasphemy and cataract of 
 incredulous word . there be something shocking about the dropping 
 of his mask ; it be like a man 's real face fall off . 

 " see here ! " he cry in broad American , when he be breathless 
 with cursing , " I may be an adventurer , but I guess you be a murderess . 
 yes , gentleman , here be your death explain , and without any levitation . 
 the poor girl be write a will in my favour ; her cursed sister come in , 
 struggle for the pen , drag she to the well , and throw she down before 
 she can finish it . sake ! I reckon we want the handcuff after all . " 

 " as you have truly remark , " reply Joan , with ugly calm , " your clerk be 
 a very respectable young man , who know the nature of an oath ; and he will 
 swear in any court that I be up in your office arrange some typewrite 
 work for five minute before and five minute after my sister fall . 
 Mr. Flambeau will tell you that he find I there . " 

 there be a silence . 

 " why , then , " cry Flambeau , " Pauline be alone when she fall , 
 and it be suicide ! " 

 " she be alone when she fall , " say Father Brown , " but it be not suicide . " 

 " then how do she die ? " ask Flambeau impatiently . 

 " she be murder . " 

 " but she be alone , " object the detective . 

 " she be murder when she be all alone , " answer the priest . 

 all the rest star at he , but he remain sit in 
 the same old dejected attitude , with a wrinkle in his round 
 forehead and an appearance of impersonal shame and sorrow ; 
 his voice be colourless and sad . 

 " what I want to know , " cry Kalon , with an oath , " be when 
 the police be come for this bloody and wicked sister . 
 she be kill her flesh and blood ; she be rob I of half 
 a million that be just as sacredly mine as - " 

 " come , come , prophet , " interrupt Flambeau , with a kind of sneer ; 
 " remember that all this world be a cloudland . " 

 the hierophant of the sun - god make an effort to climb back 
 on his pedestal . " it be not the mere money , " he cry , 
 " though that would equip the cause throughout the world . 
 it be also my beloved one 's wish . to Pauline all this be holy . 
 in Pauline 's eye - " 

 Father Brown suddenly spring erect , so that his chair fall over flat 
 behind he . he be deathly pale , yet he seem fire with a hope ; 
 his eye shine . 

 " that be it ! " he cry in a clear voice . " that be the way to begin . 
 in Pauline 's eye - " 

 the tall prophet retreat before the tiny priest in an almost mad disorder . 
 " what do you mean ? how dare you ? " he cry repeatedly . 

 " in Pauline 's eye , " repeat the priest , his own shin more and more . 
 " go on - in God 's name , go on . the foulest crime the fiend ever 
 prompt feel light after confession ; and I implore you to confess . 
 go on , go on - in Pauline 's eye - " 

 " let I go , you devil ! " thunder Kalon , struggle like a giant in bond . 
 " who be you , you curse spy , to weave your spider ' webs round I , 
 and peep and peer ? let I go . " 

 " shall I stop he ? " ask Flambeau , bound towards the exit , 
 for Kalon have already throw the door wide open . 

 " no ; let he pass , " say Father Brown , with a strange deep 
 sigh that seem to come from the depth of the universe . 
 " let Cain pass by , for he belong to God . " 

 there be a long - draw silence in the room when he have leave it , 
 which be to Flambeau 's fierce wit one long agony of interrogation . 
 Miss Joan Stacey very coolly tidy up the paper on her desk . 

 " Father , " say Flambeau at last , " it be my duty , not my curiosity only - 
 it be my duty to find out , if I can , who commit the crime . " 

 " which crime ? " ask Father Brown . 

 " the one we be deal with , of course , " reply his impatient friend . 

 " we be deal with two crime , " say Brown , " crime of very 
 different weight - and by very different criminal . " 

 Miss Joan Stacey , have collect and put away her paper , 
 proceed to lock up her drawer . Father Brown go on , 
 notice she as little as she notice he . 

 " the two crime , " he observe , " be commit against the same 
 weakness of the same person , in a struggle for her money . 
 the author of the large crime find himself thwart by the 
 small crime ; the author of the small crime get the money . " 

 " oh , do not   go on like a lecturer , " groan Flambeau ; " put it 
 in a few word . " 

 " I can put it in one word , " answer his friend . 

 Miss Joan Stacey skewer her business - like black hat on to her head 
 with a business - like black frown before a little mirror , and , as the 
 conversation proceed , take her handbag and umbrella in an unhurrie style , 
 and leave the room . 

 " the truth be one word , and a short one , " say Father Brown . 
 " Pauline Stacey be blind . " 

 " blind ! " repeat Flambeau , and rise slowly to his whole huge stature . 

 " she be subject to it by blood , " Brown proceed . " her sister 
 would have start eyeglass if Pauline would have let she ; 
 but it be her special philosophy or fad that one must not encourage 
 such disease by yield to they . she would not admit the cloud ; 
 or she try to dispel it by will . so her eye get bad 
 and bad with straining ; but the bad strain be to come . 
 it come with this precious prophet , or whatever he call himself , 
 who teach she to stare at the hot sun with the naked eye . 
 it be call accept Apollo . oh , if these new pagan would 
 only be old pagan , they would be a little wiser ! the old pagan 
 know that mere naked nature - worship must have a cruel side . 
 they know that the eye of Apollo can blast and blind . " 

 there be a pause , and the priest go on in a gentle and even break voice . 
 " whether or no that devil deliberately make she blind , there be 
 no doubt that he deliberately kill she through her blindness . 
 the very simplicity of the crime be sicken . you know he and she 
 go up and down in those lift without official help ; you know 
 also how smoothly and silently the lift slide . Kalon bring 
 the lift to the girl 's landing , and see she , through the open door , 
 write in her slow , sightless way the will she have promise he . 
 he call out to she cheerily that he have the lift ready for she , 
 and she be to come out when she be ready . then he press a button 
 and shoot soundlessly up to his own floor , walk through his own office , 
 out on to his own balcony , and be safely pray before the crowd 
 street when the poor girl , have finish her work , run gaily out 
 to where lover and lift be to receive she , and step - " 

 " do not ! " cry Flambeau . 

 " he ought to have get half a million by press that button , " 
 continue the little father , in the colourless voice in which 
 he talk of such horror . " but that go smash . it go smash 
 because there happen to be another person who also want the money , 
 and who also know the secret about poor Pauline 's sight . 
 there be one thing about that will that I think nobody notice : 
 although it be unfinished and without signature , the other Miss Stacey 
 and some servant of hers have already sign it as witness . 
 Joan have sign first , say Pauline could finish it later , with a 
 typical feminine contempt for legal form . therefore , Joan want 
 her sister to sign the will without real witness . why ? I think 
 of the blindness , and feel sure she have want Pauline to sign 
 in solitude because she have want she not to sign at all . 

 " People like the Staceys always use fountain pen ; but this be 
 specially natural to Pauline . by habit and her strong will and memory 
 she could still write almost as well as if she see ; but she could 
 not tell when her pen need dipping . therefore , her fountain pen 
 be carefully fill by her sister - all except this fountain pen . 
 this be carefully not fill by her sister ; the remain of 
 the ink hold out for a few line and then fail altogether . 
 and the prophet lose five hundred thousand pound and commit one 
 of the most brutal and brilliant murder in human history for nothing . " 

 Flambeau go to the open door and hear the official police ascend 
 the stair . he turn and say : " you must have follow everything 
 devilish close to have trace the crime to Kalon in ten minute . " 

 Father Brown give a sort of start . 

 " oh ! to he , " he say . " no ; I have to follow rather close to find out about 
 Miss Joan and the fountain pen . but I know Kalon be the criminal before I 
 come into the front door . " 

 " you must be joke ! " cry Flambeau . 

 " I be quite serious , " answer the priest . " I tell you I know he have do it , 
 even before I know what he have do . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " these pagan stoic , " say Brown reflectively , " always fail by 
 their strength . there come a crash and a scream down the street , 
 and the priest of Apollo do not start or look round . 
 I do not know what it be . but I know that he be expect it . " 



  the Sign of the Broken Sword 

 the thousand arm of the forest be grey , and its million finger silver . 
 in a sky of dark green - blue - like slate the star be bleak and 
 brilliant like splintered ice . all that thickly woode and sparsely 
 tenant countryside be stiff with a bitter and brittle frost . 
 the black hollow between the trunk of the tree look like bottomless , 
 black cavern of that scandinavian hell , a hell of incalculable cold . 
 even the square stone tower of the church look northern to the point 
 of heathenry , as if it be some barbaric tower among the sea rock 
 of Iceland . it be a queer night for anyone to explore a churchyard . 
 but , on the other hand , perhaps it be worth explore . 

 it rise abruptly out of the ashen waste of forest in a sort of hump 
 or shoulder of green turf that look grey in the starlight . 
 Most of the graf be on a slant , and the path lead up to the church 
 be as steep as a staircase . on the top of the hill , in the one flat 
 and prominent place , be the monument for which the place be famous . 
 it contrast strangely with the featureless graf all round , for it be 
 the work of one of the great sculptor of modern Europe ; and yet his fame 
 be at once forget in the fame of the man whose image he have make . 
 it show , by touch of the small silver pencil of starlight , 
 the massive metal figure of a soldier recumbent , the strong hand 
 seal in an everlasting worship , the great head pillow upon a gun . 
 the venerable face be bearded , or rather whisker , in the old , 
 heavy Colonel Newcome fashion . the uniform , though suggest 
 with the few stroke of simplicity , be that of modern war . 
 by his right side lie a sword , of which the tip be break off ; 
 on the left side lie a Bible . on glow summer afternoon wagonette 
 come full of Americans and cultured suburban to see the sepulchre ; 
 but even then they feel the vast forest land with its one dumpy 
 dome of churchyard and church as a place oddly dumb and neglect . 
 in this freezing darkness of mid - winter one would think he might be leave 
 alone with the star . nevertheless , in the stillness of those stiff 
 wood a wooden gate creak , and two dim figure dress in black 
 climb up the little path to the tomb . 

 so faint be that frigid starlight that nothing could have be 
 trace about they except that while they both wear black , 
 one man be enormously big , and the other   perhaps by contrast 
 almost startlingly small . they go up to the great graven tomb 
 of the historic warrior , and stand for a few minute star at it . 
 there be no human , perhaps no living , thing for a wide circle ; 
 and a morbid fancy might well have wonder if they be human themselves . 
 in any case , the beginning of their conversation might have seem strange . 
 after the first silence the small man say to the other : 

 " where do a wise man hide a pebble ? " 

 and the tall man answer in a low voice : " on the beach . " 

 the small man nod , and after a short silence say : 
 " where do a wise man hide a leaf ? " 

 and the other answer : " in the forest . " 

 there be another stillness , and then the tall man resume : 
 " do you mean that when a wise man have to hide a real diamond 
 he have be know to hide it among sham one ? " 

 " no , no , " say the little man with a laugh , " we will let bygone be bygone . " 

 he stamp his cold foot for a second or two , and then say : 
 " I be not think of that at all , but of something else ; 
 something rather peculiar . just strike a match , will you ? " 

 the big man fumble in his pocket , and soon a scratch and a flare paint 
 gold the whole flat side of the monument . on it be cut in black letter 
 the well - know word which so many Americans have reverently read : 
 " sacred to the Memory of General Sir Arthur St. Clare , Hero and Martyr , 
 who always vanquish his enemy and always spar they , 
 and be treacherously Slain by they at Last . may God in whom he trust 
 both Reward and revenge he . " 

 the match burn the big man 's finger , blacken , and drop . 
 he be about to strike another , but his small companion stop he . 
 " that be all right , Flambeau , old man ; I see what I want . or , rather , 
 I do not   see what I do not   want . and now we must walk a mile and a half 
 along the road to the next inn , and I will try to tell you all about it . 
 for Heaven know a man should have a fire and ale when he dare tell 
 such a story . " 

 they descend the precipitous path , they relatche the rusty gate , 
 and set off at a stamp , ring walk down the frozen forest road . 
 they have go a full quarter of a mile before the small man speak again . 
 he say : " yes ; the wise man hide a pebble on the beach . 
 but what do he do if there be no beach ? do you know anything 
 of that great St. Clare trouble ? " 

 " I know nothing about english general , Father Brown , " 
 answer the large man , laugh , " though a little about 
 english policeman . I only know that you have drag I a precious 
 long dance to all the shrine of this fellow , whoever he be . 
 one would think he get bury in six different place . 
 I have   see a memorial to General St. Clare in Westminster Abbey . 
 I have   see a ramp equestrian statue of General St. Clare on 
 the Embankment . I have   see a medallion of St. Clare in the street 
 he be bear in , and another in the street he live in ; and now 
 you drag I after dark to his coffin in the village churchyard . 
 I be begin to be a bit tired of his magnificent personality , 
 especially as I do not   in the least know who he be . 
 what be you hunt for in all these crypt and effigy ? " 

 " I be only look for one word , " say Father Brown . " a word 
 that be not   there . " 

 " well , " ask Flambeau ; " be you go to tell I anything about it ? " 

 " I must divide it into two part , " remark the priest . 
 " first there be what everybody know ; and then there be what 
 I know . now , what everybody know be short and plain enough . 
 it be also entirely wrong . " 

 " right you be , " say the big man call Flambeau cheerfully . 
 " let us begin at the wrong end . let us begin with what everybody know , 
 which be not   true . " 

 " if not wholly untrue , it be at least very inadequate , " 
 continue Brown ; " for in point of fact , all that the public 
 know amount precisely to this : the public know that 
 Arthur St. Clare be a great and successful english general . 
 it know that after splendid yet careful campaign both in India 
 and Africa he be in command against Brazil when the great 
 brazilian patriot Olivier issue his ultimatum . it know that on 
 that occasion St. Clare with a very small force attack olivier 
 with a very large one , and be capture after heroic resistance . 
 and it know that after his capture , and to the abhorrence of 
 the civilised world , St. Clare be hang on the near tree . 
 he be find swing there after the Brazilians have retire , 
 with his broken sword hang round his neck . " 

 " and that popular story be untrue ? " suggest Flambeau . 

 " no , " say his friend quietly , " that story be quite true , 
 so far as it go . " 

 " well , I think it go far enough ! " say Flambeau ; " but if the popular 
 story be true , what be the mystery ? " 

 they have pass many hundred of grey and ghostly tree before the little 
 priest answer . then he bite his finger reflectively and say : 
 " why , the mystery be a mystery of psychology . or , rather , it be a mystery 
 of two psychology . in that brazilian business two of the most famous 
 man of modern history act flat against their character . mind you , 
 Olivier and St. Clare be both hero - the old thing , and no mistake ; 
 it be like the fight between Hector and Achilles . now , what would you 
 say to an affair in which Achilles be timid and Hector be treacherous ? " 

 " go on , " say the large man impatiently as the other bit his finger again . 

 " Sir Arthur St. Clare be a soldier of the old religious type - 
 the type that save we during the Mutiny , " continue Brown . " he be 
 always more for duty than for dash ; and with all his personal 
 courage be decidedly a prudent commander , particularly indignant 
 at any needless waste of soldier . yet in this last battle 
 he attempt something that a baby could see be absurd . 
 one need not be a strategist to see it be as wild as wind ; just as one 
 need not be a strategist to keep out of the way of a motor - bus . well , 
 that be the first mystery ; what have become of the english general 's head ? 
 the second riddle be , what have become of the brazilian general 's heart ? 
 President Olivier might be call a visionary or a nuisance ; 
 but even his enemy admit that he be magnanimous to the point 
 of knight errantry . almost every other prisoner he have ever 
 capture have be set free or even load with benefit . 
 man who have really wrong he come away touch by his simplicity 
 and sweetness . why the deuce should he diabolically revenge 
 himself only once in his life ; and that for the one particular 
 blow that could not have hurt he ? well , there you have it . 
 one of the wise man in the world act like an idiot for no reason . 
 one of the good man in the world act like a fiend for no reason . 
 that be the long and the short of it ; and I leave it to you , my boy . " 

 " no , you do not , " say the other with a snort . " I leave it to you ; 
 and you jolly well tell I all about it . " 

 " well , " resume Father Brown , " it be not fair to say that the public 
 impression be just what I have   say , without add that two thing 
 have happen since . I can not   say they throw a new light ; for nobody 
 can make sense of they . but they throw a new kind of darkness ; 
 they throw the darkness in new direction . the first be this . 
 the family physician of the St. Clares quarrel with 
 that family , and begin publish a violent series of article , 
 in which he say that the late general be a religious maniac ; 
 but as far as the tale go , this seem to mean little 
 more than a religious man . anyhow , the story fizzle out . 
 everyone know , of course , that St. Clare have some of the eccentricity 
 of puritan piety . the second incident be much more arresting . 
 in the luckless and unsupported regiment which make that rash 
 attempt at the Black River there be a certain Captain Keith , 
 who be at that time engage to St. Clare 's daughter , 
 and who afterwards marry she . he be one of those who be 
 capture by Olivier , and , like all the rest except the general , 
 appear to have be bounteously treat and promptly set free . 
 some twenty year afterwards this man , then Lieutenant - Colonel Keith , 
 publish a sort of autobiography call ` a british Officer 
 in Burmah and Brazil . ' in the place where the reader look 
 eagerly for some account of the mystery of St. Clare 's disaster 
 may be find the follow word : ` everywhere else in this book 
 I have narrate thing exactly as they occur , hold as I 
 do the old - fashioned opinion that the glory of England be old 
 enough to take care of itself . the exception I shall make be 
 in this matter of the defeat by the Black River ; and my reason , 
 though private , be honourable and compelling . I will , however , 
 add this in justice to the memory of two distinguished man . 
 General St. Clare have be accuse of incapacity on this occasion ; 
 I can at least testify that this action , properly understand , 
 be one of the most brilliant and sagacious of his life . 
 President Olivier by similar report be charge with savage injustice . 
 I think it due to the honour of an enemy to say that he act on 
 this occasion with even more than his characteristic good feeling . 
 to put the matter popularly , I can assure my countryman that St. Clare 
 be by no mean such a fool nor Olivier such a brute as he look . 
 this be all I have to say ; nor shall any earthly consideration 
 induce I to add a word to it . ' " 

 a large frozen moon like a lustrous snowball begin to show through the tangle 
 of twig in front of they , and by its light the narrator have be able 
 to refresh his memory of Captain Keith 's text from a scrap of print paper . 
 as he fold it up and put it back in his pocket Flambeau throw up his hand 
 with a french gesture . 

 " wait a bit , wait a bit , " he cry excitedly . " I believe I can 
 guess it at the first go . " 

 he stride on , breathe hard , his black head and bull neck forward , 
 like a man win a walking race . the little priest , 
 amuse and interested , have some trouble in trot beside he . 
 just before they the tree fall back a little to leave and right , 
 and the road sweep downwards across a clear , moonlit valley , 
 till it dive again like a rabbit into the wall of another wood . 
 the entrance to the farth forest look small and round , 
 like the black hole of a remote railway tunnel . 
 but it be within some hundred yard , and gap like a cavern 
 before Flambeau speak again . 

 " I have   get it , " he cry at last , slap his thigh with his great hand . 
 " four minute ' thinking , and I can tell your whole story myself . " 

 " all right , " assent his friend . " you tell it . " 

 Flambeau lift his head , but lower his voice . 
 " General Sir Arthur St. Clare , " he say , " come of a family in which madness 
 be hereditary ; and his whole aim be to keep this from his daughter , 
 and even , if possible , from his future son - in - law . rightly or wrongly , 
 he think the final collapse be close , and resolve on suicide . 
 yet ordinary suicide would blazon the very idea he dread . 
 as the campaign approach the cloud come thick on his brain ; 
 and at last in a mad moment he sacrifice his public duty to his private . 
 he rush rashly into battle , hop to fall by the first shot . 
 when he find that he have only attain capture and discredit , 
 the sealed bomb in his brain burst , and he break his own sword 
 and hang himself . " 

 he star firmly at the grey facade of forest in front of he , with the one 
 black gap in it , like the mouth of the grave , into which their path plunge . 
 perhaps something menacing in the road thus suddenly swallow reinforce 
 his vivid vision of the tragedy , for he shudder . 

 " a horrid story , " he say . 

 " a horrid story , " repeat the priest with bent head . 
 " but not the real story . " 

 then he throw back his head with a sort of despair and cry : 
 " oh , I wish it have be . " 

 the tall Flambeau face round and star at he . 

 " yours be a clean story , " cry Father Brown , deeply move . 
 " a sweet , pure , honest story , as open and white as that moon . 
 madness and despair be innocent enough . there be 
 bad thing , Flambeau . " 

 Flambeau look up wildly at the moon thus invoke ; and from where he stand 
 one black tree - bough curve across it exactly like a devil 's horn . 

 " Father - father , " cry Flambeau with the french gesture and step 
 yet more rapidly forward , " do you mean it be bad than that ? " 

 " bad than that , " say Paul like a grave echo . and they plunge 
 into the black cloister of the woodland , which run by they in a dim 
 tapestry of trunk , like one of the dark corridor in a dream . 

 they be soon in the most secret entrail of the wood , 
 and feel close about they foliage that they could not see , 
 when the priest say again : 

 " where do a wise man hide a leaf ? in the forest . 
 but what do he do if there be no forest ? " 

 " well , well , " cry Flambeau irritably , " what do he do ? " 

 " he grow a forest to hide it in , " say the priest in an obscure voice . 
 " a fearful sin . " 

 " look here , " cry his friend impatiently , for the dark wood and the dark 
 saying get a little on his nerve ; will you tell I this story or not ? 
 what other evidence be there to go on ? " 

 " there be three more bit of evidence , " say the other , 
 " that I have dig up in hole and corner ; and I will give they 
 in logical rather than chronological order . first of all , 
 of course , our authority for the issue and event of the battle 
 be in Olivier 's own dispatch , which be lucid enough . 
 he be entrench with two or three regiment on the height 
 that sweep down to the Black River , on the other side of which 
 be low and more marshy ground . beyond this again be gently 
 rise country , on which be the first english outpost , 
 support by other which lay , however , considerably in its rear . 
 the british force as a whole be greatly superior in number ; 
 but this particular regiment be just far enough from its base to make 
 olivi consider the project of cross the river to cut it off . 
 by sunset , however , he have decide to retain his own position , 
 which be a specially strong one . at daybreak next morning 
 he be thunderstruck to see that this stray handful of English , 
 entirely unsupported from their rear , have fling themselves 
 across the river , half by a bridge to the right , and the other 
 half by a ford higher up , and be mass upon the marshy 
 bank below he . 

 " that they should attempt an attack with such number against such 
 a position be incredible enough ; but Olivier notice something yet 
 more extraordinary . for instead of attempt to seize more solid ground , 
 this mad regiment , have put the river in its rear by one wild charge , 
 do nothing more , but stick there in the mire like fly in treacle . 
 needless to say , the Brazilians blow great gap in they with artillery , 
 which they could only return with spirited but lessen rifle fire . 
 yet they never break ; and Olivier 's curt account end with a strong 
 tribute of admiration for the mystic valour of these imbecile . 
 ` our line then advance finally , ' write Olivier , ` and drive they 
 into the river ; we capture General St. Clare himself and several 
 other officer . the colonel and the major have both fall in the battle . 
 I can not resist say that few fine sight can have be see 
 in history than the last stand of this extraordinary regiment ; 
 wound officer pick up the rifle of dead soldier , and the general 
 himself face we on horseback bareheade and with a broken sword . ' 
 on what happen to the general afterwards Olivier be as silent 
 as Captain Keith . " 

 " well , " grunt Flambeau , " get on to the next bit of evidence . " 

 " the next evidence , " say Father Brown , " take some time to find , but it 
 will not take long to tell . I find at last in an almshouse down in the 
 Lincolnshire Fens an old soldier who not only be wound at the Black River , 
 but have actually kneel beside the colonel of the regiment when he die . 
 this latter be a certain Colonel Clancy , a big bull of an Irishman ; 
 and it would seem that he die almost as much of rage as of bullet . 
 he , at any rate , be not responsible for that ridiculous raid ; 
 it must have be impose on he by the general . his last edify word , 
 accord to my informant , be these : ` and there go the damned old 
 donkey with the end of his sword knock off . I wish it be his head . ' 
 you will remark that everyone seem to have notice this detail about 
 the broken sword blade , though most people regard it somewhat more reverently 
 than do the late Colonel Clancy . and now for the third fragment . " 

 their path through the woodland begin to go upward , 
 and the speaker pause a little for breath before he go on . 
 then he continue in the same business - like tone : 

 " only a month or two ago a certain brazilian official die 
 in England , have quarrel with Olivier and leave his country . 
 he be a well - know figure both here and on the continent , 
 a Spaniard name Espado ; I know he myself , a yellow - face 
 old dandy , with a hooked nose . for various private reason 
 I have permission to see the document he have leave ; he be 
 a Catholic , of course , and I have be with he towards the end . 
 there be nothing of his that light up any corner of the black 
 St. Clare business , except five or six common exercise book 
 fill with the diary of some english soldier . I can only suppose 
 that it be find by the Brazilians on one of those that fall . 
 anyhow , it stop abruptly the night before the battle . 

 " but the account of that last day in the poor fellow 's life 
 be certainly worth read . I have it on I ; but it be too dark 
 to read it here , and I will give you a resume . the first part 
 of that entry be full of joke , evidently fling about among the man , 
 about somebody call the vulture . it do not seem as if this person , 
 whoever he be , be one of themselves , nor even an Englishman ; 
 neither be he exactly speak of as one of the enemy . it sound 
 rather as if he be some local go - between and non - combatant ; 
 perhaps a guide or a journalist . he have be closet with old 
 Colonel Clancy ; but be more often see talk to the major . 
 indeed , the major be somewhat prominent in this soldier 's narrative ; 
 a lean , dark - haired man , apparently , of the name of Murray - 
 a north of Ireland man and a Puritan . there be continual 
 jest about the contrast between this Ulsterman 's austerity 
 and the conviviality of Colonel Clancy . there be also some joke 
 about the vulture wear bright - colour clothe . 

 " but all these levity be scatter by what may well be 
 call the note of a bugle . behind the English camp and 
 almost parallel to the river run one of the few great road 
 of that district . westward the road curve round towards 
 the river , which it cross by the bridge before mention . 
 to the east the road sweep backwards into the wild , 
 and some two mile along it be the next english outpost . 
 from this direction there come along the road that evening a glitter 
 and clatter of light cavalry , in which even the simple diarist 
 could recognise with astonishment the general with his staff . 
 he ride the great white horse which you have see so often 
 in illustrate paper and Academy picture ; and you may be sure 
 that the salute they give he be not merely ceremonial . 
 he , at least , waste no time on ceremony , but , spring from 
 the saddle immediately , mix with the group of officer , 
 and fall into emphatic though confidential speech . 
 what strike our friend the diarist most be his special disposition 
 to discuss matter with Major Murray ; but , indeed , such a selection , 
 so long as it be not mark , be in no way unnatural . 
 the two man be make for sympathy ; they be man who ` read 
 their bible ' ; they be both the old evangelical type of officer . 
 however this may be , it be certain that when the general mount 
 again he be still talk earnestly to Murray ; and that as he walk 
 his horse slowly down the road towards the river , the tall 
 Ulsterman still walk by his bridle rein in earnest debate . 
 the soldier watch the two until they vanish behind 
 a clump of tree where the road turn towards the river . 
 the colonel have go back to his tent , and the man to their picket ; 
 the man with the diary linger for another four minute , 
 and see a marvellous sight . 

 " the great white horse which have march slowly down the road , 
 as it have march in so many procession , fly back , gallop up 
 the road towards they as if it be mad to win a race . 
 at first they think it have run away with the man on its back ; 
 but they soon see that the general , a fine rider , be himself urge 
 it to full speed . horse and man sweep up to they like a whirlwind ; 
 and then , rein up the reel charger , the general turn on they 
 a face like flame , and call for the colonel like the trumpet 
 that wake the dead . 

 " I conceive that all the earthquake event of that catastrophe tumble 
 on top of each other rather like lumber in the mind of man such 
 as our friend with the diary . with the daze excitement of a dream , 
 they find themselves fall - literally fall - into their rank , 
 and learn that an attack be to be lead at once across the river . 
 the general and the major , it be say , have find out something at the bridge , 
 and there be only just time to strike for life . the major have go 
 back at once to call up the reserve along the road behind ; it be 
 doubtful if even with that prompt appeal help could reach they in time . 
 but they must pass the stream that night , and seize the height by morning . 
 it be with the very stir and throb of that romantic nocturnal march 
 that the diary suddenly end . " 

 Father Brown have mount ahead ; for the woodland path 
 grow small , steeper , and more twisted , till they feel as if they 
 be ascend a winding staircase . the priest 's voice come 
 from above out of the darkness . 

 " there be one other little and enormous thing . when the general urge 
 they to their chivalric charge he half draw his sword from the scabbard ; 
 and then , as if ashamed of such melodrama , thrust it back again . 
 the sword again , you see . " 

 a half - light break through the network of bough above they , 
 fling the ghost of a net about their foot ; for they be 
 mount again to the faint luminosity of the naked night . 
 Flambeau feel truth all round he as an atmosphere , 
 but not as an idea . he answer with bewildered brain : 
 " well , what be the matter with the sword ? officer generally 
 have sword , do not   they ? " 

 " they be not often mention in modern war , " say the other dispassionately ; 
 " but in this affair one fall over the bless sword everywhere . " 

 " well , what be there in that ? " growl Flambeau ; " it be a twopence colour 
 sort of incident ; the old man 's blade break in his last battle . 
 anyone might bet the paper would get hold of it , as they have . 
 on all these tomb and thing it be show break at the point . 
 I hope you have not   drag I through this polar expedition merely 
 because two man with an eye for a picture see St. Clare 's broken sword . " 

 " no , " cry Father Brown , with a sharp voice like a pistol shot ; 
 " but who see his unbroken sword ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " cry the other , and stand still under the star . 
 they have come abruptly out of the grey gate of the wood . 

 " I say , who see his unbroken sword ? " repeat Father Brown obstinately . 
 " not the writer of the diary , anyhow ; the general sheathe it in time . " 

 Flambeau look about he in the moonlight , as a man strike blind might look 
 in the sun ; and his friend go on , for the first time with eagerness : 

 " Flambeau , " he cry , " I can not prove it , even after hunt 
 through the tomb . but I be sure of it . let I add just one 
 more tiny fact that tip the whole thing over . the colonel , 
 by a strange chance , be one of the first strike by a bullet . 
 he be strike long before the troop come to close quarter . 
 but he see St. Clare 's sword break . why be it break ? 
 how be it break ? my friend , it be break before the battle . " 

 " oh ! " say his friend , with a sort of forlorn jocularity ; 
 " and pray where be the other piece ? " 

 " I can tell you , " say the priest promptly . " in the northeast corner 
 of the cemetery of the Protestant Cathedral at Belfast . " 

 " indeed ? " inquire the other . " have you look for it ? " 

 " I could not , " reply Brown , with frank regret . " there be a great 
 marble monument on top of it ; a monument to the heroic Major Murray , 
 who fall fight gloriously at the famous Battle of the Black River . " 

 Flambeau seem suddenly galvanise into existence . " you mean , " 
 he cry hoarsely , " that General St. Clare hat Murray , 
 and murder he on the field of battle because - " 

 " you be still full of good and pure thought , " say the other . 
 " it be bad than that . " 

 " well , " say the large man , " my stock of evil imagination be use up . " 

 the priest seem really doubtful where to begin , and at last he say again : 

 " where would a wise man hide a leaf ? in the forest . " 

 the other do not answer . 

 " if there be no forest , he would make a forest . and if he wish 
 to hide a dead leaf , he would make a dead forest . " 

 there be still no reply , and the priest add still more mildly and quietly : 

 " and if a man have to hide a dead body , he would make a field of dead body 
 to hide it in . " 

 Flambeau begin to stamp forward with an intolerance of delay in time or space ; 
 but Father Brown go on as if he be continue the last sentence : 

 " Sir Arthur St. Clare , as I have already say , be a man 
 who read his Bible . that be what be the matter with he . 
 when will people understand that it be useless for a man to read his 
 Bible unless he also read everybody else 's Bible ? a printer read 
 a Bible for misprint . a Mormon read his Bible , and find polygamy ; 
 a Christian Scientist read his , and find we have no arm and leg . 
 St. Clare be an old anglo - indian protestant soldier . now , just think 
 what that might mean ; and , for Heaven 's sake , do not   can not about it . 
 it might mean a man physically formidable live under a tropic sun 
 in an oriental society , and soak himself without sense or guidance 
 in an oriental Book . of course , he read the Old Testament rather 
 than the New . of course , he find in the Old Testament anything 
 that he want - lust , tyranny , treason . oh , I dare say he be honest , 
 as you call it . but what be the good of a man be honest in his 
 worship of dishonesty ? 

 " in each of the hot and secret country to which the man go 
 he keep a harem , he torture witness , he amass shameful gold ; 
 but certainly he would have say with steady eye that he do it 
 to the glory of the Lord . my own theology be sufficiently express 
 by ask which Lord ? anyhow , there be this about such evil , 
 that it open door after door in hell , and always into small and 
 small chamber . this be the real case against crime , that a man 
 do not become wilder and wilder , but only mean and meaner . 
 St. Clare be soon suffocate by difficulty of bribery and blackmail ; 
 and need more and more cash . and by the time of the battle 
 of the Black River he have fall from world to world to that place 
 which Dante make the low floor of the universe . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask his friend again . 

 " I mean that , " retort the cleric , and suddenly point 
 at a puddle seal with ice that shine in the moon . 
 " do you remember whom Dante put in the last circle of ice ? " 

 " the traitor , " say Flambeau , and shudder . as he look 
 around at the inhuman landscape of tree , with taunt and 
 almost obscene outline , he could almost fancy he be Dante , 
 and the priest with the rivulet of a voice be , indeed , a Virgil 
 lead he through a land of eternal sin . 

 the voice go on : " Olivier , as you know , be quixotic , 
 and would not permit a secret service and spy . 
 the thing , however , be do , like many other thing , 
 behind his back . it be manage by my old friend Espado ; 
 he be the bright - clothe fop , whose hook nose get he call 
 the vulture . pose as a sort of philanthropist at the front , 
 he feel his way through the English Army , and at last get his finger 
 on its one corrupt man - please God ! - and that man at the top . 
 St. Clare be in foul need of money , and mountain of it . 
 the discredited family doctor be threaten those extraordinary 
 exposure that afterwards begin and be break off ; tale of 
 monstrous and prehistoric thing in Park Lane ; thing do by an 
 English Evangelist that smell like human sacrifice and horde 
 of slave . money be want , too , for his daughter 's dowry ; 
 for to he the fame of wealth be as sweet as wealth itself . 
 he snap the last thread , whisper the word to Brazil , 
 and wealth pour in from the enemy of England . but another 
 man have talk to Espado the vulture as well as he . 
 somehow the dark , grim young major from Ulster have guess 
 the hideous truth ; and when they walk slowly together down 
 that road towards the bridge Murray be tell the general 
 that he must resign instantly , or be court - martialle and shoot . 
 the general temporise with he till they come to the fringe 
 of tropic tree by the bridge ; and there by the singing river 
 and the sunlit palm   for I can see the picture   the general 
 draw his sabre and plunge it through the body of the major . " 

 the wintry road curve over a ridge in cut frost , with cruel 
 black shape of bush and thicket ; but Flambeau fancy that 
 he see beyond it faintly the edge of an aureole that be not 
 starlight and moonlight , but some fire such as be make by man . 
 he watch it as the tale draw to its close . 

 " St. Clare be a hell - hound , but he be a hound of breed . never , I will swear , 
 be he so lucid and so strong as when poor Murray lie a cold lump 
 at his foot . never in all his triumph , as Captain Keith say truly , 
 be the great man so great as he be in this last world - despise defeat . 
 he look coolly at his weapon to wipe off the blood ; he see the point 
 he have plant between his victim 's shoulder have break off in the body . 
 he see quite calmly , as through a club windowpane , all that must follow . 
 he see that man must find the unaccountable corpse ; must extract 
 the unaccountable sword - point ; must notice the unaccountable 
 break sword - or absence of sword . he have kill , but not silence . 
 but his imperious intellect rise against the facer ; there be one way yet . 
 he could make the corpse less unaccountable . he could create a hill 
 of corps to cover this one . in twenty minute eight hundred English 
 soldier be march down to their death . " 

 the warmer glow behind the black winter wood grow rich and bright , 
 and Flambeau stride on to reach it . Father Brown also quicken his stride ; 
 but he seem merely absorb in his tale . 

 " such be the valour of that English thousand , and such the genius 
 of their commander , that if they have at once attack the hill , 
 even their mad march might have meet some luck . but the evil mind 
 that play with they like pawn have other aim and reason . 
 they must remain in the marsh by the bridge at least till british 
 corps should be a common sight there . then for the last grand scene ; 
 the silver - haired soldier - saint would give up his shattered sword 
 to save further slaughter . oh , it be well organise for an impromptu . 
 but I think   I can not prove , I think that it be while they stick 
 there in the bloody mire that someone doubt - and someone guess . " 

 he be mute a moment , and then say : " there be a voice from nowhere 
 that tell I the man who guess be the lover ... the man to we d 
 the old man 's child . " 

 " but what about Olivier and the hanging ? " ask Flambeau . 

 " Olivier , partly from chivalry , partly from policy , seldom 
 encumber his march with captive , " explain the narrator . 
 " he release everybody in most case . he release everybody 
 in this case . 

 " everybody but the general , " say the tall man . 

 " everybody , " say the priest . 

 Flambeau knit his black brow . " I do not   grasp it all yet , " he say . 

 " there be another picture , Flambeau , " say Brown in his more 
 mystical undertone . " I can not   prove it ; but I can do more - I can see it . 
 there be a camp break up on the bare , torrid hill at morning , 
 and brazilian uniform mass in block and column to march . 
 there be the red shirt and long black beard of Olivier , 
 which blow as he stand , his broad - brim hat in his hand . 
 he be say farewell to the great enemy he be set free - 
 the simple , snow - head english veteran , who thank he in the name 
 of his man . the English remnant stand behind at attention ; 
 beside they be store and vehicle for the retreat . the drum roll ; 
 the Brazilians be move ; the English be still like statue . 
 so they abide till the last hum and flash of the enemy have fade 
 from the tropic horizon . then they alter their posture all at once , 
 like dead man come to life ; they turn their fifty face upon 
 the general - face not to be forget . " 

 Flambeau give a great jump . " ah , " he cry , " you do not   mean - " 

 " yes , " say Father Brown in a deep , move voice . 
 " it be an english hand that put the rope round St. Clare 's neck ; 
 I believe the hand that put the ring on his daughter 's finger . 
 they be english hand that drag he up to the tree of shame ; 
 the hand of man that have adore he and follow he to victory . 
 and they be english soul   God pardon and endure we all ! 
 who star at he swing in that foreign sun on the green 
 gallow of palm , and pray in their hatred that he might drop 
 off it into hell . " 

 as the two top the ridge there burst on they the strong 
 scarlet light of a red - curtain English inn . it stand sideways 
 in the road , as if stand aside in the amplitude of hospitality . 
 its three door stand open with invitation ; and even where they 
 stand they could hear the hum and laughter of humanity happy 
 for a night . 

 " I need not tell you more , " say Father Brown . " they try he 
 in the wilderness and destroy he ; and then , for the honour 
 of England and of his daughter , they take an oath to seal up 
 for ever the story of the traitor 's purse and the assassin 's 
 sword blade . perhaps - Heaven help they - they try to forget it . 
 let we try to forget it , anyhow ; here be our inn . " 

 " with all my heart , " say Flambeau , and be just stride into the bright , 
 noisy bar when he step back and almost fall on the road . 

 " look there , in the devil 's name ! " he cry , and point 
 rigidly at the square wooden sign that overhang the road . 
 it show dimly the crude shape of a sabre hilt and a shorten blade ; 
 and be inscribe in false archaic lettering , " the Sign 
 of the Broken Sword . " 

 " be you not prepare ? " ask Father Brown gently . 
 " he be the god of this country ; half the inn and park and 
 street be name after he and his story . " 

 " I think we have do with the leper , " cry Flambeau , 
 and spat on the road . 

 " you will never have do with he in England , " say the priest , 
 look down , " while brass be strong and stone abide . 
 his marble statue will erect the soul of proud , innocent boy 
 for century , his village tomb will smell of loyalty as of lily . 
 million who never know he shall love he like a father - 
 this man whom the last few that know he deal with like dung . 
 he shall be a saint ; and the truth shall never be tell of he , 
 because I have make up my mind at last . there be so much good 
 and evil in break secret , that I put my conduct to a test . 
 all these newspaper will perish ; the anti - brazil boom be already over ; 
 Olivier be already honour everywhere . but I tell myself that 
 if anywhere , by name , in metal or marble that will endure like 
 the pyramid , Colonel Clancy , or Captain Keith , or President Olivier , 
 or any innocent man be wrongly blame , then I would speak . 
 if it be only that St. Clare be wrongly praise , I would be silent . 
 and I will . " 

 they plunge into the red - curtain tavern , which be not only cosy , 
 but even luxurious inside . on a table stand a silver model of the tomb 
 of St. Clare , the silver head bow , the silver sword break . 
 on the wall be colour photograph of the same scene , 
 and of the system of wagonette that take tourist to see it . 
 they sit down on the comfortable padded bench . 

 " come , it be cold , " cry Father Brown ; " let us have some wine or beer . " 

 " or brandy , " say Flambeau . 



  the Three Tools of Death 

 both by call and conviction Father Brown know well than 
 most of we , that every man be dignified when he be dead . 
 but even he feel a pang of incongruity when he be knock up 
 at daybreak and tell that Sir Aaron Armstrong have be murder . 
 there be something absurd and unseemly about secret violence 
 in connection with so entirely entertaining and popular a figure . 
 for Sir Aaron Armstrong be entertaining to the point of be comic ; 
 and popular in such a manner as to be almost legendary . 
 it be like hear that sunny Jim have hang himself ; 
 or that Mr. Pickwick have die in Hanwell . for though Sir Aaron be 
 a philanthropist , and thus deal with the dark side of our society , 
 he pride himself on deal with it in the bright possible style . 
 his political and social speech be cataract of anecdote 
 and " loud laughter " ; his bodily health be of a bursting sort ; 
 his ethic be all optimism ; and he deal with the Drink problem 
  his favourite topic   with that immortal or even monotonous gaiety 
 which be so often a mark of the prosperous total abstainer . 

 the established story of his conversion be familiar on the more 
 puritanic platform and pulpit , how he have be , when only a boy , 
 draw away from Scotch theology to Scotch whisky , and how he have 
 rise out of both and become   as he modestly put it   what he be . 
 yet his wide white beard , cherubic face , and sparkle spectacle , 
 at the numberless dinner and congress where they appear , 
 make it hard to believe , somehow , that he have ever be anything 
 so morbid as either a dram - drinker or a Calvinist . he be , one feel , 
 the most seriously merry of all the son of man . 

 he have live on the rural skirt of Hampstead in a handsome 
 house , high but not broad , a modern and prosaic tower . 
 the narrowest of its narrow side overhang the steep green 
 bank of a railway , and be shake by pass train . 
 Sir Aaron Armstrong , as he boisterously explain , have no nerve . 
 but if the train have often give a shock to the house , 
 that morning the table be turn , and it be the house 
 that give a shock to the train . 

 the engine slow down and stop just beyond that point where 
 an angle of the house impinge upon the sharp slope of turf . 
 the arrest of most mechanical thing must be slow ; 
 but the live cause of this have be very rapid . 
 a man clothe completely in black , even   it be remember 
 to the dreadful detail of black glove , appear on the ridge above 
 the engine , and wave his black hand like some sable windmill . 
 this in itself would hardly have stop even a linger train . 
 but there come out of he a cry which be talk of afterwards 
 as something utterly unnatural and new . it be one of those shout 
 that be horridly distinct even when we can not hear what be shout . 
 the word in this case be " murder ! " 

 but the engine - driver swear he would have pull up just the same if he have 
 hear only the dreadful and definite accent and not the word . 

 the train once arrest , the most superficial stare could take 
 in many feature of the tragedy . the man in black on the green bank 
 be Sir Aaron Armstrong 's man - servant Magnus . the baronet in his 
 optimism have often laugh at the black glove of this dismal attendant ; 
 but no one be likely to laugh at he just now . 

 so soon as an inquirer or two have step off the line and across 
 the smoky hedge , they see , roll down almost to the bottom 
 of the bank , the body of an old man in a yellow dressing - gown 
 with a very vivid scarlet lining . a scrap of rope seem 
 catch about his leg , entangle presumably in a struggle . 
 there be a smear or so of blood , though very little ; but the body 
 be bent or break into a posture impossible to any live thing . 
 it be Sir Aaron Armstrong . a few more bewildered moment bring 
 out a big fair - bearded man , whom some traveller could salute as 
 the dead man 's secretary , Patrick Royce , once well know in Bohemian 
 society and even famous in the bohemian art . in a manner more vague , 
 but even more convincing , he echo the agony of the servant . 
 by the time the third figure of that household , Alice Armstrong , 
 daughter of the dead man , have come already totter and wave 
 into the garden , the engine - driver have put a stop to his stoppage . 
 the whistle have blow and the train have pant on to get help 
 from the next station . 

 Father Brown have be thus rapidly summon at the request 
 of Patrick Royce , the big ex - bohemian secretary . 
 Royce be an Irishman by birth ; and that casual kind of Catholic 
 that never remember his religion until he be really in a hole . 
 but Royce 's request might have be less promptly comply 
 with if one of the official detective have not be a friend 
 and admirer of the unofficial Flambeau ; and it be impossible 
 to be a friend of Flambeau without hear numberless story 
 about Father Brown . hence , while the young detective 
  whose name be Merton   lead the little priest across the field 
 to the railway , their talk be more confidential than could 
 be expect between two total stranger . 

 " as far as I can see , " say Mr. Merton candidly , " there be no 
 sense to be make of it at all . there be nobody one can suspect . 
 Magnus be a solemn old fool ; far too much of a fool to be an assassin . 
 Royce have be the baronet 's good friend for year ; and his 
 daughter undoubtedly adore he . besides , it be all too absurd . 
 who would kill such a cheery old chap as Armstrong ? who could 
 dip his hand in the gore of an after - dinner speaker ? 
 it would be like kill Father Christmas . " 

 " yes , it be a cheery house , " assent Father Brown . " it be a cheery house 
 while he be alive . do you think it will be cheery now he be dead ? " 

 Merton start a little and regard his companion with an enliven eye . 
 " now he be dead ? " he repeat . 

 " yes , " continue the priest stolidly , " he be cheerful . 
 but do he communicate his cheerfulness ? frankly , be anyone 
 else in the house cheerful but he ? " 

 a window in Merton 's mind let in that strange light of surprise 
 in which we see for the first time thing we have know all along . 
 he have often be to the armstrong ' , on little police job 
 of the philanthropist ; and , now he come to think of it , it be in 
 itself a depressing house . the room be very high and very cold ; 
 the decoration mean and provincial ; the draughty corridor be light 
 by electricity that be bleaker than moonlight . and though the old 
 man 's scarlet face and silver beard have blaze like a bonfire in each 
 room or passage in turn , it do not leave any warmth behind it . 
 doubtless this spectral discomfort in the place be partly due 
 to the very vitality and exuberance of its owner ; he need no stove 
 or lamp , he would say , but carry his own warmth with he . 
 but when Merton recall the other inmate , he be compel 
 to confess that they also be as shadow of their lord . 
 the moody man - servant , with his monstrous black glove , be almost 
 a nightmare ; Royce , the secretary , be solid enough , a big bull of a man , 
 in tweed , with a short beard ; but the straw - colour beard be 
 startlingly salt with grey like the tweed , and the broad forehead 
 be bar with premature wrinkle . he be good - natured enough also , 
 but it be a sad sort of good - nature , almost a heart - break sort - 
 he have the general air of be some sort of failure in life . 
 as for Armstrong 's daughter , it be almost incredible that she be 
 his daughter ; she be so pallid in colour and sensitive in outline . 
 she be graceful , but there be a quiver in the very shape of she 
 that be like the line of an aspen . Merton have sometimes wonder 
 if she have learn to quail at the crash of the pass train . 

 " you see , " say Father Brown , blink modestly , " I be not sure that 
 the Armstrong cheerfulness be so very cheerful - for other people . 
 you say that nobody could kill such a happy old man , but I be not sure ; 
 ne nos inducas in tentationem . if ever I murder somebody , " 
 he add quite simply , " I dare say it might be an Optimist . " 

 " why ? " cry Merton amuse . " do you think people dislike cheerfulness ? " 

 " People like frequent laughter , " answer Father Brown , " but I 
 do not   think they like a permanent smile . cheerfulness without 
 humour be a very try thing . " 

 they walk some way in silence along the windy grassy bank by the rail , 
 and just as they come under the far - flung shadow of the tall 
 Armstrong house , Father Brown say suddenly , like a man throw 
 away a troublesome thought rather than offer it seriously : 
 " of course , drink be neither good nor bad in itself . 
 but I can not   help sometimes feel that man like Armstrong want 
 an occasional glass of wine to sadden they . " 

 Merton 's official superior , a grizzled and capable detective 
 name Gilder , be stand on the green bank wait for the coroner , 
 talk to Patrick Royce , whose big shoulder and bristly beard and hair 
 tower above he . this be the more noticeable because Royce walk 
 always with a sort of powerful stoop , and seem to be go about 
 his small clerical and domestic duty in a heavy and humble style , 
 like a buffalo draw a go - cart . 

 he raise his head with unusual pleasure at the sight of the priest , 
 and take he a few pace apart . meanwhile Merton be address the old 
 detective respectfully indeed , but not without a certain boyish impatience . 

 " well , Mr. Gilder , have you get much far with the mystery ? " 

 " there be no mystery , " reply Gilder , as he look under dreamy 
 eyelid at the rook . 

 " well , there be for I , at any rate , " say Merton , smile . 

 " it be simple enough , my boy , " observe the senior investigator , 
 stroke his grey , point beard . " three minute after you would 
 go for Mr. Royce 's parson the whole thing come out . 
 you know that pasty - face servant in the black glove who 
 stop the train ? " 

 " I should know he anywhere . somehow he rather give I the creep . " 

 " well , " drawled Gilder , " when the train have go on again , 
 that man have go too . rather a cool criminal , do not   you think , 
 to escape by the very train that go off for the police ? " 

 " you be pretty sure , I suppose , " remark the young man , 
 " that he really do kill his master ? " 

 " yes , my son , I be pretty sure , " reply Gilder drily , 
 " for the trifling reason that he have go off with twenty 
 thousand pound in paper that be in his master 's desk . 
 no , the only thing worth call a difficulty be how he kill he . 
 the skull seem break as with some big weapon , but there be 
 no weapon at all lie about , and the murderer would have find 
 it awkward to carry it away , unless the weapon be too small 
 to be notice . " 

 " perhaps the weapon be too big to be notice , " say the priest , 
 with an odd little giggle . 

 Gilder look round at this wild remark , and rather sternly ask 
 Brown what he mean . 

 " silly way of put it , I know , " say Father Brown apologetically . 
 " sound like a fairy tale . but poor Armstrong be kill with a giant 's club , 
 a great green club , too big to be see , and which we call the earth . 
 he be break against this green bank we be stand on . " 

 " how do you mean ? " ask the detective quickly . 

 Father Brown turn his moon face up to the narrow facade 
 of the house and blink hopelessly up . follow his eye , 
 they see that right at the top of this otherwise blind back 
 quarter of the building , an attic window stand open . 

 " do not   you see , " he explain , point a little awkwardly like a child , 
 " he be throw down from there ? " 

 Gilder frowningly scrutinise the window , and then say : 
 " well , it be certainly possible . but I do not   see why you be 
 so sure about it . " 

 Brown open his grey eye wide . " why , " he say , " there be a bit 
 of rope round the dead man 's leg . do not   you see that other bit 
 of rope up there catch at the corner of the window ? " 

 at that height the thing look like the faint particle 
 of dust or hair , but the shrewd old investigator be satisfied . 
 " you be quite right , sir , " he say to Father Brown ; " that be 
 certainly one to you . " 

 almost as he speak a special train with one carriage take the curve 
 of the line on their left , and , stop , disgorge another group 
 of policeman , in whose midst be the hangdog visage of Magnus , 
 the abscond servant . 

 " by Jove ! they have   get he , " cry Gilder , and step forward 
 with quite a new alertness . 

 " have you get the money ! " he cry to the first policeman . 

 the man look he in the face with a rather curious expression and say : 
 " no . " then he add : " at least , not here . " 

 " which be the inspector , please ? " ask the man call Magnus . 

 when he speak everyone instantly understand how this voice have stop 
 a train . he be a dull - look man with flat black hair , a colourless face , 
 and a faint suggestion of the East in the level slit in his eye and mouth . 
 his blood and name , indeed , have remain dubious , ever since Sir Aaron have 
 " rescue " he from a waitership in a London restaurant , and   as some say 
 from more infamous thing . but his voice be as vivid as his face be dead . 
 whether through exactitude in a foreign language , or in deference to 
 his master   who have be somewhat deaf , Magnus 's tone have a peculiarly 
 ring and pierce quality , and the whole group quite jump when he speak . 

 " I always know this would happen , " he say aloud with brazen blandness . 
 " my poor old master make game of I for wear black ; but I always say 
 I should be ready for his funeral . " 

 and he make a momentary movement with his two dark - glove hand . 

 " Sergeant , " say Inspector Gilder , eye the black hand 
 with wrath , " be not   you put the bracelet on this fellow ; 
 he look pretty dangerous . " 

 " well , sir , " say the sergeant , with the same odd look of wonder , 
 " I do not   know that we can . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask the other sharply . " have not   you arrest he ? " 

 a faint scorn widen the slit - like mouth , and the whistle of an approach 
 train seem oddly to echo the mockery . 

 " we arrest he , " reply the sergeant gravely , " just as he be come out 
 of the police station at Highgate , where he have deposit all his master 's 
 money in the care of Inspector Robinson . " 

 Gilder look at the man - servant in utter amazement . 
 " why on earth do you do that ? " he ask of Magnus . 

 " to keep it safe from the criminal , of course , " reply that person placidly . 

 " surely , " say Gilder , " Sir Aaron 's money might have be safely leave 
 with Sir Aaron 's family . " 

 the tail of his sentence be drown in the roar of the train as it 
 go rock and clanking ; but through all the hell of noise to 
 which that unhappy house be periodically subject , they could hear 
 the syllable of Magnus 's answer , in all their bell - like distinctness : 
 " I have no reason to feel confidence in Sir Aaron 's family . " 

 all the motionless man have the ghostly sensation of the presence of some 
 new person ; and Merton be scarcely surprised when he look up and see 
 the pale face of Armstrong 's daughter over Father Brown 's shoulder . 
 she be still young and beautiful in a silvery style , but her hair 
 be of so dusty and hueless a brown that in some shadow it seem 
 to have turn totally grey . 

 " be careful what you say , " say Royce gruffly , " you will 
 frighten Miss Armstrong . " 

 " I hope so , " say the man with the clear voice . 

 as the woman wince and everyone else wonder , he go on : 
 " I be somewhat used to Miss Armstrong 's tremor . 
 I have see she tremble off and on for year . and some say 
 she be shake with cold and some she be shake with fear , 
 but I know she be shake with hate and wicked anger - 
 fiend that have have their feast this morning . she would have 
 be away by now with her lover and all the money but for I . 
 ever since my poor old master prevent she from marry 
 that tipsy blackguard - " 

 " stop , " say Gilder very sternly . " we have nothing to do with your 
 family fancy or suspicion . unless you have some practical evidence , 
 your mere opinion - " 

 " oh ! I will give you practical evidence , " cut in Magnus , in his 
 hacking accent . " you will have to subpoena I , Mr. Inspector , 
 and I shall have to tell the truth . and the truth be this : 
 an instant after the old man be pitch bleed out of 
 the window , I run into the attic , and find his daughter 
 swoon on the floor with a red dagger still in her hand . 
 allow I to hand that also to the proper authority . " 
 he take from his tail - pocket a long horn - hilte knife with 
 a red smear on it , and hand it politely to the sergeant . 
 then he stand back again , and his slit of eye almost fade 
 from his face in one fat chinese sneer . 

 Merton feel an almost bodily sickness at the sight of he ; 
 and he mutter to Gilder : " surely you would take Miss Armstrong 's 
 word against his ? " 

 Father Brown suddenly lift a face so absurdly fresh that it 
 look somehow as if he have just wash it . " yes , " he say , 
 radiate innocence , " but be Miss Armstrong 's word against his ? " 

 the girl utter a startle , singular little cry ; everyone look at she . 
 her figure be rigid as if paralyse ; only her face within its 
 frame of faint brown hair be alive with an appalling surprise . 
 she stand like one of a sudden lassooed and throttle . 

 " this man , " say Mr. Gilder gravely , " actually say that you be find 
 grasp a knife , insensible , after the murder . " 

 " he say the truth , " answer Alice . 

 the next fact of which they be conscious be that Patrick Royce strode 
 with his great stoop head into their ring and utter the singular word : 
 " well , if I have   get to go , I will have a bit of pleasure first . " 

 his huge shoulder heave and he send an iron fist smash into Magnus 's 
 bland mongolian visage , lay he on the lawn as flat as a starfish . 
 two or three of the police instantly put their hand on Royce ; 
 but to the rest it seem as if all reason have break up and the universe 
 be turn into a brainless harlequinade . 

 " none of that , Mr. Royce , " Gilder have call out authoritatively . 
 " I shall arrest you for assault . " 

 " no , you will not , " answer the secretary in a voice like an iron gong , 
 " you will arrest I for murder . " 

 Gilder throw an alarmed glance at the man knock down ; but since 
 that outraged person be already sit up and wipe a little 
 blood off a substantially uninjured face , he only say shortly : 
 " what do you mean ? " 

 " it be quite true , as this fellow say , " explain Royce , 
 " that Miss Armstrong faint with a knife in her hand . 
 but she have not snatch the knife to attack her father , 
 but to defend he . " 

 " to defend he , " repeat Gilder gravely . " against whom ? " 

 " against I , " answer the secretary . 

 Alice look at he with a complex and baffle face ; 
 then she say in a low voice : " after it all , I be still glad 
 you be brave . " 

 " come upstairs , " say Patrick Royce heavily , " and I will show 
 you the whole cursed thing . " 

 the attic , which be the secretary 's private place   and rather a small cell 
 for so large a hermit , have indeed all the vestige of a violent drama . 
 near the centre of the floor lie a large revolver as if fling away ; 
 near to the left be roll a whisky bottle , open but not quite empty . 
 the cloth of the little table lie drag and trample , and a length of cord , 
 like that find on the corpse , be cast wildly across the windowsill . 
 two vas be smash on the mantelpiece and one on the carpet . 

 " I be drunk , " say Royce ; and this simplicity in the prematurely 
 battered man somehow have the pathos of the first sin of a baby . 

 " you all know about I , " he continue huskily ; " everybody know 
 how my story begin , and it may as well end like that too . 
 I be call a clever man once , and might have be a happy one ; 
 Armstrong save the remain of a brain and body from the tavern , 
 and be always kind to I in his own way , poor fellow ! 
 only he would not   let I marry Alice here ; and it will always 
 be say that he be right enough . well , you can form your 
 own conclusion , and you will not   want I to go into detail . 
 that be my whisky bottle half empty in the corner ; that be 
 my revolver quite emptied on the carpet . it be the rope from 
 my box that be find on the corpse , and it be from my window 
 the corpse be throw . you need not set detective to grub 
 up my tragedy ; it be a common enough weed in this world . 
 I give myself to the gallow ; and , by God , that be enough ! " 

 at a sufficiently delicate sign , the police gather round 
 the large man to lead he away ; but their unobtrusiveness be 
 somewhat stagger by the remarkable appearance of Father Brown , 
 who be on his hand and knee on the carpet in the doorway , 
 as if engage in some kind of undignified prayer . 
 be a person utterly insensible to the social figure he cut , 
 he remain in this posture , but turn a bright round face 
 up at the company , present the appearance of a quadrupe 
 with a very comic human head . 

 " I say , " he say good - naturedly , " this really will not   do at all , 
 you know . at the beginning you say we would find no weapon . 
 but now we be find too many ; there be the knife to stab , 
 and the rope to strangle , and the pistol to shoot ; and after all 
 he break his neck by fall out of a window ! it will not   do . 
 it be not economical . " and he shake his head at the ground 
 as a horse do graze . 

 Inspector Gilder have open his mouth with serious intention , 
 but before he could speak the grotesque figure on the floor 
 have go on quite volubly . 

 " and now three quite impossible thing . first , these hole 
 in the carpet , where the six bullet have go in . 
 why on earth should anybody fire at the carpet ? a drunken man 
 let fly at his enemy 's head , the thing that be grin at he . 
 he do not   pick a quarrel with his foot , or lie siege to his slipper . 
 and then there be the rope " - and have do with the carpet 
 the speaker lift his hand and put they in his pocket , 
 but continue unaffectedly on his knee - " in what conceivable 
 intoxication would anybody try to put a rope round a man 's 
 neck and finally put it round his leg ? Royce , anyhow , be not 
 so drunk as that , or he would be sleep like a log by now . 
 and , plainest of all , the whisky bottle . you suggest a dipsomaniac 
 fight for the whisky bottle , and then have win , roll it 
 away in a corner , spill one half and leave the other . 
 that be the very last thing a dipsomaniac would do . " 

 he scramble awkwardly to his foot , and say to the self - accuse 
 murderer in tone of limpid penitence : " I be awfully sorry , 
 my dear sir , but your tale be really rubbish . " 

 " Sir , " say Alice Armstrong in a low tone to the priest , 
 " can I speak to you alone for a moment ? " 

 this request force the communicative cleric out of the gangway , 
 and before he could speak in the next room , the girl be talk 
 with strange incisiveness . 

 " you be a clever man , " she say , " and you be try to 
 save Patrick , I know . but it be no use . the core of all this 
 be black , and the more thing you find out the more there 
 will be against the miserable man I love . " 

 " why ? " ask Brown , look at she steadily . 

 " because , " she answer equally steadily , " I see he commit 
 the crime myself . " 

 " ah ! " say the unmoved Brown , " and what do he do ? " 

 " I be in this room next to they , " she explain ; " both door 
 be close , but I suddenly hear a voice , such as I have never 
 hear on earth , roar ` Hell , hell , hell , ' again and again , 
 and then the two door shake with the first explosion 
 of the revolver . Thrice again the thing bang before I 
 get the two door open and find the room full of smoke ; 
 but the pistol be smoke in my poor , mad Patrick 's hand ; 
 and I see he fire the last murderous volley with my own eye . 
 then he leap on my father , who be cling in terror 
 to the window - sill , and , grappling , try to strangle he 
 with the rope , which he throw over his head , but which slip 
 over his struggle shoulder to his foot . then it tighten 
 round one leg and Patrick drag he along like a maniac . 
 I snatch a knife from the mat , and , rush between they , 
 manage to cut the rope before I faint . " 

 " I see , " say Father Brown , with the same wooden civility . " thank you . " 

 as the girl collapse under her memory , the priest pass 
 stiffly into the next room , where he find Gilder and Merton 
 alone with Patrick Royce , who sit in a chair , handcuff . 
 there he say to the Inspector submissively : 

 " might I say a word to the prisoner in your presence ; 
 and might he take off those funny cuff for a minute ? " 

 " he be a very powerful man , " say Merton in an undertone . 
 " why do you want they take off ? " 

 " why , I think , " reply the priest humbly , " that perhaps I 
 might have the very great honour of shake hand with he . " 

 both detective star , and Father Brown add : " will not   you tell they 
 about it , sir ? " 

 the man on the chair shake his tousled head , and the 
 priest turn impatiently . 

 " then I will , " he say . " private life be more important 
 than public reputation . I be go to save the living , 
 and let the dead bury their dead . " 

 he go to the fatal window , and blink out of it as he go on talk . 

 " I tell you that in this case there be too many weapon and only one death . 
 I tell you now that they be not weapon , and be not use to cause death . 
 all those grisly tool , the noose , the bloody knife , the explode pistol , 
 be instrument of a curious mercy . they be not use to kill Sir Aaron , 
 but to save he . " 

 " to save he ! " repeat Gilder . " and from what ? " 

 " from himself , " say Father Brown . " he be a suicidal maniac . " 

 " what ? " cry Merton in an incredulous tone . 
 " and the Religion of Cheerfulness - " 

 " it be a cruel religion , " say the priest , look out of the window . 
 " why could not   they let he weep a little , like his father before he ? 
 his plan stiffen , his view grow cold ; behind that merry mask 
 be the empty mind of the atheist . at last , to keep up his hilarious 
 public level , he fall back on that dram - drinking he have abandon long ago . 
 but there be this horror about alcoholism in a sincere teetotaler : 
 that he picture and expect that psychological inferno from which 
 he have warn other . it leap upon poor Armstrong prematurely , 
 and by this morning he be in such a case that he sit here and cry 
 he be in hell , in so crazy a voice that his daughter do not know it . 
 he be mad for death , and with the monkey trick of the mad he have 
 scatter round he death in many shape - a run noose and his friend 's 
 revolver and a knife . Royce enter accidentally and act in a flash . 
 he fling the knife on the mat behind he , snatch up the revolver , and have 
 no time to unload it , empty it shoot after shoot all over the floor . 
 the suicide see a fourth shape of death , and make a dash for the window . 
 the rescuer do the only thing he could - run after he with the rope and 
 try to tie he hand and foot . then it be that the unlucky girl run in , 
 and misunderstand the struggle , strove to slash her father free . 
 at first she only slash poor Royce 's knuckle , from which have 
 come all the little blood in this affair . but , of course , 
 you notice that he leave blood , but no wound , on that servant 's face ? 
 only before the poor woman swoon , she do hack her father loose , 
 so that he go crash through that window into eternity . " 

 there be a long stillness slowly break by the metallic noise 
 of Gilder unlock the handcuff of Patrick Royce , to whom he say : 
 " I think I should have tell the truth , sir . you and the young lady 
 be worth more than Armstrong 's obituary notice . " 

 " Confound Armstrong 's notice , " cry Royce roughly . 
 " do not   you see it be because she must not   know ? " 

 " must not   know what ? " ask Merton . 

 " why , that she kill her father , you fool ! " roar the other . 
 " he would have be alive now but for she . it might craze she 
 to know that . " 

 " no , I do not   think it would , " remark Father Brown , as he pick up his hat . 
 " I rather think I should tell she . even the most murderous blunder do not 
 poison life like sin ; anyhow , I think you may both be the happy now . 
 I have   get to go back to the Deaf School . " 

 as he go out on to the gusty grass an acquaintance from Highgate 
 stop he and say : 

 " the Coroner have arrive . the inquiry be just go to begin . " 

 " I have   get to get back to the Deaf School , " say Father Brown . " I be sorry 
 I can not   stop for the inquiry . " 


