the Napoleon of 
 Notting Hill 
 _ by _ 
 GILBERT K. CHESTERTON 
 _ to hilaire BELLOC _ 

      _ for every tiny town or place 
      God make the star especially ; 
      baby look up with owlish face 
      and see they tangle in a tree : 
      you see a moon from Sussex Downs , 
      a Sussex moon , untravelle still , 
      I see a moon that be the town 's , 
      the large lamp on Campden Hill . _ 

      _ yea ; Heaven be everywhere at home 
      the big blue cap that always fit , 
      and so it be ( be calm ; they come 
      to goal at last , my wander wit ) , 
      so be it with the heroic thing ; 
      this shall not end for the world 's end , 
      and though the sullen engine swing , 
      be you not much afraid , my friend . _ 

      _ this do not end by Nelson 's urn 
      where an immortal England sits-- 
      nor where your tall young man in turn 
      Drank death like wine at Austerlitz . 
      and when the pedant bid we mark 
      what cold mechanic happening 
      must come ; our soul say in the dark , 
      " belike ; but there be likeli thing . " _ 

      _ likelier across these flat afar 
      these sulky level smooth and free 
      the drum shall crash a waltz of war 
      and death shall dance with Liberty ; 
      Likelier the barricade shall blare 
      Slaughter below and smoke above , 
      and death and hate and hell declare 
      that man have find a thing to love . _ 

      _ far from your sunny upland set 
      I see the dream ; the street I trod 
      the light straight street shoot out and meet 
      the starry street that point to God . 
      this legend of an epic hour 
      a child I dream , and dream it still , 
      under the great grey water - tower 
      that strike the star on Campden Hill . _ 

                              G. K. C. 
 BOOK I 




 _ the napoleon of NOTTING HILL _ 




 CHAPTER I--_Introductory Remarks on the Art of Prophecy _ 


 the human race , to which so many of my reader belong , have be 
 play at child 's game from the beginning , and will probably do 
 it till the end , which be a nuisance for the few people who grow up . 
 and one of the game to which it be most attach be call " keep 
 to - morrow dark , " and which be also name ( by the rustic in 
 Shropshire , I have no doubt ) " cheat the Prophet . " the player listen 
 very carefully and respectfully to all that the clever man have to say 
 about what be to happen in the next generation . the player then wait 
 until all the clever man be dead , and bury they nicely . they then go 
 and do something else . that be all . for a race of simple taste , 
 however , it be great fun . 

 for human being , be child , have the childish wilfulness and the 
 childish secrecy . and they never have from the beginning of the world 
 do what the wise man have see to be inevitable . they stone the 
 false prophet , it be say ; but they could have stone true prophet 
 with a great and juster enjoyment . individually , man may present a 
 more or less rational appearance , eating , sleeping , and scheme . but 
 humanity as a whole be changeful , mystical , fickle , delightful . man 
 be man , but Man be a woman . 

 but in the beginning of the twentieth century the game of Cheat the 
 Prophet be make far more difficult than it have ever be before . the 
 reason be , that there be so many prophet and so many prophecy , 
 that it be difficult to elude all their ingenuity . when a man do 
 something free and frantic and entirely his own , a horrible thought 
 strike he afterwards ; it might have be predict . whenever a duke 
 climb a lamp - post , when a dean get drunk , he could not be really 
 happy , he could not be certain that he be not fulfil some 
 prophecy . in the beginning of the twentieth century you could not see 
 the ground for clever man . they be so common that a stupid man be 
 quite exceptional , and when they find he , they follow he in 
 crowd down the street and treasure he up and give he some high 
 post in the State . and all these clever man be at work give 
 account of what would happen in the next age , all quite clear , all 
 quite keen - sighted and ruthless , and all quite different . and it 
 seem that the good old game of hoodwink your ancestor could not 
 really be manage this time , because the ancestor neglect meat and 
 sleep and practical politic , so that they might meditate day and 
 night on what their descendant would be likely to do . 

 but the way the prophet of the twentieth century go to work be 
 this . they take something or other that be certainly go on in 
 their time , and then say that it would go on more and more until 
 something extraordinary happen . and very often they add that in 
 some odd place that extraordinary thing have happen , and that it 
 show the sign of the time . 

 thus , for instance , there be Mr. H. G. Wells and other , who think 
 that science would take charge of the future ; and just as the 
 motor - car be quick than the coach , so some lovely thing would be 
 quick than the motor - car ; and so on for ever . and there arise from 
 their ash Dr. Quilp , who say that a man could be send on his 
 machine so fast round the world that he could keep up a long , chatty 
 conversation in some old - world village by say a word of a sentence 
 each time he come round . and it be say that the experiment have be 
 try on an apoplectic old major , who be send round the world so fast 
 that there seem to be ( to the inhabitant of some other star ) a 
 continuous band round the earth of white whisker , red complexion and 
 tweed -- a thing like the ring of Saturn . 

 then there be the opposite school . there be Mr. Edward Carpenter , 
 who think we should in a very short time return to Nature , and live 
 simply and slowly as the animal do . and Edward Carpenter be follow 
 by James Pickie , D.D. ( of Pocohontas College ) , who say that man be 
 immensely improve by graze , or take their food slowly and 
 continuously , after the manner of cow . and he say that he have , with 
 the most encouraging result , turn city man out on all four in a 
 field cover with veal cutlet . then Tolstoy and the Humanitarians 
 say that the world be grow more merciful , and therefore no one 
 would ever desire to kill . and Mr. Mick not only become a vegetarian , 
 but at length declare vegetarianism doom ( " shedding , " as he call 
 it finely , " the green blood of the silent animal " ) , and predict 
 that man in a well age would live on nothing but salt . and then 
 come the pamphlet from Oregon ( where the thing be try ) , the 
 pamphlet call " why should salt suffer ? " and there be more trouble . 

 [ illustration : CITY MEN out on all FOURS in a field covered with veal 
 CUTLETS . ] 

 and on the other hand , some people be predict that the line of 
 kinship would become narrow and sterner . there be Mr. Cecil Rhodes , 
 who think that the one thing of the future be the British Empire , 
 and that there would be a gulf between those who be of the empire 
 and those who be not , between the Chinaman in Hong Kong and the 
 Chinaman outside , between the Spaniard on the Rock of Gibraltar and 
 the Spaniard off it , similar to the gulf between man and the low 
 animal . and in the same way his impetuous friend , Dr. Zoppi ( " the 
 Paul of anglo - saxonism " ) , carry it yet far , and hold that , as a 
 result of this view , cannibalism should be hold to mean eat a 
 member of the empire , not eat one of the subject people , who 
 should , he say , be kill without needless pain . his horror at the 
 idea of eat a man in British Guiana show how they misunderstood 
 his stoicism who think he devoid of feel . he be , however , in a 
 hard position ; as it be say that he have attempt the experiment , 
 and , live in London , have to subsist entirely on italian 
 organ - grinder . and his end be terrible , for just when he have begin , 
 Sir Paul Swiller read his great paper at the Royal Society , prove 
 that the savage be not only quite right in eat their enemy , 
 but right on moral and hygienic ground , since it be true that the 
 quality of the enemy , when eat , pass into the eater . the notion 
 that the nature of an italian organ - man be irrevocably grow and 
 burgeon inside he be almost more than the kindly old professor 
 could bear . 

 there be Mr. Benjamin Kidd , who say that the grow note of our 
 race would be the care for and knowledge of the future . his idea be 
 develop more powerfully by William Borker , who write that passage 
 which every schoolboy know by heart , about man in future age weep 
 by the graf of their descendant , and tourist be show over the 
 scene of the historic battle which be to take place some century 
 afterwards . 

 and Mr. Stead , too , be prominent , who think that England would in 
 the twentieth century be unite to America ; and his young lieutenant , 
 Graham Podge , who include the state of France , Germany , and Russia 
 in the American Union , the State of Russia be abbreviate to Ra . 

 there be Mr. Sidney Webb , also , who say that the future would see a 
 continuously increase order and neatness in the life of the people , 
 and his poor friend fipp , who go mad and run about the country with 
 an axe , hack branch off the tree whenever there be not the 
 same number on both side . 

 all these clever man be prophesy with every variety of ingenuity 
 what would happen soon , and they all do it in the same way , by take 
 something they see " go strong , " as the saying be , and carry it 
 as far as ever their imagination could stretch . this , they say , be 
 the true and simple way of anticipate the future . " just as , " say 
 Dr. Pellkins , in a fine passage,--"just as when we see a pig in a 
 litter large than the other pig , we know that by an unalterable law 
 of the inscrutable it will some day be large than an elephant,--just 
 as we know , when we see weed and dandelion grow more and more 
 thickly in a garden , that they must , in spite of all our effort , grow 
 tall than the chimney - pot and swallow the house from sight , so we 
 know and reverently acknowledge , that when any power in human politic 
 have show for any period of time any considerable activity , it will go 
 on until it reach to the sky . " 

 and it do certainly appear that the prophet have put the people 
 ( engage in the old game of Cheat the Prophet ) in a quite 
 unprecedented difficulty . it seem really hard to do anything without 
 fulfil some of their prophecy . 

 but there be , nevertheless , in the eye of labourer in the street , 
 of peasant in the field , of sailor and child , and especially 
 woman , a strange look that keep the wise man in a perfect fever of 
 doubt . they could not fathom the motionless mirth in their eye . they 
 still have something up their sleeve ; they be still play the game 
 of Cheat the Prophet . 

 then the wise man grow like wild thing , and sway hither and 
 thither , cry , " what can it be ? what can it be ? what will London be 
 like a century hence ? be there anything we have not think of ? house 
 upside down -- more hygienic , perhaps ? man walk on hand -- make foot 
 flexible , do not you know ? Moon ... motor - car ... no head .... " and so 
 they sway and wonder until they die and be bury nicely . 

 then the people go and do what they like . let I no long conceal 
 the painful truth . the people have cheat the prophet of the 
 twentieth century . when the curtain go up on this story , eighty 
 year after the present date , London be almost exactly like what it be 
 now . 




 CHAPTER II--_The Man in Green _ 


 very few word be need to explain why London , a hundred year 
 hence , will be very like it be now , or rather , since I must slip into 
 a prophetic past , why London , when my story open , be very like it 
 be in those enviable day when I be still alive . 

 the reason can be state in one sentence . the people have absolutely 
 lose faith in revolution . all revolution be doctrinal -- such as the 
 french one , or the one that introduce Christianity . for it stand to 
 common sense that you can not upset all exist thing , custom , and 
 compromise , unless you believe in something outside they , something 
 positive and divine . now , England , during this century , lose all 
 belief in this . it believe in a thing call Evolution . and it say , 
 " all theoretic change have end in blood and ennui . if we change , we 
 must change slowly and safely , as the animal do . nature 's revolution 
 be the only successful one . there have be no conservative reaction 
 in favour of tail . " 

 and some thing do change . thing that be not much thought of 
 drop out of sight . thing that have not often happen do not 
 happen at all . thus , for instance , the actual physical force rule 
 the country , the soldier and police , grow small and small , and at 
 last vanish almost to a point . the people combine could have sweep 
 the few policeman away in ten minute : they do not , because they do 
 not believe it would do they the least good . they have lose faith in 
 revolution . 

 Democracy be dead ; for no one mind the governing class governing . 
 England be now practically a despotism , but not an hereditary one . 
 some one in the official class be make King . no one care how : no one 
 care who . he be merely an universal secretary . 

 in this manner it happen that everything in London be very quiet . 
 that vague and somewhat depressed reliance upon thing happen as 
 they have always happen , which be with all londoner a mood , have 
 become an assumed condition . there be really no reason for any man 
 do anything but the thing he have do the day before . 

 there be therefore no reason whatever why the three young man who have 
 always walk up to their Government office together should not walk 
 up to it together on this particular wintry and cloudy morning . 
 everything in that age have become mechanical , and Government clerk 
 especially . all those clerk assemble regularly at their post . three 
 of those clerk always walk into town together . all the 
 neighbourhood know they : two of they be tall and one short . and on 
 this particular morning the short clerk be only a few second late to 
 join the other two as they pass his gate : he could have overtake 
 they in three stride ; he could have call after they easily . but he 
 do not . 

 for some reason that will never be understand until all soul be 
 judge ( if they be ever judge ; the idea be at this time class 
 with fetish worship ) he do not join his two companion , but walk 
 steadily behind they . the day be dull , their dress be dull , 
 everything be dull ; but in some odd impulse he walk through street 
 after street , through district after district , look at the back of 
 the two man , who would have swing round at the sound of his voice . 
 now , there be a law write in the darkest of the Books of Life , and 
 it be this : if you look at a thing nine hundred and ninety - nine time , 
 you be perfectly safe ; if you look at it the thousandth time , you 
 be in frightful danger of see it for the first time . 

 so the short Government official look at the coat - tail of the tall 
 Government official , and through street after street , and round 
 corner after corner , see only coat - tail , coat - tail , and again 
 coat - tail -- when , he do not in the least know why , something happen 
 to his eye . 

 two black dragon be walk backwards in front of he . two black 
 dragon be look at he with evil eye . the dragon be walk 
 backwards it be true , but they keep their eye fix on he none the 
 less . the eye which he see be , in truth , only the two button at 
 the back of a frock - coat : perhaps some traditional memory of their 
 meaningless character give this half - witted prominence to their gaze . 
 the slit between the tail be the nose - line of the monster : whenever 
 the tail flap in the winter wind the dragon lick their lip . it 
 be only a momentary fancy , but the small clerk find it imbed in 
 his soul ever afterwards . he never could again think of man in 
 frock - coat except as dragon walk backwards . he explain 
 afterwards , quite tactfully and nicely , to his two official friend , 
 that ( while feel an inexpressible regard for each of they ) he could 
 not seriously regard the face of either of they as anything but a 
 kind of tail . it be , he admit , a handsome tail -- a tail elevate in 
 the air . but if , he say , any true friend of theirs wish to see 
 their face , to look into the eye of their soul , that friend must be 
 allow to walk reverently round behind they , so as to see they from 
 the rear . there he would see the two black dragon with the blind 
 eye . 

 but when first the two black dragon spring out of the fog upon the 
 small clerk , they have merely the effect of all miracle -- they change 
 the universe . he discover the fact that all romantic know -- that 
 adventure happen on dull day , and not on sunny one . when the chord 
 of monotony be stretch most tight , then it break with a sound like 
 song . he have scarcely notice the weather before , but with the four 
 dead eye glare at he he look round and realise the strange dead 
 day . 

 the morning be wintry and dim , not misty , but darken with that 
 shadow of cloud or snow which steep everything in a green or copper 
 twilight . the light there be on such a day seem not so much to come 
 from the clear heaven as to be a phosphorescence cling to the 
 shape themselves . the load of heaven and the cloud be like a load of 
 water , and the man move like fish , feel that they be on the 
 floor of a sea . everything in a London street complete the fantasy ; 
 the carriage and cab themselves resemble deep - sea creature with 
 eye of flame . he have be startle at first to meet two dragon . now 
 he find he be among deep - sea dragon possess the deep sea . 

 the two young man in front be like the small young man himself , 
 well - dress . the line of their frock - coat and silk hat have that 
 luxuriant severity which make the modern fop , hideous as he be , a 
 favourite exercise of the modern draughtsman ; that element which Mr. 
 Max Beerbohm have admirably express in speak of " certain 
 congruity of dark cloth and the rigid perfection of linen . " 

 they walk with the gait of an affected snail , and they speak at the 
 long interval , drop a sentence at about every sixth lamp - post . 

 they crawl on past the lamp - post ; their mien be so immovable that 
 a fanciful description might almost say , that the lamp - post crawl 
 past the man , as in a dream . then the small man suddenly run after 
 they and said-- 

 " I want to get my hair cut . I say , do you know a little shop anywhere 
 where they cut your hair properly ? I keep on have my hair cut , but 
 it keep on grow again . " 

 one of the tall man look at he with the air of a pained naturalist . 

 " why , here be a little place , " cry the small man , with a sort of 
 imbecile cheerfulness , as the bright bulging window of a fashionable 
 toilet - saloon glow abruptly out of the foggy twilight . " do you know , 
 I often find hair - dresser when I walk about London . I will lunch with 
 you at Cicconani 's . you know , I be awfully fond of hair - dresser ' 
 shop . they be mile well than those nasty butcher ' . " and he 
 disappear into the doorway . 

 the man call James continue to gaze after he , a monocle screw 
 into his eye . 

 " what the devil do you make of that fellow ? " he ask his companion , a 
 pale young man with a high nose . 

 the pale young man reflect conscientiously for some minute , and 
 then said-- 

 " have a knock on his head when he be a kid , I should think . " 

 " no , I do not think it be that , " reply the Honourable James Barker . 
 " I have sometimes fancy he be a sort of artist , Lambert . " 

 " Bosh ! " cry Mr. Lambert , briefly . 

 " I admit I can not make he out , " resume Barker , abstractedly ; " he 
 never open his mouth without say something so indescribably 
 half - witted that to call he a fool seem the very feeble attempt at 
 characterisation . but there be another thing about he that be rather 
 funny . do you know that he have the one collection of japanese lacquer 
 in Europe ? have you ever see his book ? all greek poet and mediæval 
 French and that sort of thing . have you ever be in his room ? it be 
 like be inside an amethyst . and he move about in all that and 
 talk like -- like a turnip . " 

 " well , damn all book . your blue book as well , " say the ingenuous 
 Mr. Lambert , with a friendly simplicity . " you ought to understand such 
 thing . what do you make of he ? " 

 " he be beyond I , " return Barker . " but if you ask I for my 
 opinion , I should say he be a man with a taste for nonsense , as they 
 call it -- artistic fooling , and all that kind of thing . and I seriously 
 believe that he have talk nonsense so much that he have half 
 bewilder his own mind and do not know the difference between sanity 
 and insanity . he have go round the mental world , so to speak , and 
 find the place where the East and the West be one , and extreme 
 idiocy be as good as sense . but I can not explain these psychological 
 game . " 

 " you can not explain they to I , " reply Mr. Wilfrid Lambert , with 
 candour . 

 as they pass up the long street towards their restaurant the copper 
 twilight clear slowly to a pale yellow , and by the time they reach 
 it they stand discernible in a tolerable winter daylight . the 
 Honourable James Barker , one of the most powerful official in the 
 English Government ( by this time a rigidly official one ) , be a lean 
 and elegant young man , with a blank handsome face and bleak blue eye . 
 he have a great amount of intellectual capacity , of that peculiar kind 
 which raise a man from throne to throne and let he die load with 
 honour without have either amuse or enlighten the mind of a 
 single man . Wilfrid Lambert , the youth with the nose which appear to 
 impoverish the rest of his face , have also contribute little to the 
 enlargement of the human spirit , but he have the honourable excuse of 
 be a fool . 

 Lambert would have be call a silly man ; Barker , with all his 
 cleverness , might have be call a stupid man . but mere silliness 
 and stupidity sink into insignificance in the presence of the awful 
 and mysterious treasure of foolishness apparently store up in the 
 small figure that stand wait for they outside Cicconani 's . the 
 little man , whose name be Auberon Quin , have an appearance compound 
 of a baby and an owl . his round head , round eye , seem to have be 
 design by nature playfully with a pair of compass . his flat dark 
 hair and preposterously long frock - coat give he something of the look 
 of a child 's " Noah . " when he enter a room of stranger , they mistook 
 he for a small boy , and want to take he on their knee , until he 
 speak , when they perceive that a boy would have be more 
 intelligent . 

 " I have be wait quite a long time , " say Quin , mildly . " it be 
 awfully funny I should see you come up the street at last . " 

 " why ? " ask Lambert , star . " you tell we to come here yourself . " 

 " my mother use to tell people to come to place , " say the sage . 

 they be about to turn into the restaurant with a resign air , when 
 their eye be catch by something in the street . the weather , though 
 cold and blank , be now quite clear , and across the dull brown of the 
 wood pavement and between the dull grey terrace be move something 
 not to be see for mile round -- not to be see perhaps at that time in 
 England -- a man dress in bright colour . a small crowd hang on the 
 man 's heel . 

 he be a tall stately man , clothe in a military uniform of brilliant 
 green , splash with great silver facing . from the shoulder swing a 
 short green furred cloak , somewhat like that of a Hussar , the lining 
 of which gleam every now and then with a kind of tawny crimson . his 
 breast glitter with medal ; round his neck be the red ribbon and 
 star of some foreign order ; and a long straight sword , with a blaze 
 hilt , trail and clatter along the pavement . at this time the 
 pacific and utilitarian development of Europe have relegate all such 
 custom to the Museums . the only remain force , the small but 
 well - organise police , be attire in a sombre and hygienic manner . 
 but even those who remember the last Life Guards and Lancers who 
 disappear in 1912 must have know at a glance that this be not , and 
 never have be , an english uniform ; and this conviction would have 
 be heighten by the yellow aquiline face , like Dante carve in 
 bronze , which rise , crown with white hair , out of the green military 
 collar , a keen and distinguish , but not an english face . 

 the magnificence with which the green - clothe gentleman walk down the 
 centre of the road would be something difficult to express in human 
 language . for it be an ingrained simplicity and arrogance , something 
 in the mere carriage of the head and body , which make ordinary modern 
 in the street stare after he ; but it have comparatively little to do 
 with actual conscious gesture or expression . in the matter of these 
 merely temporary movement , the man appear to be rather worried and 
 inquisitive , but he be inquisitive with the inquisitiveness of a 
 despot and worried as with the responsibility of a god . the man who 
 lounge and wonder behind he follow partly with an astonishment 
 at his brilliant uniform , that be to say , partly because of that 
 instinct which make we all follow one who look like a madman , but 
 far more because of that instinct which make all man follow ( and 
 worship ) any one who choose to behave like a king . he have to so 
 sublime an extent that great quality of royalty -- an almost imbecile 
 unconsciousness of everybody , that people go after he as they do 
 after king -- to see what would be the first thing or person he would 
 take notice of . and all the time , as we have say , in spite of his 
 quiet splendour , there be an air about he as if he be look for 
 somebody ; an expression of inquiry . 

 suddenly that expression of inquiry vanish , none could tell why , and 
 be replace by an expression of contentment . amid the rapt attention 
 of the mob of idler , the magnificent green gentleman deflect 
 himself from his direct course down the centre of the road and walk 
 to one side of it . he come to a halt opposite to a large poster of 
 Colman 's Mustard erect on a wooden hoarding . his spectator almost 
 hold their breath . 

 he take from a small pocket in his uniform a little penknife ; with 
 this he make a slash at the stretch paper . complete the rest of 
 the operation with his finger , he tear off a strip or rag of paper , 
 yellow in colour and wholly irregular in outline . then for the first 
 time the great being address his adore onlookers-- 

 " can any one , " he say , with a pleasing foreign accent , " lend I a 
 pin ? " 

 Mr. Lambert , who happen to be near , and who carry innumerable 
 pin for the purpose of attach innumerable buttonhole , lend he 
 one , which be receive with extravagant but dignified bow , and 
 hyperbole of thank . 

 the gentleman in green , then , with every appearance of be 
 gratify , and even puff up , pin the piece of yellow paper to 
 the green silk and silver - lace adornment of his breast . then he 
 turn his eye round again , search and unsatisfie . 

 " anything else I can do , sir ? " ask Lambert , with the absurd 
 politeness of the Englishman when once embarrassed . 

 " Red , " say the strange , vaguely , " red . " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " 

 " I beg yours also , Señor , " say the strange , bow . " I be wonder 
 whether any of you have any red about you . " 

 " any red about us?--well really -- no , I do not think I have -- I use to 
 carry a red bandanna once , but-- " 

 " Barker , " ask Auberon Quin , suddenly , " where be your red cockatoo ? 
 where be your red cockatoo ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Barker , desperately . " what cockatoo ? you have 
 never see I with any cockatoo ! " 

 " I know , " say Auberon , vaguely mollify . " where be it be all the 
 time ? " 

 Barker swing round , not without resentment . 

 " I be sorry , sir , " he say , shortly but civilly , " none of we seem to 
 have anything red to lend you . but why , if one may ask-- " 

 " I thank you , Señor , it be nothing . I can , since there be nothing 
 else , fulfil my own requirement . " 

 and stand for a second of thought with the penknife in his hand , he 
 stab his left palm . the blood fall with so full a stream that it 
 strike the stone without dripping . the foreigner pull out his 
 handkerchief and tear a piece from it with his tooth . the rag be 
 immediately soak in scarlet . 

 " since you be so generous , Señor , " he say , " another pin , perhaps . " 

 Lambert hold one out , with eye protrude like a frog 's . 

 the red linen be pin beside the yellow paper , and the foreigner 
 take off his hat . 

 " I have to thank you all , gentleman , " he say ; and wrap the 
 remainder of the handkerchief round his bleed hand , he resume his 
 walk with an overwhelming stateliness . 

 while all the rest pause , in some disorder , little Mr. Auberon Quin 
 run after the stranger and stop he , with hat in hand . considerably 
 to everybody 's astonishment , he address he in the purest spanish-- 

 " Señor , " he say in that language , " pardon a hospitality , perhaps 
 indiscreet , towards one who appear to be a distinguish , but a 
 solitary guest in London . will you do I and my friend , with whom 
 you have hold some conversation , the honour of lunch with we at the 
 adjoining restaurant ? " 

 the man in the green uniform have turn a fiery colour of pleasure at 
 the mere sound of his own language , and he accept the invitation 
 with that profusion of bow which so often show , in the case of the 
 southern race , the falsehood of the notion that ceremony have nothing 
 to do with feeling . 

 " Señor , " he say , " your language be my own ; but all my love for my 
 people shall not lead I to deny to yours the possession of so 
 chivalrous an entertainer . let I say that the tongue be spanish but 
 the heart English . " and he pass with the rest into Cicconani 's . 

 " now , perhaps , " say Barker , over the fish and sherry , intensely 
 polite , but burn with curiosity , " perhaps it would be rude of I to 
 ask why you do that ? " 

 " do what , Señor ? " ask the guest , who speak English quite well , 
 though in a manner indefinably American . 

 " well , " say the Englishman , in some confusion , " I mean tear a strip 
 off a hoarding and ... er ... cut yourself ... and .... " 

 " to tell you that , Señor , " answer the other , with a certain sad 
 pride , " involve merely tell you who I be . I be Juan del Fuego , 
 President of Nicaragua . " 

 the manner with which the President of Nicaragua leant back and drank 
 his sherry show that to he this explanation cover all the fact 
 observe and a great deal more . Barker 's brow , however , be still a 
 little clouded . 

 " and the yellow paper , " he begin , with anxious friendliness , " and the 
 red rag .... " 

 " the yellow paper and the red rag , " say Fuego , with indescribable 
 grandeur , " be the colour of Nicaragua . " 

 " but Nicaragua ... " begin Barker , with great hesitation , " Nicaragua be 
 no long a .... " 

 " Nicaragua have be conquer like Athens . Nicaragua have be annex 
 like Jerusalem , " cry the old man , with amazing fire . " the Yankee and 
 the German and the brute power of modernity have trample it with the 
 hoof of oxen . but Nicaragua be not dead . Nicaragua be an idea . " 

 Auberon Quin suggest timidly , " a brilliant idea . " 

 " yes , " say the foreigner , snatch at the word . " you be right , 
 generous Englishman . an idea _ brillant _ , a burn thought . Señor , 
 you ask I why , in my desire to see the colour of my country , I 
 snatch at paper and blood . can you not understand the ancient 
 sanctity of colour ? the Church have her symbolic colour . and think of 
 what colour mean to we -- think of the position of one like myself , who 
 can see nothing but those two colour , nothing but the red and the 
 yellow . to I all shape be equal , all common and noble thing be in 
 a democracy of combination . wherever there be a field of marigold and 
 the red cloak of an old woman , there be Nicaragua . wherever there be a 
 field of poppy and a yellow patch of sand , there be Nicaragua . 
 wherever there be a lemon and a red sunset , there be my country . 
 wherever I see a red pillar - box and a yellow sunset , there my heart 
 beat . blood and a splash of mustard can be my heraldry . if there be 
 yellow mud and red mud in the same ditch , it be well to I than 
 white star . " 

 " and if , " say Quin , with equal enthusiasm , " there should happen to be 
 yellow wine and red wine at the same lunch , you could not confine 
 yourself to sherry . let I order some Burgundy , and complete , as it 
 be , a sort of nicaraguan heraldry in your inside . " 

 Barker be fiddle with his knife , and be evidently make up his 
 mind to say something , with the intense nervousness of the amiable 
 Englishman . 

 " I be to understand , then , " he say at last , with a cough , " that you , 
 ahem , be the President of Nicaragua when it make its -- er -- one must , 
 of course , agree -- its quite heroic resistance to -- er-- " 

 the ex - President of Nicaragua wave his hand . 

 " you need not hesitate in speak to I , " he say . " I be quite fully 
 aware that the whole tendency of the world of to - day be against 
 Nicaragua and against I . I shall not consider it any diminution of 
 your evident courtesy if you say what you think of the misfortune 
 that have lay my republic in ruin . " 

 Barker look immeasurably relieve and gratify . 

 " you be most generous , President , " he say , with some hesitation over 
 the title , " and I will take advantage of your generosity to express 
 the doubt which , I must confess , we modern have about such thing 
 as -- er -- the nicaraguan independence . " 

 " so your sympathy be , " say Del Fuego , quite calmly , " with the big 
 nation which-- " 

 " Pardon I , pardon I , President , " say Barker , warmly ; " my sympathy 
 be with no nation . you misunderstand , I think , the modern intellect . 
 we do not disapprove of the fire and extravagance of such 
 commonwealth as yours only to become more extravagant on a large 
 scale . we do not condemn Nicaragua because we think Britain ought to 
 be more nicaraguan . we do not discourage small nationality because 
 we wish large nationality to have all their smallness , all their 
 uniformity of outlook , all their exaggeration of spirit . if I differ 
 with the great respect from your nicaraguan enthusiasm , it be not 
 because a nation or ten nation be against you ; it be because 
 civilisation be against you . we modern believe in a great 
 cosmopolitan civilisation , one which shall include all the talent of 
 all the absorb peoples-- " 

 " the Señor will forgive I , " say the President . " may I ask the Señor 
 how , under ordinary circumstance , he catch a wild horse ? " 

 " I never catch a wild horse , " reply Barker , with dignity . 

 " precisely , " say the other ; " and there end your absorption of the 
 talent . that be what I complain of your cosmopolitanism . when you 
 say you want all people to unite , you really mean that you want all 
 people to unite to learn the trick of your people . if the Bedouin 
 Arab do not know how to read , some English missionary or 
 schoolmaster must be send to teach he to read , but no one ever say , 
 ' this schoolmaster do not know how to ride on a camel ; let we pay a 
 Bedouin to teach he . ' you say your civilisation will include all 
 talent . will it ? do you really mean to say that at the moment when 
 the Esquimaux have learn to vote for a County Council , you will have 
 learn to spear a walrus ? I recur to the example I give . in Nicaragua 
 we have a way of catch wild horse -- by lassooe the fore 
 foot -- which be suppose to be the good in South America . if you be 
 go to include all the talent , go and do it . if not , permit I to 
 say what I have always say , that something go from the world when 
 Nicaragua be civilised . " 

 " something , perhaps , " reply Barker , " but that something a mere 
 barbarian dexterity . I do not know that I could chip flint as well as 
 a primeval man , but I know that civilisation can make these knife 
 which be well , and I trust to civilisation . " 

 " you have good authority , " answer the Nicaraguan . " many clever man 
 like you have trust to civilisation . many clever Babylonians , many 
 clever Egyptians , many clever man at the end of Rome . can you tell I , 
 in a world that be flagrant with the failure of civilisation , what 
 there be particularly immortal about your ? " 

 " I think you do not quite understand , President , what our be , " 
 answer Barker . " you judge it rather as if England be still a poor 
 and pugnacious island ; you have be long out of Europe . many thing 
 have happen . " 

 " and what , " ask the other , " would you call the summary of those 
 thing ? " 

 " the summary of those thing , " answer Barker , with great animation , 
 " be that we be rid of the superstition , and in become so we have 
 not merely become rid of the superstition which have be most 
 frequently and most enthusiastically so describe . the superstition of 
 big nationality be bad , but the superstition of small nationality 
 be bad . the superstition of reverence our own country be bad , but 
 the superstition of reverence other people 's country be bad . it 
 be so everywhere , and in a hundred way . the superstition of monarchy 
 be bad , and the superstition of aristocracy be bad , but the 
 superstition of democracy be the bad of all . " 

 the old gentleman open his eye with some surprise . 

 " be you , then , " he say , " no long a democracy in England ? " 

 Barker laugh . 

 " the situation invite paradox , " he say . " we be , in a sense , the 
 pure democracy . we have become a despotism . have you not notice how 
 continually in history democracy become despotism ? People call it the 
 decay of democracy . it be simply its fulfilment . why take the trouble 
 to number and register and enfranchise all the innumerable John 
 Robinsons , when you can take one John Robinson with the same intellect 
 or lack of intellect as all the rest , and have do with it ? the old 
 idealistic republicans use to found democracy on the idea that all 
 man be equally intelligent . believe I , the sane and endure 
 democracy be found on the fact that all man be equally idiotic . why 
 should we not choose out of they one as much as another . all that we 
 want for Government be a man not criminal and insane , who can rapidly 
 look over some petition and sign some proclamation . to think what 
 time be waste in argue about the House of Lords , Tories say it 
 ought to be preserve because it be clever , and radical say it 
 ought to be destroy because it be stupid , and all the time no one 
 see that it be right because it be stupid , because that chance mob 
 of ordinary man throw there by accident of blood , be a great 
 democratic protest against the Lower House , against the eternal 
 insolence of the aristocracy of talent . we have establish now in 
 England , the thing towards which all system have dimly grope , the 
 dull popular despotism without illusion . we want one man at the head 
 of our state , not because he be brilliant or virtuous , but because he 
 be one man and not a chattering crowd . to avoid the possible chance of 
 hereditary disease or such thing , we have abandon hereditary 
 monarchy . the King of England be choose like a juryman upon an 
 official rotation list . beyond that the whole system be quietly 
 despotic , and we have not find it raise a murmur . " 

 " do you really mean , " ask the President , incredulously , " that you 
 choose any ordinary man that come to hand and make he despot -- that 
 you trust to the chance of some alphabetical list .... " 

 " and why not ? " cry Barker . " do not half the historical nation 
 trust to the chance of the eld son of eld son , and do not 
 half of they get on tolerably well ? to have a perfect system be 
 impossible ; to have a system be indispensable . all hereditary 
 monarchy be a matter of luck : so be alphabetical monarchy . can 
 you find a deep philosophical meaning in the difference between the 
 Stuarts and the Hanoverians ? believe I , I will undertake to find a 
 deep philosophical meaning in the contrast between the dark tragedy of 
 the A 's , and the solid success of the B 's . " 

 " and you risk it ? " ask the other . " though the man may be a tyrant or 
 a cynic or a criminal . " 

 " we risk it , " answer Barker , with a perfect placidity . " suppose he 
 be a tyrant -- he be still a check on a hundred tyrant . suppose he be a 
 cynic , it be to his interest to govern well . suppose he be a 
 criminal -- by remove poverty and substituting power , we put a check 
 on his criminality . in short , by substitute despotism we have put a 
 total check on one criminal and a partial check on all the rest . " 

 the nicaraguan old gentleman lean over with a queer expression in 
 his eye . 

 " my church , sir , " he say , " have teach I to respect faith . I do not 
 wish to speak with any disrespect of your , however fantastic . but do 
 you really mean that you will trust to the ordinary man , the man who 
 may happen to come next , as a good despot ? " 

 " I do , " say Barker , simply . " he may not be a good man . but he will be 
 a good despot . for when he come to a mere business routine of 
 government he will endeavour to do ordinary justice . do we not assume 
 the same thing in a jury ? " 

 the old President smile . 

 " I do not know , " he say , " that I have any particular objection in 
 detail to your excellent scheme of Government . my only objection be a 
 quite personal one . it be , that if I be ask whether I would belong 
 to it , I should ask first of all , if I be not permit , as an 
 alternative , to be a toad in a ditch . that be all . you can not argue 
 with the choice of the soul . " 

 " of the soul , " say Barker , knit his brow , " I can not pretend to 
 say anything , but speak in the interest of the public-- " 

 Mr. Auberon Quin rise suddenly to his foot . 

 " if you will excuse I , gentleman , " he say , " I will step out for a 
 moment into the air . " 

 " I be so sorry , Auberon , " say Lambert , good - naturedly ; " do you feel 
 bad ? " 

 " not bad exactly , " say Auberon , with self - restraint ; " rather good , if 
 anything . strangely and richly good . the fact be , I want to reflect a 
 little on those beautiful word that have just be utter . 
 ' speak , ' yes , that be the phrase , ' speak in the interest of 
 the public . ' one can not get the honey from such thing without be 
 alone for a little . " 

 " be he really off his chump , do you think ? " ask Lambert . 

 the old President look after he with queerly vigilant eye . 

 " he be a man , I think , " he say , " who care for nothing but a joke . he 
 be a dangerous man . " 

 Lambert laugh in the act of lift some maccaroni to his mouth . 

 " dangerous ! " he say . " you do not know little Quin , sir ! " 

 " every man be dangerous , " say the old man without move , " who care 
 only for one thing . I be once dangerous myself . " 

 and with a pleasant smile he finish his coffee and rise , bow 
 profoundly , pass out into the fog , which have again grow dense and 
 sombre . three day afterwards they hear that he have die quietly in 
 lodging in Soho . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 drown somewhere else in the dark sea of fog be a little figure 
 shake and quaking , with what might at first sight have seem terror 
 or ague : but which be really that strange malady , a lonely laughter . 
 he be repeat over and over to himself with a rich accent--"but 
 speak in the interest of the public .... " 




 CHAPTER III--_The Hill of Humour _ 


 " in a little square garden of yellow rose , beside the sea , " say 
 Auberon Quin , " there be a Nonconformist minister who have never be 
 to Wimbledon . his family do not understand his sorrow or the strange 
 look in his eye . but one day they repent their neglect , for they 
 hear that a body have be find on the shore , batter , but wear 
 patent leather boot . as it happen , it turn out not to be the 
 minister at all . but in the dead man 's pocket there be a return 
 ticket to Maidstone . " 

 there be a short pause as Quin and his friend Barker and Lambert 
 go swing on through the slushy grass of Kensington Gardens . then 
 Auberon resume . 

 " that story , " he say reverently , " be the test of humour . " 

 they walk on far and fast , wad through high grass as they 
 begin to climb a slope . 

 " I perceive , " continue Auberon , " that you have pass the test , and 
 consider the anecdote excruciatingly funny ; since you say nothing . 
 only coarse humour be receive with pot - house applause . the great 
 anecdote be receive in silence , like a benediction . you feel pretty 
 benedicte , do not you , Barker ? " 

 " I see the point , " say Barker , somewhat loftily . 

 " do you know , " say Quin , with a sort of idiot gaiety , " I have lot of 
 story as good as that . listen to this one . " 

 and he slightly clear his throat . 

 " Dr. Polycarp be , as you all know , an unusually sallow bimetallist . 
 ' there , ' people of wide experience would say , ' there go the 
 sallowest bimetallist in Cheshire . ' once this be say so that he 
 overheard it : it be say by an actuary , under a sunset of mauve and 
 grey . Polycarp turn upon he . ' sallow ! ' he cry fiercely , ' sallow ! 
 _ Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querente . _ ' it be say that no 
 actuary ever make game of Dr. Polycarp again . " 

 Barker nod with a simple sagacity . Lambert only grunt . 

 " here be another , " continue the insatiable Quin . " in a hollow of the 
 grey - green hill of rainy Ireland , live an old , old woman , whose 
 uncle be always Cambridge at the Boat Race . but in her grey - green 
 hollow , she know nothing of this : she do not know that there be a 
 Boat race . also she do not know that she have an uncle . she have hear 
 of nobody at all , except of George the First , of whom she have hear ( I 
 know not why ) , and in whose historical memory she put her simple 
 trust . and by and by in God 's good time , it be discover that this 
 uncle of hers be not really her uncle , and they come and tell she so . 
 she smile through her tear , and say only , ' Virtue be its own 
 reward . ' " 

 again there be a silence , and then Lambert said-- 

 " it seem a bit mysterious . " 

 " mysterious ! " cry the other . " the true humour be mysterious . do you 
 not realise the chief incident of the nineteenth and twentieth 
 century ? " 

 " and what be that ? " ask Lambert , shortly . 

 " it be very simple , " reply the other . " Hitherto it be the ruin of a 
 joke that people do not see it . now it be the sublime victory of a 
 joke that people do not see it . Humour , my friend , be the one 
 sanctity remain to mankind . it be the one thing you be thoroughly 
 afraid of . look at that tree . " 

 his interlocutor look vaguely towards a beech that leant out 
 towards they from the ridge of the hill . 

 " if , " say Mr. Quin , " I be to say that you do not see the great 
 truth of science exhibit by that tree , though they star any man 
 of intellect in the face , what would you think or say ? you would 
 merely regard I as a pedant with some unimportant theory about 
 vegetable cell . if I be to say that you do not see in that tree 
 the vile mismanagement of local politic , you would dismiss I as a 
 socialist crank with some particular fad about public park . if I be 
 to say that you be guilty of the supreme blasphemy of look at 
 that tree and not see in it a new religion , a special revelation of 
 God , you would simply say I be a mystic , and think no more about I . 
 but if"--and he lift a pontifical hand--"if I say that you can not 
 see the humour of that tree , and that I see the humour of it -- my God ! 
 you will roll about at my foot . " 

 he pause a moment , and then resume . 

 " yes ; a sense of humour , a weird and delicate sense of humour , be the 
 new religion of mankind ! it be towards that man will strain themselves 
 with the asceticism of saint . exercise , spiritual exercise , will be 
 set in it . it will be ask , ' can you see the humour of this iron 
 railing ? ' or ' can you see the humour of this field of corn ? can you 
 see the humour of the star ? can you see the humour of the sunset ? ' 
 how often I have laugh myself to sleep over a violet sunset . " 

 " quite so , " say Mr. Barker , with an intelligent embarrassment . 

 " let I tell you another story . how often it happen that the M.P. 's 
 for Essex be less punctual than one would suppose . the least punctual 
 Essex M.P. , perhaps , be James Wilson , who say , in the very act of 
 pluck a poppy-- " 

 Lambert suddenly face round and strike his stick into the ground in a 
 defiant attitude . 

 " Auberon , " he say , " chuck it . I will not stand it . it be all bosh . " 

 both man star at he , for there be something very explosive about 
 the word , as if they have be cork up painfully for a long time . 

 " you have , " begin Quin , " no-- " 

 " I do not care a curse , " say Lambert , violently , " whether I have ' a 
 delicate sense of humour ' or not . I will not stand it . it be all a 
 confound fraud . there be no joke in those infernal tale at all . you 
 know there be not as well as I do . " 

 " well , " reply Quin , slowly , " it be true that I , with my rather 
 gradual mental process , do not see any joke in they . but the finer 
 sense of Barker perceive it . " 

 Barker turn a fierce red , but continue to stare at the horizon . 

 " you ass , " say Lambert ; " why can not you be like other people ? why 
 can not you say something really funny , or hold your tongue ? the man who 
 sit on his hat in a pantomime be a long sight funny than you be . " 

 Quin regard he steadily . they have reach the top of the ridge and 
 the wind strike their face . 

 " Lambert , " say Auberon , " you be a great and good man , though I be 
 hang if you look it . you be more . you be a great revolutionist or 
 deliverer of the world , and I look forward to see you carve in 
 marble between Luther and Danton , if possible in your present 
 attitude , the hat slightly on one side . I say as I come up the hill 
 that the new humour be the last of the religion . you have make it 
 the last of the superstition . but let I give you a very serious 
 warning . be careful how you ask I to do anything _ outré _ , to imitate 
 the man in the pantomime , and to sit on my hat . because I be a man 
 whose soul have be empty of all pleasure but folly . and for 
 twopence I would do it . " 

 " do it , then , " say Lambert , swing his stick impatiently . " it would 
 be funny than the bosh you and Barker talk . " 

 Quin , stand on the top of the hill , stretch his hand out towards 
 the main avenue of Kensington Gardens . 

 " two hundred yard away , " he say , " be all your fashionable 
 acquaintance with nothing on earth to do but to stare at each other 
 and at we . we be stand upon an elevation under the open sky , a 
 peak as it be of fantasy , a Sinai of humour . we be in a great 
 pulpit or platform , light up with sunlight , and half London can see we . 
 be careful how you suggest thing to I . for there be in I a madness 
 which go beyond martyrdom , the madness of an utterly idle man . " 

 " I do not know what you be talk about , " say Lambert , 
 contemptuously . " I only know I would rather you stand on your silly head , 
 than talk so much . " 

 " Auberon ! for goodness ' sake ... " cry Barker , spring forward ; but 
 he be too late . face from all the bench and avenue be turn in 
 their direction . group stop and small crowd collect ; and the 
 sharp sunlight pick out the whole scene in blue , green and black , 
 like a picture in a child 's toy - book . and on the top of the small 
 hill Mr. Auberon Quin stand with considerable athletic neatness upon 
 his head , and wave his patent - leather boot in the air . 

 " for God 's sake , Quin , get up , and do not be an idiot , " cry Barker , 
 wring his hand ; " we shall have the whole town here . " 

 " yes , get up , get up , man , " say Lambert , amuse and annoyed . " I be 
 only fool ; get up . " 

 Auberon do so with a bound , and fling his hat high than the 
 tree , proceed to hop about on one leg with a serious expression . 
 Barker stamp wildly . 

 " oh , let us get home , Barker , and leave he , " say Lambert ; " some of 
 your proper and correct police will look after he . here they come ! " 

 two grave - look man in quiet uniform come up the hill towards they . 
 one hold a paper in his hand . 

 " there he be , officer , " say Lambert , cheerfully ; " we be not 
 responsible for he . " 

 the officer look at the caper Mr. Quin with a quiet eye . 

 " we have not come , gentleman , " he say , " about what I think you be 
 allude to . we have come from head - quarter to announce the 
 selection of his Majesty the king . it be the rule , inherit from the 
 old _ régime _ , that the news should be bring to the new Sovereign 
 immediately , wherever he be ; so we have follow you across Kensington 
 Gardens . " 

 Barker 's eye be blaze in his pale face . he be consume with 
 ambition throughout his life . with a certain dull magnanimity of the 
 intellect he have really believe in the chance method of select 
 despot . but this sudden suggestion , that the selection might have 
 fall upon he , unnerve he with pleasure . 

 " which of we , " he begin , and the respectful official interrupt he . 

 " not you , sir , I be sorry to say . if I may be permit to say so , we 
 know your service to the Government , and should be very thankful if 
 it be . the choice have fall .... " 

 " God bless my soul ! " say Lambert , jump back two pace . " not I . 
 do not say I be autocrat of all the Russias . " 

 " no , sir , " say the officer , with a slight cough and a glance towards 
 Auberon , who be at that moment put his head between his leg and 
 make a noise like a cow ; " the gentleman whom we have to congratulate 
 seem at the moment -- er -- er -- occupy . " 

 " not quin ! " shriek Barker , rush up to he ; " it can not be . Auberon , 
 for God 's sake pull yourself together . you have be make king ! " 

 with his head still upside down between his leg , Mr. Quin answer 
 modestly-- 

 " I be not worthy . I can not reasonably claim to equal the great man who 
 have previously sway the sceptre of Britain . perhaps the only 
 peculiarity that I can claim be that I be probably the first monarch 
 that ever speak out his soul to the people of England with his head 
 and body in this position . this may in some sense give I , to quote a 
 poem that I write in my youth-- 

 a nobler office on the earth 
 than valour , power of brain , or birth 
 could give the warrior king of old . 

 the intellect clarify by this posture-- " 

 Lambert and Barker make a kind of rush at he . 

 " do not you understand ? " cry Lambert . " it be not a joke . they have 
 really make you king . by gosh ! they must have rum taste . " 

 " the great bishop of the Middle Ages , " say Quin , kick his leg in 
 the air , as he be drag up more or less upside down , " be in the 
 habit of refuse the honour of election three time and then 
 accept it . a mere matter of detail separate I from those great 
 man . I will accept the post three time and refuse it afterwards . oh ! 
 I will toil for you , my faithful people ! you shall have a banquet of 
 humour . " 

 by this time he have be land the right way up , and the two man be 
 still try in vain to impress he with the gravity of the situation . 

 " do you not tell I , Wilfrid Lambert , " he say , " that I should be of 
 more public value if I adopt a more popular form of humour ? and when 
 should a popular form of humour be more firmly rivet upon I than 
 now , when I have become the darling of a whole people ? Officer , " he 
 continue , address the startled messenger , " be there no ceremony 
 to celebrate my entry into the city ? " 

 " ceremony , " begin the official , with embarrassment , " have be more 
 or less neglect for some little time , and-- " 

 Auberon Quin begin gradually to take off his coat . 

 " all ceremony , " he say , " consist in the reversal of the obvious . 
 thus man , when they wish to be priest or judge , dress up like woman . 
 kindly help I on with this coat . " and he hold it out . 

 " but , your Majesty , " say the officer , after a moment 's bewilderment 
 and manipulation , " you be put it on with the tail in front . " 

 " the reversal of the obvious , " say the King , calmly , " be as near as 
 we can come to ritual with our imperfect apparatus . lead on . " 

 the rest of that afternoon and evening be to Barker and Lambert a 
 nightmare , which they could not properly realise or recall . the King , 
 with his coat on the wrong way , go towards the street that be 
 await he , and the old Kensington Palace which be the Royal 
 residence . as he pass small group of man , the group turn into 
 crowd , and give forth sound which seem strange in welcome an 
 autocrat . Barker walk behind , his brain reeling , and , as the crowd 
 grow thick and thick , the sound become more and more unusual . and 
 when he have reach the great market - place opposite the church , 
 Barker know that he have reach it , though he be rood behind , 
 because a cry go up such as have never before greet any of the 
 king of the earth . 




 BOOK II 




 CHAPTER i--_the Charter of the Cities _ 


 Lambert be stand bewilder outside the door of the King 's 
 apartment amid the scurry of astonishment and ridicule . he be just 
 pass out into the street , in a daze manner , when James Barker 
 dash by he . 

 " where be you go ? " he ask . 

 " to stop all this foolery , of course , " reply Barker ; and he 
 disappear into the room . 

 he enter it headlong , slam the door , and slap his 
 incomparable silk hat on the table . his mouth open , but before he 
 could speak , the King said-- 

 " your hat , if you please . " 

 fidgette with his finger , and scarcely know what he be do , 
 the young politician hold it out . 

 the King place it on his own chair , and sit on it . 

 " a quaint old custom , " he explain , smile above the ruin . " when 
 the King receive the representative of the House of Barker , the hat 
 of the latter be immediately destroy in this manner . it represent 
 the absolute finality of the act of homage express in the removal 
 of it . it declare that never until that hat shall once more appear 
 upon your head ( a contingency which I firmly believe to be remote ) 
 shall the House of Barker rebel against the Crown of England . " 

 Barker stand with clenched fist , and shake lip . 

 " your joke , " he begin , " and my property-- " and then explode with an 
 oath , and stop again . 

 " continue , continue , " say the King , wave his hand . 

 " what do it all mean ? " cry the other , with a gesture of passionate 
 rationality . " be you mad ? " 

 " not in the least , " reply the king , pleasantly . " Madmen be always 
 serious ; they go mad from lack of humour . you be look serious 
 yourself , James . " 

 " why can not you keep it to your own private life ? " expostulate the 
 other . " you have get plenty of money , and plenty of house now to play 
 the fool in , but in the interest of the public-- " 

 " Epigrammatic , " say the King , shake his finger sadly at he . " none 
 of your daring scintillation here . as to why I do not do it in 
 private , I rather fail to understand your question . the answer be of 
 comparative limpidity . I do not do it in private , because it be funny 
 to do it in public . you appear to think that it would be amusing to be 
 dignified in the banquet hall and in the street , and at my own 
 fireside ( I could procure a fireside ) to keep the company in a roar . 
 but that be what every one do . every one be grave in public , and 
 funny in private . my sense of humour suggest the reversal of this ; it 
 suggest that one should be funny in public , and solemn in private . I 
 desire to make the state function , parliament , coronation , and so 
 on , one roar old - fashioned pantomime . but , on the other hand , I 
 shut myself up alone in a small store - room for two hour a day , where 
 I be so dignified that I come out quite ill . " 

 by this time Barker be walk up and down the room , his frock coat 
 flap like the black wing of a bird . 

 " well , you will ruin the country , that be all , " he say shortly . 

 " it seem to I , " say Auberon , " that the tradition of ten century 
 be be break , and the House of Barker be rebel against the 
 Crown of England . it would be with regret ( for I admire your 
 appearance ) that I should be oblige forcibly to decorate your head 
 with the remain of this hat , but-- " 

 " what I can not understand , " say Barker fling up his finger with a 
 feverish american movement , " be why you do not care about anything else 
 but your game . " 

 the King stop sharply in the act of lift the silken remnant , 
 drop they , and walk up to Barker , look at he steadily . 

 " I make a kind of vow , " he say , " that I would not talk seriously , 
 which always mean answer silly question . but the strong man will 
 always be gentle with politician . 

 ' the shape my scornful look deride 
 require a God to form ; ' 

 if I may so theologically express myself . and for some reason I can not 
 in the least understand , I feel impel to answer that question of 
 your , and to answer it as if there be really such a thing in the 
 world as a serious subject . you ask I why I do not care for anything 
 else . can you tell I , in the name of all the god you do not believe 
 in , why I should care for anything else ? " 

 " do not you realise common public necessity ? " cry Barker . " be it 
 possible that a man of your intelligence do not know that it be 
 every one 's interest-- " 

 " do not you believe in Zoroaster ? be it possible that you neglect 
 Mumbo - Jumbo ? " return the King , with startling animation . " do a man 
 of your intelligence come to I with these damned early victorian 
 ethic ? if , on study my feature and manner , you detect any 
 particular resemblance to the Prince Consort , I assure you you be 
 mistaken . do Herbert Spencer ever convince you -- do he ever convince 
 anybody -- do he ever for one mad moment convince himself -- that it must 
 be to the interest of the individual to feel a public spirit ? do you 
 believe that , if you rule your department badly , you stand any more 
 chance , or one half of the chance , of be guillotine , that an 
 angler stand of be pull into the river by a strong pike ? Herbert 
 Spencer refrain from theft for the same reason that he refrain 
 from wear feather in his hair , because he be an english gentleman 
 with different taste . I be an english gentleman with different 
 taste . he like philosophy . I like art . he like write ten book on 
 the nature of human society . I like to see the Lord Chamberlain 
 walk in front of I with a piece of paper pin to his coat - tail . 
 it be my humour . be you answer ? at any rate , I have say my last 
 serious word to - day , and my last serious word I trust for the 
 remainder of my life in this Paradise of Fools . the remainder of my 
 conversation with you to - day , which I trust will be long and 
 stimulate , I propose to conduct in a new language of my own by mean 
 of rapid and symbolic movement of the left leg . " and he begin to 
 pirouette slowly round the room with a preoccupied expression . 

 Barker run round the room after he , bombard he with demand and 
 entreaty . but he receive no response except in the new language . he 
 come out bang the door again , and sick like a man come on shore . 
 as he stride along the street he find himself suddenly opposite 
 Cicconani 's restaurant , and for some reason there rise up before he 
 the green fantastic figure of the Spanish General , standing , as he have 
 see he last , at the door , with the word on his lip , " you can not 
 argue with the choice of the soul . " 

 the King come out from his dancing with the air of a man of business 
 legitimately tired . he put on an overcoat , light a cigar , and go out 
 into the purple night . 

 [ illustration : " I'M king of the CASTLE . " ] 

 " I will go , " he say , " and mingle with the people . " 

 he pass swiftly up a street in the neighbourhood of Notting Hill , 
 when suddenly he feel a hard object drive into his waistcoat . he 
 pause , put up his single eye - glass , and beheld a boy with a wooden 
 sword and a paper cock hat , wear that expression of awed 
 satisfaction with which a child contemplate his work when he have hit 
 some one very hard . the King gaze thoughtfully for some time at his 
 assailant , and slowly take a note - book from his breast - pocket . 

 " I have a few note , " he say , " for my die speech ; " and he turn 
 over the leaf . " die speech for political assassination ; ditto , if 
 by former friend -- h'm , h'm . die speech for death at hand of injured 
 husband ( repentant ) . die speech for same ( cynical ) . I be not quite 
 sure which meet the present .... " 

 " I be the king of the Castle , " say the boy , truculently , and very 
 pleased with nothing in particular . 

 the King be a kind - hearted man , and very fond of child , like all 
 people who be fond of the ridiculous . 

 " infant , " he say , " I be glad you be so stalwart a defender of your 
 old inviolate Notting Hill . look up nightly to that peak , my child , 
 where it lift itself among the star so ancient , so lonely , so 
 unutterably notting . so long as you be ready to die for the sacred 
 mountain , even if it be ring with all the army of bayswater-- " 

 the King stop suddenly , and his eye shine . 

 " perhaps , " he say , " perhaps the noble of all my conception . a 
 revival of the arrogance of the old mediæval city apply to our 
 glorious suburb . Clapham with a city guard . Wimbledon with a city 
 wall . Surbiton toll a bell to raise its citizen . West Hampstead 
 go into battle with its own banner . it shall be do . I , the king , 
 have say it . " and , hastily present the boy with half a crown , 
 remarking , " for the war - chest of Notting Hill , " he run violently home 
 at such a rate of speed that crowd follow he for mile . on 
 reach his study , he order a cup of coffee , and plunge into 
 profound meditation upon the project . at length he call his 
 favourite equerry , Captain Bowler , for whom he have a deep affection , 
 found principally upon the shape of his whisker . 

 " Bowler , " he say , " be not there some society of historical research , 
 or something of which I be an honorary member ? " 

 " yes , sir , " say Captain Bowler , rub his nose , " you be a member 
 of ' the Encouragers of Egyptian Renaissance , ' and ' the teutonic Tombs 
 Club , ' and ' the Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities , ' 
 and-- " 

 " that be admirable , " say the King . " the London Antiquities do my 
 trick . go to the Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities and 
 speak to their secretary , and their sub - secretary , and their 
 president , and their vice - president , say , ' the King of England be 
 proud , but the honorary member of the Society for the Recovery of 
 London Antiquities be prouder than king . I should like to tell you of 
 certain discovery I have make touch the neglect tradition of 
 the London borough . the revelation may cause some excitement , 
 stir burning memory and touch old wound in Shepherd 's Bush 
 and bayswater , in Pimlico and South Kensington . the King hesitate , 
 but the honorary member be firm . I approach you invoke the vow of 
 my initiation , the Sacred Seven Cats , the Poker of Perfection , and the 
 Ordeal of the Indescribable Instant ( forgive I if I mix you up with 
 the Clan - na - Gael or some other club I belong to ) , and ask you to 
 permit I to read a paper at your next meeting on the " war of the 
 London Boroughs . " ' say all this to the Society , Bowler . remember it 
 very carefully , for it be most important , and I have forget it 
 altogether , and send I another cup of coffee and some of the cigar 
 that we keep for vulgar and successful people . I be go to write my 
 paper . " 

 the Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities meet a month after 
 in a corrugated iron hall on the outskirt of one of the southern 
 suburb of London . a large number of people have collect there under 
 the coarse and flare gas - jet when the King arrive , perspire and 
 genial . on take off his great - coat , he be perceive to be in 
 evening dress , wear the Garter . his appearance at the small table , 
 adorn only with a glass of water , be receive with respectful 
 cheering . 

 the chairman ( Mr. Huggins ) say that he be sure that they have all 
 be pleased to listen to such distinguished lecturer as they have 
 hear for some time past ( hear , hear ) . Mr. Burton ( hear , hear ) , Mr. 
 Cambridge , Professor King ( loud and continue cheer ) , our old friend 
 Peter Jessop , Sir William White ( loud laughter ) , and other eminent 
 man , have do honour to their little venture ( cheer ) . but there be 
 other circumstance which lend a certain unique quality to the present 
 occasion ( hear , hear ) . so far as his recollection go , and in 
 connection with the Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities it 
 go very far ( loud cheer ) , he do not remember that any of their 
 lecturer have bear the title of King . he would therefore call upon 
 King Auberon briefly to address the meeting . 

 the King begin by say that this speech might be regard as the 
 first declaration of his new policy for the nation . " at this supreme 
 hour of my life I feel that to no one but the member of the Society 
 for the Recovery of London Antiquities can I open my heart ( cheer ) . 
 if the world turn upon my policy , and the storm of popular hostility 
 begin to rise ( no , no ) , I feel that it be here , with my brave 
 Recoverers around I , that I can well meet they , sword in hand " ( loud 
 cheer ) . 

 his Majesty then go on to explain that , now old age be creep 
 upon he , he propose to devote his remain strength to bring 
 about a keener sense of local patriotism in the various municipality 
 of London . how few of they know the legend of their own borough ! 
 how many there be who have never hear of the true origin of the Wink 
 of Wandsworth ! what a large proportion of the young generation in 
 Chelsea neglect to perform the old Chelsea Chuff ! Pimlico no long 
 pump the pimlie . Battersea have forget the name of Blick . 

 there be a short silence , and then a voice say " Shame ! " 

 the King continue : " be call , however unworthily , to this high 
 estate , I have resolve that , so far as possible , this neglect shall 
 cease . I desire no military glory . I lie claim to no constitutional 
 equality with Justinian or Alfred . if I can go down to history as the 
 man who save from extinction a few old English custom , if our 
 descendant can say it be through this man , humble as he be , that 
 the ten Turnips be still eat in Fulham , and the Putney parish 
 councillor still shave one half of his head , I shall look my great 
 father reverently but not fearfully in the face when I go down to the 
 last house of king . " 

 the King pause , visibly affected , but collect himself , resume 
 once more . 

 " I trust that to very few of you , at least , I need dwell on the 
 sublime origin of these legend . the very name of your borough 
 bear witness to they . so long as Hammersmith be call Hammersmith , 
 its people will live in the shadow of that primal hero , the 
 Blacksmith , who lead the democracy of the Broadway into battle till he 
 drive the chivalry of Kensington before he and overthrow they at that 
 place which in honour of the good blood of the defeated aristocracy be 
 still call Kensington Gore . man of Hammersmith will not fail to 
 remember that the very name of Kensington originate from the lip of 
 their hero . for at the great banquet of reconciliation hold after the 
 war , when the disdainful oligarch decline to join in the song of 
 the man of the Broadway ( which be to this day of a rude and popular 
 character ) , the great republican leader , with his rough humour , say 
 the word which be write in gold upon his monument , ' little bird 
 that can sing and will not sing , must be make to sing . ' so that the 
 Eastern Knights be call Cansings or Kensings ever afterwards . but 
 you also have great memory , o man of Kensington ! you show that you 
 could sing , and sing great war - song . even after the dark day of 
 Kensington Gore , history will not forget those three Knights who 
 guard your disorder retreat from Hyde Park ( so call from your 
 hiding there ) , those three Knights after whom Knightsbridge be name . 
 nor will it forget the day of your re - emergence , purge in the fire of 
 calamity , cleanse of your oligarchic corruption , when , sword in 
 hand , you drive the Empire of Hammersmith back mile by mile , sweep it 
 past its own Broadway , and break it at last in a battle so long and 
 bloody that the bird of prey have leave their name upon it . man have 
 call it , with austere irony , the Ravenscourt . I shall not , I trust , 
 wound the patriotism of Bayswater , or the lonely pride of Brompton , 
 or that of any other historic township , by take these two special 
 example . I select they , not because they be more glorious than the 
 rest , but partly from personal association ( I be myself descended from 
 one of the three hero of Knightsbridge ) , and partly from the 
 consciousness that I be an amateur antiquarian , and can not presume to 
 deal with time and place more remote and more mysterious . it be not 
 for I to settle the question between two such man as Professor Hugg 
 and Sir William Whisky as to whether Notting Hill mean Nutting Hill 
 ( in allusion to the rich wood which no long cover it ) , or whether 
 it be a corruption of Nothing - ill , refer to its reputation among 
 the ancient as an Earthly Paradise . when a Podkins and a Jossy 
 confess themselves doubtful about the boundary of West Kensington 
 ( say to have be trace in the blood of Oxen ) , I need not be ashamed 
 to confess a similar doubt . I will ask you to excuse I from further 
 history , and to assist I with your encouragement in deal with the 
 problem which face we to - day . be this ancient spirit of the London 
 township to die out ? be our omnibus conductor and policeman to lose 
 altogether that light which we see so often in their eye , the dreamy 
 light of 

 ' old unhappy far - off thing 
 and battle long ago ' 

 --to quote the word of a little - know poet who be a friend of my 
 youth ? I have resolve , as I have say , so far as possible , to 
 preserve the eye of policeman and omnibus conductor in their present 
 dreamy state . for what be a state without dream ? and the remedy I 
 propose be as follows:-- 

 " to - morrow morning at twenty - five minute past ten , if Heaven spar 
 my life , I purpose to issue a Proclamation . it have be the work of my 
 life , and be about half finish . with the assistance of a whisky and 
 soda , I shall conclude the other half to - night , and my people will 
 receive it to - morrow . all these borough where you be bear , and hope 
 to lay your bone , shall be reinstate in their ancient 
 magnificence,--Hammersmith , Kensington , Bayswater , Chelsea , Battersea , 
 Clapham , Balham , and a hundred other . each shall immediately build a 
 city wall with gate to be close at sunset . each shall have a city 
 guard , arm to the tooth . each shall have a banner , a coat - of - arm , 
 and , if convenient , a gathering cry . I will not enter into the detail 
 now , my heart be too full . they will be find in the proclamation 
 itself . you will all , however , be subject to enrolment in the local 
 city guard , to be summon together by a thing call the Tocsin , the 
 meaning of which I be study in my research into history . 
 personally , I believe a tocsin to be some kind of highly pay 
 official . if , therefore , any of you happen to have such a thing as a 
 halberd in the house , I should advise you to practise with it in the 
 garden . " 

 here the King bury his face in his handkerchief and hurriedly leave 
 the platform , overcome by emotion . 

 the member of the Society for the Recovery of London Antiquities rise 
 in an indescribable state of vagueness . some be purple with 
 indignation ; an intellectual few be purple with laughter ; the great 
 majority find their mind a blank . there remain a tradition that one 
 pale face with burn blue eye remain fix upon the lecturer , and 
 after the lecture a red - haired boy run out of the room . 




 CHAPTER II--_The Council of the Provosts _ 


 the King get up early next morning and come down three step at a time 
 like a schoolboy . have eat his breakfast hurriedly , but with an 
 appetite , he summon one of the high official of the Palace , and 
 present he with a shilling . " go and buy I , " he say , " a shilling 
 paint - box , which you will get , unless the mist of time mislead I , in 
 a shop at the corner of the second and dirty street that lead out 
 of Rochester Row . I have already request the Master of the 
 Buckhounds to provide I with cardboard . it seem to I ( I know not 
 why ) that it fall within his department . " 

 the King be happy all that morning with his cardboard and his 
 paint - box . he be engage in design the uniform and coat - of - arm 
 for the various municipality of London . they give he deep and no 
 inconsiderable thought . he feel the responsibility . 

 " I can not think , " he say , " why people should think the name of 
 place in the country more poetical than those in London . shallow 
 romanticist go away in train and stop in place call 
 Hugmy - in - the - Hole , or Bumps - on - the - Puddle . and all the time they 
 could , if they like , go and live at a place with the dim , divine name 
 of St. John 's Wood . I have never be to St. John 's Wood . I dare not . 
 I should be afraid of the innumerable night of fir tree , afraid to 
 come upon a blood - red cup and the beating of the wing of the Eagle . 
 but all these thing can be imagine by remain reverently in the 
 Harrow train . " 

 and he thoughtfully retouch his design for the head - dress of the 
 halberdier of St. John 's Wood , a design in black and red , compound 
 of a pine tree and the plumage of an eagle . then he turn to another 
 card . " let we think of milder matter , " he say . " Lavender Hill ! could 
 any of your glebe and combe and all the rest of it produce so 
 fragrant an idea ? think of a mountain of lavender lift itself in 
 purple poignancy into the silver sky and fill man 's nostril with 
 a new breath of life -- a purple hill of incense . it be true that upon 
 my few excursion of discovery on a halfpenny tram I have fail to 
 hit the precise spot . but it must be there ; some poet call it by 
 its name . there be at least warrant enough for the solemn purple 
 plume ( follow the botanical formation of lavender ) which I have 
 require people to wear in the neighbourhood of Clapham Junction . it 
 be so everywhere , after all . I have never be actually to 
 Southfields , but I suppose a scheme of lemon and olive represent 
 their austral instinct . I have never visit Parson 's Green , or see 
 either the Green or the Parson , but surely the pale - green shovel - hat 
 I have design must be more or less in the spirit . I must work in the 
 dark and let my instinct guide I . the great love I bear to my people 
 will certainly save I from distress their noble spirit or 
 violate their great tradition . " 

 as he be reflect in this vein , the door be fling open , and an 
 official announce Mr. Barker and Mr. Lambert . 

 Mr. Barker and Mr. Lambert be not particularly surprised to find the 
 King sit on the floor amid a litter of water - colour sketch . they 
 be not particularly surprised because the last time they have call 
 on he they have find he sit on the floor , surround by a litter 
 of child 's brick , and the time before surround by a litter of 
 wholly unsuccessful attempt to make paper dart . but the trend of 
 the royal infant 's remark , utter from amid this infantile chaos , 
 be not quite the same affair . 

 for some time they let he babble on , conscious that his remark mean 
 nothing . and then a horrible thought begin to steal over the mind of 
 James Barker . he begin to think that the King 's remark do not mean 
 nothing . 

 " in God 's name , Auberon , " he suddenly volley out , startle the 
 quiet hall , " you do not mean that you be really go to have these 
 city guard and city wall and thing ? " 

 " I be , indeed , " say the infant , in a quiet voice . " why should not I 
 have they ? I have model they precisely on your political 
 principle . do you know what I have do , Barker ? I have behave like a 
 true Barkerian . I have ... but perhaps it will not interest you , the 
 account of my barkerian conduct . " 

 " oh , go on , go on , " cry Barker . 

 " the account of my barkerian conduct , " say Auberon , calmly , " seem 
 not only to interest , but to alarm you . yet it be very simple . it 
 merely consist in choose all the provost under any new scheme by 
 the same principle by which you have cause the central despot to be 
 appoint . each provost , of each city , under my charter , be to be 
 appoint by rotation . Sleep , therefore , my Barker , a rosy sleep . " 

 Barker 's wild eye flare . 

 " but , in God 's name , do not you see , Quin , that the thing be quite 
 different ? in the centre it do not matter so much , just because the 
 whole object of despotism be to get some sort of unity . but if any 
 damned parish can go to any damned man-- " 

 " I see your difficulty , " say King Auberon , calmly . " you feel that 
 your talent may be neglect . listen ! " and he rise with immense 
 magnificence . " I solemnly give to my liege subject , James Barker , my 
 special and splendid favour , the right to override the obvious text of 
 the Charter of the Cities , and to be , in his own right , Lord High 
 Provost of South Kensington . and now , my dear James , you be all 
 right . good day . " 

 " But-- " begin Barker . 

 " the audience be at an end , Provost , " say the King , smile . 

 how far his confidence be justify , it would require a somewhat 
 complicated description to explain . " the Great Proclamation of the 
 Charter of the Free Cities " appear in due course that morning , and 
 be post by bill - sticker all over the front of the Palace , the king 
 assist they with animate direction , and stand in the middle of 
 the road , with his head on one side , contemplate the result . it be 
 also carry up and down the main thoroughfare by sandwichman , and 
 the King be , with difficulty , restrain from go out in that 
 capacity himself , be , in fact , find by the Groom of the Stole and 
 Captain Bowler , struggle between two board . his excitement have 
 positively to be quiet like that of a child . 

 the reception which the Charter of the Cities meet at the hand of the 
 public may mildly be describe as mix . in one sense it be popular 
 enough . in many happy home that remarkable legal document be read 
 aloud on winter evening amid uproarious appreciation , when everything 
 have be learn by heart from that quaint but immortal old classic , 
 Mr. W. W. Jacobs . but when it be discover that the King have every 
 intention of seriously require the provision to be carry out , of 
 insist that the grotesque city , with their tocsin and city 
 guard , should really come into existence , thing be throw into a 
 far angry confusion . londoner have no particular objection to the 
 King make a fool of himself , but they become indignant when it 
 become evident that he wish to make fool of they ; and protest 
 begin to come in . 

 the Lord High Provost of the Good and Valiant City of West Kensington 
 write a respectful letter to the king , explain that upon State 
 occasion it would , of course , be his duty to observe what formality 
 the King think proper , but that it be really awkward for a decent 
 householder not to be allow to go out and put a post - card in a 
 pillar - box without be escort by five herald , who announce , with 
 formal cry and blast of a trumpet , that the Lord High Provost 
 desire to catch the post . 

 the Lord High Provost of North Kensington , who be a prosperous 
 draper , write a curt business note , like a man complain of a 
 railway company , state that definite inconvenience have be cause 
 he by the presence of the halberdier , whom he have to take with he 
 everywhere . when attempt to catch an omnibus to the City , he have 
 find that while room could have be find for himself , the 
 halberdier have a difficulty in get in to the vehicle -- believe 
 he , theirs faithfully . 

 the Lord High Provost of Shepherd 's Bush say his wife do not like 
 man hang round the kitchen . 

 the King be always delighted to listen to these grievance , 
 deliver lenient and kingly answer , but as he always insist , as 
 the absolute _ sine qua non _ , that verbal complaint should be 
 present to he with the full pomp of trumpet , plume , and 
 halberd , only a few resolute spirit be prepared to run the 
 gauntlet of the little boy in the street . 

 among these , however , be prominent the abrupt and business - like 
 gentleman who rule North Kensington . and he have before long , occasion 
 to interview the King about a matter wide and even more urgent than 
 the problem of the halberdier and the omnibus . this be the great 
 question which then and for long afterwards bring a stir to the 
 blood and a flush to the cheek of all the speculative builder and 
 house agent from Shepherd 's Bush to the Marble Arch , and from 
 Westbourne Grove to High Street , Kensington . I refer to the great 
 affair of the improvement in Notting Hill . the scheme be conduct 
 chiefly by Mr. Buck , the abrupt North Kensington magnate , and by Mr. 
 Wilson , the Provost of Bayswater . a great thoroughfare be to be 
 drive through three borough , through West Kensington , North 
 Kensington and Notting Hill , open at one end into Hammersmith 
 Broadway , and at the other into Westbourne Grove . the negotiation , 
 buying , selling , bullying and bribing take ten year , and by the end 
 of it Buck , who have conduct they almost single - handed , have prove 
 himself a man of the strong type of material energy and material 
 diplomacy . and just as his splendid patience and more splendid 
 impatience have finally bring he victory , when workman be already 
 demolish house and wall along the great line from Hammersmith , a 
 sudden obstacle appear that have neither be reckon with nor 
 dream of , a small and strange obstacle , which , like a speck of grit 
 in a great machine , jar the whole vast scheme and bring it to a 
 stand - still , and Mr. Buck , the draper , get with great impatience 
 into his robe of office and summon with indescribable disgust his 
 halberdier , hurry over to speak to the King . 

 ten year have not tire the King of his joke . there be still new 
 face to be see look out from the symbolic head - gear he have 
 design , gaze at he from amid the pastoral ribbon of Shepherd 's 
 Bush or from under the sombre hood of the Blackfriars Road . and the 
 interview which be promise he with the Provost of North Kensington 
 he anticipate with a particular pleasure , for " he never really 
 enjoy , " he say , " the full richness of the mediæval garment unless 
 the people compel to wear they be very angry and business - like . " 

 Mr. Buck be both . at the King 's command the door of the 
 audience - chamber be throw open and a herald appear in the purple 
 colour of Mr. Buck 's commonwealth emblazon with the Great Eagle 
 which the King have attribute to North Kensington , in vague 
 reminiscence of Russia , for he always insist on regard North 
 Kensington as some kind of semi - arctic neighbourhood . the herald 
 announce that the Provost of that city desire audience of the King . 

 " from North Kensington ? " say the King , rise graciously . " what news 
 do he bring from that land of high hill and fair woman ? he be 
 welcome . " 

 the herald advance into the room , and be immediately follow by 
 twelve guard clothe in purple , who be follow by an attendant 
 bear the banner of the Eagle , who be follow by another attendant 
 bear the key of the city upon a cushion , who be follow by Mr. 
 Buck in a great hurry . when the King see his strong animal face and 
 steady eye , he know that he be in the presence of a great man of 
 business , and consciously brace himself . 

 " well , well , " he say , cheerily come down two or three step from a 
 daïs , and strike his hand lightly together , " I be glad to see you . 
 never mind , never mind . ceremony be not everything . " 

 " I do not understand your Majesty , " say the Provost , stolidly . 

 " never mind , never mind , " say the King , gaily . " a knowledge of Courts 
 be by no mean an unmixed merit ; you will do it next time , no doubt . " 

 the man of business look at he sulkily from under his black brow 
 and say again without show of civility-- 

 " I do not follow you . " 

 " well , well , " reply the King , good - naturedly , " if you ask I I do not 
 mind tell you , not because I myself attach any importance to these 
 form in comparison with the Honest heart . but it be usual -- it be 
 usual -- that be all , for a man when enter the presence of Royalty to 
 lie down on his back on the floor and elevate his foot towards 
 heaven ( as the source of Royal power ) to say three time ' monarchical 
 institution improve the manner . ' but there , there -- such pomp be far 
 less truly dignified than your simple kindliness . " 

 the Provost 's face be red with anger , and he maintain silence . 

 " and now , " say the king , lightly , and with the exasperating air of a 
 man soften a snub ; " what delightful weather we be have ! you must 
 find your official robe warm , my Lord . I design they for your own 
 snow - bind land . " 

 " they be as hot as hell , " say Buck , briefly . " I come here on 
 business . " 

 " right , " say the King , nod a great number of time with quite 
 unmeaning solemnity ; " right , right , right . business , as the sad glad 
 old Persian say , be business . be punctual . rise early . point the pen 
 to the shoulder . point the pen to the shoulder , for you know not 
 whence you come nor why . point the pen to the shoulder , for you know 
 not when you go nor where . " 

 the Provost pull a number of paper from his pocket and savagely 
 flap they open . 

 " your Majesty may have hear , " he begin , sarcastically , " of 
 Hammersmith and a thing call a road . we have be at work ten year 
 buy property and get compulsory power and fix compensation 
 and square vested interest , and now at the very end , the thing be 
 stop by a fool . Old Prout , who be Provost of Notting Hill , be a 
 business man , and we deal with he quite satisfactorily . but he be 
 dead , and the cursed lot have fall on a young man name Wayne , who be 
 up to some game that be perfectly incomprehensible to I . we offer he 
 a well price than any one ever dream of , but he will not let the road 
 go through . and his Council seem to be back he up . it be midsummer 
 madness . " 

 the King , who be rather inattentively engage in draw the 
 Provost 's nose with his finger on the window - pane , hear the last two 
 word . 

 " what a perfect phrase that be ! " he say . " ' Midsummer madness ' ! " 

 " the chief point be , " continue Buck , doggedly , " that the only part 
 that be really in question be one dirty little street -- Pump Street -- a 
 street with nothing in it but a public - house and a penny toy - shop , and 
 that sort of thing . all the respectable people of Notting Hill have 
 accept our compensation . but the ineffable Wayne stick out over 
 Pump Street . say he be provost of Notting Hill . he be only Provost of 
 Pump Street . " 

 " a good thought , " reply Auberon . " I like the idea of a Provost of 
 Pump Street . why not let he alone ? " 

 " and drop the whole scheme ! " cry out Buck , with a burst of brutal 
 spirit . " I will be damn if we do . no . I be for send in workman to 
 pull down without more ado . " 

 " strike for the purple Eagle ! " cry the King , hot with historical 
 association . 

 " I will tell you what it be , " say Buck , lose his temper altogether . 
 " if your Majesty would spend less time in insult respectable people 
 with your silly coat - of - arm , and more time over the business of the 
 nation-- " 

 the King 's brow wrinkle thoughtfully . 

 " the situation be not bad , " he say ; " the haughty burgher defy the 
 King in his own Palace . the burgher 's head should be throw back and 
 the right arm extend ; the left may be lift towards Heaven , but 
 that I leave to your private religious sentiment . I have sink back in 
 this chair , stricken with baffled fury . now again , please . " 

 Buck 's mouth open like a dog 's , but before he could speak another 
 herald appear at the door . 

 " the Lord High Provost of Bayswater , " he say , " desire an audience . " 

 " admit he , " say Auberon . " this _ be _ a jolly day . " 

 the halberdier of Bayswater wear a prevailing uniform of green , and 
 the banner which be bear after they be emblazon with a green 
 bay - wreath on a silver ground , which the king , in the course of his 
 research into a bottle of champagne , have discover to be the quaint 
 old pun cognisance of the city of Bayswater . 

 " it be a fit symbol , " say the King , " your immortal bay - wreath . Fulham 
 may seek for wealth , and Kensington for art , but when do the man of 
 bayswater care for anything but glory ? " 

 immediately behind the banner , and almost completely hide by it , 
 come the Provost of the city , clothe in splendid robe of green and 
 silver with white fur and crown with bay . he be an anxious little 
 man with red whisker , originally the owner of a small sweet - stuff 
 shop . 

 " our cousin of Bayswater , " say the King , with delight ; " what can we 
 get for you ? " the King be hear also distinctly to mutter , " cold 
 beef , cold ' am , cold chicken , " his voice die into silence . 

 " I come to see your Majesty , " say the Provost of Bayswater , whose 
 name be Wilson , " about that Pump Street affair . " 

 " I have just be explain the situation to his Majesty , " say Buck , 
 curtly , but recover his civility . " I be not sure , however , whether 
 his Majesty know how much the matter affect you also . " 

 " it affect both of we , yer see , yer Majesty , as this scheme be 
 start for the benefit of the ' ole neighbourhood . so Mr. Buck and I 
 we put our ' ead together-- " 

 the King clasp his hand . 

 " perfect ! " he cry in ecstacy . " your head together ! I can see it ! 
 can not you do it now ? oh , do do it now ! " 

 a smothered sound of amusement appear to come from the halberdier , 
 but Mr. Wilson look merely bewilder , and Mr. Buck merely 
 diabolical . 

 " I suppose , " he begin bitterly , but the King stop he with a 
 gesture of listen . 

 " hush , " he say , " I think I hear some one else come . I seem to hear 
 another herald , a herald whose boot creak . " 

 as he speak another voice cry from the doorway-- 

 " the Lord High Provost of South Kensington desire an audience . " 

 " the Lord High Provost of South Kensington ! " cry the king . " why , 
 that be my old friend James Barker ! what do he want , I wonder ? if 
 the tender memory of friendship have not grow misty , I fancy he 
 want something for himself , probably money . how be you , James ? " 

 Mr. James Barker , whose guard be attire in a splendid blue , and 
 whose blue banner bear three gold bird sing , rush , in his blue 
 and gold robe , into the room . despite the absurdity of all the 
 dress , it be worth notice that he carry his well than the 
 rest , though he loathe it as much as any of they . he be a gentleman , 
 and a very handsome man , and could not help unconsciously wear even 
 his preposterous robe as it should be wear . he speak quickly , but with 
 the slight initial hesitation he always show in address the king , 
 due to suppress an impulse to address his old acquaintance in the 
 old way . 

 " your Majesty -- pray forgive my intrusion . it be about this man in Pump 
 Street . I see you have Buck here , so you have probably hear what be 
 necessary . I-- " 

 the King sweep his eye anxiously round the room , which now blaze 
 with the trapping of three city . 

 " there be one thing necessary , " he say . 

 " yes , your Majesty , " say Mr. Wilson of Bayswater , a little eagerly . 
 " what do yer Majesty think necessary ? " 

 " a little yellow , " say the King , firmly . " send for the Provost of 
 West Kensington . " 

 amid some materialistic protest he be send for , and arrive with his 
 yellow halberdier in his saffron robe , wipe his forehead with a 
 handkerchief . after all , place as he be , he have a good deal to say 
 on the matter . 

 " welcome , West Kensington , " say the King . " I have long wish to see 
 you touch that matter of the Hammersmith land to the south of the 
 Rowton House . will you hold it feudally from the Provost of 
 Hammersmith ? you have only to do he homage by put his left arm 
 in his overcoat and then march home in state . " 

 " no , your Majesty ; I would rather not , " say the Provost of West 
 Kensington , who be a pale young man with a fair moustache and 
 whisker , who keep a successful dairy . 

 the King strike he heartily on the shoulder . 

 " the fierce old West Kensington blood , " he say ; " they be not wise 
 who ask it to do homage . " 

 then he glance again round the room . it be full of a roar sunset 
 of colour , and he enjoy the sight , possible to so few artist -- the 
 sight of his own dream move and blaze before he . in the 
 foreground the yellow of the West Kensington livery outline itself 
 against the dark blue drapery of South Kensington . the crest of 
 these again brighten suddenly into green as the almost woodland 
 colour of bayswater rise behind they . and over and behind all , the 
 great purple plume of North Kensington show almost funereal and 
 black . 

 " there be something lacking , " say the king--"somethe lacking . what 
 can -- ah , there it be ! there it be ! " 

 in the doorway have appear a new figure , a herald in flame red . he 
 cry in a loud but unemotional voice-- 

 " the Lord High Provost of Notting Hill desire an audience . " 




 CHAPTER iii--_enter a Lunatic _ 


 the king of the Fairies , who be , it be to be presume , the godfather 
 of King Auberon , must have be very favourable on this particular day 
 to his fantastic godchild , for with the entrance of the guard of the 
 provost of Notting Hill there be a certain more or less inexplicable 
 addition to his delight . the wretched navvy and sandwich - man who 
 carry the colour of Bayswater or South Kensington , engage merely 
 for the day to satisfy the Royal hobby , slouch into the room with a 
 comparatively hang - dog air , and a great part of the King 's 
 intellectual pleasure consist in the contrast between the arrogance 
 of their sword and feather and the meek misery of their face . but 
 these Notting Hill halberdier in their red tunic belt with gold 
 have the air rather of an absurd gravity . they seem , so to speak , to 
 be take part in the joke . they march and wheel into position 
 with an almost startling dignity and discipline . 

 they carry a yellow banner with a great red lion , name by the king 
 as the Notting Hill emblem , after a small public - house in the 
 neighbourhood , which he once frequent . 

 between the two line of his follower there advance towards the king 
 a tall , red - haired young man , with high feature and bold blue eye . 
 he would have be call handsome , but that a certain indefinable air 
 of his nose be too big for his face , and his foot for his leg , 
 give he a look of awkwardness and extreme youth . his robe be red , 
 accord to the King 's heraldry , and , alone among the Provosts , he 
 be gird with a great sword . this be Adam Wayne , the intractable 
 provost of Notting Hill . 

 the King fling himself back in his chair , and rub his hand . 

 " what a day , what a day ! " he say to himself . " now there will be a row . 
 I have no idea it would be such fun as it be . these provost be so very 
 indignant , so very reasonable , so very right . this fellow , by the look 
 in his eye , be even more indignant than the rest . no sign in those 
 large blue eye , at any rate , of ever have hear of a joke . he will 
 remonstrate with the other , and they will remonstrate with he , and 
 they will all make themselves sumptuously happy remonstrate with I . " 

 " welcome , my Lord , " he say aloud . " what news from the Hill of a 
 hundred legend ? what have you for the ear of your king ? I know that 
 trouble have arise between you and these other , our cousin , but 
 these trouble it shall be our pride to compose . and I doubt not , and 
 can not doubt , that your love for I be not less tender , no less 
 ardent , than theirs . " 

 Mr. Buck make a bitter face , and James Barker 's nostril curl ; 
 Wilson begin to giggle faintly , and the Provost of West Kensington 
 follow in a smothered way . but the big blue eye of Adam Wayne never 
 change , and he call out in an odd , boyish voice down the hall-- 

 " I bring homage to my king . I bring he the only thing I have -- my 
 sword . " 

 and with a great gesture he fling it down on the ground , and kneel on 
 one knee behind it . 

 there be a dead silence . 

 " I beg your pardon , " say the King , blankly . 

 " you speak well , sire , " say Adam Wayne , " as you ever speak , when you 
 say that my love be not less than the love of these . small would it be 
 if it be not more . for I be the heir of your scheme -- the child of 
 the great Charter . I stand here for the right the Charter give I , 
 and I swear , by your sacred crown , that where I stand , I stand fast . " 

 [ illustration : " I bring homage to my king . " ] 

 the eye of all five man stand out of their head . 

 then Buck say , in his jolly , jarring voice : " be the whole world mad ? " 

 the King spring to his foot , and his eye blaze . 

 " yes , " he cry , in a voice of exultation , " the whole world be mad , 
 but Adam Wayne and I . it be true as death what I tell you long ago , 
 James Barker , seriousness send man mad . you be mad , because you care 
 for politic , as mad as a man who collect tram ticket . Buck be mad , 
 because he care for money , as mad as a man who live on opium . Wilson 
 be mad , because he think himself right , as mad as a man who think 
 himself God Almighty . the Provost of West Kensington be mad , because 
 he think he be respectable , as mad as a man who think he be a 
 chicken . all man be mad but the humorist , who care for nothing and 
 possess everything . I think that there be only one humorist in 
 England . fools!--dolts!--open your cow ' eye ; there be two ! in 
 Notting Hill -- in that unpromise elevation -- there have be bear an 
 artist ! you think to spoil my joke , and bully I out of it , by 
 become more and more modern , more and more practical , more and more 
 bustling and rational . oh , what a feast it be to answer you by 
 become more and more august , more and more gracious , more and more 
 ancient and mellow ! but this lad have see how to bowl I out . he have 
 answer I back , vaunt for vaunt , rhetoric for rhetoric . he have 
 lift the only shield I can not break , the shield of an impenetrable 
 pomposity . listen to he . you have come , my Lord , about Pump Street ? " 

 " about the city of Notting Hill , " answer Wayne , proudly , " of which 
 Pump Street be a live and rejoice part . " 

 " not a very large part , " say Barker , contemptuously . 

 " that which be large enough for the rich to covet , " say Wayne , 
 draw up his head , " be large enough for the poor to defend . " 

 the King slap both his leg , and wave his foot for a second in the 
 air . 

 " every respectable person in Notting Hill , " cut in Buck , with his 
 cold , coarse voice , " be for we and against you . I have plenty of 
 friend in Notting Hill . " 

 " your friend be those who have take your gold for other man 's 
 hearthstone , my Lord Buck , " say Provost Wayne . " I can well believe 
 they be your friend . " 

 " they have never sell dirty toy , anyhow , " say Buck , laugh shortly . 

 " they have sell dirty thing , " say Wayne , calmly : " they have sell 
 themselves . " 

 " it be no good , my Buckling , " say the King , roll about on his 
 chair . " you can not cope with this chivalrous eloquence . you can not cope 
 with an artist . you can not cope with the humorist of Notting Hill . oh , 
 _ nunc dimittis_--that I have live to see this day ! Provost Wayne , you 
 stand firm ? " 

 " let they wait and see , " say Wayne . " if I stand firm before , do you 
 think I shall weaken now that I have see the face of the king ? for I 
 fight for something great , if great there can be , than the 
 hearthstone of my people and the Lordship of the Lion . I fight for 
 your royal vision , for the great dream you dream of the League of the 
 Free Cities . you have give I this liberty . if I have be a beggar 
 and you have fling I a coin , if I have be a peasant in a dance and 
 you have fling I a favour , do you think I would have let it be take 
 by any ruffian on the road ? this leadership and liberty of Notting 
 Hill be a gift from your Majesty , and if it be take from I , by God ! 
 it shall be take in battle , and the noise of that battle shall be 
 hear in the flat of Chelsea and in the studio of St. John 's Wood . " 

 " it be too much -- it be too much , " say the King . " nature be weak . I 
 must speak to you , brother artist , without further disguise . let I 
 ask you a solemn question . Adam Wayne , Lord High Provost of Notting 
 Hill , do not you think it splendid ? " 

 " Splendid ! " cry Adam Wayne . " it have the splendour of God . " 

 " bowl out again , " say the King . " you will keep up the pose . 
 funnily , of course , it be serious . but seriously , be not it funny ? " 

 " what ? " ask Wayne , with the eye of a baby . 

 " hang it all , do not play any more . the whole business -- the Charter of 
 the Cities . be not it immense ? " 

 " immense be no unworthy word for that glorious design . " 

 " oh , hang you ! but , of course , I see . you want I to clear the room of 
 these reasonable sow . you want the two humorist alone together . 
 leave we , gentleman . " 

 Buck throw a sour look at Barker , and at a sullen signal the whole 
 pageant of blue and green , of red , gold , and purple , roll out of 
 the room , leave only two in the great hall , the King sit in his 
 seat on the daïs , and the red - clothe figure still kneel on the floor 
 before his fall sword . 

 the King bound down the step and smack Provost Wayne on the back . 

 " before the star be make , " he cry , " we be make for each other . 
 it be too beautiful . think of the valiant independence of Pump Street . 
 that be the real thing . it be the deification of the ludicrous . " 

 the kneeling figure spring to his foot with a fierce stagger . 

 " ludicrous ! " he cry , with a fiery face . 

 " oh , come , come , " say the King , impatiently , " you need not keep it up 
 with I . the augur must wink sometimes from sheer fatigue of the 
 eyelid . let we enjoy this for half an hour , not as actor , but as 
 dramatic critic . be not it a joke ? " 

 Adam Wayne look down like a boy , and answer in a constrained 
 voice-- 

 " I do not understand your Majesty . I can not believe that while I fight 
 for your royal charter your Majesty desert I for these dog of the 
 gold hunt . " 

 " oh , damn your -- but what be this ? what the devil 's this ? " 

 the King star into the young Provost 's face , and in the twilight of 
 the room begin to see that his face be quite white and his lip 
 shake . 

 " what in God 's name be the matter ? " cry Auberon , hold his wrist . 

 Wayne fling back his face , and the tear be shin on it . 

 " I be only a boy , " he say , " but it be true . I would paint the Red Lion 
 on my shield if I have only my blood . " 

 King Auberon drop the hand and stand without stirring , 
 thunderstruck . 

 " my God in Heaven ! " he say ; " be it possible that there be within the 
 four sea of Britain a man who take Notting Hill seriously ? " 

 " and my God in Heaven ! " say Wayne passionately ; " be it possible that 
 there be within the four sea of Britain a man who do not take it 
 seriously ? " 

 the King say nothing , but merely go back up the step of the daïs , 
 like a man daze . he fall back in his chair again and kick his 
 heel . 

 " if this sort of thing be to go on , " he say weakly , " I shall begin to 
 doubt the superiority of art to life . in Heaven 's name , do not play 
 with I . do you really mean that you be -- God help me!--a Notting Hill 
 patriot ; that you are-- ? " 

 Wayne make a violent gesture , and the King soothe he wildly . 

 " all right -- all right -- I see you be ; but let I take it in . you do 
 really propose to fight these modern improver with their board and 
 inspector and surveyor and all the rest of it ? " 

 " be they so terrible ? " ask Wayne , scornfully . 

 the King continue to stare at he as if he be a human curiosity . 

 " and I suppose , " he say , " that you think that the dentist and small 
 tradesman and maiden lady who inhabit Notting Hill , will rally with 
 war - hymn to your standard ? " 

 " if they have blood they will , " say the Provost . 

 " and I suppose , " say the King , with his head back among the cushion , 
 " that it never cross your mind that"--his voice seem to lose 
 itself luxuriantly--"never cross your mind that any one ever think 
 that the idea of a Notting Hill idealism be -- er -- slightly -- slightly 
 ridiculous ? " 

 " of course they think so , " say Wayne . 

 " what be the meaning of mock the prophet ? " 

 " where , " ask the king , lean forward--"where in Heaven 's name do 
 you get this miraculously inane idea ? " 

 " you have be my tutor , Sire , " say the Provost , " in all that be high 
 and honourable . " 

 " Eh ? " say the King . 

 " it be your Majesty who first stir my dim patriotism into flame . 
 ten year ago , when I be a boy ( I be only nineteen ) , I be play on 
 the slope of Pump Street , with a wooden sword and a paper helmet , 
 dreaming of great war . in an angry trance I strike out with my sword , 
 and stand petrify , for I see that I have strike you , Sire , my king , 
 as you wander in a noble secrecy , watch over your people 's 
 welfare . but I need have have no fear . then be I teach to understand 
 Kingliness . you neither shrink nor frowned . you summon no guard . 
 you invoke no punishment . but in august and burn word , which be 
 write in my soul , never to be erase , you tell I ever to turn my 
 sword against the enemy of my inviolate city . like a priest pointing 
 to the altar , you point to the hill of Notting . ' so long , ' you say , 
 ' as you be ready to die for the sacred mountain , even if it be 
 ring with all the army of Bayswater . ' I have not forget the 
 word , and I have reason now to remember they , for the hour be come 
 and the crown of your prophecy . the sacred hill be ring with the 
 army of Bayswater , and I be ready to die . " 

 the King be lie back in his chair , a kind of wreck . 

 " oh , Lord , Lord , Lord , " he murmur , " what a life ! what a life ! all my 
 work ! I seem to have do it all . so you be the red - haired boy that 
 hit I in the waistcoat . what have I do ? God , what have I do ? I 
 think I would have a joke , and I have create a passion . I try to 
 compose a burlesque , and it seem to be turn halfway through into 
 an epic . what be to be do with such a world ? in the Lord 's name , 
 be not the joke broad and bold enough ? I abandon my subtle humour to 
 amuse you , and I seem to have bring tear to your eye . what be to be 
 do with people when you write a pantomime for they -- call the 
 sausage classic festoon , and the policeman cut in two a tragedy of 
 public duty ? but why be I talk ? why be I ask question of a nice 
 young gentleman who be totally mad ? what be the good of it ? what be 
 the good of anything ? oh , Lord ! oh , Lord ! " 

 suddenly he pull himself upright . 

 " do not you really think the sacred Notting Hill at all absurd ? " 

 " Absurd ? " ask Wayne , blankly . " why should I ? " 

 the King star back equally blankly . 

 " I beg your pardon , " he say . 

 " Notting Hill , " say the Provost , simply , " be a rise or high ground of 
 the common earth , on which man have build house to live , in which 
 they be bear , fall in love , pray , marry , and die . why should I think 
 it absurd ? " 

 the King smile . 

 " because , my Leonidas-- " he begin , then suddenly , he know not how , 
 find his mind be a total blank . after all , why be it absurd ? why 
 be it absurd ? he feel as if the floor of his mind have give way . he 
 feel as all man feel when their first principle be hit hard with a 
 question . Barker always feel so when the King say , " why trouble about 
 politic ? " 

 the King 's thought be in a kind of rout ; he could not collect they . 

 " it be generally feel to be a little funny , " he say vaguely . 

 " I suppose , " say Adam , turn on he with a fierce suddenness--"i 
 suppose you fancy crucifixion be a serious affair ? " 

 " well , I-- " begin auberon--"i admit I have generally think it have 
 its graver side . " 

 " then you be wrong , " say Wayne , with incredible violence . 
 " crucifixion be comic . it be exquisitely divert . it be an absurd 
 and obscene kind of impale reserve for people who be make to be 
 laugh at -- for slave and provincial , for dentist and small 
 tradesman , as you would say . I have see the grotesque gallow - shape , 
 which the little roman gutter - boy scribble on wall as a vulgar 
 joke , blaze on the pinnacle of the temple of the world . and shall 
 I turn back ? " 

 the King make no answer . 

 Adam go on , his voice ring in the roof . 

 " this laughter with which man tyrannise be not the great power you 
 think it . Peter be crucify , and crucify head downwards . what 
 could be funny than the idea of a respectable old Apostle upside 
 down ? what could be more in the style of your modern humour ? but what 
 be the good of it ? upside down or right side up , Peter be Peter to 
 mankind . upside down he still hang over Europe , and million move 
 and breathe only in the life of his Church . " 

 King Auberon get up absently . 

 " there be something in what you say , " he say . " you seem to have be 
 thinking , young man . " 

 " only feeling , sire , " answer the Provost . " I be bear , like other 
 man , in a spot of the earth which I love because I have play boy ' 
 game there , and fall in love , and talk with my friend through 
 night that be night of the god . and I feel the riddle . these 
 little garden where we tell our love . these street where we bring 
 out our dead . why should they be commonplace ? why should they be 
 absurd ? why should it be grotesque to say that a pillar - box be poetic 
 when for a year I could not see a red pillar - box against the yellow 
 evening in a certain street without be wrack with something of 
 which God keep the secret , but which be strong than sorrow or joy ? 
 why should any one be able to raise a laugh by say ' the Cause of 
 Notting Hill'?--Notting Hill where thousand of immortal spirit blaze 
 with alternate hope and fear . " 

 Auberon be flick dust off his sleeve with quite a new seriousness 
 on his face , distinct from the owlish solemnity which be the pose of 
 his humour . 

 " it be very difficult , " he say at last . " it be a damned difficult 
 thing . I see what you mean ; I agree with you even up to a point -- or I 
 should like to agree with you , if I be young enough to be a prophet 
 and poet . I feel a truth in everything you say until you come to the 
 word ' Notting Hill . ' and then I regret to say that the old Adam 
 awake roar with laughter and make short work of the new Adam , 
 whose name be Wayne . " 

 for the first time Provost Wayne be silent , and stand gaze dreamily 
 at the floor . evening be close in , and the room have grow dark . 

 " I know , " he say , in a strange , almost sleepy voice , " there be truth 
 in what you say , too . it be hard not to laugh at the common name -- I 
 only say we should not . I have think of a remedy ; but such thought 
 be rather terrible . " 

 " what thought ? " ask Auberon . 

 the provost of Notting Hill seem to have fall into a kind of 
 trance ; in his eye be an elvish light . 

 " I know of a magic wand , but it be a wand that only one or two may 
 rightly use , and only seldom . it be a fairy wand of great fear , 
 strong than those who use it -- often frightful , often wicked to use . 
 but whatever be touch with it be never again wholly common ; whatever 
 be touch with it take a magic from outside the world . if I touch , 
 with this fairy wand , the railway and the road of Notting Hill , man 
 will love they , and be afraid of they for ever . " 

 " what the devil be you talk about ? " ask the King . 

 " it have make mean landscape magnificent , and hovel outlast 
 cathedral , " go on the madman . " why should it not make lamp - post 
 fair than greek lamp ; and an omnibus - ride like a paint ship ? the 
 touch of it be the finger of a strange perfection . " 

 " what be your wand ? " cry the king , impatiently . 

 " there it be , " say Wayne ; and point to the floor , where his sword 
 lie flat and shin . 

 " the sword ! " cry the king ; and spring up straight on the daïs . 

 " yes , yes , " cry Wayne , hoarsely . " the thing touch by that be 
 not vulgar ; the thing touch by that-- " 

 King Auberon make a gesture of horror . 

 " you will shed blood for that ! " he cry . " for a cursed point of 
 view-- " 

 " oh , you king , you king ! " cry out Adam , in a burst of scorn . " how 
 humane you be , how tender , how considerate ! you will make war for a 
 frontier , or the import of a foreign harbour ; you will shed blood for 
 the precise duty on lace , or the salute to an admiral . but for the 
 thing that make life itself worthy or miserable -- how humane you be ! 
 I say here , and I know well what I speak of , there be never any 
 necessary war but the religious war . there be never any just war 
 but the religious war . there be never any humane war but the 
 religious war . for these man be fight for something that 
 claim , at least , to be the happiness of a man , the virtue of a man . 
 a Crusader thought , at least , that Islam hurt the soul of every man , 
 king or tinker , that it could really capture . I think Buck and Barker 
 and these rich vulture hurt the soul of every man , hurt every inch of 
 the ground , hurt every brick of the house , that they can really 
 capture . do you think I have no right to fight for Notting Hill , you 
 whose English Government have so often fight for tomfoolery ? if , as 
 your rich friend say , there be no god , and the sky be dark above 
 we , what should a man fight for , but the place where he have the Eden 
 of childhood and the short heaven of first love ? if no temple and no 
 scripture be sacred , what be sacred if a man 's own youth be not 
 sacred ? " 

 the King walk a little restlessly up and down the daïs . 

 " it be hard , " he say , bite his lip , " to assent to a view so 
 desperate -- so responsible .... " 

 as he speak , the door of the audience chamber fall ajar , and through 
 the aperture come , like the sudden chatter of a bird , the high , nasal , 
 but well - breed voice of Barker . 

 " I say to he quite plainly -- the public interests-- " 

 Auberon turn on Wayne with violence . 

 " what the devil be all this ? what be I say ? what be you say ? 
 have you hypnotise I ? curse your uncanny blue eye ! let I go . give 
 I back my sense of humour . give it I back -- give it I back , I say ! " 

 " I solemnly assure you , " say Wayne , uneasily , with a gesture , as if 
 feel all over himself , " that I have not get it . " 

 the King fall back in his chair , and go into a roar of Rabelaisian 
 laughter . 

 " I do not think you have , " he cry . 




 BOOK III 




 CHAPTER i--_the Mental Condition of Adam Wayne _ 


 a little while after the King 's accession a small book of poem 
 appear , call " Hymns on the Hill . " they be not good poem , nor 
 be the book successful , but it attract a certain amount of 
 attention from one particular school of critic . the King himself , who 
 be a member of the school , review it in his capacity of literary 
 critic to " straight from the stable , " a sporting journal . they be 
 know as the Hammock School , because it have be calculate 
 malignantly by an enemy that no less than thirteen of their delicate 
 criticism have begin with the word , " I read this book in a hammock : 
 half asleep in the sleepy sunlight , I ... " ; after that there be 
 important difference . under these condition they like everything , 
 but especially everything silly . " next to authentic goodness in a 
 book , " they said--"next to authentic goodness in a book ( and that , 
 alas ! we never find ) we desire a rich badness . " thus it happen that 
 their praise ( as indicate the presence of a rich badness ) be not 
 universally seek after , and author become a little disquiet when 
 they find the eye of the Hammock School fix upon they with peculiar 
 favour . 

 the peculiarity of " Hymns on the Hill " be the celebration of the 
 poetry of London as distinct from the poetry of the country . this 
 sentiment or affectation be , of course , not uncommon in the twentieth 
 century , nor be it , although sometimes exaggerated , and sometimes 
 artificial , by any mean without a great truth at its root , for there 
 be one respect in which a town must be more poetical than the country , 
 since it be close to the spirit of man ; for London , if it be not one 
 of the masterpiece of man , be at least one of his sin . a street be 
 really more poetical than a meadow , because a street have a secret . a 
 street be go somewhere , and a meadow nowhere . but , in the case of 
 the book call " Hymns on the Hill , " there be another peculiarity , 
 which the King point out with great acuman in his review . he be 
 naturally interested in the matter , for he have himself publish a 
 volume of lyric about London under his pseudonym of " Daisy Daydream . " 

 this difference , as the King point out , consist in the fact that , 
 while mere artificer like " Daisy Daydream " ( on whose elaborate style 
 the king , over his signature of " Thunderbolt , " be perhaps somewhat 
 too severe ) think to praise London by compare it to the 
 country -- use nature , that is , as a background from which all 
 poetical image have to be draw -- the more robust author of " Hymns on 
 the Hill " praise the country , or nature , by compare it to the town , 
 and use the town itself as a background . " take , " say the critic , 
 " the typically feminine line , ' to the Inventor of the Hansom Cab'-- 

 ' Poet , whose cunning carve this amorous shell , 
            where twain may dwell . ' " 

 " surely , " write the King , " no one but a woman could have write those 
 line . a woman have always a weakness for nature ; with her art be only 
 beautiful as an echo or shadow of it . she be praise the hansom cab 
 by theme and theory , but her soul be still a child by the sea , pick 
 up shell . she can never be utterly of the town , as a man can ; indeed , 
 do we not speak ( with sacred propriety ) of ' a man about town ' ? who 
 ever speak of a woman about town ? however much , physically , ' about 
 town ' a woman may be , she still model herself on nature ; she try to 
 carry nature with she ; she bid grass to grow on her head , and furry 
 beast to bite she about the throat . in the heart of a dim city , she 
 model her hat on a flaring cottage garden of flower . we , with our 
 nobler civic sentiment , model our on a chimney pot ; the ensign of 
 civilisation . and rather than be without bird , she will commit 
 massacre , that she may turn her head into a tree , with dead bird to 
 sing on it . " 

 this kind of thing go on for several page , and then the critic 
 remember his subject , and return to it . 

 " Poet , whose cunning carve this amorous shell , 
           where twain may dwell . " 

 " the peculiarity of these fine though feminine line , " continue 
 " Thunderbolt , " " be , as we have say , that they praise the hansom cab 
 by compare it to the shell , to a natural thing . now , hear the author 
 of ' Hymns on the Hill , ' and how he deal with the same subject . in his 
 fine nocturne , entitle ' the last Omnibus ' he relieve the rich and 
 poignant melancholy of the theme by a sudden sense of rush at the 
 end-- 

 ' the wind round the old street corner 
 Swung sudden and quick as a cab . ' 

 " here the distinction be obvious . ' Daisy Daydream ' think it a great 
 compliment to a hansom cab to be compare to one of the spiral 
 chamber of the sea . and the author of ' Hymns on the Hill ' think it a 
 great compliment to the immortal whirlwind to be compare to a hackney 
 coach . he surely be the real admirer of London . we have no space to 
 speak of all his perfect application of the idea ; of the poem in 
 which , for instance , a lady 's eye be compare , not to star , but to 
 two perfect street - lamp guide the wanderer . we have no space to 
 speak of the fine lyric , recall the Elizabethan spirit , in which 
 the poet , instead of say that the rose and the lily contend in her 
 complexion , say , with a purer modernism , that the red omnibus of 
 Hammersmith and the white omnibus of Fulham fight there for the 
 mastery . how perfect the image of two contend omnibus ! " 

 here , somewhat abruptly , the review conclude , probably because the 
 King have to send off his copy at that moment , as he be in some want 
 of money . but the King be a very good critic , whatever he may have 
 be as King , and he have , to a considerable extent , hit the right nail 
 on the head . " hymn on the Hill " be not at all like the poem 
 originally publish in praise of the poetry of London . and the 
 reason be that it be really write by a man who have see nothing 
 else but London , and who regard it , therefore , as the universe . it 
 be write by a raw , red - headed lad of seventeen , name Adam Wayne , 
 who have be bear in Notting Hill . an accident in his seventh year 
 prevent his be take away to the seaside , and thus his whole life 
 have be pass in his own Pump Street , and in its neighbourhood . and 
 the consequence be , that he see the street - lamp as thing quite as 
 eternal as the star ; the two fire be mingle . he see the house as 
 thing endure , like the mountain , and so he write about they as one 
 would write about mountain . nature put on a disguise when she speak 
 to every man ; to this man she put on the disguise of Notting Hill . 
 Nature would mean to a poet bear in the Cumberland hill , a stormy 
 sky - line and sudden rock . nature would mean to a poet bear in the 
 Essex flat , a waste of splendid water and splendid sunset . so 
 nature mean to this man Wayne a line of violet roof and lemon lamp , 
 the chiaroscuro of the town . he do not think it clever or funny to 
 praise the shadow and colour of the town ; he have see no other 
 shadow or colour , and so he praise they -- because they be shadow 
 and colour . he see all this because he be a poet , though in practice 
 a bad poet . it be too often forget that just as a bad man be 
 nevertheless a man , so a bad poet be nevertheless a poet . 

 Mr. Wayne 's little volume of verse be a complete failure ; and he 
 submit to the decision of fate with a quite rational humility , go 
 back to his work , which be that of a draper 's assistant , and write no 
 more . he still retain his feeling about the town of Notting Hill , 
 because he could not possibly have any other feeling , because it be 
 the back and base of his brain . but he do not seem to have make any 
 particular attempt to express it or insist upon it . 

 he be a genuine natural mystic , one of those who live on the border 
 of fairyland . but he be perhaps the first to realise how often the 
 boundary of fairyland run through a crowded city . twenty foot from 
 he ( for he be very short - sighted ) the red and white and yellow sun 
 of the gas - light throng and melt into each other like an orchard 
 of fiery tree , the beginning of the wood of elf - land . 

 but , oddly enough , it be because he be a small poet that he come to 
 his strange and isolated triumph . it be because he be a failure in 
 literature that he become a portent in english history . he be one of 
 those to whom nature have give the desire without the power of 
 artistic expression . he have be a dumb poet from his cradle . he might 
 have be so to his grave , and carry unuttered into the darkness a 
 treasure of new and sensational song . but he be bear under the lucky 
 star of a single coincidence . he happen to be at the head of his 
 dingy municipality at the time of the King 's jest , at the time when 
 all municipality be suddenly command to break out into banner 
 and flower . out of the long procession of the silent poet , who have 
 be pass since the beginning of the world , this one man find 
 himself in the midst of an heraldic vision , in which he could act and 
 speak and live lyrically . while the author and the victim alike 
 treat the whole matter as a silly public charade , this one man , by 
 take it seriously , spring suddenly into a throne of artistic 
 omnipotence . armour , music , standard , watch - fire , the noise of 
 drum , all the theatrical property be throw before he . this one 
 poor rhymster , have burn his own rhyme , begin to live that life of 
 open air and act poetry of which all the poet of the earth have 
 dream in vain ; the life for which the Iliad be only a cheap 
 substitute . 

 Upwards from his abstract childhood , Adam Wayne have grow strongly 
 and silently in a certain quality or capacity which be in modern 
 city almost entirely artificial , but which can be natural , and be 
 primarily almost brutally natural in he , the quality or capacity of 
 patriotism . it exist , like other virtue and vice , in a certain 
 undiluted reality . it be not confuse with all kind of other thing . 
 a child speak of his country or his village may make every mistake 
 in Mandeville or tell every lie in Munchausen , but in his statement 
 there will be no psychological lie any more than there can be in a 
 good song . Adam Wayne , as a boy , have for his dull street in Notting 
 Hill the ultimate and ancient sentiment that go out to Athens or 
 Jerusalem . he know the secret of the passion , those secret which make 
 real old national song sound so strange to our civilisation . he know 
 that real patriotism tend to sing about sorrow and forlorn hope 
 much more than about victory . he know that in proper name themselves 
 be half the poetry of all national poem . above all , he know the 
 supreme psychological fact about patriotism , as certain in connection 
 with it as that a fine shame come to all lover , the fact that the 
 patriot never under any circumstance boast of the largeness of his 
 country , but always , and of necessity , boast of the smallness of it . 

 all this he know , not because he be a philosopher or a genius , but 
 because he be a child . any one who care to walk up a side slum like 
 Pump Street , can see a little Adam claim to be king of a 
 paving - stone . and he will always be proud if the stone be almost 
 too narrow for he to keep his foot inside it . 

 it be while he be in such a dream of defensive battle , mark out 
 some strip of street or fortress of step as the limit of his haughty 
 claim , that the King have meet he , and , with a few word fling in 
 mockery , ratify for ever the strange boundary of his soul . 
 thenceforward the fanciful idea of the defence of Notting Hill in war 
 become to he a thing as solid as eat or drink or light a 
 pipe . he dispose his meal for it , alter his plan for it , lay 
 awake in the night and go over it again . two or three shop be to 
 he an arsenal ; an area be to he a moat ; corner of balcony and 
 turn of stone step be point for the location of a culverin or an 
 archer . it be almost impossible to convey to any ordinary imagination 
 the degree to which he have transmit the leaden London landscape to 
 a romantic gold . the process begin almost in babyhood , and become 
 habitual like a literal madness . it be feel most keenly at night , 
 when London be really herself , when her light shine in the dark like 
 the eye of innumerable cat , and the outline of the dark house have 
 the bold simplicity of blue hill . but for he the night reveal 
 instead of conceal , and he read all the blank hour of morning and 
 afternoon , by a contradictory phrase , in the light of that darkness . 
 to this man , at any rate , the inconceivable have happen . the 
 artificial city have become to he nature , and he feel the curbstone 
 and gas - lamp as thing as ancient as the sky . 

 one instance may suffice . walk along Pump Street with a friend , he 
 say , as he gaze dreamily at the iron fence of a little front garden , 
 " how those railing stir one 's blood ! " 

 his friend , who be also a great intellectual admirer , look at they 
 painfully , but without any particular emotion . he be so troubled 
 about it that he go back quite a large number of time on quiet 
 evening and star at the railing , wait for something to happen 
 to his blood , but without success . at last he take refuge in ask 
 Wayne himself . he discover that the ecstacy lie in the one point he 
 have never notice about the railing even after his six visit -- the 
 fact that they be , like the great majority of other -- in London , 
 shape at the top after the manner of a spear . as a child , Wayne have 
 half unconsciously compare they with the spear in picture of 
 Lancelot and St. George , and have grow up under the shadow of the 
 graphic association . now , whenever he look at they , they be simply 
 the serrie weapon that make a hedge of steel round the sacred home 
 of Notting Hill . he could not have cleanse his mind of that meaning 
 even if he try . it be not a fanciful comparison , or anything like 
 it . it would not have be true to say that the familiar railing 
 remind he of spear ; it would have be far truer to say that the 
 familiar spear occasionally remind he of railing . 

 a couple of day after his interview with the king , Adam Wayne be 
 pace like a cage lion in front of five shop that occupy the 
 upper end of the dispute street . they be a grocer 's , a chemist 's , a 
 barber 's , an old curiosity shop and a toy - shop that sell also 
 newspaper . it be these five shop which his childish fastidiousness 
 have first select as the essential of the Notting Hill campaign , the 
 citadel of the city . if Notting Hill be the heart of the universe , 
 and Pump Street be the heart of Notting Hill , this be the heart of 
 Pump Street . the fact that they be all small and side by side 
 realise that feeling for a formidable comfort and compactness which , 
 as we have say , be the heart of his patriotism , and of all 
 patriotism . the grocer ( who have a wine and spirit licence ) be 
 include because he could provision the garrison ; the old curiosity 
 shop because it contain enough sword , pistol , partisan , 
 cros - bow , and blunderbuss to arm a whole irregular regiment ; the 
 toy and paper shop because Wayne think a free press an essential 
 centre for the soul of Pump Street ; the chemist 's to cope with 
 outbreak of disease among the besiege ; and the barber 's because it 
 be in the middle of all the rest , and the barber 's son be an 
 intimate friend and spiritual affinity . 

 it be a cloudless October evening settle down through purple into 
 pure silver around the roof and chimney of the steep little street , 
 which look black and sharp and dramatic . in the deep shadow the 
 gas - light shop front gleam like five fire in a row , and before they , 
 darkly outline like a ghost against some purgatorial furnace , pass 
 to and fro the tall bird - like figure and eagle nose of Adam Wayne . 

 he swing his stick restlessly , and seem fitfully talk to himself . 

 " there be , after all , enigma , " he say " even to the man who have 
 faith . there be doubt that remain even after the true philosophy be 
 complete in every rung and rivet . and here be one of they . be the 
 normal human need , the normal human condition , high or low than 
 those special state of the soul which call out a doubtful and 
 dangerous glory ? those special power of knowledge or sacrifice which 
 be make possible only by the existence of evil ? which should come 
 first to our affection , the endure sanity of peace or the 
 half - maniacal virtue of battle ? which should come first , the man 
 great in the daily round or the man great in emergency ? which should 
 come first , to return to the enigma before I , the grocer or the 
 chemist ? which be more certainly the stay of the city , the swift 
 chivalrous chemist or the benignant all - provide grocer ? in such 
 ultimate spiritual doubt it be only possible to choose a side by the 
 high instinct , and to abide the issue . in any case , I have make my 
 choice . may I be pardon if I choose wrongly , but I choose the 
 grocer . " 

 " good morning , sir , " say the grocer , who be a middle - aged man , 
 partially bald , with harsh red whisker and beard , and forehead line 
 with all the care of the small tradesman . " what can I do for you , 
 sir ? " 

 Wayne remove his hat on enter the shop , with a ceremonious 
 gesture , which , slight as it be , make the tradesman eye he with the 
 beginning of wonder . 

 " I come , sir , " he say soberly , " to appeal to your patriotism . " 

 " why , sir , " say the grocer , " that sound like the time when I be a 
 boy and we use to have election . " 

 " you will have they again , " say Wayne , firmly , " and far great 
 thing . listen , Mr. Mead . I know the temptation which a grocer have to 
 a too cosmopolitan philosophy . I can imagine what it must be to sit 
 all day as you do surround with ware from all the end of the 
 earth , from strange sea that we have never sail and strange forest 
 that we could not even picture . no eastern king ever have such 
 argosy or such cargo come from the sunrise and the sunset , and 
 Solomon in all his glory be not enrich like one of you . India be at 
 your elbow , " he cry , lift his voice and point his stick at a 
 drawer of rice , the grocer make a movement of some alarm , " China be 
 before you , Demerara be behind you , America be above your head , and at 
 this very moment , like some old spanish admiral , you hold Tunis in 
 your hand . " 

 Mr. Mead drop the box of date which he be just lift , and then 
 pick it up again vaguely . 

 Wayne go on with a heighten colour , but a lowered voice , 

 " I know , I say , the temptation of so international , so universal a 
 vision of wealth . I know that it must be your danger not to fall like 
 many tradesman into too dusty and mechanical a narrowness , but rather 
 to be too broad , to be too general , too liberal . if a narrow 
 nationalism be the danger of the pastry - cook , who make his own ware 
 under his own heaven , no less be cosmopolitanism the danger of the 
 grocer . but I come to you in the name of that patriotism which no 
 wandering or enlightenment should ever wholly extinguish , and I ask 
 you to remember Notting Hill . for , after all , in this cosmopolitan 
 magnificence , she have play no small part . your date may come from 
 the tall palm of Barbary , your sugar from the strange island of the 
 tropic , your tea from the secret village of the Empire of the 
 Dragon . that this room might be furnish , forest may have be 
 spoil under the Southern Cross , and leviathan spear under the 
 Polar Star . but you yourself -- surely no inconsiderable treasure -- you 
 yourself , the brain that wield these vast interest -- you yourself , at 
 least , have grow to strength and wisdom between these grey house and 
 under this rainy sky . this city which make you , and thus make your 
 fortune , be threaten with war . come forth and tell to the end of 
 the earth this lesson . oil be from the North and fruit from the 
 South ; rice be from India and spice from Ceylon ; sheep be from New 
 Zealand and man from Notting Hill . " 

 the grocer sit for some little while , with dim eye and his mouth 
 open , look rather like a fish . then he scratch the back of his 
 head , and say nothing . then he said-- 

 " anything out of the shop , sir ? " 

 Wayne look round in a daze way . see a pile of tin of pine - apple 
 chunk , he wave his stick generally towards they . 

 " yes , " he say ; " I will take those . " 

 " all those , sir ? " say the grocer , with greatly increase interest . 

 " yes , yes ; all those , " reply Wayne , still a little bewildered , like 
 a man splash with cold water . 

 " very good , sir ; thank you , sir , " say the grocer with animation . " you 
 may count upon my patriotism , sir . " 

 " I count upon it already , " say Wayne , and pass out into the 
 gathering night . 

 the grocer put the box of date back in its place . 

 " what a nice fellow he be ! " he say . " it be odd how often they be 
 nice . much nice than those as be all right . " 

 meanwhile Adam Wayne stand outside the glowing chemist 's shop , 
 unmistakably waver . 

 " what a weakness it be ! " he mutter . " I have never get rid of it from 
 childhood -- the fear of this magic shop . the grocer be rich , he be 
 romantic , he be poetical in the true sense , but he be not -- no , he be 
 not supernatural . but the chemist ! all the other shop stand in 
 Notting Hill , but this stand in elf - land . look at those great burning 
 bowl of colour . it must be from they that God paint the sunset . it 
 be superhuman , and the superhuman be all the more uncanny when it be 
 beneficent . that be the root of the fear of God . I be afraid . but I 
 must be a man and enter . " 

 he be a man , and enter . a short , dark young man be behind the 
 counter with spectacle , and greet he with a bright but entirely 
 business - like smile . 

 " a fine evening , sir , " he say . 

 " fine indeed , strange Father , " say Adam , stretch his hand 
 somewhat forward . " it be on such clear and mellow night that your 
 shop be most itself . then they appear most perfect , those moon of 
 green and gold and crimson , which from afar oft guide the pilgrim of 
 pain and sickness to this house of merciful witchcraft . " 

 " can I get you anything ? " ask the chemist . 

 " let I see , " say Wayne , in a friendly but vague manner . " let I have 
 some sal volatile . " 

 " Eightpence , tenpence , or one and sixpence a bottle ? " say the young 
 man , genially . 

 " one and six -- one and six , " reply Wayne , with a wild submissiveness . 
 " I come to ask you , Mr. Bowles , a terrible question . " 

 he pause and collect himself . 

 " it be necessary , " he muttered--"it be necessary to be tactful , and to 
 suit the appeal to each profession in turn . " 

 " I come , " he resume aloud , " to ask you a question which go to the 
 root of your miraculous toil . Mr. Bowles , shall all this witchery 
 cease ? " and he wave his stick around the shop . 

 meeting with no answer , he continue with animation-- 

 " in Notting Hill we have feel to its core the elfish mystery of your 
 profession . and now Notting Hill itself be threaten . " 

 " anything more , sir ? " ask the chemist . 

 " oh , " say Wayne , somewhat disturbed--"oh , what be it chemist sell ? 
 Quinine , I think . thank you . shall it be destroy ? I have meet these 
 man of Bayswater and North Kensington -- Mr. Bowles , they be 
 materialist . they see no witchery in your work , even when it be 
 work within their own border . they think the chemist be 
 commonplace . they think he human . " 

 the chemist appear to pause , only a moment , to take in the insult , 
 and immediately said-- 

 " and the next article , please ? " 

 " Alum , " say the Provost , wildly . " I resume . it be in this sacred 
 town alone that your priesthood be reverence . therefore , when you 
 fight for we you fight not only for yourself , but for everything you 
 typify . you fight not only for Notting Hill , but for Fairyland , for as 
 surely as Buck and Barker and such man hold sway , the sense of 
 Fairyland in some strange manner diminish . " 

 " anything more , sir ? " ask Mr. Bowles , with unbroken cheerfulness . 

 " oh yes , jujube -- Gregory powder -- magnesia . the danger be imminent . in 
 all this matter I have feel that I fight not merely for my own city 
 ( though to that I owe all my blood ) , but for all place in which these 
 great idea could prevail . I be fight not merely for Notting Hill , 
 but for Bayswater itself ; for North Kensington itself . for if the 
 gold - hunter prevail , these also will lose all their ancient 
 sentiment and all the mystery of their national soul . I know I can 
 count upon you . " 

 " oh yes , sir , " say the chemist , with great animation ; " we be always 
 glad to oblige a good customer . " 

 Adam Wayne go out of the shop with a deep sense of fulfilment of 
 soul . 

 " it be so fortunate , " he say , " to have tact , to be able to play upon 
 the peculiar talent and speciality , the cosmopolitanism of the 
 grocer and the world - old necromancy of the chemist . where should I be 
 without tact ? " 




 chapter ii--_the remarkable Mr. Turnbull _ 


 after two more interview with shopman , however , the patriot 's 
 confidence in his own psychological diplomacy begin vaguely to wane . 
 despite the care with which he consider the peculiar rationale and 
 the peculiar glory of each separate shop , there seem to be something 
 unresponsive about the shopman . whether it be a dark resentment 
 against the uninitiate for peep into their masonic magnificence , he 
 could not quite conjecture . 

 his conversation with the man who keep the shop of curiosity have 
 begin encouragingly . the man who keep the shop of curiosity have , 
 indeed , enchant he with a phrase . he be stand drearily at the 
 door of his shop , a wrinkle man with a grey point beard , evidently 
 a gentleman who have come down in the world . 

 " and how do your commerce go , you strange guardian of the past ? " 
 say Wayne , affably . 

 " well , sir , not very well , " reply the man , with that patient voice 
 of his class which be one of the most heart - break thing in the 
 world . " thing be terribly quiet . " 

 Wayne 's eye shine suddenly . 

 " a great saying , " he say , " worthy of a man whose merchandise be human 
 history . terribly quiet ; that be in two word the spirit of this age , 
 as I have feel it from my cradle . I sometimes wonder how many other 
 people feel the oppression of this union between quietude and terror . 
 I see blank well - order street and man in black moving about 
 inoffensively , sullenly . it go on day after day , day after day , and 
 nothing happen ; but to I it be like a dream from which I might wake 
 scream . to I the straightness of our life be the straightness of a 
 thin cord stretch tight . its stillness be terrible . it might snap 
 with a noise like thunder . and you who sit , amid the _ débris _ of the 
 great war , you who sit , as it be , upon a battlefield , you know that 
 war be less terrible than this evil peace ; you know that the idle 
 lad who carry those sword under Francis or Elizabeth , the rude 
 Squire or Baron who swing that mace about in Picardy or northumberland 
 battle , may have be terribly noisy , but be not like we , terribly 
 quiet . " 

 whether it be a faint embarrassment of conscience as to the original 
 source and date of the weapon refer to , or merely an engraine 
 depression , the guardian of the past look , if anything , a little 
 more worried . 

 " but I do not think , " continue Wayne , " that this horrible silence of 
 modernity will last , though I think for the present it will increase . 
 what a farce be this modern liberality ! freedom of speech mean 
 practically , in our modern civilisation , that we must only talk about 
 unimportant thing . we must not talk about religion , for that be 
 illiberal ; we must not talk about bread and cheese , for that be 
 talking shop ; we must not talk about death , for that be depressing ; we 
 must not talk about birth , for that be indelicate . it can not last . 
 something must break this strange indifference , this strange dreamy 
 egoism , this strange loneliness of million in a crowd . something must 
 break it . why should it not be you and I ? can you do nothing else but 
 guard relic ? " 

 the shopman wear a gradually clearing expression , which would have lead 
 those unsympathetic with the cause of the Red Lion to think that the 
 last sentence be the only one to which he have attach any meaning . 

 " I be rather old to go into a new business , " he say , " and I do not 
 quite know what to be , either . " 

 " why not , " say Wayne , gently have reach the crisis of his 
 delicate persuasion--"why not be a colonel ? " 

 it be at this point , in all probability , that the interview begin to 
 yield more disappointing result . the man appear incline at first 
 to regard the suggestion of become a colonel as outside the sphere 
 of immediate and relevant discussion . a long exposition of the 
 inevitable war of independence , couple with the purchase of a 
 doubtful sixteenth - century sword for an exaggerated price , seem to 
 resettle matter . Wayne leave the shop , however , somewhat infect with 
 the melancholy of its owner . 

 that melancholy be complete at the barber 's . 

 " Shaving , sir ? " inquire that artist from inside his shop . 

 " War ! " reply Wayne , stand on the threshold . 

 " I beg your pardon , " say the other , sharply . 

 " War ! " say Wayne , warmly . " but not for anything inconsistent with the 
 beautiful and the civilised art . war for beauty . war for society . war 
 for peace . a great chance be offer you of repel that slander 
 which , in defiance of the life of so many artist , attribute 
 poltroonery to those who beautify and polish the surface of our life . 
 why should not hairdresser be hero ? why should not-- " 

 " now , you get out , " say the barber , irascibly . " we do not want any of 
 your sort here . you get out . " 

 and he come forward with the desperate annoyance of a mild person when 
 enrage . 

 Adam Wayne lay his hand for a moment on the sword , then drop it . 

 " Notting Hill , " he say , " will need her bold son ; " and he turn 
 gloomily to the toy - shop . 

 it be one of those queer little shop so constantly see in the side 
 street of London , which must be call toy - shop only because toy 
 upon the whole predominate ; for the remainder of good seem to consist 
 of almost everything else in the world -- tobacco , exercise - book , 
 sweet - stuff , novelette , halfpenny paper clip , halfpenny pencil 
 sharpener , bootlace , and cheap firework . it also sell newspaper , 
 and a row of dirty - look poster hang along the front of it . 

 " I be afraid , " say Wayne , as he enter , " that I be not get on 
 with these tradesman as I should . be it that I have neglect to rise 
 to the full meaning of their work ? be there some secret bury in each 
 of these shop which no mere poet can discover ? " 

 he step to the counter with a depression which he rapidly conquer 
 as he address the man on the other side of it,--a man of short 
 stature , and hair prematurely white , and the look of a large baby . 

 " Sir , " say Wayne , " I be go from house to house in this street of 
 our , seek to stir up some sense of the danger which now threaten 
 our city . nowhere have I feel my duty so difficult as here . for the 
 toy - shop keeper have to do with all that remain to we of Eden before 
 the first war begin . you sit here meditate continually upon the 
 want of that wonderful time when every staircase lead to the star , 
 and every garden - path to the other end of nowhere . be it 
 thoughtlessly , do you think , that I strike the dark old drum of peril 
 in the paradise of child ? but consider a moment ; do not condemn I 
 hastily . even that paradise itself contain the rumour or beginning of 
 that danger , just as the Eden that be make for perfection contain 
 the terrible tree . for judge childhood , even by your own arsenal of 
 its pleasure . you keep brick ; you make yourself thus , doubtless , 
 the witness of the constructive instinct old than the destructive . 
 you keep doll ; you make yourself the priest of that divine idolatry . 
 you keep Noah 's Arks ; you perpetuate the memory of the salvation of 
 all life as a precious , an irreplaceable thing . but do you keep only , 
 sir , the symbol of this prehistoric sanity , this childish rationality 
 of the earth ? do you not keep more terrible thing ? what be those 
 box , seemingly of lead soldier , that I see in that glass case ? be 
 they not witness to that terror and beauty , that desire for a lovely 
 death , which could not be exclude even from the immortality of Eden ? 
 do not despise the lead soldier , Mr. Turnbull . " 

 " I do not , " say Mr. Turnbull , of the toy - shop , shortly , but with great 
 emphasis . 

 " I be glad to hear it , " reply Wayne . " I confess that I fear for my 
 military scheme the awful innocence of your profession . how , I 
 think to myself , will this man , use only to the wooden sword that 
 give pleasure , think of the steel sword that give pain ? but I be at 
 least partly reassure . your tone suggest to I that I have at least 
 the entry of a gate of your fairyland -- the gate through which the 
 soldier enter , for it can not be deny -- I ought , sir , no long to 
 deny , that it be of soldier that I come to speak . let your gentle 
 employment make you merciful towards the trouble of the world . let 
 your own silvery experience tone down our sanguine sorrow . for there 
 be war in Notting Hill . " 

 the little toy - shop keeper spring up suddenly , slap his fat hand 
 like two fan on the counter . 

 " War ? " he cry . " not really , sir ? be it true ? oh , what a joke ! oh , 
 what a sight for sore eye ! " 

 Wayne be almost take aback by this outburst . 

 " I be delighted , " he stammer . " I have no notion-- " 

 he spring out of the way just in time to avoid Mr. Turnbull , who take 
 a fly leap over the counter and dash to the front of the shop . 

 " you look here , sir , " he say ; " you just look here . " 

 he come back with two of the torn poster in his hand which be 
 flap outside his shop . 

 " look at those , sir , " he say , and fling they down on the counter . 

 Wayne bend over they , and read on one-- 

 " last fighting . 
 REDUCTION of the CENTRAL DERVISH CITY . 
 REMARKABLE , ETC . " 

 on the other he read-- 

 " last small REPUBLIC ANNEXED . 
 nicaraguan capital surrender after a 
 month 's fighting . 
 GREAT slaughter . " 

 Wayne bend over they again , evidently puzzle ; then he look at the 
 date . they be both date in August fifteen year before . 

 " why do you keep these old thing ? " he say , startle entirely out of 
 his absurd tact of mysticism . " why do you hang they outside your 
 shop ? " 

 " because , " say the other , simply , " they be the record of the last 
 war . you mention war just now . it happen to be my hobby . " 

 Wayne lift his large blue eye with an infantile wonder . 

 " come with I , " say Turnbull , shortly , and lead he into a parlour at 
 the back of the shop . 

 in the centre of the parlour stand a large deal table . on it be set 
 row and row of the tin and lead soldier which be part of the 
 shopkeeper 's stock . the visitor would have think nothing of it if it 
 have not be for a certain odd grouping of they , which do not seem 
 either entirely commercial or entirely haphazard . 

 " you be acquaint , no doubt , " say Turnbull , turn his big eye 
 upon Wayne--"you be acquaint , no doubt , with the arrangement of the 
 american and nicaraguan troop in the last battle ; " and he wave his 
 hand towards the table . 

 " I be afraid not , " say Wayne . " I-- " 

 " ah ! you be at that time occupy too much , perhaps , with the 
 Dervish affair . you will find it in this corner . " and he point to a 
 part of the floor where there be another arrangement of child 's 
 soldier group here and there . 

 " you seem , " say Wayne , " to be interested in military matter . " 

 " I be interested in nothing else , " answer the toy - shop keeper , 
 simply . 

 Wayne appear convulse with a singular , suppress excitement . 

 " in that case , " he say , " I may approach you with an unusual degree 
 of confidence . touch the matter of the defence of Notting Hill , 
 I-- " 

 " defence of Notting Hill ? yes , sir . this way , sir , " say Turnbull , 
 with great perturbation . " just step into this side room ; " and he lead 
 Wayne into another apartment , in which the table be entirely cover 
 with an arrangement of child 's brick . a second glance at it tell 
 Wayne that the brick be arrange in the form of a precise and 
 perfect plan of Notting Hill . " Sir , " say Turnbull , impressively , " you 
 have , by a kind of accident , hit upon the whole secret of my life . as 
 a boy , I grow up among the last war of the world , when Nicaragua be 
 take and the dervish wipe out . and I adopt it as a hobby , sir , 
 as you might adopt astronomy or bird - stuffing . I have no ill - will to 
 any one , but I be interested in war as a science , as a game . and 
 suddenly I be bowl out . the big Powers of the world , have 
 swallow up all the small one , come to that confound agreement , 
 and there be no more war . there be nothing more for I to do but to 
 do what I do now -- to read the old campaign in dirty old newspaper , 
 and to work they out with tin soldier . one other thing have occur 
 to I . I think it an amusing fancy to make a plan of how this 
 district or our ought to be defend if it be ever attack . it 
 seem to interest you too . " 

 " if it be ever attack , " repeat Wayne , awe into an almost 
 mechanical enunciation . " Mr. Turnbull , it be attack . thank Heaven , I 
 be bring to at least one human be the news that be at bottom the 
 only good news to any son of Adam . your life have not be useless . 
 your work have not be play . now , when the hair be already grey on 
 your head , Turnbull , you shall have your youth . God have not destroy , 
 he have only defer it . let we sit down here , and you shall explain 
 to I this military map of Notting Hill . for you and I have to defend 
 Notting Hill together . " 

 Mr. Turnbull look at the other for a moment , then hesitate , and 
 then sit down beside the brick and the stranger . he do not rise 
 again for seven hour , when the dawn break . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the headquarters of Provost Adam Wayne and his Commander - in - Chief 
 consist of a small and somewhat unsuccessful milk - shop at the corner 
 of Pump Street . the blank white morning have only just begin to break 
 over the blank London building when Wayne and Turnbull be to be 
 find seat in the cheerless and unswept shop . Wayne have something 
 feminine in his character ; he belong to that class of person who 
 forget their meal when anything interesting be in hand . he have have 
 nothing for sixteen hour but hurry glass of milk , and , with a 
 glass stand empty beside he , he be write and sketch and 
 dotting and cross out with inconceivable rapidity with a pencil and 
 a piece of paper . Turnbull be of that more masculine type in which a 
 sense of responsibility increase the appetite , and with his 
 sketch - map beside he he be deal strenuously with a pile of 
 sandwich in a paper packet , and a tankard of ale from the tavern 
 opposite , whose shutter have just be take down . neither of they 
 speak , and there be no sound in the live stillness except the 
 scratching of Wayne 's pencil and the squealing of an aimless - look 
 cat . at length Wayne break the silence by saying-- 

 " seventeen pound eight shilling and ninepence . " 

 Turnbull nod and put his head in the tankard . 

 " that , " say Wayne , " be not count the five pound you take 
 yesterday . what do you do with it ? " 

 " ah , that be rather interesting ! " reply Turnbull , with his mouth 
 full . " I use that five pound in a kindly and philanthropic act . " 

 Wayne be gaze with mystification in his queer and innocent eye . 

 " I use that five pound , " continue the other , " in give no less 
 than forty little London boy rid in hansom cab . " 

 " be you insane ? " ask the Provost . 

 " it be only my light touch , " return Turnbull . " these hansom - cab 
 ride will raise the tone -- raise the tone , my dear fellow -- of our 
 London youth , widen their horizon , brace their nervous system , make 
 they acquaint with the various public monument of our great city . 
 Education , Wayne , education . how many excellent thinker have point 
 out that political reform be useless until we produce a cultured 
 populace . so that twenty year hence , when these boy be grow up-- " 

 " mad ! " say Wayne , lay down his pencil ; " and five pound go ! " 

 " you be in error , " explain Turnbull . " you grave creature can never 
 be bring to understand how much quick work really go with the 
 assistance of nonsense and good meal . strip of its decorative 
 beauty , my statement be strictly accurate . last night I give forty 
 half - crown to forty little boy , and send they all over London to 
 take hansom cab . I tell they in every case to tell the cabman to 
 bring they to this spot . in half an hour from now the declaration of 
 war will be post up . at the same time the cab will have begin to 
 come in , you will have order out the guard , the little boy will 
 drive up in state , we shall commandeer the horse for cavalry , use the 
 cab for barricade , and give the man the choice between serve in our 
 rank and detention in our basement and cellar . the little boy we 
 can use as scout . the main thing be that we start the war with an 
 advantage unknown in all the other army -- horse . and now , " he say , 
 finish his beer , " I will go and drill the troop . " 

 and he walk out of the milk - shop , leave the Provost staring . 

 a minute or two afterwards , the Provost laugh . he only laugh once 
 or twice in his life , and then he do it in a queer way as if it be 
 an art he have not master . even he see something funny in the 
 preposterous coup of the half - crown and the little boy . he do not 
 see the monstrous absurdity of the whole policy and the whole war . he 
 enjoy it seriously as a crusade , that is , he enjoy it far more 
 than any joke can be enjoy . Turnbull enjoy it partly as a joke , 
 even more perhaps as a reversion from the thing he hat -- modernity 
 and monotony and civilisation . to break up the vast machinery of 
 modern life and use the fragment as engine of war , to make the 
 barricade of omnibus and point of vantage of chimney - pot , be to 
 he a game worth infinite risk and trouble . he have that rational and 
 deliberate preference which will always to the end trouble the peace 
 of the world , the rational and deliberate preference for a short life 
 and a merry one . 




 CHAPTER III--_The Experiment of Mr. Buck _ 


 an earnest and eloquent petition be send up to the King sign with 
 the name of Wilson , Barker , Buck , Swindon , and other . it urge that 
 at the forthcoming conference to be hold in his Majesty 's presence 
 touch the final disposition of the property in Pump Street , it 
 might be hold not inconsistent with political decorum and with the 
 unutterable respect they entertain for his Majesty if they appear 
 in ordinary morning dress , without the costume decree for they as 
 provost . so it happen that the company appear at that council in 
 frock - coat and that the King himself limit his love of ceremony to 
 appear ( after his not unusual manner ) , in evening dress with one 
 order -- in this case not the Garter , but the button of the Club of Old 
 Clipper 's Best pal , a decoration obtain ( with difficulty ) from a 
 halfpenny boy 's paper . thus also it happen that the only spot of 
 colour in the room be Adam Wayne , who enter in great dignity with 
 the great red robe and the great sword . 

 " we have meet , " say Auberon , " to decide the most arduous of modern 
 problem . may we be successful . " and he sit down gravely . 

 Buck turn his chair a little , and fling one leg over the other . 

 " your Majesty , " he say , quite good - humouredly , " there be only one 
 thing I can not understand , and that be why this affair be not settle 
 in five minute . here be a small property which be worth a thousand to 
 we and be not worth a hundred to any one else . we offer the thousand . 
 it be not business - like , I know , for we ought to get it for less , and 
 it be not reasonable and it be not fair on we , but I be damned if I can 
 see why it be difficult . " 

 " the difficulty may be very simply state , " say Wayne . " you may offer 
 a million and it will be very difficult for you to get Pump Street . " 

 " but look here , Mr. Wayne , " cry Barker , strike in with a kind of 
 cold excitement . " just look here . you have no right to take up a 
 position like that . you have a right to stand out for a big price , 
 but you be not do that . you be refuse what you and every sane man 
 know to be a splendid offer simply from malice or spite -- it must be 
 malice or spite . and that kind of thing be really criminal ; it be 
 against the public good . the King 's Government would be justify in 
 force you . " 

 with his lean finger spread on the table , he star anxiously at 
 Wayne 's face , which do not move . 

 " in force you ... it would , " he repeat . 

 " it shall , " say Buck , shortly , turn to the table with a jerk . " we 
 have do our good to be decent . " 

 Wayne lift his large eye slowly . 

 " be it my Lord Buck , " he inquire , " who say that the King of England 
 ' shall ' do something ? " 

 Buck flush and say testily-- 

 " I mean it must -- it ought to . as I say , we have do our good to be 
 generous ; I defy any one to deny it . as it be , Mr. Wayne , I do not want 
 to say a word that be uncivil . I hope it be not uncivil to say that you 
 can be , and ought to be , in gaol . it be criminal to stop public work 
 for a whim . a man might as well burn ten thousand onion in his front 
 garden or bring up his child to run naked in the street , as do what 
 you say you have a right to do . People have be compel to sell 
 before now . the King could compel you , and I hope he will . " 

 " until he do , " say Wayne , calmly , " the power and government of 
 this great nation be on my side and not your , and I defy you to defy 
 it . " 

 " in what sense , " cry Barker , with his feverish eye and hand , " be 
 the Government on your side ? " 

 with one ring movement Wayne unroll a great parchment on the 
 table . it be decorate down the side with wild water - colour sketch 
 of vestryman in crown and wreath . 

 " the Charter of the Cities , " he begin . 

 Buck explode in a brutal oath and laugh . 

 " that tomfool 's joke . have not we have enough-- " 

 " and there you sit , " cry Wayne , spring erect and with a voice 
 like a trumpet , " with no argument but to insult the King before his 
 face . " 

 Buck rise also with blaze eye . 

 " I be hard to bully , " he begin -- and the slow tone of the King strike 
 in with incomparable gravity-- 

 " my Lord Buck , I must ask you to remember that your King be present . 
 it be not often that he need to protect himself among his subject . " 

 Barker turn to he with frantic gesture . 

 " for God 's sake do not back up the madman now , " he implore . " have 
 your joke another time . oh , for Heaven 's sake-- " 

 " my Lord Provost of South Kensington , " say King Auberon , steadily , " I 
 do not follow your remark , which be utter with a rapidity unusual 
 at Court . nor do your well - mean effort to convey the rest with your 
 finger materially assist I . I say that my Lord Provost of North 
 Kensington , to whom I speak , ought not in the presence of his 
 Sovereign to speak disrespectfully of his Sovereign 's ordinance . do 
 you disagree ? " 

 Barker turn restlessly in his chair , and Buck curse without 
 speak . the King go on in a comfortable voice-- 

 " my Lord Provost of Notting Hill , proceed . " 

 Wayne turn his blue eye on the king , and to every one 's surprise 
 there be a look in they not of triumph , but of a certain childish 
 distress . 

 " I be sorry , your Majesty , " he say ; " I fear I be more than equally 
 to blame with the Lord Provost of North Kensington . we be debate 
 somewhat eagerly , and we both rise to our foot . I do so first , I be 
 ashamed to say . the Provost of North Kensington be , therefore , 
 comparatively innocent . I beseech your Majesty to address your rebuke 
 chiefly , at least , to I . Mr. Buck be not innocent , for he do no 
 doubt , in the heat of the moment , speak disrespectfully . but the rest 
 of the discussion he seem to I to have conduct with great good 
 temper . " 

 Buck look genuinely pleased , for business man be all simple - minded , 
 and have therefore that degree of communion with fanatic . the King , 
 for some reason , look , for the first time in his life , ashame . 

 " this very kind speech of the provost of Notting Hill , " begin Buck , 
 pleasantly , " seem to I to show that we have at least get on to a 
 friendly footing . now come , Mr. Wayne . five hundred pound have be 
 offer to you for a property you admit not to be worth a hundred . 
 well , I be a rich man and I will not be outdo in generosity . let we say 
 fifteen hundred pound , and have do with it . and let we shake 
 hand ; " and he rise , glow and laugh . 

 " fifteen hundred pound , " whisper Mr. Wilson of Bayswater ; " can we 
 do fifteen hundred pound ? " 

 " I will stand the racket , " say Buck , heartily . " Mr. Wayne be a 
 gentleman and have speak up for I . so I suppose the negotiation be 
 at an end . " 

 Wayne bow . 

 " they be indeed at an end . I be sorry I can not sell you the 
 property . " 

 " what ? " cry Mr. Barker , start to his foot . 

 " Mr. Buck have speak correctly , " say the King . 

 " I have , I have , " cry Buck , spring up also ; " I said-- " 

 " Mr. Buck have speak correctly , " say the King ; " the negotiation be 
 at an end . " 

 all the man at the table rise to their foot ; Wayne alone rise without 
 excitement . 

 " have I , then , " he say , " your Majesty 's permission to depart ? I have 
 give my last answer . " 

 " you have it , " say Auberon , smile , but not lift his eye from 
 the table . and amid a dead silence the provost of Notting Hill pass 
 out of the room . 

 " well ? " say Wilson , turn round to barker--"well ? " 

 Barker shake his head desperately . 

 " the man ought to be in an asylum , " he say . " but one thing be 
 clear -- we need not bother far about he . the man can be treat as 
 mad . " 

 " of course , " say Buck , turn to he with sombre decisiveness . 
 " you be perfectly right , Barker . he be a good enough fellow , but he 
 can be treat as mad . let us put it in simple form . go and tell any 
 twelve man in any town , go and tell any doctor in any town , that there 
 be a man offer fifteen hundred pound for a thing he could sell 
 commonly for four hundred , and that when ask for a reason for not 
 accept it he plead the inviolate sanctity of Notting Hill and 
 call it the Holy Mountain . what would they say ? what more can we have 
 on our side than the common sense of everybody ? on what else do all 
 law rest ? I will tell you , Barker , what be well than any further 
 discussion . let us send in workman on the spot to pull down Pump 
 Street . and if old Wayne say a word , arrest he as a lunatic . that be 
 all . " 

 Barker 's eye kindle . 

 " I always regard you , Buck , if you do not mind my saying so , as a 
 very strong man . I will follow you . " 

 " so , of course , will I , " say Wilson . 

 Buck rise again impulsively . 

 " your Majesty , " he say , glow with popularity , " I beseech your 
 Majesty to consider favourably the proposal to which we have commit 
 ourselves . your Majesty 's leniency , our own offer , have fall in 
 vain on that extraordinary man . he may be right . he may be God . he 
 may be the devil . but we think it , for practical purpose , more 
 probable that he be off his head . unless that assumption be act 
 on , all human affair would go to piece . we act on it , and we propose 
 to start operation in Notting Hill at once . " 

 the King lean back in his chair . 

 " the Charter of the Cities ... , " he say with a rich intonation . 

 but Buck , be finally serious , be also cautious , and do not again 
 make the mistake of disrespect . 

 " your Majesty , " he say , bow , " I be not here to say a word against 
 anything your Majesty have say or do . you be a far well educate 
 man than I , and no doubt there be reason , upon intellectual 
 ground , for those proceeding . but may I ask you and appeal to your 
 common good - nature for a sincere answer ? when you draw up the Charter 
 of the Cities , do you contemplate the rise of a man like Adam Wayne ? 
 do you expect that the Charter -- whether it be an experiment , or a 
 scheme of decoration , or a joke -- could ever really come to this -- to 
 stop a vast scheme of ordinary business , to shut up a road , 
 to spoil the chance of cab , omnibus , railway station , to 
 disorganise half a city , to risk a kind of civil war ? whatever 
 be your object , be they that ? " 

 Barker and Wilson look at he admiringly ; the King more admiringly 
 still . 

 " Provost Buck , " say Auberon , " you speak in public uncommonly well . I 
 give you your point with the magnanimity of an artist . my scheme do 
 not include the appearance of Mr. Wayne . alas ! would that my poetic 
 power have be great enough . " 

 " I thank your Majesty , " say Buck , courteously , but quickly . " your 
 Majesty 's statement be always clear and study ; therefore I may 
 draw a deduction . as the scheme , whatever it be , on which you set 
 your heart do not include the appearance of Mr. Wayne , it will 
 survive his removal . why not let we clear away this particular Pump 
 Street , which do interfere with our plan , and which do not , by 
 your Majesty 's own statement , interfere with your . " 

 " catch out ! " say the King , enthusiastically and quite impersonally , 
 as if he be watch a cricket match . 

 " this man Wayne , " continue Buck , " would be shut up by any doctor in 
 England . but we only ask to have it put before they . meanwhile no 
 one 's interest , not even in all probability his own , can be really 
 damage by go on with the improvement in Notting Hill . not our 
 interest , of course , for it have be the hard and quiet work of ten 
 year . not the interest of Notting Hill , for nearly all its educate 
 inhabitant desire the change . not the interest of your Majesty , for 
 you say , with characteristic sense , that you never contemplate the 
 rise of the lunatic at all . not , as I say , his own interest , for the 
 man have a kind heart and many talent , and a couple of good doctor 
 would probably put he righter than all the free city and sacred 
 mountain in creation . I therefore assume , if I may use so bold a 
 word , that your Majesty will not offer any obstacle to our proceeding 
 with the improvement . " 

 and Mr. Buck sit down amid subdue but excited applause among the 
 ally . 

 " Mr. Buck , " say the King , " I beg your pardon , for a number of 
 beautiful and sacred thought , in which you be generally classify 
 as a fool . but there be another thing to be consider . suppose you 
 send in your workman , and Mr. Wayne do a thing regrettable indeed , 
 but of which , I be sorry to say , I think he quite capable -- knock 
 their tooth out ? " 

 " I have think of that , your Majesty , " say Mr. Buck , easily , " and I 
 think it can simply be guard against . let we send in a strong guard 
 of , say , a hundred man -- a hundred of the North Kensington Halberdiers " 
 ( he smile grimly ) , " of whom your Majesty be so fond . or say a hundred 
 and fifty . the whole population of Pump Street , I fancy , be only about 
 a hundred . " 

 " still they might stand together and lick you , " say the King , 
 dubiously . 

 " then say two hundred , " say Buck , gaily . 

 " it might happen , " say the King , restlessly , " that one Notting Hiller 
 fight well than two North Kensingtons . " 

 " it might , " say Buck , coolly ; " then say two hundred and fifty . " 

 the King bite his lip . 

 " and if they be beat too ? " he say viciously . 

 " your Majesty , " say Buck , and lean back easily in his chair , 
 " suppose they be . if anything be clear , it be clear that all fight 
 matter be mere matter of arithmetic . here we have a hundred and 
 fifty , say , of Notting Hill soldier . or say two hundred . if one of 
 they can fight two of we -- we can send in , not four hundred , but six 
 hundred , and smash he . that be all . it be out of all immediate 
 probability that one of they could fight four of we . so what I say be 
 this . run no risk . finish it at once . send in eight hundred man and 
 smash he -- smash he almost without see he . and go on with the 
 improvement . " 

 and Mr. Buck pull out a bandanna and blow his nose . 

 " do you know , Mr. Buck , " say the King , star gloomily at the table , 
 " the admirable clearness of your reason produce in my mind a 
 sentiment which I trust I shall not offend you by describe as an 
 aspiration to punch your head . you irritate I sublimely . what can it 
 be in I ? be it the relic of a moral sense ? " 

 " but your Majesty , " say Barker , eagerly and suavely , " do not refuse 
 our proposal ? " 

 " my dear Barker , your proposal be as damnable as your manner . I 
 want to have nothing to do with they . suppose I stop they 
 altogether . what would happen ? " 

 Barker answer in a very low voice-- 

 " Revolution . " 

 the King glance quickly at the man round the table . they be all 
 look down silently : their brow be red . 

 he rise with a startling suddenness , and an unusual pallor . 

 " gentleman , " he say , " you have overrule I . therefore I can speak 
 plainly . I think Adam Wayne , who be as mad as a hatter , worth more 
 than a million of you . but you have the force , and , I admit , the 
 common sense , and he be lose . take your eight hundred halberdier and 
 smash he . it would be more sportsmanlike to take two hundred . " 

 " More sportsmanlike , " say Buck , grimly , " but a great deal less 
 humane . we be not artist , and street purple with gore do not catch 
 our eye in the right way . " 

 " it be pitiful , " say Auberon . " with five or six time their number , 
 there will be no fight at all . " 

 " I hope not , " say Buck , rise and adjust his glove . " we desire 
 no fight , your Majesty . we be peaceable business man . " 

 " well , " say the King , wearily , " the conference be at an end at last . " 

 and he go out of the room before any one else could stir . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 forty workman , a hundred Bayswater Halberdiers , two hundred from 
 South , and three from North Kensington , assemble at the foot of 
 Holland Walk and march up it , under the general direction of Barker , 
 who look flushed and happy in full dress . at the end of the 
 procession a small and sulky figure linger like an urchin . it be 
 the king . 

 " Barker , " he say at length , appealingly , " you be an old friend of 
 mine -- you understand my hobby as I understand your . why can not you 
 let it alone ? I hop that such fun might come out of this Wayne 
 business . why can not you let it alone ? it do not really so much matter 
 to you -- what be a road or so ? for I it be the one joke that may save I 
 from pessimism . take few man and give I an hour 's fun . really and 
 truly , James , if you collect coin or humming - bird , and I could buy 
 one with the price of your road , I would buy it . I collect 
 incident -- those rare , those precious thing . let I have one . pay a 
 few pound for it . give these Notting Hillers a chance . let they 
 alone . " 

 " Auberon , " say Barker , kindly , forget all royal title in a rare 
 moment of sincerity , " I do feel what you mean . I have have moment when 
 these hobby have hit I . I have have moment when I have sympathise 
 with your humour . I have have moment , though you may not easily 
 believe it , when I have sympathise with the madness of Adam Wayne . 
 but the world , Auberon , the real world , be not run on these hobby . 
 it go on great brutal wheel of fact -- wheel on which you be the 
 butterfly ; and Wayne be the fly on the wheel . " 

 Auberon 's eye look frankly at the other 's . 

 " thank you , James ; what you say be true . it be only a parenthetical 
 consolation to I to compare the intelligence of fly somewhat 
 favourably with the intelligence of wheel . but it be the nature of 
 fly to die soon , and the nature of wheel to go on for ever . go on 
 with the wheel . good - bye , old man . " 

 and James Barker go on , laugh , with a high colour , slap his 
 bamboo on his leg . 

 the King watch the tail of the retreating regiment with a look of 
 genuine depression , which make he seem more like a baby than ever . 
 then he swing round and strike his hand together . 

 " in a world without humour , " he say , " the only thing to do be to eat . 
 and how perfect an exception ! how can these people strike dignified 
 attitude , and pretend that thing matter , when the total 
 ludicrousness of life be prove by the very method by which it be 
 support ? a man strike the lyre , and say , ' life be real , life be 
 earnest , ' and then go into a room and stuff alien substance into a 
 hole in his head . I think Nature be indeed a little broad in her 
 humour in these matter . but we all fall back on the pantomime , as I 
 have in this municipal affair . nature have her farce , like the act of 
 eating or the shape of the kangaroo , for the more brutal appetite . she 
 keep her star and mountain for those who can appreciate something 
 more subtly ridiculous . " he turn to his equerry . " but , as I say 
 ' eating , ' let we have a picnic like two nice little child . just run 
 and bring I a table and a dozen course or so , and plenty of 
 champagne , and under these swing bough , Bowler , we will return to 
 Nature . " 

 it take about an hour to erect in Holland Lane the monarch 's simple 
 repast , during which time he walk up and down and whistle , but 
 still with an unaffected air of gloom . he have really be do out of 
 a pleasure he have promise himself , and have that empty and sicken 
 feeling which a child have when disappoint of a pantomime . when he 
 and the equerry have sit down , however , and consume a fair amount of 
 dry champagne , his spirit begin mildly to revive . 

 " thing take too long in this world , " he say . " I detest all this 
 barkerian business about evolution and the gradual modification of 
 thing . I wish the world have be make in six day , and knock to 
 piece again in six more . and I wish I have do it . the joke 's good 
 enough in a broad way , sun and moon and the image of God , and all 
 that , but they keep it up so damnably long . do you ever long for a 
 miracle , Bowler ? " 

 " no , sir , " say Bowler , who be an evolutionist , and have be 
 carefully bring up . 

 " then I have , " answer the King . " I have walk along a street with 
 the good cigar in the cosmo in my mouth , and more Burgundy inside I 
 than you ever see in your life , and long that the lamp - post would 
 turn into an elephant to save I from the hell of blank existence . 
 take my word for it , my evolutionary Bowler , do not you believe people 
 when they tell you that people seek for a sign , and believe in 
 miracle because they be ignorant . they do it because they be 
 wise , filthily , vilely wise -- too wise to eat or sleep or put on their 
 boot with patience . this seem delightfully like a new theory of the 
 origin of Christianity , which would itself be a thing of no mean 
 absurdity . take some more wine . " 

 the wind blow round they as they sit at their little table , with its 
 white cloth and bright wine - cup , and fling the tree - top of Holland 
 Park against each other , but the sun be in that strong temper which 
 turn green into gold . the King push away his plate , light a cigar 
 slowly , and go on-- 

 " yesterday I think that something next door to a really entertaining 
 miracle might happen to I before I go to amuse the worm . to see 
 that red - haired maniac wave a great sword , and make speech to 
 his incomparable follower , would have be a glimpse of that Land of 
 Youth from which the Fates shut we out . I have plan some quite 
 delightful thing . a Congress of Knightsbridge with a treaty , and 
 myself in the chair , and perhaps a roman triumph , with jolly old 
 Barker lead in chain . and now these wretched prig have go and 
 stamp out the exquisite Mr. Wayne altogether , and I suppose they 
 will put he in a private asylum somewhere in their damned humane way . 
 think of the treasure daily pour out to his unappreciative keeper ! 
 I wonder whether they would let I be his keeper . but life be a vale . 
 never forget at any moment of your existence to regard it in the light 
 of a vale . this graceful habit , if not acquire in youth-- " 

 the King stop , with his cigar lift , for there have slide into his 
 eye the startled look of a man listen . he do not move for a few 
 moment ; then he turn his head sharply towards the high , thin , and 
 lath - like pal which fence certain long garden and similar space 
 from the lane . from behind it there be come a curious scrambling 
 and scrap noise , as of a desperate thing imprison in this box of 
 thin wood . the King throw away his cigar , and jump on to the table . 
 from this position he see a pair of hand hang with a hungry clutch 
 on the top of the fence . then the hand quiver with a convulsive 
 effort , and a head shoot up between they -- the head of one of the 
 Bayswater Town Council , his eye and whisker wild with fear . he swing 
 himself over , and fall on the other side on his face , and groan 
 openly and without cease . the next moment the thin , taut wood of the 
 fence be strike as by a bullet , so that it reverberate like a drum , 
 and over it come tear and cursing , with torn clothe and broken 
 nail and bleed face , twenty man at one rush . the King spring five 
 foot clear off the table on to the ground . the moment after the table 
 be fling over , send bottle and glass fly , and the _ débris _ 
 be literally sweep along the ground by that stream of man pour 
 past , and Bowler be bear along with they , as the King say in his 
 famous newspaper article , " like a capture bride . " the great fence 
 swung and split under the load of climber that still scale and 
 clear it . tremendous gap be tear in it by this live artillery ; 
 and through they the King could see more and more frantic face , as in 
 a dream , and more and more man run . they be as miscellaneous as 
 if some one have take the lid off a human dustbin . some be 
 untouched , some be slash and batter and bloody , some be 
 splendidly dress , some tattered and half naked , some be in the 
 fantastic garb of the burlesque city , some in the dull modern 
 dress . the King star at all of they , but none of they look at the 
 king . suddenly he step forward . 

 " Barker , " he say , " what be all this ? " 

 " Beaten , " say the politician--"beaten all to hell ! " and he plunge 
 past with nostril shake like a horse 's , and more and more man 
 plunge after he . 

 almost as he speak , the last standing strip of fence bow and 
 snap , fling , as from a catapult , a new figure upon the road . he 
 wear the flame red of the halberdier of Notting Hill , and on his 
 weapon there be blood , and in his face victory . in another moment 
 mass of red glow through the gap of the fence , and the pursuer , 
 with their halberd , come pour down the lane . pursue and pursuer 
 alike sweep by the little figure with the owlish eye , who have not 
 take his hand out of his pocket . 

 the King have still little beyond the confused sense of a man catch in 
 a torrent -- the feeling of man eddy by . then something happen 
 which he be never able afterwards to describe , and which we can not 
 describe for he . suddenly in the dark entrance , between the break 
 gate of a garden , there appear frame a flaming figure . 

 Adam Wayne , the conqueror , with his face fling back , and his mane like 
 a lion 's , stand with his great sword point upwards , the red raiment of 
 his office flap round he like the red wing of an archangel . and 
 the King see , he know not how , something new and overwhelming . the 
 great green tree and the great red robe swing together in the wind . 
 the sword seem make for the sunlight . the preposterous masquerade , 
 bear of his own mockery , tower over he and embrace the world . this 
 be the normal , this be sanity , this be nature ; and he himself , 
 with his rationality and his detachment and his black frock - coat , he 
 be the exception and the accident -- a blot of black upon a world of 
 crimson and gold . 




 BOOK IV 




 CHAPTER I--_The Battle of the Lamps _ 


 Mr. Buck , who , though retire , frequently go down to his big drapery 
 store in Kensington High Street , be lock up those premise , be 
 the last to leave . it be a wonderful evening of green and gold , but 
 that do not trouble he very much . if you have point it out , he 
 would have agree seriously , for the rich always desire to be 
 artistic . 

 he step out into the cool air , button up his light yellow coat , 
 and blow great cloud from his cigar , when a figure dash up to 
 he in another yellow overcoat , but unbuttoned and fly behind he . 

 " Hullo , Barker ! " say the draper . " any of our summer article ? you be 
 too late . factory act , Barker . humanity and progress , my boy . " 

 " oh , do not chatter , " cry Barker , stamp . " we have be beat . " 

 " Beaten -- by what ? " ask Buck , mystify . 

 " by Wayne . " 

 Buck look at Barker 's fierce white face for the first time , as it 
 gleam in the lamplight . 

 " come and have a drink , " he say . 

 they adjourn to a cushioned and glaring buffet , and Buck establish 
 himself slowly and lazily in a seat , and pull out his cigar - case . 

 " have a smoke , " he say . 

 Barker be still stand , and on the fret , but after a moment 's 
 hesitation , he sit down as if he might spring up again the next 
 minute . they order drink in silence . 

 " how do it happen ? " ask Buck , turn his big bold eye on he . 

 " how the devil do I know ? " cry Barker . " it happen like -- like a 
 dream . how can two hundred man beat six hundred ? how can they ? " 

 " well , " say Buck , coolly , " how do they ? you ought to know . " 

 " I do not know ; I can not describe , " say the other , drum on the 
 table . " it seem like this . we be six hundred , and march with 
 those damned poleax of Auberon's -- the only weapon we have get . we 
 march two abreast . we go up Holland Walk , between the high paling 
 which seem to I to go straight as an arrow for Pump Street . I be 
 near the tail of the line , and it be a long one . when the end of it 
 be still between the high paling , the head of the line be already 
 cross Holland Park Avenue . then the head plunge into the 
 network of narrow street on the other side , and the tail and myself 
 come out on the great crossing . when we also have reach the northern 
 side and turn up a small street that point , crookedly as it be , 
 towards Pump Street , the whole thing feel different . the street 
 dodge and bend so much that the head of our line seem lose 
 altogether : it might as well have be in North America . and all this 
 time we have not see a soul . " 

 [ illustration : Map of the SEAT of WAR . ] 

 Buck , who be idly dab the ash of his cigar on the ash - tray , begin 
 to move it deliberately over the table , make feathery grey line , a 
 kind of map . 

 " but though the little street be all desert ( which get a trifle 
 on my nerve ) , as we get deep and deep into they , a thing begin to 
 happen that I could not understand . sometimes a long way ahead -- three 
 turn or corner ahead , as it be -- there break suddenly a sort of 
 noise , clattering , and confused cry , and then stop . then , when it 
 happen , something , I can not describe it -- a kind of shake or stagger 
 go down the line , as if the line be a live thing , whose head have 
 be strike , or have be an electric cord . none of we know why we be 
 move , but we move and jostle . then we recover , and go on 
 through the little dirty street , round corner , and up twisted way . 
 the little crooked street begin to give I a feeling I can not 
 explain -- as if it be a dream . I feel as if thing have lose their 
 reason , and we should never get out of the maze . Odd to hear I talk 
 like that , be not it ? the street be quite well - know street , all 
 down on the map . but the fact remain . I be not afraid of something 
 happen . I be afraid of nothing ever happen -- nothing ever 
 happen for all God 's eternity . " 

 he drain his glass and call for more whisky . he drink it , and go 
 on . 

 " and then something do happen . Buck , it be the solemn truth , that 
 nothing have ever happen to you in your life . nothing have ever 
 happen to I in my life . " 

 " nothing ever happen ! " say Buck , star . " what do you mean ? " 

 " nothing have ever happen , " repeat Barker , with a morbid obstinacy . 
 " you do not know what a thing happen mean ? you sit in your office 
 expect customer , and customer come ; you walk in the street 
 expect friend , and friend meet you ; you want a drink , and get it ; 
 you feel inclined for a bet , and make it . you expect either to win or 
 lose , and you do either one or the other . but thing happen ! " and 
 he shudder ungovernably . 

 " go on , " say Buck , shortly . " get on . " 

 " as we walk wearily round the corner , something happen . when 
 something happen , it happen first , and you see it afterwards . it 
 happen of itself , and you have nothing to do with it . it prove a 
 dreadful thing -- that there be other thing besides one 's self . I can 
 only put it in this way . we go round one turning , two turning , 
 three turning , four turning , five . then I lift myself slowly up 
 from the gutter where I have be shoot half senseless , and be beat 
 down again by live man crash on top of I , and the world be full 
 of roaring , and big man roll about like nine - pin . " 

 Buck look at his map with knit brow . 

 " be that Portobello Road ? " he ask . 

 " yes , " say Barker--"yes ; Portobello Road . I see it afterwards ; but , 
 my God , what a place it be ! Buck , have you ever stand and let a six 
 foot of man lash and lash at your head with six foot of pole with six 
 pound of steel at the end ? because , when you have have that 
 experience , as Walt Whitman say , ' you re - examine philosophy and 
 religion . ' " 

 " I have no doubt , " say Buck . " if that be Portobello Road , do not you 
 see what happen ? " 

 " I know what happen exceedingly well . I be knock down four time ; 
 an experience which , as I say , have an effect on the mental attitude . 
 and another thing happen , too . I knock down two man . after the 
 fourth fall ( there be not much bloodshe -- more brutal rushing and 
 throwing -- for nobody could use their weapon ) , after the fourth fall , 
 I say , I get up like a devil , and I tear a poleaxe out of a man 's hand 
 and strike where I see the scarlet of Wayne 's fellow , strike again 
 and again . two of they go over , bleed on the stone , thank God ; 
 and I laugh and find myself sprawl in the gutter again , and get 
 up again , and strike again , and break my halberd to piece . I hurt a 
 man 's head , though . " 

 Buck set down his glass with a bang , and spit out curse through his 
 thick moustache . 

 " what be the matter ? " ask Barker , stop , for the man have be 
 calm up to now , and now his agitation be far more violent than his 
 own . 

 " the matter ? " say Buck , bitterly ; " do not you see how these maniacs 
 have get we ? why should two idiot , one a clown and the other a 
 scream lunatic , make sane man so different from themselves ? look 
 here , Barker ; I will give you a picture . a very well - breed young man of 
 this century be dance about in a frock - coat . he have in his hand a 
 nonsensical seventeenth - century halberd , with which he be try to 
 kill man in a street in Notting Hill . damn it ! do not you see how 
 they have get we ? never mind how you feel -- that be how you look . the 
 King would put his cursed head on one side and call it exquisite . the 
 provost of Notting Hill would put his cursed nose in the air and call 
 it heroic . but in Heaven 's name what would you have call it -- two 
 day before ? " 

 Barker bite his lip . 

 " you have not be through it , Buck , " he say . " you do not understand 
 fighting -- the atmosphere . " 

 " I do not deny the atmosphere , " say Buck , strike the table . " I only 
 say it be their atmosphere . it be Adam Wayne 's atmosphere . it be the 
 atmosphere which you and I think have vanish from an educate world 
 for ever . " 

 " well , it have not , " say Barker ; " and if you have any linger doubt , 
 lend I a poleaxe , and I will show you . " 

 there be a long silence , and then Buck turn to his neighbour and 
 speak in that good - temper tone that come of a power of look 
 fact in the face -- the tone in which he conclude great bargain . 

 " Barker , " he say , " you be right . this old thing -- this fighting , have 
 come back . it have come back suddenly and take we by surprise . so it 
 be first blood to Adam Wayne . but , unless reason and arithmetic and 
 everything else have go crazy , it must be next and last blood to we . 
 but when an issue have really arise , there be only one thing to do -- to 
 study that issue as such and win in it . Barker , since it be fight , 
 we must understand fighting . I must understand fighting as coolly and 
 completely as I understand drapery ; you must understand fighting as 
 coolly and completely as you understand politic . now , look at the 
 fact . I stick without hesitation to my original formula . fight , 
 when we have the strong force , be only a matter of arithmetic . it 
 must be . you ask I just now how two hundred man could defeat six 
 hundred . I can tell you . two hundred man can defeat six hundred when 
 the six hundred behave like fool . when they forget the very 
 condition they be fight in ; when they fight in a swamp as if it 
 be a mountain ; when they fight in a forest as if it be a plain ; 
 when they fight in street without remember the object of street . " 

 " what be the object of street ? " ask Barker . 

 " what be the object of supper ? " cry Buck , furiously . " be not it 
 obvious ? this military science be mere common sense . the object of a 
 street be to lead from one place to another ; therefore all street 
 join ; therefore street fighting be quite a peculiar thing . you 
 advance into that hive of street as if you be advance into an 
 open plain where you could see everything . instead of that , you be 
 advance into the bowel of a fortress , with street point at you , 
 street turn on you , street jump out at you , and all in the 
 hand of the enemy . do you know what Portobello Road be ? it be the 
 only point on your journey where two side street run up opposite each 
 other . Wayne mass his man on the two side , and when he have let 
 enough of your line go past , cut it in two like a worm . do not you see 
 what would have save you ? " 

 Barker shake his head . 

 " can not your ' atmosphere ' help you ? " ask Buck , bitterly . " must I 
 attempt explanation in the romantic manner ? suppose that , as you be 
 fight blindly with the red Notting Hillers who imprison you on 
 both side , you have hear a shout from behind they . suppose , oh , 
 romantic Barker ! that behind the red tunic you have see the blue and 
 gold of South Kensington take they in the rear , surround they in 
 their turn and hurl they on to your halberd . " 

 " if the thing have be possible , " begin Barker , curse . 

 " the thing would have be as possible , " say Buck , simply , " as simple 
 as arithmetic . there be a certain number of street entry that lead 
 to Pump Street . there be not nine hundred ; there be not nine 
 million . they do not grow in the night . they do not increase like 
 mushroom . it must be possible , with such an overwhelming force as we 
 have , to advance by all of they at once . in every one of the artery , 
 or approach , we can put almost as many man as Wayne can put into the 
 field altogether . once do that , and we have he to demonstration . it 
 be like a proposition of Euclid . " 

 " you think that be certain ? " say Barker , anxious , but dominate 
 delightfully . 

 " I will tell you what I think , " say Buck , get up jovially . " I 
 think Adam Wayne make an uncommonly spirited little fight ; and I think 
 I be confoundedly sorry for he . " 

 " Buck , you be a great man ! " cry Barker , rise also . " you have 
 knock I sensible again . I be ashamed to say it , but I be get 
 romantic . of course , what you say be adamantine sense . fight , be 
 physical , must be mathematical . we be beat because we be neither 
 mathematical nor physical nor anything else -- because we deserve to be 
 beat . hold all the approach , and with our force we must have he . 
 when shall we open the next campaign ? " 

 " now , " say Buck , and walk out of the bar . 

 " now ! " cry Barker , follow he eagerly . " do you mean now ? it be so 
 late . " 

 Buck turn on he , stamp . 

 " do you think fighting be under the Factory act ? " he say ; and he 
 call a cab . " Notting Hill Gate Station , " he say ; and the two drove 
 off . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 a genuine reputation can sometimes be make in an hour . Buck , in the 
 next sixty or eighty minute , show himself a really great man of 
 action . his cab carry he like a thunderbolt from the King to 
 Wilson , from Wilson to Swindon , from Swindon to Barker again ; if his 
 course be jagged , it have the jaggedness of the lightning . only two 
 thing he carry with he -- his inevitable cigar and the map of North 
 Kensington and Notting Hill . there be , as he again and again point 
 out , with every variety of persuasion and violence , only nine possible 
 way of approach Pump Street within a quarter of a mile round it ; 
 three out of Westbourne Grove , two out of Ladbroke Grove , and four out 
 of Notting Hill High Street . and he have detachment of two hundred 
 each , station at every one of the entrance before the last green of 
 that strange sunset have sink out of the black sky . 

 the sky be particularly black , and on this alone be one false 
 protest raise against the triumphant optimism of the Provost of North 
 Kensington . he overrule it with his infectious common sense . 

 " there be no such thing , " he say , " as night in London . you have only 
 to follow the line of street lamp . look , here be the map . two hundred 
 purple North Kensington soldier under myself march up Ossington 
 Street , two hundred more under Captain Bruce , of the North Kensington 
 Guard , up Clanricarde Gardens.[1 ] two hundred yellow West Kensingtons 
 under Provost Swindon attack from Pembridge Road . two hundred more of 
 my man from the eastern street , lead away from Queen 's Road . two 
 detachment of yellow enter by two road from Westbourne Grove . 
 lastly , two hundred green Bayswaters come down from the North through 
 Chepstow Place , and two hundred more under Provost Wilson himself , 
 through the upper part of Pembridge Road . gentleman , it be mate in two 
 move . the enemy must either mass in Pump Street and be cut to piece ; 
 or they must retreat past the Gaslight & Coke Co. , and rush on my four 
 hundred ; or they must retreat past St. Luke 's Church , and rush on the 
 six hundred from the West . unless we be all mad , it be plain . come on . 
 to your quarter and await Captain Brace 's signal to advance . then you 
 have only to walk up a line of gas - lamp and smash this nonsense by 
 pure mathematic . to - morrow we shall all be civilian again . " 

 [ Footnote 1 : Clanricarde Gardens at this time be no long a 
 _ cul - de - sac _ , but be connect by Pump Street to Pembridge Square . 
 see map . ] 

 his optimism glow like a great fire in the night , and run round the 
 terrible ring in which Wayne be now hold helpless . the fight be 
 already over . one man 's energy for one hour have save the city from 
 war . 

 for the next ten minute Buck walk up and down silently beside the 
 motionless clump of his two hundred . he have not change his appearance 
 in any way , except to sle across his yellow overcoat a case with a 
 revolver in it . so that his light - clothe modern figure show up oddly 
 beside the pompous purple uniform of his halberdier , which darkly 
 but richly colour the black night . 

 at length a shrill trumpet ring from some way up the street ; it be 
 the signal of advance . Buck briefly give the word , and the whole 
 purple line , with its dimly shin steel , move up the side alley . 
 before it be a slope of street , long , straight , and shin in the 
 dark . it be a sword point at Pump Street , the heart at which nine 
 other sword be point that night . 

 a quarter of an hour 's silent marching bring they almost within 
 earshot of any tumult in the doom citadel . but still there be no 
 sound and no sign of the enemy . this time , at any rate , they know that 
 they be close in on it mechanically , and they march on under the 
 lamplight and the dark without any of that eerie sense of ignorance 
 which Barker have feel when enter the hostile country by one avenue 
 alone . 

 " halt -- point arm ! " cry Buck , suddenly , and as he speak there come a 
 clatter of foot tumble along the stone . but the halberd be 
 level in vain . the figure that rush up be a messenger from the 
 contingent of the North . 

 " Victory , Mr. Buck ! " he cry , pant ; " they be oust . provost 
 Wilson of Bayswater have take Pump Street . " 

 Buck run forward in his excitement . 

 " then , which way be they retreat ? it must be either by St. Luke 's 
 to meet Swindon , or by the Gas Company to meet we . run like mad to 
 Swindon , and see that the yellow be hold the St. Luke 's Road . we 
 will hold this , never fear . we have they in an iron trap . run ! " 

 as the messenger dash away into the darkness , the great guard of 
 North Kensington swing on with the certainty of a machine . yet 
 scarcely a hundred yard far their halberd - point again fall in 
 line gleam in the gaslight ; for again a clatter of foot be hear 
 on the stone , and again it prove to be only the messenger . 

 " Mr. Provost , " he say , " the yellow West Kensingtons have be 
 hold the road by St. Luke 's for twenty minute since the capture of 
 Pump Street . Pump Street be not two hundred yard away ; they can not be 
 retreat down that road . " 

 " then they be retreat down this , " say Provost Buck , with a final 
 cheerfulness , " and by good fortune down a well - light road , though it 
 twist about . forward ! " 

 as they move along the last three hundred yard of their journey , 
 Buck fall , for the first time in his life , perhaps , into a kind of 
 philosophical reverie , for man of his type be always make kindly , and 
 as it be melancholy , by success . 

 " I be sorry for poor old Wayne , I really be , " he think . " he speak up 
 splendidly for I at that Council . and he black old Barker 's eye 
 with considerable spirit . but I do not see what a man can expect when 
 he fight against arithmetic , to say nothing of civilisation . and what 
 a wonderful hoax all this military genius be ! I suspect I have just 
 discover what Cromwell discover , that a sensible tradesman be the 
 good general , and that a man who can buy man and sell man can lead and 
 kill they . the thing be simply like add up a column in a ledger . if 
 Wayne have two hundred man , he can not put two hundred man in nine 
 place at once . if they be oust from Pump Street they be fly 
 somewhere . if they be not fly past the church they be fly past 
 the Works . and so we have they . we business man should have no chance 
 at all except that cleverer people than we get bee in their bonnet 
 that prevent they from reason properly -- so we reason alone . and so 
 I , who be comparatively stupid , see thing as God see they , as a vast 
 machine . my God , what be this ? " and he clap his hand to his eye 
 and stagger back . 

 then through the darkness he cry in a dreadful voice-- 

 " do I blaspheme God ? I be strike blind . " 

 " what ? " wail another voice behind he , the voice of a certain 
 Wilfred Jarvis of North Kensington . 

 " blind ! " cry Buck ; " blind ! " 

 " I be blind too ! " cry Jarvis , in an agony . 

 " Fools , all of you , " say a gross voice behind they ; " we be all blind . 
 the lamp have go out . " 

 " the lamp ! but why ? where ? " cry Buck , turn furiously in the 
 darkness . " how be we to get on ? how be we to chase the enemy ? where 
 have they go ? " 

 " the enemy went-- " say the rough voice behind , and then stop 
 doubtfully . 

 " where ? " shout Buck , stamp like a madman . 

 " they go , " say the gruff voice , " past the Gas Works , and they have 
 use their chance . " 

 " Great God ! " thunder Buck , and snatch at his revolver ; " do you 
 mean they have turn out-- " 

 but almost before he have speak the word , he be hurl like a stone 
 from catapult into the midst of his own man . 

 " Notting Hill ! Notting Hill ! " cry frightful voice out of the 
 darkness , and they seem to come from all side , for the man of North 
 Kensington , unacquainted with the road , have lose all their bearing in 
 the black world of blindness . 

 " Notting Hill ! Notting Hill ! " cry the invisible people , and the 
 invader be hew down horribly with black steel , with steel that 
 give no glint against any light . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 Buck , though badly maim with the blow of a halberd , keep an angry 
 but splendid sanity . he grope madly for the wall and find it . 
 struggle with crawl finger along it , he find a side opening and 
 retreat into it with the remnant of his man . their adventure 
 during that prodigious night be not to be describe . they do not 
 know whether they be go towards or away from the enemy . not 
 know where they themselves be , or where their opponent be , it 
 be mere irony to ask where be the rest of their army . for a thing 
 have descend upon they which London do not know -- darkness , which 
 be before the star be make , and they be as much lose in it as if 
 they have be make before the star . every now and then , as those 
 frightful hour wear on , they buffet in the darkness against live 
 man , who strike at they and at whom they strike , with an idiot fury . 
 when at last the grey dawn come , they find they have wander back to 
 the edge of the Uxbridge Road . they find that in those horrible 
 eyeless encounter , the North Kensingtons and the Bayswaters and the 
 West Kensingtons have again and again meet and butcher each other , and 
 they hear that Adam Wayne be barricade in Pump Street . 




 CHAPTER II--_The correspondent of the Court Journal _ 


 Journalism have become , like most other such thing in England under 
 the cautious government and philosophy represent by James Barker , 
 somewhat sleepy and much diminish in importance . this be partly due 
 to the disappearance of party government and public speaking , partly 
 to the compromise or dead - lock which have make foreign war impossible , 
 but mostly , of course , to the temper of the whole nation which be 
 that of a people in a kind of back - water . perhaps the most well know 
 of the remain newspaper be the _ Court Journal _ , which be 
 publish in a dusty but genteel - look office just out of Kensington 
 High Street . for when all the paper of a people have be for year 
 grow more and more dim and decorous and optimistic , the dim and 
 most decorous and most optimistic be very likely to win . in the 
 journalistic competition which be still go on at the beginning of 
 the twentieth century , the final victor be the _ Court Journal _ . 

 for some mysterious reason the King have a great affection for hang 
 about in the _ Court Journal _ office , smoke a morning cigarette and 
 look over file . like all ingrainedly idle man , he be very fond of 
 lounge and chat in place where other people be do work . 
 but one would have think that , even in the prosaic England of his 
 day , he might have find a more bustling centre . 

 on this particular morning , however , he come out of Kensington Palace 
 with a more alert step and a busy air than usual . he wear an 
 extravagantly long frock - coat , a pale - green waistcoat , a very full and 
 _ dégagé _ black tie , and curious yellow glove . this be his uniform as 
 Colonel of a regiment of his own creation , the 1st Decadents Green . it 
 be a beautiful sight to see he drill they . he walk quickly 
 across the Park and the High Street , light his cigarette as he 
 go , and fling open the door of the _ Court Journal _ office . 

 " you have hear the news , Pally -- you've hear the news ? " he say . 

 the Editor 's name be hoskin , but the King call he Pally , which 
 be an abbreviation of Paladium of our Liberties . 

 " well , your Majesty , " say Hoskins , slowly ( he be a worried , 
 gentlemanly look person , with a wandering brown beard)--"well , 
 your Majesty , I have hear rather curious thing , but I-- " 

 " you will hear more of they , " say the King , dance a few step of a 
 kind of negro shuffle . " you will hear more of they , my blood - and - thunder 
 tribune . do you know what I be go to do for you ? " 

 " no , your Majesty , " reply the Paladium , vaguely . 

 " I be go to put your paper on strong , dashing , enterprise line , " 
 say the King . " now , where be your poster of last night 's defeat ? " 

 " I do not propose , your Majesty , " say the Editor , " to have any 
 poster exactly-- " 

 " Paper , paper ! " cry the king , wildly ; " bring I paper as big as a 
 house . I will do you poster . stop , I must take my coat off . " he begin 
 remove that garment with an air of set intensity , fling it playfully 
 at Mr. Hoskins ' head , entirely envelop he , and look at himself 
 in the glass . " the coat off , " he say , " and the hat on . that look 
 like a sub - editor . it be indeed the very essence of sub - editing . 
 well , " he continue , turn round abruptly , " come along with that 
 paper . " 

 the Paladium have only just extricate himself reverently from the 
 fold of the King 's frock - coat , and say bewildered-- 

 " I be afraid , your majesty-- " 

 " oh , you have get no enterprise , " say Auberon . " what be that roll in the 
 corner ? wall - paper ? decoration for your private residence ? art in the 
 home , Pally ? fling it over here , and I will paint such poster on the 
 back of it that when you put it up in your drawing - room you will paste 
 the original pattern against the wall . " and the King unroll the 
 wall - paper , spread it over the whole floor . " now give I the 
 scissor , " he cry , and take they himself before the other could 
 stir . 

 he slit the paper into about five piece , each nearly as big as a 
 door . then he take a big blue pencil , and go down on his knee on 
 the dusty oil - cloth and begin to write on they , in huge letters-- 

 " from the front . 
 GENERAL BUCK DEFEATED . 
 DARKNESS , DANGER , and DEATH . 
 WAYNE say to be in PUMP STREET . 
 feel in the city . " 

 he contemplate it for some time , with his head on one side , and get 
 up , with a sigh . 

 " not quite intense enough , " he said--"not alarming . I want the _ Court 
 Journal _ to be fear as well as love . let us try something more 
 hard - hitting . " and he go down on his knee again . after suck the 
 blue pencil for some time , he begin write again busily . " how will 
 this do ? " he said-- 

      " WAYNE 'S WONDERFUL victory . " 

 " I suppose , " he say , look up appealingly , and suck the 
 pencil--"i suppose we could not say ' wictory'--'Wayne 's wonderful 
 wictory ' ? no , no . Refinement , Pally , refinement . I have it . " 

 " WAYNE WINS . 
 ASTOUNDING fight in the dark . 
 _ the gas - lamp in their course fight against Buck . _ " 

 " ( nothing like our fine old english translation . ) what else can we 
 say ? well , anything to annoy old Buck ; " and he add , thoughtfully , in 
 small letters-- 

      " Rumoured Court - martial on General Buck . " 

 " those will do for the present , " he say , and turn they both face 
 downward . " paste , please . " 

 the Paladium , with an air of great terror , bring the paste out of an 
 inner room . 

 the King slab it on with the enjoyment of a child mess with 
 treacle . then take one of his huge composition flutter in each 
 hand , he run outside , and begin paste they up in prominent position 
 over the front of the office . 

 " and now , " say Auberon , enter again with undiminishe 
 vivacity--"now for the lead article . " 

 he pick up another of the large strip of wall - paper , and , lay it 
 across a desk , pull out a fountain - pen and begin write with 
 feverish intensity , read clause and fragment aloud to himself , 
 and roll they on his tongue like wine , to see if they have the pure 
 journalistic flavour . 

 " the news of the disaster to our force in Notting Hill , awful as it 
 be -- awful as it is--(no , distress as it be ) , may do some good if it 
 draw attention to the what's - his - name inefficiency ( scandalous 
 inefficiency , of course ) of the Government 's preparation . in our 
 present state of information , it would be premature ( what a jolly 
 word!)--it would be premature to cast any reflection upon the conduct 
 of General Buck , whose service upon so many stricken field ( ha , 
 ha ! ) , and whose honourable scar and laurel , give he a right to have 
 judgment upon he at least suspend . but there be one matter on which 
 we must speak plainly . we have be silent on it too long , from 
 feeling , perhaps of mistaken caution , perhaps of mistaken loyalty . 
 this situation would never have arise but for what we can only call 
 the indefensible conduct of the king . it pain we to say such thing , 
 but , speak as we do in the public interest ( I plagiarise from 
 Barker 's famous epigram ) , we shall not shrink because of the distress 
 we may cause to any individual , even the most exalted . at this crucial 
 moment of our country , the voice of the People demand with a single 
 tongue , ' where be the king ? ' what be he do while his subject tear 
 each other in piece in the street of a great city ? be his 
 amusement and his dissipation ( of which we can not pretend to be 
 ignorant ) so engross that he can spare no thought for a perish 
 nation ? it be with a deep sense of our responsibility that we warn 
 that exalted person that neither his great position nor his 
 incomparable talent will save he in the hour of delirium from the 
 fate of all those who , in the madness of luxury or tyranny , have meet 
 the english people in the rare day of its wrath . " 

 " I be now , " say the king , " go to write an account of the battle by 
 an eye - witness . " and he pick up a fourth sheet of wall - paper . almost 
 at the same moment Buck stride quickly into the office . he have a 
 bandage round his head . 

 " I be tell , " he say , with his usual gruff civility , " that your 
 Majesty be here . " 

 " and of all thing on earth , " cry the King , with delight , " here be 
 an eye - witness ! an eye - witness who , I regret to observe , have at 
 present only one eye to witness with . can you write we the special 
 article , Buck ? have you a rich style ? " 

 Buck , with a self - restraint which almost approach politeness , take 
 no notice whatever of the king 's madden geniality . 

 " I take the liberty , your Majesty , " he say shortly , " of ask Mr. 
 Barker to come here also . " 

 as he speak , indeed , Barker come swing into the office , with his 
 usual air of hurry . 

 " what be happen now ? " ask Buck , turn to he with a kind of 
 relief . 

 " fight still go on , " say Barker . " the four hundred from West 
 Kensington be hardly touch last night . they hardly get near the 
 place . Poor Wilson 's bayswater man get cut about , though . they fight 
 confoundedly well . they take Pump Street once . what mad thing do 
 happen in the world . to think that of all of we it should be little 
 Wilson with the red whisker who come out well . " 

 the King make a note on his paper-- 

      " _ romantic Conduct of Mr. Wilson _ . " 

 " yes , " say Buck ; " it make one a bit less proud of one 's _ h 's _ . " 

 the King suddenly fold or crumple up the paper , and put it in his 
 pocket . 

 " I have an idea , " he say . " I will be an eye - witness . I will write you 
 such letter from the front as will be more gorgeous than the real 
 thing . give I my coat , Paladium . I enter this room a mere King of 
 England . I leave it , Special War Correspondent of the _ Court Journal _ . 
 it be useless to stop I , pally ; it be vain to cling to my knee , 
 Buck ; it be hopeless , Barker , to weep upon my neck . ' when duty 
 calls'--the remainder of the sentiment escape I . you will receive my 
 first article this evening by the eight - o'clock post . " 

 and , run out of the office , he jump upon a blue bayswater 
 omnibus that go swing by . 

 " well , " say Barker , gloomily , " well . " 

 " Barker , " say Buck , " business may be low than politic , but war be , 
 as I discover last night , a long sight more like business . you 
 politician be such ingrain demagogue that even when you have a 
 despotism you think of nothing but public opinion . so you learn to 
 tack and run , and be afraid of the first breeze . now we stick to a 
 thing and get it . and our mistake help we . look here ! at this moment 
 we have beat Wayne . " 

 " Beaten Wayne , " repeat Barker . 

 " why the dicken not ? " cry the other , fling out his hand . " look 
 here . I say last night that we have they by hold the nine 
 entrance . well , I be wrong . we should have have they but for a 
 singular event -- the lamp go out . but for that it be certain . have 
 it occur to you , my brilliant Barker , that another singular event 
 have happen since that singular event of the lamp go out ? " 

 " what event ? " ask Barker . 

 " by an astounding coincidence , the sun have rise , " cry out Buck , 
 with a savage air of patience . " why the hell be not we hold all 
 those approach now , and pass in on they again ? it should have 
 be do at sunrise . the confounded doctor would not let I go out . 
 you be in command . " 

 Barker smile grimly . 

 " it be a gratification to I , my dear Buck , to be able to say that we 
 anticipate your suggestion precisely . we go as early as possible 
 to reconnoitre the nine entrance . unfortunately , while we be 
 fight each other in the dark , like a lot of drunken navvy , Mr. 
 Wayne 's friend be work very hard indeed . three hundred yard 
 from Pump Street , at every one of those entrance , there be a 
 barricade nearly as high as the house . they be finish the last , 
 in Pembridge Road , when we arrive . our mistake , " he cry bitterly , 
 and fling his cigarette on the ground . " it be not we who learn from 
 they . " 

 there be a silence for a few moment , and Barker lie back wearily in 
 a chair . the office clock tick exactly in the stillness . 

 at length Barker say suddenly-- 

 " Buck , do it ever cross your mind what this be all about ? the 
 Hammersmith to Maida Vale thoroughfare be an uncommonly good 
 speculation . you and I hop a great deal from it . but be it worth it ? 
 it will cost we thousand to crush this ridiculous riot . suppose we 
 let it alone ? " 

 " and be thrash in public by a red - haired madman whom any two doctor 
 would lock up ? " cry out Buck , start to his foot . " what do you 
 propose to do , Mr. Barker ? to apologise to the admirable Mr. Wayne ? to 
 kneel to the Charter of the city ? to clasp to your bosom the flag of 
 the Red Lion ? to kiss in succession every sacred lamp - post that save 
 Notting Hill ? no , by God ! my man fight jolly well -- they be beat 
 by a trick . and they will fight again . " 

 " Buck , " say Barker , " I always admire you . and you be quite right 
 in what you say the other day . " 

 " in what ? " 

 " in say , " say Barker , rise quietly , " that we have all get into 
 Adam Wayne 's atmosphere and out of our own . my friend , the whole 
 territorial kingdom of Adam Wayne extend to about nine street , with 
 barricade at the end of they . but the spiritual kingdom of Adam Wayne 
 extend , God know where -- it extend to this office , at any rate . the 
 red - haired madman whom any two doctor would lock up be fill this 
 room with his roar , unreasonable soul . and it be the red - haired 
 madman who say the last word you speak . " 

 Buck walk to the window without reply . " you understand , of 
 course , " he say at last , " I do not dream of give in . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 the king , meanwhile , be rattle along on the top of his blue 
 omnibus . the traffic of London as a whole have not , of course , be 
 greatly disturb by these event , for the affair be treat as a 
 Notting Hill riot , and that area be mark off as if it have be in 
 the hand of a gang of recognise rioter . the blue omnibus simply 
 go round as they would have do if a road be be mend , and 
 the omnibus on which the correspondent of the _ Court Journal _ be 
 sit sweep round the corner of Queen 's Road , bayswater . 

 the King be alone on the top of the vehicle , and be enjoy the 
 speed at which it be go . 

 " Forward , my beauty , my Arab , " he say , pat the omnibus 
 encouragingly , " fleet of all thy bounding tribe . be thy relation 
 with thy driver , I wonder , those of the Bedouin and his steed ? do he 
 sleep side by side with thee-- " 

 his meditation be break by a sudden and jarring stoppage . look 
 over the edge , he see that the head of the horse be be hold 
 by man in the uniform of Wayne 's army , and hear the voice of an 
 officer call out order . 

 [ illustration : KING AUBERON descended from the OMNIBUS with DIGNITY . ] 

 King Auberon descend from the omnibus with dignity . the guard or 
 picket of red halberdier who have stop the vehicle do not number 
 more than twenty , and they be under the command of a short , dark , 
 clever - look young man , conspicuous among the rest as be clothe in 
 an ordinary frock - coat , but girt round the waist with a red sash and a 
 long seventeenth - century sword . a shiny silk hat and spectacle 
 complete the outfit in a pleasing manner . 

 " to whom have I the honour of speak ? " say the King , endeavour 
 to look like Charles I. , in spite of personal difficulty . 

 the dark man in spectacle lift his hat with equal gravity . 

 " my name be Bowles , " he say . " I be a chemist . I be also a captain of 
 o company of the army of Notting Hill . I be distressed at have to 
 incommode you by stop the omnibus , but this area be cover by our 
 proclamation , and we intercept all traffic . may I ask to whom I have 
 the honour -- why , good gracious , I beg your Majesty 's pardon . I be 
 quite overwhelmed at find myself concerned with the king . " 

 Auberon put up his hand with indescribable grandeur . 

 " not with the king , " he say ; " with the special war correspondent of 
 the _ Court Journal _ . " 

 " I beg your Majesty 's pardon , " begin Mr. Bowles , doubtfully . 

 " do you call I Majesty ? I repeat , " say Auberon , firmly , " I be a 
 representative of the press . I have choose , with a deep sense of 
 responsibility , the name of Pinker . I should desire a veil to be draw 
 over the past . " 

 " very well , sir , " say Mr. Bowles , with an air of submission , " in our 
 eye the sanctity of the press be at least as great as that of the 
 throne . we desire nothing well than that our wrong and our glory 
 should be widely know . may I ask , Mr. Pinker , if you have any 
 objection to be present to the Provost and to General Turnbull ? " 

 " the Provost I have have the honour of meeting , " say Auberon , easily . 
 " we old journalist , you know , meet everybody . I should be most 
 delighted to have the same honour again . General Turnbull , also , it 
 would be a gratification to know . the young man be so interesting . 
 we of the old Fleet Street gang lose touch with they . " 

 " will you be so good as to step this way ? " say the leader of O 
 company . 

 " I be always good , " say Mr. Pinker . " lead on . " 




 CHAPTER III--_The Great Army of South Kensington _ 


 the article from the special correspondent of the _ Court Journal _ 
 arrive in due course , write on very coarse copy - paper in the King 's 
 arabesque of handwriting , in which three word fill a page , and yet 
 be illegible . moreover , the contribution be the more perplexing at 
 first , as it open with a succession of erase paragraph . the writer 
 appear to have attempt the article once or twice in several 
 journalistic style . at the side of one experiment be write , " try 
 american style , " and the fragment began-- 

 " the King must go . we want gritty man . Flapdoodle be all very ... ; " 
 and then break off , follow by the note , " good sound journalism 
 safe . try it . " 

 the experiment in good sound journalism appear to begin-- 

 " the great of english poet have say that a rise by any ... " 

 this also stop abruptly . the next annotation at the side be almost 
 undecipherable , but seem to be something like-- 

 " how about old Steevens and the _ mot juste _ ? E.g .... " 

 " Morning wink a little wearily at I over the curt edge of Campden 
 Hill and its house with their sharp shadow . under the abrupt black 
 cardboard of the outline , it take some little time to detect colour ; 
 but at length I see a brownish yellow shifting in the obscurity , and I 
 know that it be the guard of Swindon 's West Kensington army . they be 
 be hold as a reserve , and line the whole ridge above the 
 Bayswater Road . their camp and their main force be under the great 
 Waterworks Tower on Campden Hill . I forget to say that the Waterworks 
 Tower look swart . 

 " as I pass they and come over the curve of Silver Street , I see the 
 blue cloudy mass of Barker 's man block the entrance to the 
 high - road like a sapphire smoke ( good ) . the disposition of the allied 
 troop , under the general management of Mr. Wilson , appear to be as 
 follow : the Yellow army ( if I may so describe the West 
 Kensingtonians ) lie , as I have say , in a strip along the ridge , its 
 furth point westward be the west side of Campden Hill Road , its 
 furth point eastward the beginning of Kensington Gardens . the Green 
 army of Wilson line the Notting Hill High Road itself from Queen 's 
 Road to the corner of Pembridge Road , curve round the latter , and 
 extend some three hundred yard up towards Westbourne Grove . 
 Westbourne Grove itself be occupy by Barker of South Kensington . the 
 fourth side of this rough square , the Queen 's Road side , be hold by 
 some of Buck 's purple warrior . 

 " the whole resemble some ancient and dainty dutch flower - bed . along 
 the crest of Campden Hill lie the golden crocus of West Kensington . 
 they be , as it be , the first fiery fringe of the whole . Northward 
 lie our hyacinth Barker , with all his blue hyacinth . round to the 
 south - west run the green rush of Wilson of Bayswater , and a line of 
 violet iris ( aptly symbolise by Mr. Buck ) complete the whole . the 
 argent exterior ... ( I be lose the style . I should have say 
 ' curve with a whisk ' instead of merely ' curve . ' also I should have 
 call the hyacinth ' sudden . ' I can not keep this up . War be too rapid 
 for this style of writing . please ask office - boy to insert _ mots 
 juste _ . ) 

 " the truth be that there be nothing to report . that commonplace 
 element which be always ready to devour all beautiful thing ( as the 
 Black Pig in the Irish Mythology will finally devour the star and 
 god ) ; that commonplace element , as I say , have in its Black Piggish 
 way devour finally the chance of any romance in this affair ; that 
 which once consist of absurd but thrill combat in the street , 
 have degenerate into something which be the very prose of warfare -- it 
 have degenerate into a siege . a siege may be define as a peace plus 
 the inconvenience of war . of course Wayne can not hold out . there be no 
 more chance of help from anywhere else than of ship from the moon . 
 and if old Wayne have stock his street with tin meat till all his 
 garrison have to sit on they , he could not hold out for more than a 
 month or two . as a matter of melancholy fact , he have do something 
 rather like this . he have stock his street with food until there must 
 be uncommonly little room to turn round . but what be the good ? to hold 
 out for all that time and then to give in of necessity , what do it 
 mean ? it mean wait until your victory be forget , and then 
 take the trouble to be defeat . I can not understand how Wayne can 
 be so inartistic . 

 " and how odd it be that one view a thing quite differently when one 
 know it be defeat ! I always think Wayne be rather fine . but now , 
 when I know that he be do for , there seem to be nothing else but 
 Wayne . all the street seem to point at he , all the chimney seem to 
 lean towards he . I suppose it be a morbid feeling ; but Pump Street 
 seem to be the only part of London that I feel physically . I suppose , 
 I say , that it be morbid . I suppose it be exactly how a man feel 
 about his heart when his heart be weak . ' pump street'--the heart be a 
 pump . and I be drivel . 

 " our fine leader at the front be , beyond all question , General 
 Wilson . he have adopt alone among the other Provosts the uniform of 
 his own halberdier , although that fine old sixteenth - century garb be 
 not originally intend to go with red side - whisker . it be he who , 
 against a most admirable and desperate defence , break last night into 
 Pump Street and hold it for at least half an hour . he be afterwards 
 expel from it by General Turnbull , of Notting Hill , but only after 
 desperate fighting and the sudden descent of that terrible darkness 
 which prove so much more fatal to the force of General Buck and 
 General Swindon . 

 " Provost Wayne himself , with whom I have , with great good fortune , a 
 most interesting interview , bear the most eloquent testimony to the 
 conduct of General Wilson and his man . his precise word be as 
 follow : ' I have buy sweet at his funny little shop when I be 
 four year old , and ever since . I never notice anything , I be ashamed 
 to say , except that he talk through his nose , and do not wash 
 himself particularly . and he come over our barricade like a devil from 
 hell . ' I repeat this speech to General Wilson himself , with some 
 delicate improvement , and he seem pleased with it . he do not , 
 however , seem pleased with anything so much just now as he be with the 
 wearing of a sword . I have it from the front on the good authority 
 that General Wilson be not completely shave yesterday . it be 
 believe in military circle that he be grow a moustache .... 

 " as I have say , there be nothing to report . I walk wearily to the 
 pillar - box at the corner of Pembridge Road to post my copy . nothing 
 whatever have happen , except the preparation for a particularly long 
 and feeble siege , during which I trust I shall not be require to be 
 at the Front . as I glance up Pembridge Road in the grow dusk , the 
 aspect of that road remind I that there be one note worth add . 
 General Buck have suggest , with characteristic acuman , to General 
 Wilson that , in order to obviate the possibility of such a catastrophe 
 as overwhelm the ally force in the last advance on Notting Hill 
 ( the catastrophe , I mean , of the extinguished lamp ) , each soldier 
 should have a light lantern round his neck . this be one of the 
 thing which I really admire about General Buck . he possess what 
 people use to mean by ' the humility of the man of science , ' that be , 
 he learn steadily from his mistake . Wayne may score off he in some 
 other way , but not in that way . the lantern look like fairy light as 
 they curve round the end of Pembridge Road . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " _ later_.--i write with some difficulty , because the blood will run 
 down my face and make pattern on the paper . blood be a very beautiful 
 thing ; that be why it be conceal . if you ask why blood run down my 
 face , I can only reply that I be kick by a horse . if you ask I 
 what horse , I can reply with some pride that it be a war - horse . if 
 you ask I how a war - horse come on the scene in our simple pedestrian 
 warfare , I be reduce to the necessity , so painful to a special 
 correspondent , of recount my experience . 

 " I be , as I have say , in the very act of post my copy at the 
 pillar - box , and of glance as I do so up the glitter curve of 
 Pembridge Road , stud with the light of Wilson 's man . I do not know 
 what make I pause to examine the matter , but I have a fancy that the 
 line of light , where it melt into the indistinct brown twilight , 
 be more indistinct than usual . I be almost certain that in a certain 
 stretch of the road where there have be five light there be now 
 only four . I strain my eye ; I count they again , and there be 
 only three . a moment after there be only two ; an instant after only 
 one ; and an instant after that the lantern near to I swing like 
 jangle bell , as if strike suddenly . they flare and fall ; and for 
 the moment the fall of they be like the fall of the sun and star out 
 of heaven . it leave everything in a primal blindness . as a matter of 
 fact , the road be not yet legitimately dark . there be still red 
 ray of a sunset in the sky , and the brown gloaming be still warm , 
 as it be , with a feeling as of firelight . but for three second 
 after the lantern swing and sink , I see in front of I a blackness 
 block the sky . and with the fourth second I know that this 
 blackness which block the sky be a man on a great horse ; and I be 
 trample and toss aside as a swirl of horseman sweep round the 
 corner . as they turn I see that they be not black , but scarlet ; 
 they be a sortie of the besiege , Wayne rid ahead . 

 " I lift myself from the gutter , blind with blood from a very 
 slight skin - wound , and , queerly enough , not care either for the 
 blindness or for the slightness of the wound . for one mortal minute 
 after that amazing cavalcade have spin past , there be dead stillness 
 on the empty road . and then come Barker and all his halberdier 
 run like devil in the track of they . it have be their business 
 to guard the gate by which the sortie have break out ; but they have not 
 reckon , and small blame to they , on cavalry . as it be , Barker and 
 his man make a perfectly splendid run after they , almost catch 
 Wayne 's horse by the tail . 

 " nobody can understand the sortie . it consist only of a small number 
 of Wayne 's garrison . turnbull himself , with the vast mass of it , be 
 undoubtedly still barricade in Pump Street . sortie of this kind be 
 natural enough in the majority of historical siege , such as the siege 
 of Paris in 1870 , because in such case the besiege be certain of 
 some support outside . but what can be the object of it in this case ? 
 Wayne know ( or if he be too mad to know anything , at least turnbull 
 know ) that there be not , and never have be , the small chance of 
 support for he outside ; that the mass of the sane modern inhabitant 
 of London regard his farcical patriotism with as much contempt as they 
 do the original idiotcy that give it birth -- the folly of our miserable 
 king . what Wayne and his horseman be do nobody can even 
 conjecture . the general theory round here be that he be simply a 
 traitor , and have abandon the besieged . but all such large but yet 
 more soluble riddle be as nothing compare to the one small but 
 unanswerable riddle : where do they get the horse ? 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " _ later_.--i have hear a most extraordinary account of the origin of 
 the appearance of the horse . it appear that that amazing person , 
 General Turnbull , who be now rule Pump Street in the absence of 
 Wayne , send out , on the morning of the declaration of war , a vast 
 number of little boy ( or cherub of the gutter , as we pressman say ) , 
 with half - crown in their pocket , to take cab all over London . no 
 less than a hundred and sixty cab meet at Pump Street ; be 
 commandeer by the garrison . the man be set free , the cab use to 
 make barricade , and the horse keep in Pump Street , where they be 
 feed and exercise for several day , until they be sufficiently 
 rapid and efficient to be use for this wild ride out of the town . if 
 this be so , and I have it on the good possible authority , the method 
 of the sortie be explain . but we have no explanation of its object . 
 just as Barker 's Blues be swing round the corner after they , they 
 be stop , but not by an enemy ; only by the voice of one man , and 
 he a friend . Red Wilson of Bayswater run alone along the main road 
 like a madman , wave they back with a halberd snatch from a 
 sentinel . he be in supreme command , and Barker stop at the corner , 
 star and bewilder . we could hear Wilson 's voice loud and distinct 
 out of the dusk , so that it seem strange that the great voice should 
 come out of the little body . ' Halt , South Kensington ! guard this 
 entry , and prevent they return . I will pursue . forward , the Green 
 Guards ! ' 

 " a wall of dark blue uniform and a wood of pole - axis be between I 
 and Wilson , for Barker 's man block the mouth of the road in two 
 rigid line . but through they and through the dusk I could hear the 
 clear order and the clank of arm , and see the green army of Wilson 
 marching by towards the west . they be our great fighting - man . Wilson 
 have fill they with his own fire ; in a few day they have become 
 veteran . each of they wear a silver medal of a pump , to boast that 
 they alone of all the ally army have stand victorious in Pump 
 Street . 

 " I manage to slip past the detachment of Barker 's blue , who be 
 guard the end of Pembridge Road , and a sharp spell of run 
 bring I to the tail of Wilson 's green army as it swing down the 
 road in pursuit of the fly Wayne . the dusk have deepen into almost 
 total darkness ; for some time I only hear the throb of the marching 
 pace . then suddenly there be a cry , and the tall fight man be 
 fling back on I , almost crush I , and again the lantern swing and 
 jingle , and the cold nozzle of great horse push into the press of 
 we . they have turn and charge we . 

 " ' you fool ! ' come the voice of Wilson , cleave our panic with a 
 splendid cold anger . ' do not you see ? the horse have no rider ! ' 

 " it be true . we be be plunge at by a stampede of horse with 
 empty saddle . what could it mean ? have Wayne meet some of our man and 
 be defeat ? or have he fling these horse at we as some kind of ruse 
 or mad new mode of warfare , such as he seem bent on invent ? or 
 do he and his man want to get away in disguise ? or do they want to 
 hide in house somewhere ? 

 " never do I admire any man 's intellect ( even my own ) so much as I do 
 Wilson 's at that moment . without a word , he simply point the halberd 
 ( which he still grasp ) to the southern side of the road . as you 
 know , the street run up to the ridge of Campden Hill from the 
 main road be peculiarly steep , they be more like sudden flight of 
 stair . we be just opposite Aubrey Road , the steep of all ; up 
 that it would have be far more difficult to urge half - train horse 
 than to run up on one 's foot . 

 " ' left wheel ! ' halloo Wilson . ' they have go up here , ' he add to 
 I , who happen to be at his elbow . 

 " ' why ? ' I venture to ask . 

 " ' can not say for certain , ' reply the Bayswater General . ' they have go 
 up here in a great hurry , anyhow . they have simply turn their horse 
 loose , because they could not take they up . I fancy I know . I fancy 
 they be try to get over the ridge to Kensingston or Hammersmith , or 
 somewhere , and be strike up here because it be just beyond the end 
 of our line . damned fool , not to have go far along the road , 
 though . they have only just shave our last outpost . Lambert be hardly 
 four hundred yard from here . and I have send he word . ' 

 " ' Lambert ! ' I say . ' not young Wilfrid Lambert -- my old friend . ' 

 " ' Wilfrid Lambert 's his name , ' say the General ; ' use to be a " man 
 about town ; " silly fellow with a big nose . that kind of man always 
 volunteer for some war or other ; and what be funny , he generally 
 be not half bad at it . Lambert be distinctly good . the yellow West 
 Kensingtons I always reckon the weak part of the army ; but he have 
 pull they together uncommonly well , though he be subordinate to 
 Swindon , who be a donkey . in the attack from Pembridge Road the other 
 night he show great pluck . ' 

 " ' he have show great pluck than that , ' I say . ' he have criticise my 
 sense of humour . that be his first engagement . ' 

 " this remark be , I be sorry to say , lose on the admirable commander 
 of the ally force . we be in the act of climb the last half of 
 Aubrey Road , which be so abrupt a slope that it look like an 
 old - fashioned map lean up against the wall . there be line of 
 little tree , one above the other , as in the old - fashioned map . 

 " we reach the top of it , pant somewhat , and be just about to 
 turn the corner by a place call ( in chivalrous anticipation of our 
 war of sword and axe ) Tower Creçy , when we be suddenly knock in 
 the stomach ( I can use no other term ) by a horde of man hurl back 
 upon we . they wear the red uniform of Wayne ; their halberd be 
 break ; their forehead bleed ; but the mere impetus of their 
 retreat stagger we as we stand at the last ridge of the slope . 

 " ' good old Lambert ! ' yell out suddenly the stolid Mr. Wilson of 
 bayswater , in an uncontrollable excitement . ' damned jolly old Lambert ! 
 he be get there already ! he be drive they back on we ! Hurrah ! hurrah ! 
 Forward , the Green Guards ! ' 

 " we swing round the corner eastward , Wilson run first , 
 brandish the halberd-- 

 " will you pardon a little egotism ? every one like a little egotism , 
 when it take the form , as mine do in this case , of a disgraceful 
 confession . the thing be really a little interesting , because it show 
 how the merely artistic habit have bite into man like I . it be the 
 most intensely exciting occurrence that have ever come to I in my 
 life ; and I be really intensely excited about it . and yet , as we 
 turn that corner , the first impression I have be of something that 
 have nothing to do with the fight at all . I be stricken from the sky 
 as by a thunderbolt , by the height of the Waterworks Tower on Campden 
 Hill . I do not know whether londoner generally realise how high it 
 look when one come out , in this way , almost immediately under it . 
 for the second it seem to I that at the foot of it even human war 
 be a triviality . for the second I feel as if I have be drunk with 
 some trivial orgie , and that I have be sober by the shock of that 
 shadow . a moment afterwards , I realise that under it be go on 
 something more enduring than stone , and something wilder than the 
 dizzy height -- the agony of man . and I know that , compare to that , 
 this overwhelming tower be itself a triviality ; it be a mere stalk 
 of stone which humanity could snap like a stick . 

 " I do not know why I have talk so much about this silly old 
 Waterworks Tower , which at the very good be only a tremendous 
 background . it be that , certainly , a sombre and awful landscape , 
 against which our figure be relieve . but I think the real reason 
 be , that there be in my own mind so sharp a transition from the 
 tower of stone to the man of flesh . for what I see first when I have 
 shake off , as it be , the shadow of the tower , be a man , and a man 
 I know . 

 " Lambert stand at the further corner of the street that curve round 
 the tower , his figure outline in some degree by the beginning of 
 moonrise . he look magnificent , a hero ; but he look something much 
 more interesting than that . he be , as it happen , in almost 
 precisely the same swaggering attitude in which he have stand nearly 
 fifteen year ago , when he swing his walking - stick and strike it into 
 the ground , and tell I that all my subtlety be drivel . and , upon my 
 soul , I think he require more courage to say that than to fight as he 
 do now . for then he be fight against something that be in the 
 ascendant , fashionable , and victorious . and now he be fight ( at the 
 risk of his life , no doubt ) merely against something which be already 
 dead , which be impossible , futile ; of which nothing have be more 
 impossible and futile than this very sortie which have bring he into 
 contact with it . People nowadays allow infinitely too little for the 
 psychological sense of victory as a factor in affair . then he be 
 attack the degraded but undoubtedly victorious Quin ; now he be 
 attack the interesting but totally extinguish Wayne . 

 " his name recall I to the detail of the scene . the fact be 
 these . a line of red halberdier , head by Wayne , be march up 
 the street , close under the northern wall , which be , in fact , the 
 bottom of a sort of dyke or fortification of the Waterworks . Lambert 
 and his yellow West Kensingtons have that instant sweep round the 
 corner and have shake the waynite heavily , hurl back a few of the 
 more timid , as I have just describe , into our very arm . when our 
 force strike the tail of Wayne 's , every one know that all be up with 
 he . his favourite military barber be strike down . his grocer be 
 stun . he himself be hurt in the thigh , and reel back against the 
 wall . we have he in a trap with two jaw . ' be that you ? ' shout 
 Lambert , genially , to Wilson , across the hem - in host of Notting 
 Hill . ' that be about the ticket , ' reply General Wilson ; ' keep they 
 under the wall . ' 

 " the man of Notting Hill be fall fast . Adam Wayne throw up his 
 long arm to the wall above he , and with a spring stand upon it ; a 
 gigantic figure against the moon . he tear the banner out of the hand 
 of the standard - bearer below he , and shake it out suddenly above our 
 head , so that it be like thunder in the heaven . 

 " ' round the Red Lion ! ' he cry . ' sword round the Red Lion ! halberd 
 round the Red Lion ! they be the thorn round rise . ' 

 " his voice and the crack of the banner make a momentary rally , and 
 Lambert , whose idiotic face be almost beautiful with battle , feel it 
 as by an instinct , and cried-- 

 " ' drop your public - house flag , you footler ! drop it ! ' 

 " ' the banner of the Red Lion seldom stoop , ' say Wayne , proudly , 
 let it out luxuriantly on the night wind . 

 " the next moment I know that poor Adam 's sentimental theatricality have 
 cost he much . Lambert be on the wall at a bound , his sword in his 
 tooth , and have slash at Wayne 's head before he have time to draw his 
 sword , his hand be busy with the enormous flag . he step back 
 only just in time to avoid the first cut , and let the flag - staff fall , 
 so that the spear - blade at the end of it point to Lambert . 

 " ' the banner stoop , ' cry Wayne , in a voice that must have startle 
 street . ' the banner of Notting Hill stoop to a hero . ' and with the 
 word he drive the spear - point and half the flag - staff through 
 Lambert 's body and drop he dead upon the road below , a stone upon 
 the stone of the street . 

 " ' Notting Hill ! Notting Hill ! ' cry Wayne , in a sort of divine rage . 
 ' her banner be all the holier for the blood of a brave enemy ! up on 
 the wall , patriot ! up on the wall ! Notting Hill ! ' 

 " with his long strong arm he actually drag a man up on to the wall 
 to be silhouette against the moon , and more and more man climb up 
 there , pull themselves and be pull , till cluster and crowd of 
 the half - massacre man of Pump Street mass upon the wall above we . 

 " ' Notting Hill ! Notting Hill ! ' cry Wayne , unceasingly . 

 " ' well , what about bayswater ? ' say a worthy working - man in Wilson 's 
 army , irritably . ' bayswater for ever ! ' 

 " ' we have win ! ' cry Wayne , strike his flag - staff in the ground . 
 ' bayswater for ever ! we have teach our enemy patriotism ! ' 

 " ' oh , cut these fellow up and have do with it ! ' cry one of 
 Lambert 's lieutenant , who be reduce to something border on 
 madness by the responsibility of succeed to the command . 

 " ' let we by all mean try , ' say Wilson , grimly ; and the two army 
 close round the third . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " I simply can not describe what follow . I be sorry , but there be such 
 a thing as physical fatigue , as physical nausea , and , I may add , as 
 physical terror . suffice it to say that the above paragraph be 
 write about 11 p.m. , and that it be now about 2 a.m. , and that the 
 battle be not finish , and be not likely to be . suffice it far to 
 say that down the steep street which lead from the Waterworks Tower 
 to the Notting Hill High Road , blood have be run , and be run , 
 in great red serpent , that curl out into the main thoroughfare and 
 shine in the moon . 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 " _ Later._--The final touch have be give to all this terrible 
 futility . hour have pass ; morning have break ; man be still sway 
 and fight at the foot of the tower and round the corner of Aubrey 
 Road ; the fight have not finish . but I know it be a farce . 

 " News have just come to show that Wayne 's amazing sortie , follow by 
 the amazing resistance through a whole night on the wall of the 
 Waterworks , be as if it have not be . what be the object of that 
 strange exodus we shall probably never know , for the simple reason 
 that every one who know will probably be cut to piece in the course 
 of the next two or three hour . 

 " I have hear , about three minute ago , that Buck and Buck 's method 
 have win after all . he be perfectly right , of course , when one come 
 to think of it , in hold that it be physically impossible for a 
 street to defeat a city . while we think he be patrol the 
 eastern gate with his purple army ; while we be rush about the 
 street and wave halberd and lantern ; while poor old Wilson be 
 scheme like Moltke and fight like Achilles to entrap the wild 
 provost of Notting Hill -- Mr. Buck , retired draper , have simply drive 
 down in a hansom cab and do something about as plain as butter and 
 about as useful and nasty . he have go down to South Kensington , 
 Brompton , and Fulham , and by spend about four thousand pound of 
 his private mean , have raise an army of nearly as many man ; that be 
 to say , an army big enough to beat , not only Wayne , but Wayne and all 
 his present enemy put together . the army , I understand , be encamp 
 along High Street , Kensington , and fill it from the Church to Addison 
 Road Bridge . it be to advance by ten different road uphill to the 
 north . 

 " I can not endure to remain here . everything make it bad than it 
 need be . the dawn , for instance , have break round Campden Hill ; 
 splendid space of silver , edge with gold , be tear out of the sky . 
 worse still , Wayne and his man feel the dawn ; their face , though 
 bloody and pale , be strangely hopeful ... insupportably pathetic . 
 bad of all , for the moment they be win . if it be not for Buck 
 and the new army they might just , and only just , win . 

 " I repeat , I can not stand it . it be like watch that wonderful play 
 of old Maeterlinck 's ( you know my partiality for the healthy , jolly 
 old author of the nineteenth century ) , in which one have to watch the 
 quiet conduct of people inside a parlour , while know that the very 
 man be outside the door whose word can blast it all with tragedy . and 
 this be bad , for the man be not talk , but writhe and bleed 
 and drop dead for a thing that be already settle -- and settle 
 against they . the great grey mass of man still toil and tug and 
 sway hither and thither around the great grey tower ; and the tower be 
 still motionless , as it will always be motionless . these man will be 
 crush before the sun be set ; and new man will arise and be crush , 
 and new wrong do , and tyranny will always rise again like the sun , 
 and injustice will always be as fresh as the flower of spring . and 
 the stone tower will always look down on it . matter , in its brutal 
 beauty , will always look down on those who be mad enough to consent 
 to die , and yet more mad , since they consent to live . " 

        *        *        *        *        * 

 thus end abruptly the first and last contribution of the Special 
 Correspondent of the _ Court Journal _ to that value periodical . 

 the Correspondent himself , as have be say , be simply sick and 
 gloomy at the last news of the triumph of Buck . he slouch sadly down 
 the steep Aubrey Road , up which he have the night before run in so 
 unusual an excitement , and stroll out into the empty dawn - light main 
 road , look vaguely for a cab . he see nothing in the vacant space 
 except a blue - and - gold glitter thing , run very fast , which 
 look at first like a very tall beetle , but turn out , to his great 
 astonishment , to be Barker . 

 " have you hear the good news ? " ask that gentleman . 

 " yes , " say Quin , with a measured voice . " I have hear the glad 
 tiding of great joy . shall we take a hansom down to Kensington ? I see 
 one over there . " 

 they take the cab , and be , in four minute , front the rank of 
 the multitudinous and invincible army . Quin have not speak a word all 
 the way , and something about he have prevent the essentially 
 impressionable Barker from speak either . 

 the great army , as it move up Kensington High Street , call many 
 head to the numberless window , for it be long indeed -- long than 
 the life of most of the tolerably young -- since such an army have be 
 see in London . compare with the vast organisation which be now 
 swallow up the mile , with Buck at its head as leader , and the king 
 hang at its tail as journalist , the whole story of our problem be 
 insignificant . in the presence of that army the red Notting Hills and 
 the green Bayswaters be alike tiny and straggle group . in its 
 presence the whole struggle round Pump Street be like an ant - hill 
 under the hoof of an ox . every man who feel or look at that 
 infinity of man know that it be the triumph of Buck 's brutal 
 arithmetic . whether Wayne be right or wrong , wise or foolish , be 
 quite a fair matter for discussion . but it be a matter of history . at 
 the foot of Church Street , opposite Kensington Church , they pause in 
 their glow good humour . 

 " let we send some kind of messenger or herald up to they , " say Buck , 
 turn to Barker and the king . " let we send and ask they to cave in 
 without more muddle . " 

 " what shall we say to they ? " say Barker , doubtfully . 

 " the fact of the case be quite sufficient , " rejoin Buck . " it be 
 the fact of the case that make an army surrender . let we simply say 
 that our army that be fight their army , and their army that be 
 fight our army , amount altogether to about a thousand man . say that 
 we have four thousand . it be very simple . of the thousand fighting , 
 they have at the very most , three hundred , so that , with those three 
 hundred , they have now to fight four thousand seven hundred man . let 
 they do it if it amuse they . " 

 and the provost of North Kensington laugh . 

 the herald who be despatch up Church Street in all the pomp of the 
 South Kensington blue and gold , with the Three Birds on his tabard , 
 be attend by two trumpeter . 

 " what will they do when they consent ? " ask Barker , for the sake of 
 say something in the sudden stillness of that immense army . 

 " I know my Wayne very well , " say Buck , laugh . " when he submit he 
 will send a red herald flame with the Lion of Notting Hill . even 
 defeat will be delightful to he , since it be formal and romantic . " 

 the King , who have stroll up to the head of the line , break silence 
 for the first time . 

 " I should not wonder , " he say , " if he defy you , and do not send the 
 herald after all . I do not think you do know your Wayne quite so well 
 as you think . " 

 " all right , your Majesty , " say Buck , easily ; " if it be not 
 disrespectful , I will put my political calculation in a very simple 
 form . I will lay you ten pound to a shilling the herald come with the 
 surrender . " 

 " all right , " say Auberon . " I may be wrong , but it be my notion of Adam 
 Wayne that he will die in his city , and that , till he be dead , it will 
 not be a safe property . " 

 " the bet 's make , your Majesty , " say Buck . 

 another long silence ensue , in the course of which Barker alone , amid 
 the motionless army , stroll and stamp in his restless way . 

 then Buck suddenly leant forward . 

 " it be take your money , your Majesty , " he say . " I know it be . there 
 come the herald from Adam Wayne . " 

 " it be not , " cry the King , peer forward also . " you brute , it be a 
 red omnibus . " 

 " it be not , " say Buck , calmly ; and the King do not answer , for down 
 the centre of the spacious and silent Church Street be walk , 
 beyond question , the herald of the Red Lion , with two trumpeter . 

 Buck have something in he which teach he how to be magnanimous . in 
 his hour of success he feel magnanimous towards Wayne , whom he really 
 admire ; magnanimous towards the king , off whom he have score so 
 publicly ; and , above all , magnanimous towards Barker , who be the 
 titular leader of this vast South Kensington army , which his own 
 talent have evoke . 

 " General Barker , " he say , bow , " do you propose now to receive the 
 message from the besieged ? " 

 Barker bow also , and advance towards the herald . 

 " have your master , Mr. Adam Wayne , receive our request for surrender ? " 
 he ask . 

 the herald convey a solemn and respectful affirmative . 

 Barker resume , cough slightly , but encourage . 

 " what answer do your master send ? " 

 the herald again incline himself submissively , and answer in a kind 
 of monotone . 

 " my message be this . Adam Wayne , Lord High Provost of Notting Hill , 
 under the charter of King Auberon and the law of God and all mankind , 
 free and of a free city , greet James Barker , Lord High Provost of 
 South Kensington , by the same right free and honourable , leader of 
 the army of the South . with all friendly reverence , and with all 
 constitutional consideration , he desire James Barker to lay down his 
 arm , and the whole army under his command to lay down their arm 
 also . " 

 before the word be end the King have run forward into the open 
 space with shin eye . the rest of the staff and the forefront of 
 the army be literally strike breathless . when they recover they 
 begin to laugh beyond restraint ; the revulsion be too sudden . 

 " the Lord High Provost of Notting Hill , " continue the herald , " do 
 not propose , in the event of your surrender , to use his victory for 
 any of those repressive purpose which other have entertain against 
 he . he will leave you your free law and your free city , your flag 
 and your government . he will not destroy the religion of South 
 Kensington , or crush the old custom of Bayswater . " 

 an irrepressible explosion of laughter go up from the forefront of 
 the great army . 

 " the King must have have something to do with this humour , " say Buck , 
 slap his thigh . " it be too deliciously insolent . Barker , have a 
 glass of wine . " 

 and in his conviviality he actually send a soldier across to the 
 restaurant opposite the church and bring out two glass for a 
 toast . 

 when the laughter have die down , the herald continue quite 
 monotonously-- 

 " in the event of your surrender your arm and disperse under the 
 superintendence of our force , these local right of yours shall be 
 carefully observe . in the event of your not do so , the Lord High 
 provost of Notting Hill desire to announce that he have just capture 
 the Waterworks Tower , just above you , on Campden Hill , and that within 
 ten minute from now , that is , on the reception through I of your 
 refusal , he will open the great reservoir and flood the whole valley 
 where you stand in thirty foot of water . God save King Auberon ! " 

 Buck have drop his glass and send a great splash of wine over the 
 road . 

 " but -- but-- " he say ; and then by a last and splendid effort of his 
 great sanity , look the fact in the face . 

 " we must surrender , " he say . " you could do nothing against fifty 
 thousand ton of water come down a steep hill , ten minute hence . we 
 must surrender . our four thousand man might as well be four . _ Vicisti 
 Galilæe ! _ perkin , you may as well get I another glass of wine . " 

 in this way the vast army of South Kensington surrender and the 
 Empire of Notting Hill begin . one further fact in this connection be 
 perhaps worth mention -- the fact that , after his victory , Adam Wayne 
 cause the great tower on Campden Hill to be plat with gold and 
 inscribe with a great epitaph , say that it be the monument of 
 Wilfrid Lambert , the heroic defender of the place , and surmount with 
 a statue , in which his large nose be do something less than justice 
 to . 




 BOOK v 




 CHAPTER I--_The Empire of Notting Hill _ 


 on the evening of the third of October , twenty year after the great 
 victory of Notting Hill , which give it the dominion of London , King 
 Auberon come , as of old , out of Kensington Palace . 

 he have change little , save for a streak or two of grey in his hair , 
 for his face have always be old , and his step slow , and , as it be , 
 decrepit . 

 if he look old , it be not because of anything physical or mental . 
 it be because he still wear , with a quaint conservatism , the 
 frock - coat and high hat of the day before the great war . " I have 
 survive the Deluge , " he say . " I be a pyramid , and must behave as 
 such . " 

 as he pass up the street the Kensingtonians , in their picturesque 
 blue smock , salute he as a king , and then look after he as a 
 curiosity . it seem odd to they that man have once wear so elvish an 
 attire . 

 the king , cultivate the walk attribute to the old inhabitant 
 ( " Gaffer Auberon " his friend be now confidentially desire to call 
 he ) , go toddle northward . he pause , with reminiscence in his 
 eye , at the Southern Gate of Notting Hill , one of those nine great 
 gate of bronze and steel , work with relief of the old battle , by 
 the hand of Chiffy himself . 

 " ah ! " he say , shake his head and assume an unnecessary air of 
 age , and a provincialism of accent--"Ah ! I mind when there warn't none 
 of this here . " 

 he pass through the Ossington Gate , surmount by a great lion , 
 work in red copper on yellow brass , with the motto , " nothing Ill. " 
 the guard in red and gold salute he with his halberd . 

 it be about sunset , and the lamp be be light . Auberon pause to 
 look at they , for they be Chiffy 's fine work , and his artistic eye 
 never fail to feast on they . in memory of the Great Battle of the 
 Lamps , each great iron lamp be surmount by a veiled figure , sword 
 in hand , hold over the flame an iron hood or extinguisher , as if 
 ready to let it fall if the army of the South and West should again 
 show their flag in the city . thus no child in Notting Hill could play 
 about the street without the very lamp - post remind he of the 
 salvation of his country in the dreadful year . 

 " Old Wayne be right in a way , " comment the King . " the sword do 
 make thing beautiful . it have make the whole world romantic by now . 
 and to think people once think I a buffoon for suggest a 
 romantic Notting Hill . Deary I , deary I ! ( I think that be the 
 expression)--it seem like a previous existence . " 

 turn a corner , he find himself in Pump Street , opposite the four 
 shop which Adam Wayne have study twenty year before . he enter 
 idly the shop of Mr. Mead , the grocer . Mr. Mead be somewhat old , 
 like the rest of the world , and his red beard , which he now wear with 
 a moustache , and long and full , be partly blanch and discolour . 
 he be dress in a long and richly embroider robe of blue , brown , 
 and crimson , interweave with an eastern complexity of pattern , and 
 cover with obscure symbol and picture , represent his ware 
 pass from hand to hand and from nation to nation . round his neck 
 be the chain with the Blue Argosy cut in turquoise , which he wear as 
 Grand Master of the Grocers . the whole shop have the sombre and 
 sumptuous look of its owner . the ware be display as prominently 
 as in the old day , but they be now blend and arrange with a 
 sense of tint and grouping , too often neglect by the dim grocer of 
 those forget day . the ware be show plainly , but show not so 
 much as an old grocer would have show his stock , but rather as an 
 educate virtuoso would have show his treasure . the tea be store 
 in great blue and green vas , inscribe with the nine indispensable 
 saying of the wise man of China . other vas of a confused orange and 
 purple , less rigid and dominant , more humble and dreamy , store 
 symbolically the tea of India . a row of casket of a simple silvery 
 metal contain tin meat . each be work with some rude but 
 rhythmic form , as a shell , a horn , a fish , or an apple , to indicate 
 what material have be can in it . 

 " your Majesty , " say Mr. Mead , sweep an oriental reverence . " this 
 be an honour to I , but yet more an honour to the city . " 

 Auberon take off his hat . 

 " Mr. Mead , " he say , " Notting Hill , whether in give or taking , can 
 deal in nothing but honour . do you happen to sell liquorice ? " 

 " Liquorice , sire , " say Mr. Mead , " be not the least important of our 
 benefit out of the dark heart of Arabia . " 

 and go reverently towards a green and silver canister , make in the 
 form of an arabian mosque , he proceed to serve his customer . 

 " I be just think , Mr. Mead , " say the King , reflectively , " I do not 
 know why I should think about it just now , but I be just think of 
 twenty year ago . do you remember the time before the war ? " 

 the grocer , have wrap up the liquorice stick in a piece of paper 
 ( inscribe with some appropriate sentiment ) , lift his large grey 
 eye dreamily , and look at the darken sky outside . 

 " oh yes , your Majesty , " he say . " I remember these street before the 
 Lord Provost begin to rule we . I can not remember how we feel very well . 
 all the great song and the fighting change one so ; and I do not think 
 we can really estimate all we owe to the provost ; but I can remember 
 his come into this very shop twenty - two year ago , and I remember 
 the thing he say . the singular thing be that , as far as I remember , 
 I think the thing he say odd at that time . now it be the thing 
 that I say , as far as I can recall they , that seem to I odd -- as odd 
 as a madman 's antic . " 

 " ah ! " say the King ; and look at he with an unfathomable quietness . 

 " I think nothing of be a grocer then , " he say . " be not that odd 
 enough for anybody ? I think nothing of all the wonderful place that 
 my good come from , and wonderful way that they be make . I do not 
 know that I be for all practical purpose a king with slave spear 
 fish near the secret pool , and gather fruit in the island under 
 the world . my mind be a blank on the thing . I be as mad as a 
 hatter . " 

 the King turn also , and star out into the dark , where the great 
 lamp that commemorate the battle be already flame . 

 " and be this the end of poor old Wayne ? " he say , half to himself . " to 
 inflame every one so much that he be lose himself in the blaze . be 
 this his victory that he , my incomparable Wayne , be now only one in a 
 world of Waynes ? have he conquer and become by conquest commonplace ? 
 must Mr. Mead , the grocer , talk as high as he ? Lord ! what a strange 
 world in which a man can not remain unique even by take the trouble 
 to go mad ! " 

 and he go dreamily out of the shop . 

 he pause outside the next one almost precisely as the Provost have 
 do two decade before . 

 [ illustration : " a fine evening , SIR , " say the CHEMIST . ] 

 " how uncommonly creepy this shop look ! " he say . " but yet somehow 
 encouragingly creepy , invitingly creepy . it look like something in a 
 jolly old nursery story in which you be frightened out of your skin , 
 and yet know that thing always end well . the way those low sharp 
 gable be carve like great black bat 's wing fold down , and the 
 way those queer - colour bowl underneath be make to shine like 
 giant eye - ball . it look like a benevolent warlock 's hut . it be 
 apparently a chemist 's . " 

 almost as he speak , Mr. Bowles , the chemist , come to his shop door in 
 a long black velvet gown and hood , monastic as it be , but yet with a 
 touch of the diabolic . his hair be still quite black , and his face 
 even pale than of old . the only spot of colour he carry be a red 
 star cut in some precious stone of strong tint , hang on his breast . he 
 belong to the Society of the Red Star of Charity , found on the 
 lamp display by doctor and chemist . 

 " a fine evening , sir , " say the chemist . " why , I can scarcely be 
 mistaken in suppose it to be your Majesty . pray step inside and 
 share a bottle of sal - volatile , or anything that may take your fancy . 
 as it happen , there be an old acquaintance of your Majesty 's in my 
 shop carouse ( if I may be permit the term ) upon that beverage at 
 this moment . " 

 the King enter the shop , which be an Aladdin 's garden of shade and 
 hue , for as the chemist 's scheme of colour be more brilliant than 
 the grocer 's scheme , so it be arrange with even more delicacy and 
 fancy . never , if the phrase may be employ , have such a nosegay of 
 medicine be present to the artistic eye . 

 but even the solemn rainbow of that evening interior be rival or 
 even eclipse by the figure stand in the centre of the shop . his 
 form , which be a large and stately one , be clothe in a brilliant blue 
 velvet , cut in the rich Renaissance fashion , and slash so as to 
 show gleam and gap of a wonderful lemon or pale yellow . he have 
 several chain round his neck , and his plume , which be of several 
 tint of bronze and gold , hang down to the great gold hilt of his long 
 sword . he be drink a dose of sal - volatile , and admire its opal 
 tint . the King advance with a slight mystification towards the tall 
 figure , whose face be in shadow ; then he said-- 

 " by the Great Lord of Luck , Barker ! " 

 the figure remove his plume cap , show the same dark head and 
 long , almost equine face which the King have so often see rise out 
 of the high collar of Bond Street . except for a grey patch on each 
 temple , it be totally unchanged . 

 " your Majesty , " say Barker , " this be a meeting nobly retrospective , a 
 meeting that have about it a certain October gold . I drink to old 
 day ; " and he finish his sal - volatile with simple feeling . 

 " I be delighted to see you again , Barker , " say the King . " it be 
 indeed long since we meet . what with my travel in Asia Minor , and my 
 book have to be write ( you have read my ' life of Prince Albert for 
 child , ' of course ? ) , we have scarcely meet twice since the Great 
 War . that be twenty year ago . " 

 " I wonder , " say Barker , thoughtfully , " if I might speak freely to 
 your Majesty ? " 

 " well , " say Auberon , " it be rather late in the day to start speak 
 respectfully . Flap away , my bird of freedom . " 

 " well , your Majesty , " reply Barker , lower his voice , " I do not 
 think it will be so long to the next war . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Auberon . 

 " we will stand this insolence no long , " burst out Barker , fiercely . 
 " we be not slave because Adam Wayne twenty year ago cheat we with 
 a water - pipe . Notting Hill be Notting Hill ; it be not the world . we 
 in South Kensington , we also have memory -- ay , and hope . if they 
 fight for these trumpery shop and a few lamp - post , shall we not 
 fight for the great High Street and the sacred Natural History 
 Museum ? " 

 " Great Heavens ! " say the astounded Auberon . " will wonder never 
 cease ? have the two great marvel be achieve ? have you turn 
 altruistic , and have Wayne turn selfish ? be you the patriot , and he 
 the tyrant ? " 

 " it be not from Wayne himself altogether that the evil come , " 
 answer Barker . " he , indeed , be now mostly wrap in dream , and 
 sit with his old sword beside the fire . but Notting Hill be the 
 tyrant , your Majesty . its Council and its crowd have be so 
 intoxicate by the spreading over the whole city of Wayne 's old way 
 and vision , that they try to meddle with every one , and rule every 
 one , and civilise every one , and tell every one what be good for he . 
 I do not deny the great impulse which his old war , wild as it seem , 
 give to the civic life of our time . it come when I be still a young 
 man , and I admit it enlarge my career . but we be not go to see 
 our own city flout and thwart from day to day because of 
 something Wayne do for we all nearly a quarter of a century ago . I be 
 just wait here for news upon this very matter . it be rumour that 
 Notting Hill have veto the statue of General Wilson they be put 
 up opposite Chepstow Place . if that be so , it be a black and white 
 shameless breach of the term on which we surrender to Turnbull 
 after the battle of the Tower . we be to keep our own custom and 
 self - government . if that be so-- " 

 " it be so , " say a deep voice ; and both man turn round . 

 a burly figure in purple robe , with a silver eagle hang round his 
 neck and moustache almost as florid as his plume , stand in the 
 doorway . 

 " yes , " he say , acknowledge the King 's start , " I be Provost Buck , 
 and the news be true . these man of the Hill have forget that we 
 fight round the Tower as well as they , and that it be sometimes 
 foolish , as well as base , to despise the conquered . " 

 " let we step outside , " say Barker , with a grim composure . 

 Buck do so , and stand roll his eye up and down the lamp - light 
 street . 

 " I would like to have a go at smash all this , " he mutter , 
 " though I be over sixty . I would like-- " 

 his voice end in a cry , and he reel back a step , with his hand to 
 his eye , as he have do in those street twenty year before . 

 " darkness ! " he cried--"darkness again ! what do it mean ? " 

 for in truth every lamp in the street have go out , so that they could 
 not see even each other 's outline , except faintly . the voice of the 
 chemist come with startling cheerfulness out of the density . 

 " oh , do not you know ? " he say . " do they never tell you this be the 
 Feast of the Lamps , the anniversary of the great battle that almost 
 lose and just save Notting Hill ? do not you know , your Majesty , that 
 on this night twenty - one year ago we see Wilson 's green uniform 
 charge down this street , and drive Wayne and Turnbull back upon 
 the gas - work , fight with their handful like fiend from hell ? and 
 that then , in that great hour , Wayne spring through a window of the 
 gas - work , with one blow of his hand bring darkness on the whole 
 city , and then with a cry like a lion 's , that be hear through four 
 street , fly at Wilson 's man , sword in hand , and sweep they , 
 bewilder as they be , and ignorant of the map , clear out of the 
 sacred street again ? and do not you know that upon that night every 
 year all light be turn out for half an hour while we sing the 
 Notting Hill anthem in the darkness ? Hark ! there it begin . " 

 through the night come a crash of drum , and then a strong swell of 
 human voices-- 

 " when the world be in the balance , there be night on Notting Hill , 
 ( there be night on Notting Hill ): it be noble than the day ; 
 on the city where the light be and the firesides glow , 
 from the sea and from the desert come the thing we do not know , 
 come the darkness , come the darkness , come the darkness on the foe , 
       and the old guard of God turn to bay . 
   for the old guard of God turn to bay , turn to bay , 
   and the star fall down before it ere its banner fall to - day : 
   for when army be around we as a howling and a horde , 
   when fall be the citadel and broken be the sword , 
   the darkness come upon they like the Dragon of the Lord , 
       when the old guard of God turn to bay . " 

 the voice be just uplift themselves in a second verse when they 
 be stop by a scurry and a yell . Barker have bound into the 
 street with a cry of " South Kensington ! " and a draw dagger . in less 
 time than a man could blink , the whole pack street be full of 
 curse and struggle . Barker be fling back against the shop - front , 
 but use the second only to draw his sword as well as his dagger , and 
 call out , " this be not the first time I have come through the thick 
 of you , " fling himself again into the press . it be evident that he 
 have draw blood at last , for a more violent outcry arise , and many 
 other knife and sword be discernible in the faint light . Barker , 
 after have wound more than one man , seem on the point of be 
 fling back again , when Buck suddenly step out into the street . he 
 have no weapon , for he affect rather the peaceful magnificence of the 
 great burgher , than the pugnacious dandyism which have replace the old 
 sombre dandyism in Barker . but with a blow of his clench fist he 
 break the pane of the next shop , which be the old curiosity shop , 
 and , plunge in his hand , snatch a kind of japanese scimitar , and 
 call out , " Kensington ! Kensington ! " rush to Barker 's assistance . 

 Barker 's sword be break , but he be lay about he with his 
 dagger . just as Buck run up , a man of Notting Hill strike Barker down , 
 but Buck strike the man down on top of he , and Barker spring up 
 again , the blood run down his face . 

 suddenly all these cry be cleave by a great voice , that seem to 
 fall out of heaven . it be terrible to Buck and Barker and the king , 
 from its seeming to come out the empty sky ; but it be more terrible 
 because it be a familiar voice , and one which at the same time they 
 have not hear for so long . 

 " turn up the light , " say the voice from above they , and for a moment 
 there be no reply , but only a tumult . 

 " in the name of Notting Hill and of the great Council of the City , 
 turn up the light . " 

 there be again a tumult and a vagueness for a moment , then the whole 
 street and every object in it spring suddenly out of the darkness , as 
 every lamp spring into life . and look up they see , stand upon a 
 balcony near the roof of one of the high house , the figure and the 
 face of Adam Wayne , his red hair blow behind he , a little streaked 
 with grey . 


 " what be this , my people ? " he say . " be it altogether impossible to 
 make a thing good without it immediately insist on be wicked ? 
 the glory of Notting Hill in have achieve its independence , have 
 be enough for I to dream of for many year , as I sit beside the 
 fire . be it really not enough for you , who have have so many other 
 affair to excite and distract you ? Notting Hill be a nation . why 
 should it condescend to be a mere empire ? you wish to pull down the 
 statue of General Wilson , which the man of bayswater have so rightly 
 erect in Westbourne Grove . fool ! who erect that statue ? do 
 bayswater erect it ? no . Notting Hill erect it . do you not see that 
 it be the glory of our achievement that we have infect the other 
 city with the idealism of Notting Hill ? it be we who have create 
 not only our own side , but both side of this controversy . o too 
 humble fool , why should you wish to destroy your enemy ? you have 
 do something more to they . you have create your enemy . you wish 
 to pull down that gigantic silver hammer , which stand , like an 
 obelisk , in the centre of the Broadway of Hammersmith . fool ! before 
 Notting Hill arise , do any person pass through Hammersmith 
 Broadway expect to see there a gigantic silver hammer ? you wish to 
 abolish the great bronze figure of a knight stand upon the 
 artificial bridge at Knightsbridge . fool ! who would have think of 
 it before Notting Hill arise ? I have even hear , and with deep pain I 
 have hear it , that the evil eye of our imperial envy have be cast 
 towards the remote horizon of the west , and that we have object to 
 the great black monument of a crown raven , which commemorate the 
 skirmish of Ravenscourt Park . who create all these thing ? be they 
 there before we come ? can not you be content with that destiny which 
 be enough for Athens , which be enough for Nazareth ? the destiny , the 
 humble purpose , of create a new world . be Athens angry because 
 Romans and Florentines have adopt her phraseology for express 
 their own patriotism ? be Nazareth angry because as a little village it 
 have become the type of all little village out of which , as the snob 
 say , no good can come ? have Athens ask every one to wear the chlamys ? 
 be all follower of the Nazarene compel to wear turban . no ! but 
 the soul of Athens go forth and make man drink hemlock , and the soul 
 of Nazareth go forth and make man consent to be crucify . so have 
 the soul of Notting Hill go forth and make man realise what it be to 
 live in a city . just as we inaugurate our symbol and ceremony , so 
 they have inaugurate theirs ; and be you so mad as to contend against 
 they ? Notting Hill be right ; it have always be right . it have mould 
 itself on its own necessity , its own _ sine quâ non _ ; it have accept 
 its own ultimatum . because it be a nation it have create itself ; and 
 because it be a nation it can destroy itself . notte Hill shall 
 always be the judge . if it be your will because of this matter of 
 General Wilson 's statue to make war upon bayswater-- " 

 a roar of cheer break in upon his word , and further speech be 
 impossible . pale to the lip , the great patriot try again and again 
 to speak ; but even his authority could not keep down the dark and 
 roar mass in the street below he . he say something far , but 
 it be not audible . he descend at last sadly from the garret in 
 which he live , and mingle with the crowd at the foot of the house . 
 Finding General Turnbull , he put his hand on his shoulder with a queer 
 affection and gravity , and said-- 

 " to - morrow , old man , we shall have a new experience , as fresh as the 
 flower of spring . we shall be defeat . you and I have be through 
 three battle together , and have somehow or other miss this peculiar 
 delight . it be unfortunate that we shall not probably be able to 
 exchange our experience , because , as it most annoyingly happen , we 
 shall probably both be dead . " 

 Turnbull look dimly surprised . 

 " I do not mind so much about be dead , " he say , " but why should you 
 say that we shall be defeat ? " 

 " the answer be very simple , " reply Wayne , calmly . " it be because we 
 ought to be defeat . we have be in the most horrible hole before 
 now ; but in all those I be perfectly certain that the star be on 
 our side , and that we ought to get out . now I know that we ought not 
 to get out ; and that take away from I everything with which I win . " 

 as Wayne speak he start a little , for both man become aware that a 
 third figure be listen to they -- a small figure with wonder 
 eye . 

 " be it really true , my dear Wayne , " say the King , interrupting , " that 
 you think you will be beat to - morrow ? " 

 " there can be no doubt about it whatever , " reply Adam Wayne ; " the 
 real reason be the one of which I have just speak . but as a 
 concession to your materialism , I will add that they have an organise 
 army of a hundred ally city against our one . that in itself , 
 however , would be unimportant . " 

 Quin , with his round eye , seem strangely insistent . 

 " you be quite sure , " he say , " that you must be beat ? " 

 " I be afraid , " say Turnbull , gloomily , " that there can be no doubt 
 about it . " 

 " then , " cry the King , fling out his arm , " give I a halberd ! 
 give I a halberd , somebody ! I desire all man to witness that I , 
 Auberon , King of England , do here and now abdicate , and implore the 
 provost of Notting Hill to permit I to enlist in his army . give I a 
 halberd ! " 

 he seize one from some pass guard , and , shoulder it , stamp 
 solemnly after the shout column of halberdier which be , by this 
 time , parade the street . he have , however , nothing to do with the 
 wrecking of the statue of General Wilson , which take place before 
 morning . 




 CHAPTER ii--_the last Battle _ 


 the day be cloudy when Wayne go down to die with all his army in 
 Kensington Gardens ; it be cloudy again when that army have be 
 swallow up by the vast army of a new world . there have be an 
 almost uncanny interval of sunshine , in which the provost of Notting 
 Hill , with all the placidity of an onlooker , have gaze across to the 
 hostile army on the great space of verdure opposite ; the long 
 strip of green and blue and gold lie across the park in square and 
 oblong like a proposition in Euclid work in a rich embroidery . but 
 the sunlight be a weak and , as it be , a wet sunlight , and be soon 
 swallow up . Wayne speak to the king , with a queer sort of coldness 
 and languor , as to the military operation . it be as he have say the 
 night before -- that be deprive of his sense of an impracticable 
 rectitude , he be , in effect , be deprive of everything . he be out 
 of date , and at sea in a mere world of compromise and competition , of 
 Empire against Empire , of the tolerably right and the tolerably wrong . 
 when his eye fall on the king , however , who be march very gravely 
 with a top hat and a halberd , it brighten slightly . 

 " well , your Majesty , " he say , " you at least ought to be proud to - day . 
 if your child be fight each other , at least those who win be 
 your child . other king have distribute justice , you have 
 distribute life . other king have rule a nation , you have create 
 nation . other have make kingdom , you have beget they . look at 
 your child , father ! " and he stretch his hand out towards the 
 enemy . 

 Auberon do not raise his eye . 

 " see how splendidly , " cry Wayne , " the new city come on -- the new 
 city from across the river . see where Battersea advance over 
 there -- under the flag of the Lost Dog ; and Putney -- don't you see the 
 Man on the White Boar shin on their standard as the sun catch it ? 
 it be the coming of a new age , your Majesty . Notting Hill be not a 
 common empire ; it be a thing like Athens , the mother of a mode of 
 life , of a manner of living , which shall renew the youth of the 
 world -- a thing like Nazareth . when I be young I remember , in the old 
 dreary day , wiseacre use to write book about how train would get 
 fast , and all the world be one empire , and tram - car go to the moon . 
 and even as a child I use to say to myself , ' far more likely that we 
 shall go on the crusade again , or worship the god of the city . ' and 
 so it have be . and I be glad , though this be my last battle . " 

 even as he speak there come a crash of steel from the left , and he 
 turn his head . 

 " Wilson ! " he cry , with a kind of joy . " Red Wilson have charge our 
 left . no one can hold he in ; he eat sword . he be as keen a soldier 
 as Turnbull , but less patient -- less really great . ha ! and Barker be 
 move . how Barker have improve ; how handsome he look ! it be not all 
 have plume ; it be also have a soul in one 's daily life . ha ! " 

 and another crash of steel on the right show that Barker have close 
 with Notting Hill on the other side . 

 " turnbull be there ! " cry Wayne . " see he hurl they back ! Barker be 
 check ! turnbull charge -- win ! but our left be break . Wilson have 
 smash Bowles and Mead , and may turn our flank . forward , the 
 Provost 's guard ! " 

 and the whole centre move forward , Wayne 's face and hair and sword 
 flame in the van . 

 the King run suddenly forward . 

 the next instant a great jar that go through it tell that it have meet 
 the enemy . and right over against they through the wood of their own 
 weapon Auberon see the Purple Eagle of Buck of North Kensington . 

 on the left Red Wilson be storm the broken rank , his little green 
 figure conspicuous even in the tangle of man and weapon , with the 
 flame red moustache and the crown of laurel . bowle slash at his 
 head and tear away some of the wreath , leave the rest bloody , and , 
 with a roar like a bull 's , Wilson spring at he , and , after a rattle 
 of fencing , plunge his point into the chemist , who fall , cry , 
 " Notting Hill ! " then the Notting Hillers waver , and bayswater sweep 
 they back in confusion . Wilson have carry everything before he . 

 on the right , however , Turnbull have carry the Red Lion banner with a 
 rush against Barker 's man , and the banner of the Golden Birds bear up 
 with difficulty against it . Barker 's man fall fast . in the centre 
 Wayne and Buck be engage , stubborn and confused . so far as the 
 fighting go , it be precisely equal . but the fighting be a farce . 
 for behind the three small army with which Wayne 's small army be 
 engage lie the great sea of the allied army , which look on as yet 
 as scornful spectator , but could have break all four army by 
 move a finger . 

 suddenly they do move . some of the front contingent , the pastoral 
 chief from Shepherd 's Bush , with their spear and fleece , be see 
 advance , and the rude clan from Paddington Green . they be 
 advance for a very good reason . Buck , of North Kensington , be 
 signal wildly ; he be surround , and totally cut off . his 
 regiment be a struggle mass of people , islande in a red sea of 
 Notting Hill . 

 the ally have be too careless and confident . they have allow 
 Barker 's force to be break to piece by Turnbull , and the moment that 
 be do , the astute old leader of Notting Hill swing his man round 
 and attack Buck behind and on both side . at the same moment Wayne 
 cry , " Charge ! " and strike he in front like a thunderbolt . 

 two - third of Buck 's man be cut to piece before their ally could 
 reach they . then the sea of city come on with their banner like 
 breaker , and swallow Notting Hill for ever . the battle be not 
 over , for not one of Wayne 's man would surrender , and it last till 
 sundown , and long after . but it be decide ; the story of Notting Hill 
 be end . 

 when Turnbull see it , he cease a moment from fight , and look 
 round he . the evening sunlight strike his face ; it look like a 
 child 's . 

 " I have have my youth , " he say . then , snatch an axe from a man , he 
 dash into the thick of the spear of Shepherd 's Bush , and die 
 somewhere far in the depth of their reeling rank . then the battle 
 roar on ; every man of Notting Hill be slay before night . 

 Wayne be stand by a tree alone after the battle . several man 
 approach he with axis . one strike at he . his foot seem partly to 
 slip ; but he fling his hand out , and steady himself against the 
 tree . 

 Barker spring after he , sword in hand , and shake with excitement . 

 " how large now , my lord , " he cry , " be the Empire of Notting Hill ? " 

 Wayne smile in the gathering dark . 

 " always as large as this , " he say , and sweep his sword round in a 
 semicircle of silver . 

 Barker drop , wound in the neck ; and Wilson spring over his body 
 like a tiger - cat , rush at Wayne . at the same moment there come 
 behind the Lord of the Red Lion a cry and a flare of yellow , and a 
 mass of the West Kensington halberdier plough up the slope , 
 knee - deep in grass , bear the yellow banner of the city before they , 
 and shout aloud . 

 at the same second Wilson go down under Wayne 's sword , seemingly 
 smash like a fly . the great sword rise again like a bird , but Wilson 
 seem to rise with it , and , his sword be break , spring at Wayne 's 
 throat like a dog . the foremost of the yellow halberdier have reach 
 the tree and swing his axe above the struggle Wayne . with a curse 
 the King whirl up his own halberd , and dash the blade in the man 's 
 face . he reel and roll down the slope , just as the furious Wilson 
 be fling on his back again . and again he be on his foot , and again 
 at Wayne 's throat . then he be fling again , but this time laugh 
 triumphantly . grasp in his hand be the red and yellow favour that 
 Wayne wear as Provost of Notting Hill . he have tear it from the place 
 where it have be carry for twenty - five year . 

 with a shout the West Kensington man close round Wayne , the great 
 yellow banner flap over his head . 

 " where be your favour now , Provost ? " cry the West Kensington leader . 

 and a laugh go up . 

 Adam strike at the standard - bearer and bring he reel forward . as 
 the banner stoop , he grasp the yellow fold and tear off a shred . 
 a halberdier strike he on the shoulder , wound bloodily . 

 " here be one colour ! " he cry , push the yellow into his belt ; " and 
 here ! " he cry , point to his own blood--"here be the other . " 

 at the same instant the shock of a sudden and heavy halberd lay the 
 King stunned or dead . in the wild vision of vanish consciousness , 
 he see again something that belong to an utterly forget time , 
 something that he have see somewhere long ago in a restaurant . he see , 
 with his swimming eye , red and yellow , the colour of Nicaragua . 

 Quin do not see the end . Wilson , wild with joy , spring again at Adam 
 Wayne , and the great sword of Notting Hill be whirl above once 
 more . then man duck instinctively at the rush noise of the sword 
 come down out of the sky , and Wilson of Bayswater be smash and 
 wipe down upon the floor like a fly . nothing be leave of he but a 
 wreck ; but the blade that have break he be break . in die he have 
 snap the great sword and the spell of it ; the sword of Wayne be 
 break at the hilt . one rush of the enemy carry Wayne by force 
 against the tree . they be too close to use halberd or even sword ; 
 they be breast to breast , even nostril to nostril . but Buck get 
 his dagger free . 

 " kill he ! " he cry , in a strange stifle voice . " kill he ! good or 
 bad , he be none of we ! do not be blind by the face ! ... God ! have we 
 not be blind all along ! " and he draw his arm back for a stab , and 
 seem to close his eye . 

 Wayne do not drop the hand that hang on to the tree - branch . but a 
 mighty heave go over his breast and his whole huge figure , like an 
 earthquake over great hill . and with that convulsion of effort he 
 rent the branch out of the tree , with tongue of tear wood ; and , 
 sway it once only , he let the splintered club fall on Buck , 
 break his neck . the planner of the Great Road fall face foremost 
 dead , with his dagger in a grip of steel . 

 " for you and I , and for all brave man , my brother , " say Wayne , in 
 his strange chant , " there be good wine pour in the inn at the end of 
 the world . " 

 the packed man make another lurch or heave towards he ; it be almost 
 too dark to fight clearly . he catch hold of the oak again , this time 
 get his hand into a wide crevice and grasping , as it be , the 
 bowel of the tree . the whole crowd , number some thirty man , make a 
 rush to tear he away from it ; they hang on with all their weight and 
 number , and nothing stir . a solitude could not have be stiller 
 than that group of strain man . then there be a faint sound . 

 " his hand be slip , " cry two man in exultation . 

 " you do not know much of he , " say another , grimly ( a man of the old 
 war ) . " more likely his bone crack . " 

 " it be neither -- by God , it be neither ! " say one of the first two . 

 " what be it , then ? " ask the second . 

 " the tree be fall , " he reply . 

 " as the tree falleth , so shall it lie , " say Wayne 's voice out of the 
 darkness , and it have the same sweet and yet horrible air that it have 
 have throughout , of come from a great distance , from before or after 
 the event . even when he be struggle like an eel or batter like a 
 madman , he speak like a spectator . " as the tree falleth , so shall it 
 lie , " he say . " man have call that a gloomy text . it be the essence 
 of all exultation . I be do now what I have do all my life , what 
 be the only happiness , what be the only universality . I be cling to 
 something . let it fall , and there let it lie . fool , you go about and 
 see the kingdom of the earth , and be liberal and wise and 
 cosmopolitan , which be all that the devil can give you -- all that he 
 could offer to Christ , only to be spurn away . I be do what the 
 truly wise do . when a child go out into the garden and take hold of 
 a tree , say , ' let this tree be all I have , ' that moment its root 
 take hold on hell and its branch on the star . the joy I have be 
 what the lover know when a woman be everything . it be what a savage 
 know when his idol be everything . it be what I know when Notting Hill 
 be everything . I have a city . let it stand or fall . " 

 as he speak , the turf lift itself like a live thing , and out of it 
 rise slowly , like crested serpent , the root of the oak . then the 
 great head of the tree , that seem a green cloud among grey one , 
 sweep the sky suddenly like a broom , and the whole tree heel over 
 like a ship , smash every one in its fall . 




 CHAPTER III--_Two Voices _ 


 in a place in which there be total darkness for hour , there be also 
 for hour total silence . then a voice speak out of the darkness , no 
 one could have tell from where , and say aloud-- 

 " so end the Empire of Notting Hill . as it begin in blood , so it end 
 in blood , and all thing be always the same . " 

 and there be silence again , and then again there be a voice , but it 
 have not the same tone ; it seem that it be not the same voice . 

 " if all thing be always the same , it be because they be always 
 heroic . if all thing be always the same , it be because they be 
 always new . to each man one soul only be give ; to each soul only be 
 give a little power -- the power at some moment to outgrow and swallow 
 up the star . if age after age that power come upon man , whatever 
 give it to they be great . whatever make man feel old be mean -- an 
 empire or a skin - flint shop . whatever make man feel young be great -- a 
 great war or a love - story . and in the darkest of the book of God 
 there be write a truth that be also a riddle . it be of the new 
 thing that man tire -- of fashion and proposal and improvement and 
 change . it be the old thing that startle and intoxicate . it be the 
 old thing that be young . there be no sceptic who do not feel that 
 many have doubt before . there be no rich and fickle man who do not 
 feel that all his novelty be ancient . there be no worshipper of 
 change who do not feel upon his neck the vast weight of the 
 weariness of the universe . but we who do the old thing be feed by 
 nature with a perpetual infancy . no man who be in love think that any 
 one have be in love before . no woman who have a child think that 
 there have be such thing as child . no people that fight for 
 their own city be haunt with the burden of the broken empire . yes , 
 o dark voice , the world be always the same , for it be always 
 unexpected . " 

 a little gust of wind blow through the night , and then the first voice 
 answered-- 

 " but in this world there be some , be they wise or foolish , whom 
 nothing intoxicate . there be some who see all your disturbance like 
 a cloud of fly . they know that while man will laugh at your Notting 
 Hill , and will study and rehearse and sing of Athens and Jerusalem , 
 Athens and Jerusalem be silly suburb like your Notting Hill . they 
 know that the earth itself be a suburb , and can feel only drearily 
 and respectably amuse as they move upon it . " 

 " they be philosopher or they be fool , " say the other voice . " they 
 be not man . man live , as I say , rejoice from age to age in 
 something fresh than progress -- in the fact that with every baby a 
 new sun and a new moon be make . if our ancient humanity be a single 
 man , it might perhaps be that he would break down under the memory of 
 so many loyalty , under the burden of so many diverse heroism , under 
 the load and terror of all the goodness of man . but it have please God 
 so to isolate the individual soul that it can only learn of all other 
 soul by hearsay , and to each one goodness and happiness come with the 
 youth and violence of lightning , as momentary and as pure . and the 
 doom of failure that lie on all human system do not in real fact 
 affect they any more than the worm of the inevitable grave affect a 
 child 's game in a meadow . Notting Hill have fall ; Notting Hill have 
 die . but that be not the tremendous issue . Notting Hill have live . " 

 " but if , " answer the other voice , " if what be achieve by all these 
 effort be only the common contentment of humanity , why do man so 
 extravagantly toil and die in they ? have nothing be do by Notting 
 Hill than any chance clump of farmer or clan of savage would not 
 have do without it ? what might have be do to Notting Hill if the 
 world have be different may be a deep question ; but there be a 
 deep . what could have happen to the world if Notting Hill have 
 never be ? " 

 the other voice replied-- 

 " the same that would have happen to the world and all the starry 
 system if an apple - tree grow six apple instead of seven ; something 
 would have be eternally lose . there have never be anything in the 
 world absolutely like Notting Hill . there will never be anything quite 
 like it to the crack of doom . I can not believe anything but that God 
 love it as he must surely love anything that be itself and 
 unreplaceable . but even for that I do not care . if God , with all his 
 thunder , hat it , I love it . " 

 and with the voice a tall , strange figure lift itself out of the 
 _ débris _ in the half - darkness . 

 the other voice come after a long pause , and as it be hoarsely . 

 " but suppose the whole matter be really a hocus - pocus . suppose that 
 whatever mean you may choose in your fancy to give to it , the real 
 meaning of the whole be mockery . suppose it be all folly . suppose-- " 

 " I have be in it , " answer the voice from the tall and strange 
 figure , " and I know it be not . " 

 a small figure seem half to rise in the dark . 

 " suppose I be God , " say the voice , " and suppose I make the world in 
 idleness . suppose the star , that you think eternal , be only the 
 idiot firework of an everlasting schoolboy . suppose the sun and the 
 moon , to which you sing alternately , be only the two eye of one vast 
 and sneer giant , open alternately in a never - end wink . suppose 
 the tree , in my eye , be as foolish as enormous toad - stool . suppose 
 Socrates and Charlemagne be to I only beast , make funny by 
 walk on their hind leg . suppose I be God , and have make thing , 
 laugh at they . " 

 " and suppose I be man , " answer the other . " and suppose that I give 
 the answer that shatter even a laugh . suppose I do not laugh back at 
 you , do not blaspheme you , do not curse you . but suppose , stand up 
 straight under the sky , with every power of my being , I thank you for 
 the fool ' paradise you have make . suppose I praise you , with a 
 literal pain of ecstasy , for the jest that have bring I so terrible 
 a joy . if we have take the child 's game , and give they the 
 seriousness of a Crusade , if we have drench your grotesque Dutch 
 garden with the blood of martyr , we have turn a nursery into a 
 temple . I ask you , in the name of Heaven , who win ? " 

 the sky close about the crest of the hill and tree be begin to 
 turn from black to grey , with a random suggestion of the morning . the 
 slight figure seem to crawl towards the large one , and the voice 
 be more human . 

 " but suppose , friend , " it say , " suppose that , in a bitterer and more 
 real sense , it be all a mockery . suppose that there have be , from 
 the beginning of these great war , one who watch they with a sense 
 that be beyond expression , a sense of detachment , of responsibility , 
 of irony , of agony . suppose that there be one who know it be all a 
 joke . " 

 the tall figure answered-- 

 " he could not know it . for it be not all a joke . " 

 and a gust of wind blow away some cloud that seal the sky - line , and 
 show a strip of silver behind his great dark leg . then the other 
 voice come , have creep near still . 

 [ illustration : " WAYNE , IT be all a joke . " ] 

 " Adam Wayne , " it say , " there be man who confess only in _ articulo 
 mortis _ ; there be people who blame themselves only when they can no 
 long help other . I be one of they . here , upon the field of the 
 bloody end of it all , I come to tell you plainly what you would never 
 understand before . do you know who I be ? " 

 " I know you , Auberon Quin , " answer the tall figure , " and I shall be 
 glad to unburden your spirit of anything that lie upon it . " 

 " Adam Wayne , " say the other voice , " of what I have to say you can not 
 in common reason be glad to unburden I . Wayne , it be all a joke . 
 when I make these city , I care no more for they than I care for a 
 centaur , or a merman , or a fish with leg , or a pig with feather , or 
 any other absurdity . when I speak to you solemnly and encouragingly 
 about the flag of your freedom and the peace of your city , I be 
 play a vulgar practical joke on an honest gentleman , a vulgar 
 practical joke that have last for twenty year . though no one could 
 believe it of I , perhaps , it be the truth that I be a man both timid 
 and tender - hearted . I never dare in the early day of your hope , or 
 the central day of your supremacy , to tell you this ; I never dare to 
 break the colossal calm of your face . God know why I should do it 
 now , when my farce have end in tragedy and the ruin of all your 
 people ! but I say it now . Wayne , it be do as a joke . " 

 there be silence , and the freshen breeze blow the sky clear and 
 clear , leave great space of the white dawn . 

 at last Wayne say , very slowly-- 

 " you do it all only as a joke ? " 

 " yes , " say Quin , briefly . 

 " when you conceive the idea , " go on Wayne , dreamily , " of an army 
 for Bayswater and a flag for Notting Hill , there be no gleam , no 
 suggestion in your mind that such thing might be real and 
 passionate ? " 

 " no , " answer Auberon , turn his round white face to the morning 
 with a dull and splendid sincerity ; " I have none at all . " 

 Wayne spring down from the height above he and hold out his hand . 

 " I will not stop to thank you , " he say , with a curious joy in his 
 voice , " for the great good for the world you have actually work . 
 all that I think of that I have say to you a moment ago , even when I 
 think that your voice be the voice of a derisive omnipotence , its 
 laughter old than the wind of heaven . but let I say what be 
 immediate and true . you and I , Auberon Quin , have both of we 
 throughout our life be again and again call mad . and we be mad . 
 we be mad , because we be not two man , but one man . we be mad , 
 because we be two lobe of the same brain , and that brain have be 
 cleave in two . and if you ask for the proof of it , it be not hard to 
 find . it be not merely that you , the humorist , have be in these dark 
 day strip of the joy of gravity . it be not merely that I , the 
 fanatic , have have to grope without humour . it be that , though we seem 
 to be opposite in everything , we have be opposite like man and 
 woman , aim at the same moment at the same practical thing . we be 
 the father and the mother of the Charter of the Cities . " 

 Quin look down at the _ débris _ of leaf and timber , the relic of 
 the battle and stampede , now glisten in the grow daylight , and 
 finally said-- 

 " yet nothing can alter the antagonism -- the fact that I laugh at 
 these thing and you adore they . " 

 Wayne 's wild face flame with something god - like , as he turn it to 
 be strike by the sunrise . 

 " I know of something that will alter that antagonism , something that 
 be outside we , something that you and I have all our life perhaps 
 take too little account of . the equal and eternal human being will 
 alter that antagonism , for the human being see no real antagonism 
 between laughter and respect , the human being , the common man , whom 
 mere genius like you and I can only worship like a god . when dark 
 and dreary day come , you and I be necessary , the pure fanatic , the 
 pure satirist . we have between we remedie a great wrong . we have 
 lift the modern city into that poetry which every one who know 
 mankind know to be immeasurably more common than the commonplace . but 
 in healthy people there be no war between we . we be but the two lobe 
 of the brain of a ploughman . laughter and love be everywhere . the 
 cathedral , build in the age that love God , be full of blasphemous 
 grotesque . the mother laugh continually at the child , the lover 
 laugh continually at the lover , the wife at the husband , the friend 
 at the friend . Auberon Quin , we have be too long separate ; let we 
 go out together . you have a halberd and I a sword , let we start our 
 wandering over the world . for we be its two essential . come , it be 
 already day . " 

 in the blank white light Auberon hesitate a moment . then he make the 
 formal salute with his halberd , and they go away together into the 
 unknown world . 


 the END 
