 


  A NIGHTMARE 








 
  a cloud be on the mind of man , and wail go the weather , 
  Yea , a sick cloud upon the soul when we be boy together . 
  Science announce nonentity and art admire decay ; 
  the world be old and end : but you and I be gay ; 
  round we in antic order their crippled vice come - 
  Lust that have lose its laughter , fear that have lose its shame . 
  like the white lock of Whistler , that light our aimless gloom , 
  man show their own white feather as proudly as a plume . 
  Life be a fly that fade , and death a drone that sting ; 
  the world be very old indeed when you and I be young . 
  they twist even decent sin to shape not to be name : 
  man be ashamed of honour ; but we be not ashamed . 
  weak if we be and foolish , not thus we fail , not thus ; 
  when that black Baal block the heaven he have no hymn from we 
  child we be - our fort of sand be even as weak as eve , 
  high as they go we pile they up to break that bitter sea . 
  fool as we be in motley , all jangle and absurd , 
  when all church bell be silent our cap and bed be hear . 

  not all unhelped we hold the fort , our tiny flag unfurl ; 
  some giant labour in that cloud to lift it from the world . 
  I find again the book we find , I feel the hour that fling 
  far out of fish - shape Paumanok some cry of clean thing ; 
  and the Green Carnation wither , as in forest fire that pass , 
  roar in the wind of all the world ten million leaf of grass ; 
  or sane and sweet and sudden as a bird sing in the rain - 
  truth out of Tusitala speak and pleasure out of pain . 
  Yea , cool and clear and sudden as a bird sing in the grey , 
  Dunedin to Samoa speak , and darkness unto day . 
  but we be young ; we live to see God break their bitter charm . 
  God and the good Republic come rid back in arm : 
  we have see the City of Mansoul , even as it rock , relieve - 
  Blessed be they who do not see , but be blind , believe . 

  this be a tale of those old fear , even of those empty hell , 
  and none but you shall understand the true thing that it tell - 
  of what colossal god of shame could cow man and yet crash , 
  of what huge devil hide the star , yet fall at a pistol flash . 
  the doubt that be so plain to chase , so dreadful to withstand - 
  oh , who shall understand but you ; yea , who shall understand ? 
  the doubt that drive we through the night as we two talk amain , 
  and day have break on the street e'er it break upon the brain . 
  between we , by the peace of God , such truth can now be tell ; 
  Yea , there be strength in strike root and good in grow old . 
  we have find common thing at last and marriage and a creed , 
  and I may safely write it now , and you may safely read . 

  G. K. C. 




  CHAPTER I 

  the two POETS of SAFFRON PARK 


 the suburb of Saffron Park lie on the sunset side of London , as red and 
 rag as a cloud of sunset . it be build of a bright brick throughout ; 
 its sky - line be fantastic , and even its ground plan be wild . 
 it have be the outburst of a speculative builder , faintly ting with art , 
 who call its architecture sometimes Elizabethan and sometimes Queen Anne , 
 apparently under the impression that the two sovereign be identical . 
 it be describe with some justice as an artistic colony , 
 though it never in any definable way produce any art . but although 
 its pretension to be an intellectual centre be a little vague , 
 its pretension to be a pleasant place be quite indisputable . 
 the stranger who look for the first time at the quaint red house 
 could only think how very oddly shape the people must be who could 
 fit in to they . nor when he meet the people be he disappoint 
 in this respect . the place be not only pleasant , but perfect , 
 if once he could regard it not as a deception but rather as a dream . 
 even if the people be not " artist , " the whole be nevertheless artistic . 
 that young man with the long , auburn hair and the impudent face - 
 that young man be not really a poet ; but surely he be a poem . 
 that old gentleman with the wild , white beard and the wild , 
 white hat - that venerable humbug be not really a philosopher ; 
 but at least he be the cause of philosophy in other . 
 that scientific gentleman with the bald , egg - like head and the bare , 
 bird - like neck have no real right to the air of science that he assume . 
 he have not discover anything new in biology ; but what biological 
 creature could he have discover more singular than himself ? 
 thus , and thus only , the whole place have properly to be regard ; 
 it have to be consider not so much as a workshop for artist , 
 but as a frail but finish work of art . a man who step into its 
 social atmosphere feel as if he have step into a write comedy . 

 more especially this attractive unreality fall upon it about nightfall , 
 when the extravagant roof be dark against the afterglow and 
 the whole insane village seem as separate as a drift cloud . 
 this again be more strongly true of the many night of local festivity , 
 when the little garden be often illuminate , and the big chinese lantern 
 glow in the dwarfish tree like some fierce and monstrous fruit . 
 and this be strong of all on one particular evening , still vaguely 
 remember in the locality , of which the auburn - haired poet be the hero . 
 it be not by any mean the only evening of which he be the hero . 
 on many night those pass by his little back garden might hear his high , 
 didactic voice lay down the law to man and particularly to woman . 
 the attitude of woman in such case be indeed one of the paradox of 
 the place . Most of the woman be of the kind vaguely call emancipate , 
 and profess some protest against male supremacy . yet these new woman 
 would always pay to a man the extravagant compliment which no ordinary 
 woman ever pay to he , that of listen while he be talk . 
 and Mr. Lucian Gregory , the red - haired poet , be really   in some sense 
 a man worth listen to , even if one only laugh at the end of it . 
 he put the old ca not of the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness 
 with a certain impudent freshness which give at least a momentary pleasure . 
 he be help in some degree by the arrest oddity of his appearance , 
 which he work , as the phrase go , for all it be worth . 
 his dark red hair part in the middle be literally like a woman 's , 
 and curve into the slow curl of a virgin in a pre - raphaelite picture . 
 from within this almost saintly oval , however , his face project suddenly 
 broad and brutal , the chin carry forward with a look of cockney contempt . 
 this combination at once tickle and terrify the nerve of a 
 neurotic population . he seem like a walk blasphemy , a blend 
 of the angel and the ape . 

 this particular evening , if it be remember for nothing else , 
 will be remember in that place for its strange sunset . 
 it look like the end of the world . all the heaven seem cover 
 with a quite vivid and palpable plumage ; you could only say that the sky 
 be full of feather , and of feather that almost brush the face . 
 across the great part of the dome they be grey , with the strange tint 
 of violet and mauve and an unnatural pink or pale green ; but towards 
 the west the whole grow past description , transparent and passionate , 
 and the last red - hot plume of it cover up the sun like something too 
 good to be see . the whole be so close about the earth , as to express 
 nothing but a violent secrecy . the very empyrean seem to be a secret . 
 it express that splendid smallness which be the soul of local patriotism . 
 the very sky seem small . 

 I say that there be some inhabitant who may remember the evening if only by 
 that oppressive sky . there be other who may remember it because it mark 
 the first appearance in the place of the second poet of Saffron Park . for a 
 long time the red - haired revolutionary have reign without a rival ; 
 it be upon the night of the sunset that his solitude suddenly end . 
 the new poet , who introduce himself by the name of Gabriel Syme be a very 
 mild - look mortal , with a fair , pointed beard and faint , yellow hair . 
 but an impression grow that he be less meek than he look . 
 he signalise his entrance by differ with the establish poet , 
 Gregory , upon the whole nature of poetry . he say that he   Syme   be poet 
 of law , a poet of order ; nay , he say he be a poet of respectability . 
 so all the Saffron Parkers look at he as if he have that moment fall 
 out of that impossible sky . 

 in fact , Mr. Lucian Gregory , the anarchic poet , connect the two event . 

 " it may well be , " he say , in his sudden lyrical manner , " it may 
 well be on such a night of cloud and cruel colour that there be 
 bring forth upon the earth such a portent as a respectable poet . 
 you say you be a poet of law ; I say you be a contradiction in term . 
 I only wonder there be not comet and earthquake on the night you 
 appear in this garden . " 

 the man with the meek blue eye and the pale , point beard 
 endure these thunder with a certain submissive solemnity . 
 the third party of the group , Gregory 's sister Rosamond , 
 who have her brother 's braid of red hair , but a kindlier face 
 underneath they , laugh with such mixture of admiration 
 and disapproval as she give commonly to the family oracle . 

 Gregory resume in high oratorical good humour . 

 " an artist be identical with an anarchist , " he cry . 
 " you might transpose the word anywhere . an anarchist be an artist . 
 the man who throw a bomb be an artist , because he prefer 
 a great moment to everything . he see how much more valuable 
 be one burst of blaze light , one peal of perfect thunder , 
 than the mere common body of a few shapeless policeman . 
 an artist disregard all government , abolish all convention . 
 the poet delight in disorder only . if it be not so , the most 
 poetical thing in the world would be the Underground Railway . " 

 " so it be , " say Mr. Syme . 

 " nonsense ! " say Gregory , who be very rational when anyone 
 else attempt paradox . " why do all the clerk and navvy in 
 the railway train look so sad and tired , so very sad and tired ? 
 I will tell you . it be because they know that the train be go right . 
 it be because they know that whatever place they have take a ticket 
 for that place they will reach . it be because after they have pass 
 Sloane Square they know that the next station must be Victoria , 
 and nothing but Victoria . oh , their wild rapture ! oh , their eye 
 like star and their soul again in Eden , if the next station 
 be unaccountably Baker Street ! " 

 " it be you who be unpoetical , " reply the poet Syme . " if what you 
 say of clerk be true , they can only be as prosaic as your poetry . 
 the rare , strange thing be to hit the mark ; the gross , 
 obvious thing be to miss it . we feel it be epical when man 
 with one wild arrow strike a distant bird . be it not also epical 
 when man with one wild engine strike a distant station ? 
 Chaos be dull ; because in chaos the train might indeed go anywhere , 
 to Baker Street or to Bagdad . but man be a magician , 
 and his whole magic be in this , that he do say Victoria , 
 and lo ! it be Victoria . no , take your book of mere poetry 
 and prose ; let I read a time table , with tear of pride . 
 take your Byron , who commemorate the defeat of man ; 
 give I Bradshaw , who commemorate his victory . 
 give I Bradshaw , I say ! " 

 " must you go ? " inquire Gregory sarcastically . 

 " I tell you , " go on Syme with passion , " that every time 
 a train come in I feel that it have break past battery 
 of besieger , and that man have win a battle against chaos . 
 you say contemptuously that when one have leave Sloane Square 
 one must come to Victoria . I say that one might do a thousand 
 thing instead , and that whenever I really come there I have 
 the sense of hairbreadth escape . and when I hear the guard 
 shout out the word ' Victoria , ' it be not an unmeaning word . 
 it be to I the cry of a herald announce conquest . 
 it be to I indeed ' Victoria ' ; it be the victory of Adam . " 

 Gregory wag his heavy , red head with a slow and sad smile . 

 " and even then , " he say , " we poet always ask the question , 
 ' and what be Victoria now that you have get there ? ' 
 you think Victoria be like the New Jerusalem . we know that 
 the New Jerusalem will only be like Victoria . yes , the poet 
 will be discontent even in the street of heaven . 
 the poet be always in revolt . " 

 " there again , " say Syme irritably , " what be there poetical 
 about be in revolt ? you might as well say that it be poetical 
 to be sea - sick . be sick be a revolt . both be sick and be 
 rebellious may be the wholesome thing on certain desperate occasion ; 
 but I be hang if I can see why they be poetical . 
 revolt in the abstract be - revolting . it be mere vomiting . " 

 the girl wince for a flash at the unpleasant word , but Syme 
 be too hot to heed she . 

 " it be thing go right , " he cry , " that be poetical ! 
 our digestion , for instance , go sacredly and silently right , 
 that be the foundation of all poetry . yes , the most poetical thing , 
 more poetical than the flower , more poetical than the star - 
 the most poetical thing in the world be not be sick . " 

 " really , " say Gregory superciliously , " the example you choose - " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say Syme grimly , " I forgot we have 
 abolish all convention . " 

 for the first time a red patch appear on Gregory 's forehead . 

 " you do not   expect I , " he say , " to revolutionise society on this lawn ? " 

 Syme look straight into his eye and smile sweetly . 

 " no , I do not , " he say ; " but I suppose that if you be serious 
 about your anarchism , that be exactly what you would do . " 

 Gregory 's big bull 's eye blink suddenly like those of an angry lion , 
 and one could almost fancy that his red mane rise . 

 " do not   you think , then , " he say in a dangerous voice , " that I be 
 serious about my anarchism ? " 

 " I beg your pardon ? " say Syme . 

 " be I not serious about my anarchism ? " cry Gregory , with knot fist . 

 " my dear fellow ! " say Syme , and stroll away . 

 with surprise , but with a curious pleasure , he find Rosamond Gregory 
 still in his company . 

 " Mr. Syme , " she say , " do the people who talk like you and my brother 
 often mean what they say ? do you mean what you say now ? " 

 Syme smile . 

 " do you ? " he ask . 

 " what do you mean ? " ask the girl , with grave eye . 

 " my dear Miss Gregory , " say Syme gently , " there be many kind 
 of sincerity and insincerity . when you say ' thank you ' for the salt , 
 do you mean what you say ? no . when you say ' the world be round , ' 
 do you mean what you say ? no . it be true , but you do not   mean it . 
 now , sometimes a man like your brother really find a thing he do mean . 
 it may be only a half - truth , quarter - truth , tenth - truth ; but then 
 he say more than he mean - from sheer force of mean it . " 

 she be look at he from under level brow ; her face be grave 
 and open , and there have fall upon it the shadow of that unreasoning 
 responsibility which be at the bottom of the most frivolous woman , 
 the maternal watch which be as old as the world . 

 " be he really an anarchist , then ? " she ask . 

 " only in that sense I speak of , " reply Syme ; " or if you prefer it , 
 in that nonsense . " 

 she draw her broad brow together and say abruptly - 

 " he would not   really use - bomb or that sort of thing ? " 

 Syme break into a great laugh , that seem too large for his slight 
 and somewhat dandified figure . 

 " Good Lord , no ! " he say , " that have to be do anonymously . " 

 and at that the corner of her own mouth break into a smile , 
 and she think with a simultaneous pleasure of Gregory 's 
 absurdity and of his safety . 

 Syme stroll with she to a seat in the corner of the garden , 
 and continue to pour out his opinion . for he be a 
 sincere man , and in spite of his superficial air and grace , 
 at root a humble one . and it be always the humble man who 
 talk too much ; the proud man watch himself too closely . 
 he defend respectability with violence and exaggeration . 
 he grow passionate in his praise of tidiness and propriety . 
 all the time there be a smell of lilac all round he . 
 once he hear very faintly in some distant street a barrel - organ 
 begin to play , and it seem to he that his heroic word 
 be move to a tiny tune from under or beyond the world . 

 he star and talk at the girl 's red hair and amused face 
 for what seem to be a few minute ; and then , feel that 
 the group in such a place should mix , rise to his foot . 
 to his astonishment , he discover the whole garden empty . 
 everyone have go long ago , and he go himself with a 
 rather hurried apology . he leave with a sense of champagne 
 in his head , which he could not afterwards explain . 
 in the wild event which be to follow this girl have no part 
 at all ; he never see she again until all his tale be over . 
 and yet , in some indescribable way , she keep recur like 
 a motive in music through all his mad adventure afterwards , 
 and the glory of her strange hair run like a red thread 
 through those dark and ill - draw tapestry of the night . 
 for what follow be so improbable , that it might well have 
 be a dream . 

 when Syme go out into the starlit street , he find it 
 for the moment empty . then he realise   in some odd way 
 that the silence be rather a live silence than a dead one . 
 directly outside the door stand a street lamp , whose gleam gild 
 the leaf of the tree that bent out over the fence behind he . 
 about a foot from the lamp - post stand a figure almost as rigid 
 and motionless as the lamp - post itself . the tall hat and long 
 frock coat be black ; the face , in an abrupt shadow , be almost 
 as dark . only a fringe of fiery hair against the light , 
 and also something aggressive in the attitude , proclaim that it 
 be the poet Gregory . he have something of the look of a mask 
 bravo wait sword in hand for his foe . 

 he make a sort of doubtful salute , which Syme somewhat more formally return . 

 " I be wait for you , " say Gregory . " might I have 
 a moment 's conversation ? " 

 " certainly . about what ? " ask Syme in a sort of weak wonder . 

 Gregory strike out with his stick at the lamp - post , and then at the tree . 
 " about this and this , " he cry ; " about order and anarchy . 
 there be your precious order , that lean , iron lamp , ugly and barren ; 
 and there be anarchy , rich , living , reproduce itself - there be anarchy , 
 splendid in green and gold . " 

 " all the same , " reply Syme patiently , " just at present 
 you only see the tree by the light of the lamp . I wonder 
 when you would ever see the lamp by the light of the tree . " 
 then after a pause he say , " but may I ask if you have be 
 stand out here in the dark only to resume our little argument ? " 

 " no , " cry out Gregory , in a voice that ring down the street , 
 " I do not stand here to resume our argument , but to end 
 it for ever . " 

 the silence fall again , and Syme , though he understand nothing , 
 listen instinctively for something serious . Gregory begin 
 in a smooth voice and with a rather bewilder smile . 

 " Mr. Syme , " he say , " this evening you succeed in do something 
 rather remarkable . you do something to I that no man bear of woman 
 have ever succeed in do before . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " now I remember , " resume Gregory reflectively , " one other person succeed 
 in do it . the captain of a penny steamer   if I remember correctly 
 at Southend . you have irritate I . " 

 " I be very sorry , " reply Syme with gravity . 

 " I be afraid my fury and your insult be too shocking to be wipe out even 
 with an apology , " say Gregory very calmly . " no duel could wipe it out . 
 if I strike you dead I could not wipe it out . there be only one 
 way by which that insult can be erase , and that way I choose . 
 I be go , at the possible sacrifice of my life and honour , to prove 
 to you that you be wrong in what you say . " 

 " in what I say ? " 

 " you say I be not serious about be an anarchist . " 

 " there be degree of seriousness , " reply Syme . " I have 
 never doubt that you be perfectly sincere in this sense , 
 that you think what you say well worth say , that you 
 think a paradox might wake man up to a neglect truth . " 

 Gregory star at he steadily and painfully . 

 " and in no other sense , " he ask , " you think I serious ? 
 you think I a flaneur who let fall occasional truth . 
 you do not think that in a deep , a more deadly sense , 
 I be serious . " 

 Syme strike his stick violently on the stone of the road . 

 " serious ! " he cry . " Good Lord ! be this street serious ? 
 be these damned chinese lantern serious ? be the whole caboodle serious ? 
 one come here and talk a pack of bosh , and perhaps some sense as well , 
 but I should think very little of a man who do not   keep something in 
 the background of his life that be more serious than all this talk - 
 something more serious , whether it be religion or only drink . " 

 " very well , " say Gregory , his face darken , " you shall see 
 something more serious than either drink or religion . " 

 Syme stand wait with his usual air of mildness until Gregory 
 again open his lip . 

 " you speak just now of have a religion . be it really true 
 that you have one ? " 

 " oh , " say Syme with a beam smile , " we be all Catholics now . " 

 " then may I ask you to swear by whatever god or saint your religion 
 involve that you will not reveal what I be now go to tell you to any 
 son of Adam , and especially not to the police ? will you swear that ! 
 if you will take upon yourself this awful abnegation , if you will consent 
 to burden your soul with a vow that you should never make and a knowledge 
 you should never dream about , I will promise you in return - " 

 " you will promise I in return ? " inquire Syme , as the other pause . 

 " I will promise you a very entertaining evening . " 
 Syme suddenly take off his hat . 

 " your offer , " he say , " be far too idiotic to be decline . 
 you say that a poet be always an anarchist . I disagree ; 
 but I hope at least that he be always a sportsman . 
 permit I , here and now , to swear as a Christian , and promise 
 as a good comrade and a fellow - artist , that I will not 
 report anything of this , whatever it be , to the police . 
 and now , in the name of Colney Hatch , what be it ? " 

 " I think , " say Gregory , with placid irrelevancy , " that we will call a cab . " 

 he give two long whistle , and a hansom come rattle down the road . 
 the two get into it in silence . Gregory give through the trap the 
 address of an obscure public - house on the Chiswick bank of the river . 
 the cab whisk itself away again , and in it these two fantastic 
 quit their fantastic town . 



  CHAPTER II 

  the secret of GABRIEL SYME 


 the cab pull up before a particularly dreary and greasy beershop , 
 into which Gregory rapidly conduct his companion . they seat 
 themselves in a close and dim sort of bar - parlour , at a stained 
 wooden table with one wooden leg . the room be so small and dark , 
 that very little could be see of the attendant who be summon , 
 beyond a vague and dark impression of something bulky and bearded . 

 " will you take a little supper ? " ask Gregory politely . 
 " the pate de foie gras be not good here , but I can recommend the game . " 

 Syme receive the remark with stolidity , imagine it to be a joke . 
 accept the vein of humour , he say , with a well - breed indifference - 

 " oh , bring I some lobster mayonnaise . " 

 to his indescribable astonishment , the man only say " certainly , sir ! " 
 and go away apparently to get it . 

 " what will you drink ? " resume Gregory , with the same careless 
 yet apologetic air . " I shall only have a crepe de menthe myself ; 
 I have din . but the champagne can really be trust . 
 do let I start you with a half - bottle of pommery at least ? " 

 " thank you ! " say the motionless Syme . " you be very good . " 

 his further attempt at conversation , somewhat disorganised in themselves , 
 be cut short finally as by a thunderbolt by the actual appearance 
 of the lobster . Syme taste it , and find it particularly good . 
 then he suddenly begin to eat with great rapidity and appetite . 

 " excuse I if I enjoy myself rather obviously ! " he say 
 to Gregory , smile . " I do not   often have the luck to have a dream 
 like this . it be new to I for a nightmare to lead to a lobster . 
 it be commonly the other way . " 

 " you be not asleep , I assure you , " say Gregory . " you be , 
 on the contrary , close to the most actual and rousing 
 moment of your existence . ah , here come your champagne ! 
 I admit that there may be a slight disproportion , let we say , 
 between the inner arrangement of this excellent hotel and its 
 simple and unpretentious exterior . but that be all our modesty . 
 we be the most modest man that ever live on earth . " 

 " and who be we ? " ask Syme , empty his champagne glass . 

 " it be quite simple , " reply Gregory . " we be the serious anarchist , 
 in whom you do not believe . " 

 " oh ! " say Syme shortly . " you do yourself well in drink . " 

 " yes , we be serious about everything , " answer Gregory . 

 then after a pause he add - 

 " if in a few moment this table begin to turn round a little , 
 do not   put it down to your inroad into the champagne . 
 I do not   wish you to do yourself an injustice . " 

 " well , if I be not drunk , I be mad , " reply Syme with perfect calm ; 
 " but I trust I can behave like a gentleman in either condition . 
 may I smoke ? " 

 " certainly ! " say Gregory , produce a cigar - case . " try one of mine . " 

 Syme take the cigar , clip the end off with a cigar - cutter 
 out of his waistcoat pocket , put it in his mouth , light it slowly , 
 and let out a long cloud of smoke . it be not a little to his 
 credit that he perform these rite with so much composure , 
 for almost before he have begin they the table at which he sit 
 have begin to revolve , first slowly , and then rapidly , as if at 
 an insane seance . 

 " you must not mind it , " say Gregory ; " it be a kind of screw . " 

 " quite so , " say Syme placidly , " a kind of screw . 
 how simple that be ! " 

 the next moment the smoke of his cigar , which have be waver 
 across the room in snaky twist , go straight up as if from 
 a factory chimney , and the two , with their chair and table , 
 shoot down through the floor as if the earth have swallow they . 
 they go rattle down a kind of roar chimney as rapidly as a 
 lift cut loose , and they come with an abrupt bump to the bottom . 
 but when Gregory throw open a pair of door and let in a red 
 subterranean light , Syme be still smoke with one leg throw 
 over the other , and have not turn a yellow hair . 

 Gregory lead he down a low , vaulted passage , at the end of 
 which be the red light . it be an enormous crimson lantern , 
 nearly as big as a fireplace , fix over a small but heavy iron door . 
 in the door there be a sort of hatchway or grating , and on this 
 Gregory strike five time . a heavy voice with a foreign accent ask 
 he who he be . to this he give the more or less unexpected reply , 
 " Mr. Joseph Chamberlain . " the heavy hinge begin to move ; 
 it be obviously some kind of password . 

 inside the doorway the passage gleam as if it be line with a 
 network of steel . on a second glance , Syme see that the glitter 
 pattern be really make up of rank and rank of rifle and revolver , 
 closely packed or interlocked . 

 " I must ask you to forgive I all these formality , " say Gregory ; 
 " we have to be very strict here . " 

 " oh , do not   apologise , " say Syme . " I know your passion for law and order , " 
 and he step into the passage line with the steel weapon . 
 with his long , fair hair and rather foppish frock - coat , he look 
 a singularly frail and fanciful figure as he walk down that shin 
 avenue of death . 

 they pass through several such passage , and come out at last into a queer 
 steel chamber with curved wall , almost spherical in shape , but present , 
 with its tier of bench , something of the appearance of a scientific 
 lecture - theatre . there be no rifle or pistol in this apartment , 
 but round the wall of it be hang more dubious and dreadful shape , 
 thing that look like the bulb of iron plant , or the egg of iron bird . 
 they be bomb , and the very room itself seem like the inside of a bomb . 
 Syme knock his cigar ash off against the wall , and go in . 

 " and now , my dear Mr. Syme , " say Gregory , throw himself 
 in an expansive manner on the bench under the large bomb , 
 " now we be quite cosy , so let we talk properly . now no human 
 word can give you any notion of why I bring you here . 
 it be one of those quite arbitrary emotion , like jump off a cliff 
 or fall in love . suffice it to say that you be an inexpressibly 
 irritate fellow , and , to do you justice , you be still . 
 I would break twenty oath of secrecy for the pleasure of take 
 you down a peg . that way you have of light a cigar would 
 make a priest break the seal of confession . well , you say 
 that you be quite certain I be not a serious anarchist . 
 do this place strike you as be serious ? " 

 " it do seem to have a moral under all its gaiety , " assent Syme ; 
 " but may I ask you two question ? you need not fear to give 
 me information , because , as you remember , you very wisely extort 
 from I a promise not to tell the police , a promise I shall 
 certainly keep . so it be in mere curiosity that I make my query . 
 first of all , what be it really all about ? what be it you object to ? 
 you want to abolish Government ? " 

 " to abolish God ! " say Gregory , open the eye of a fanatic . 
 " we do not only want to upset a few despotism and police regulation ; 
 that sort of anarchism do exist , but it be a mere branch 
 of the Nonconformists . we dig deeply and we blow you higher . 
 we wish to deny all those arbitrary distinction of vice and virtue , 
 honour and treachery , upon which mere rebel base themselves . 
 the silly sentimentalist of the French Revolution talk of 
 the Rights of Man ! we hate right as we hate wrong . we have 
 abolish Right and Wrong . " 

 " and right and Left , " say Syme with a simple eagerness , " I hope you 
 will abolish they too . they be much more troublesome to I . " 

 " you speak of a second question , " snap Gregory . 

 " with pleasure , " resume Syme . " in all your present act and surrounding 
 there be a scientific attempt at secrecy . I have an aunt who live 
 over a shop , but this be the first time I have find people live 
 from preference under a public - house . you have a heavy iron door . 
 you can not pass it without submit to the humiliation of call 
 yourself Mr. Chamberlain . you surround yourself with steel instrument 
 which make the place , if I may say so , more impressive than homelike . 
 may I ask why , after take all this trouble to barricade yourself 
 in the bowel of the earth , you then parade your whole secret by talk 
 about anarchism to every silly woman in Saffron Park ? " 

 Gregory smile . 

 " the answer be simple , " he say . " I tell you I be a serious anarchist , 
 and you do not believe I . nor do they believe I . unless I take they 
 into this infernal room they would not believe I . " 

 Syme smoke thoughtfully , and look at he with interest . 
 Gregory go on . 

 " the history of the thing might amuse you , " he say . 
 " when first I become one of the New Anarchists I try all 
 kind of respectable disguise . I dress up as a bishop . 
 I read up all about bishop in our anarchist pamphlet , 
 in Superstition the Vampire and Priests of Prey . I certainly 
 understand from they that bishop be strange and terrible old 
 man keep a cruel secret from mankind . I be misinform . 
 when on my first appear in episcopal gaiter in a 
 drawing - room I cry out in a voice of thunder , ' down ! down ! 
 presumptuous human reason ! ' they find out in some way 
 that I be not a bishop at all . I be nab at once . 
 then I make up as a millionaire ; but I defend Capital with so 
 much intelligence that a fool could see that I be quite poor . 
 then I try be a major . now I be a humanitarian myself , 
 but I have , I hope , enough intellectual breadth to understand 
 the position of those who , like Nietzsche , admire violence - 
 the proud , mad war of Nature and all that , you know . I throw 
 myself into the major . I draw my sword and wave it constantly . 
 I call out ' blood ! ' abstractedly , like a man call for wine . 
 I often say , ' let the weak perish ; it be the Law . ' well , well , 
 it seem major do not   do this . I be nab again . at last I 
 go in despair to the President of the Central Anarchist Council , 
 who be the great man in Europe . " 

 " what be his name ? " ask Syme . 

 " you would not know it , " answer Gregory . " that be his greatness . 
 Caesar and Napoleon put all their genius into be hear of , 
 and they be hear of . he put all his genius into not be hear of , 
 and he be not hear of . but you can not be for five minute in the room 
 with he without feel that Caesar and Napoleon would have be 
 child in his hand . " 

 he be silent and even pale for a moment , and then resume - 

 " but whenever he give advice it be always something as startle 
 as an epigram , and yet as practical as the Bank of England . I say 
 to he , ' what disguise will hide I from the world ? 
 what can I find more respectable than bishop and major ? ' 
 he look at I with his large but indecipherable face . 
 ' you want a safe disguise , do you ? you want a dress which will guarantee 
 you harmless ; a dress in which no one would ever look for a bomb ? ' 
 I nod . he suddenly lift his lion 's voice . ' why , then , 
 dress up as an anarchist , you fool ! ' he roar so that the room shake . 
 ' nobody will ever expect you to do anything dangerous then . ' 
 and he turn his broad back on I without another word . 
 I take his advice , and have never regret it . I preach 
 blood and murder to those woman day and night , and - by God ! - 
 they would let I wheel their perambulator . " 

 Syme sit watch he with some respect in his large , blue eye . 

 " you take I in , " he say . " it be really a smart dodge . " 

 then after a pause he add - 

 " what do you call this tremendous President of your ? " 

 " we generally call he Sunday , " reply Gregory with simplicity . 
 ' you see , there be seven member of the Central Anarchist Council , 
 and they be name after day of the week . he be call Sunday , 
 by some of his admirer Bloody Sunday . it be curious you should 
 mention the matter , because the very night you have drop in 
  if I may so express it   be the night on which our London branch , 
 which assemble in this room , have to elect its own deputy to fill a 
 vacancy in the Council . the gentleman who have for some time past play , 
 with propriety and general applause , the difficult part of Thursday , 
 have die quite suddenly . consequently , we have call a meeting this 
 very evening to elect a successor . " 

 he get to his foot and stroll across the room with a sort 
 of smile embarrassment . 

 " I feel somehow as if you be my mother , Syme , " he continue casually . 
 " I feel that I can confide anything to you , as you have promise 
 to tell nobody . in fact , I will confide to you something that I 
 would not say in so many word to the anarchist who will be come 
 to the room in about ten minute . we shall , of course , go through a form 
 of election ; but I do not   mind tell you that it be practically certain 
 what the result will be . " he look down for a moment modestly . 
 " it be almost a settle thing that I be to be Thursday . " 

 " my dear fellow . " say Syme heartily , " I congratulate you . 
 a great career ! " 

 Gregory smile in deprecation , and walk across the room , talk rapidly . 

 " as a matter of fact , everything be ready for I on this table , " 
 he say , " and the ceremony will probably be the short possible . " 

 Syme also stroll across to the table , and find lie across it 
 a walking - stick , which turn out on examination to be a sword - stick , 
 a large Colt 's revolver , a sandwich case , and a formidable flask of brandy . 
 over the chair , beside the table , be throw a heavy - look cape or cloak . 

 " I have only to get the form of election finish , " continue Gregory 
 with animation , " then I snatch up this cloak and stick , stuff these 
 other thing into my pocket , step out of a door in this cavern , 
 which open on the river , where there be a steam - tug already wait 
 for I , and then - then - oh , the wild joy of be Thursday ! " and he 
 clasp his hand . 

 Syme , who have sit down once more with his usual insolent languor , 
 get to his foot with an unusual air of hesitation . 

 " why be it , " he ask vaguely , " that I think you be quite a decent fellow ? 
 why do I positively like you , Gregory ? " he pause a moment , and then add 
 with a sort of fresh curiosity , " be it because you be such an ass ? " 

 there be a thoughtful silence again , and then he cry out - 

 " well , damn it all ! this be the funniest situation I have 
 ever be in in my life , and I be go to act accordingly . 
 Gregory , I give you a promise before I come into this place . 
 that promise I would keep under red - hot pincer . would you give I , 
 for my own safety , a little promise of the same kind ? " 

 " a promise ? " ask Gregory , wonder . 

 " yes , " say Syme very seriously , " a promise . I swear 
 before God that I would not tell your secret to the police . 
 will you swear by Humanity , or whatever beastly thing you believe in , 
 that you will not tell my secret to the anarchist ? " 

 " your secret ? " ask the star Gregory . " have you get a secret ? " 

 " yes , " say Syme , " I have a secret . " then after a pause , 
 " will you swear ? " 

 Gregory glare at he gravely for a few moment , and then say abruptly - 

 " you must have bewitch I , but I feel a furious curiosity about you . 
 yes , I will swear not to tell the anarchist anything you tell I . 
 but look sharp , for they will be here in a couple of minute . " 

 Syme rise slowly to his foot and thrust his long , white hand into his long , 
 grey trouser ' pocket . almost as he do so there come five knock on 
 the outer grating , proclaim the arrival of the first of the conspirator . 

 " well , " say Syme slowly , " I do not   know how to tell you the truth more 
 shortly than by say that your expedient of dress up as an aimless 
 poet be not confine to you or your President . we have know the dodge 
 for some time at Scotland Yard . " 

 Gregory try to spring up straight , but he sway thrice . 

 " what do you say ? " he ask in an inhuman voice . 

 " yes , " say Syme simply , " I be a police detective . 
 but I think I hear your friend come . " 

 from the doorway there come a murmur of " Mr. Joseph Chamberlain . " it be 
 repeat twice and thrice , and then thirty time , and the crowd 
 of Joseph Chamberlains   a solemn thought   could be hear trampling 
 down the corridor . 



  CHAPTER III 

  the MAN who be THURSDAY 


 before one of the fresh face could appear at the doorway , 
 Gregory 's stunned surprise have fall from he . he be beside 
 the table with a bound , and a noise in his throat like a wild beast . 
 he catch up the Colt 's revolver and take aim at Syme . Syme do 
 not flinch , but he put up a pale and polite hand . 

 " do not   be such a silly man , " he say , with the effeminate 
 dignity of a curate . " do not   you see it be not necessary ? 
 do not   you see that we be both in the same boat ? 
 yes , and jolly sea - sick . " 

 Gregory could not speak , but he could not fire either , 
 and he look his question . 

 " do not   you see we have   checkmate each other ? " 
 cry Syme . " I can not   tell the police you be an anarchist . 
 you can not   tell the anarchist I be a policeman . I can only watch you , 
 know what you be ; you can only watch I , know what I be . 
 in short , it be a lonely , intellectual duel , my head against your . 
 I be a policeman deprive of the help of the police . 
 you , my poor fellow , be an anarchist deprive of the help 
 of that law and organisation which be so essential to anarchy . 
 the one solitary difference be in your favour . 
 you be not surround by inquisitive policeman ; I be surround 
 by inquisitive anarchist . I can not betray you , but I might 
 betray myself . come , come ! wait and see I betray myself . 
 I shall do it so nicely . " 

 Gregory put the pistol slowly down , still star at Syme 
 as if he be a sea - monster . 

 " I do not   believe in immortality , " he say at last , " but if , after all this , 
 you be to break your word , God would make a hell only for you , to howl 
 in for ever . " 

 " I shall not break my word , " say Syme sternly , " nor will you break your . 
 here be your friend . " 

 the mass of the anarchist enter the room heavily , with a slouching 
 and somewhat weary gait ; but one little man , with a black beard and glass - 
 a man somewhat of the type of Mr. Tim Healy - detach himself , and bustle 
 forward with some paper in his hand . 

 " Comrade Gregory , " he say , " I suppose this man be a delegate ? " 

 Gregory , take by surprise , look down and mutter the name of Syme ; 
 but Syme reply almost pertly - 

 " I be glad to see that your gate be well enough guard to make 
 it hard for anyone to be here who be not a delegate . " 

 the brow of the little man with the black beard be , however , still contract 
 with something like suspicion . 

 " what branch do you represent ? " he ask sharply . 

 " I should hardly call it a branch , " say Syme , laugh ; " I should call 
 it at the very least a root . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " the fact be , " say Syme serenely , " the truth be I be a Sabbatarian . I have 
 be specially send here to see that you show a due observance of Sunday . " 

 the little man drop one of his paper , and a flicker of fear go 
 over all the face of the group . evidently the awful President , 
 whose name be Sunday , do sometimes send down such irregular 
 ambassador to such branch meeting . 

 " well , comrade , " say the man with the paper after a pause , 
 " I suppose we would well give you a seat in the meeting ? " 

 " if you ask my advice as a friend , " say Syme with severe benevolence , 
 " I think you would well . " 

 when Gregory hear the dangerous dialogue end , with a sudden safety 
 for his rival , he rise abruptly and pace the floor in painful thought . 
 he be , indeed , in an agony of diplomacy . it be clear that Syme 's inspire 
 impudence be likely to bring he out of all merely accidental dilemma . 
 Little be to be hop from they . he could not himself betray Syme , 
 partly from honour , but partly also because , if he betray he 
 and for some reason fail to destroy he , the Syme who escape would 
 be a Syme free from all obligation of secrecy , a Syme who would 
 simply walk to the near police station . after all , it be only 
 one night 's discussion , and only one detective who would know of it . 
 he would let out as little as possible of their plan that night , 
 and then let Syme go , and chance it . 

 he stride across to the group of anarchist , which be already distribute 
 itself along the bench . 

 " I think it be time we begin , " he say ; " the steam - tug be wait 
 on the river already . I move that Comrade Buttons take the chair . " 

 this be approve by a show of hand , the little man with the paper 
 slip into the presidential seat . 

 " comrade , " he begin , as sharp as a pistol - shot , " our 
 meeting to - night be important , though it need not be long . 
 this branch have always have the honour of elect Thursdays 
 for the Central European Council . we have elect many 
 and splendid Thursdays . we all lament the sad decease 
 of the heroic worker who occupy the post until last week . 
 as you know , his service to the cause be considerable . 
 he organise the great dynamite coup of Brighton which , 
 under happy circumstance , ought to have kill everybody 
 on the pier . as you also know , his death be as self - deny 
 as his life , for he die through his faith in a hygienic mixture 
 of chalk and water as a substitute for milk , which beverage 
 he regard as barbaric , and as involve cruelty to the cow . 
 Cruelty , or anything approach to cruelty , revolt he always . 
 but it be not to acclaim his virtue that we be meet , 
 but for a hard task . it be difficult properly to praise 
 his quality , but it be more difficult to replace they . 
 upon you , comrade , it devolve this evening to choose out 
 of the company present the man who shall be Thursday . if any 
 comrade suggest a name I will put it to the vote . if no comrade 
 suggest a name , I can only tell myself that that dear dynamiter , 
 who be go from we , have carry into the unknowable abyss 
 the last secret of his virtue and his innocence . " 

 there be a stir of almost inaudible applause , such as be sometimes hear 
 in church . then a large old man , with a long and venerable white beard , 
 perhaps the only real working - man present , rise lumberingly and say - 

 " I move that Comrade Gregory be elect Thursday , " and sit 
 lumberingly down again . 

 " do anyone second ? " ask the chairman . 

 a little man with a velvet coat and point beard second . 

 " before I put the matter to the vote , " say the chairman , 
 " I will call on Comrade Gregory to make a statement . " 

 Gregory rise amid a great rumble of applause . his face be deadly pale , 
 so that by contrast his queer red hair look almost scarlet . 
 but he be smile and altogether at ease . he have make up his mind , 
 and he see his good policy quite plain in front of he like a white road . 
 his good chance be to make a softened and ambiguous speech , 
 such as would leave on the detective 's mind the impression 
 that the anarchist brotherhood be a very mild affair after all . 
 he believe in his own literary power , his capacity for suggest 
 fine shade and pick perfect word . he think that with care 
 he could succeed , in spite of all the people around he , in convey 
 an impression of the institution , subtly and delicately false . 
 Syme have once think that anarchist , under all their bravado , 
 be only play the fool . could he not now , in the hour of peril , 
 make syme think so again ? 

 " comrade , " begin Gregory , in a low but penetrate voice , 
 " it be not necessary for I to tell you what be my policy , 
 for it be your policy also . our belief have be slander , 
 it have be disfigure , it have be utterly confused and conceal , 
 but it have never be alter . those who talk about 
 anarchism and its danger go everywhere and anywhere to get 
 their information , except to we , except to the fountain head . 
 they learn about anarchist from sixpenny novel ; they learn 
 about anarchist from tradesman 's newspaper ; they learn 
 about anarchist from Ally Sloper 's half - Holiday and the 
 Sporting Times . they never learn about anarchist from anarchist . 
 we have no chance of deny the mountainous slander which 
 be heap upon our head from one end of Europe to another . 
 the man who have always hear that we be walk plague have 
 never hear our reply . I know that he will not hear it tonight , 
 though my passion be to rend the roof . for it be deep , 
 deep under the earth that the persecute be permit to assemble , 
 as the Christians assemble in the Catacombs . but if , by some 
 incredible accident , there be here to - night a man who all 
 his life have thus immensely misunderstood we , I would put this 
 question to he : ' when those Christians meet in those Catacombs , 
 what sort of moral reputation have they in the street above ? 
 what tale be tell of their atrocity by one educate Roman 
 to another ? suppose '   I would say to he , ' suppose that we 
 be only repeat that still mysterious paradox of history . 
 suppose we seem as shocking as the Christians because we be 
 really as harmless as the Christians . suppose we seem as mad 
 as the Christians because we be really as meek . " ' 

 the applause that have greet the opening sentence have be 
 gradually grow fainter , and at the last word it stop suddenly . 
 in the abrupt silence , the man with the velvet jacket say , 
 in a high , squeaky voice - 

 " I be not meek ! " 

 " Comrade Witherspoon tell we , " resume Gregory , " that he be not meek . 
 ah , how little he know himself ! his word be , indeed , extravagant ; 
 his appearance be ferocious , and even   to an ordinary taste   unattractive . 
 but only the eye of a friendship as deep and delicate as mine can perceive 
 the deep foundation of solid meekness which lie at the base of he , 
 too deep even for himself to see . I repeat , we be the true early Christians , 
 only that we come too late . we be simple , as they revere simple - 
 look at Comrade Witherspoon . we be modest , as they be modest - look at I . 
 we be merciful - " 

 " no , no ! " call out Mr. Witherspoon with the velvet jacket . 

 " I say we be merciful , " repeat Gregory furiously , 
 " as the early Christians be merciful . yet this do 
 not prevent their be accuse of eat human flesh . 
 we do not eat human flesh - " 

 " Shame ! " cry Witherspoon . " why not ? " 

 " Comrade Witherspoon , " say Gregory , with a feverish gaiety , 
 " be anxious to know why nobody eat he   laughter . in our society , 
 at any rate , which love he sincerely , which be found upon love - " 

 " no , no ! " say Witherspoon , " down with love . " 

 " which be found upon love , " repeat Gregory , grind his tooth , 
 " there will be no difficulty about the aim which we shall pursue as a body , 
 or which I should pursue be I choose as the representative of that body . 
 superbly careless of the slander that represent we as assassin and 
 enemy of human society , we shall pursue with moral courage and quiet 
 intellectual pressure , the permanent ideal of brotherhood and simplicity . " 

 Gregory resume his seat and pass his hand across his forehead . 
 the silence be sudden and awkward , but the chairman rise like an automaton , 
 and say in a colourless voice - 

 " do anyone oppose the election of Comrade Gregory ? " 

 the assembly seem vague and sub - consciously disappoint , 
 and Comrade Witherspoon move restlessly on his seat and 
 mutter in his thick beard . by the sheer rush of routine , 
 however , the motion would have be put and carry . 
 but as the chairman be open his mouth to put it , Syme spring 
 to his foot and say in a small and quiet voice - 

 " yes , Mr. Chairman , I oppose . " 

 the most effective fact in oratory be an unexpected change in the voice . 
 Mr. Gabriel Syme evidently understand oratory . have say these first formal 
 word in a moderated tone and with a brief simplicity , he make his next word 
 ring and volley in the vault as if one of the gun have go off . 

 " comrade ! " he cry , in a voice that make every man jump out 
 of his boot , " have we come here for this ? do we live underground 
 like rat in order to listen to talk like this ? this be talk 
 we might listen to while eat bun at a Sunday School treat . 
 do we line these wall with weapon and bar that door with death 
 lest anyone should come and hear Comrade Gregory say to we , 
 ' be good , and you will be happy , ' ' Honesty be the good policy , ' 
 and ' Virtue be its own reward ' ? there be not a word in Comrade Gregory 's 
 address to which a curate could not have listen with pleasure 
  hear , hear . but I be not a curate   loud cheer , and I do not 
 listen to it with pleasure   renew cheer . the man who be fit 
 to make a good curate be not fit to make a resolute , forcible , 
 and efficient Thursday   hear , hear . " 

 " Comrade Gregory have tell we , in only too apologetic a tone , 
 that we be not the enemy of society . but I say that we 
 be the enemy of society , and so much the bad for society . 
 we be the enemy of society , for society be the enemy of humanity , 
 its old and its most pitiless enemy   hear , hear . Comrade Gregory 
 have tell we   apologetically again   that we be not murderer . 
 there I agree . we be not murderer , we be executioner   cheer . " 

 ever since Syme have rise Gregory have sit star at he , his face idiotic 
 with astonishment . now in the pause his lip of clay part , and he say , 
 with an automatic and lifeless distinctness - 

 " you damnable hypocrite ! " 

 Syme look straight into those frightful eye with his own pale blue one , 
 and say with dignity - 

 " Comrade Gregory accuse I of hypocrisy . he know as well as I do 
 that I be keep all my engagement and do nothing but my duty . 
 I do not mince word . I do not pretend to . I say that Comrade Gregory 
 be unfit to be Thursday for all his amiable quality . 
 he be unfit to be Thursday because of his amiable quality . 
 we do not want the Supreme Council of Anarchy infect with 
 a maudlin mercy   hear , hear . this be no time for ceremonial 
 politeness , neither be it a time for ceremonial modesty . 
 I set myself against Comrade Gregory as I would set myself 
 against all the government of Europe , because the anarchist 
 who have give himself to anarchy have forget modesty as much 
 as he have forget pride   cheer . I be not a man at all . 
 I be a cause   renew cheer . I set myself against Comrade Gregory 
 as impersonally and as calmly as I should choose one pistol 
 rather than another out of that rack upon the wall ; and I say 
 that rather than have Gregory and his milk - and - water method 
 on the Supreme Council , I would offer myself for election - " 

 his sentence be drown in a deafening cataract of applause . 
 the face , that have grow fiercer and fiercer with approval as 
 his tirade grow more and more uncompromising , be now distort 
 with grin of anticipation or cloven with delighted cry . 
 at the moment when he announce himself as ready to stand 
 for the post of Thursday , a roar of excitement and assent 
 break forth , and become uncontrollable , and at the same 
 moment Gregory spring to his foot , with foam upon his mouth , 
 and shout against the shouting . 

 " stop , you blast madman ! " he cry , at the top of a voice that tore 
 his throat . " stop , you - " 

 but louder than Gregory 's shouting and loud than the roar of the room 
 come the voice of Syme , still speak in a peal of pitiless thunder - 

 " I do not go to the Council to rebut that slander that call we murderer ; 
 I go to earn it   loud and prolonged cheering . to the priest who say 
 these man be the enemy of religion , to the judge who say these man 
 be the enemy of law , to the fat parliamentarian who say these man 
 be the enemy of order and public decency , to all these I will reply , 
 ' you be false king , but you be true prophet . I be come to destroy you , 
 and to fulfil your prophecy . ' " 

 the heavy clamour gradually die away , but before it have cease 
 Witherspoon have jump to his foot , his hair and beard all on end , 
 and have say - 

 " I move , as an amendment , that Comrade Syme be appoint to the post . " 

 " stop all this , I tell you ! " cry Gregory , with frantic face and hand . 
 " stop it , it be all - " 

 the voice of the chairman clove his speech with a cold accent . 

 " do anyone second this amendment ? " he say . a tall , 
 tired man , with melancholy eye and an american chin beard , 
 be observe on the back bench to be slowly rise to his foot . 
 Gregory have be scream for some time past ; now there 
 be a change in his accent , more shocking than any scream . 
 " I end all this ! " he say , in a voice as heavy as stone . 

 " this man can not be elect . he be a - " 

 " yes , " say Syme , quite motionless , " what be he ? " Gregory 's mouth 
 work twice without sound ; then slowly the blood begin to crawl back 
 into his dead face . " he be a man quite inexperienced in our work , " 
 he say , and sit down abruptly . 

 before he have do so , the long , lean man with the american beard be again 
 upon his foot , and be repeat in a high american monotone - 

 " I beg to second the election of Comrade Syme . " 

 " the amendment will , as usual , be put first , " say Mr. Buttons , 
 the chairman , with mechanical rapidity . 

 " the question be that Comrade Syme - " 

 Gregory have again spring to his foot , pant and passionate . 

 " comrade , " he cry out , " I be not a madman . " 

 " oh , oh ! " say Mr. Witherspoon . 

 " I be not a madman , " reiterate Gregory , with a frightful 
 sincerity which for a moment stagger the room , " but I give 
 you a counsel which you can call mad if you like . no , I will 
 not call it a counsel , for I can give you no reason for it . 
 I will call it a command . call it a mad command , but act upon it . 
 Strike , but hear I ! kill I , but obey I ! do not elect this man . " 
 truth be so terrible , even in fetter , that for a moment 
 Syme 's slender and insane victory sway like a reed . 
 but you could not have guess it from Syme 's bleak blue eye . 
 he merely begin - 

 " Comrade Gregory command - " 

 then the spell be snap , and one anarchist call out to Gregory - 

 " who be you ? you be not Sunday " ; and another anarchist add 
 in a heavy voice , " and you be not Thursday . " 

 " comrade , " cry Gregory , in a voice like that of a martyr 
 who in an ecstacy of pain have pass beyond pain , " it be nothing 
 to I whether you detest I as a tyrant or det I as a slave . 
 if you will not take my command , accept my degradation . 
 I kneel to you . I throw myself at your foot . I implore you . 
 do not elect this man . " 

 " Comrade Gregory , " say the chairman after a painful pause , 
 " this be really not quite dignified . " 

 for the first time in the proceeding there be for a few 
 second a real silence . then Gregory fall back in his seat , 
 a pale wreck of a man , and the chairman repeat , like a piece 
 of clock - work suddenly start again - 

 " the question be that Comrade Syme be elect to the post of Thursday 
 on the General Council . " 

 the roar rise like the sea , the hand rise like a forest , and three minute 
 afterwards Mr. Gabriel Syme , of the Secret Police Service , be elect 
 to the post of Thursday on the General Council of the Anarchists of Europe . 

 everyone in the room seem to feel the tug wait on the river , 
 the sword - stick and the revolver , wait on the table . 
 the instant the election be end and irrevocable , and Syme 
 have receive the paper prove his election , they all sprang 
 to their foot , and the fiery group move and mix in the room . 
 Syme find himself , somehow or other , face to face with Gregory , 
 who still regard he with a stare of stunned hatred . 
 they be silent for many minute . 

 " you be a devil ! " say Gregory at last . 

 " and you be a gentleman , " say Syme with gravity . 

 " it be you that entrap I , " begin Gregory , shake from head to foot , 
 " entrap I into - " 

 " talk sense , " say Syme shortly . " into what sort of devil ' 
 parliament have you entrap I , if it come to that ? 
 you make I swear before I make you . perhaps we be both do 
 what we think right . but what we think right be so damned different 
 that there can be nothing between we in the way of concession . 
 there be nothing possible between we but honour and death , " 
 and he pull the great cloak about his shoulder and pick 
 up the flask from the table . 

 " the boat be quite ready , " say Mr. Buttons , bustle up . 
 " be good enough to step this way . " 

 with a gesture that reveal the shop - walker , he lead Syme down 
 a short , iron - bind passage , the still agonised Gregory follow 
 feverishly at their heel . at the end of the passage be a door , 
 which Buttons open sharply , show a sudden blue and silver 
 picture of the moonlit river , that look like a scene in a theatre . 
 close to the opening lie a dark , dwarfish steam - launch , like a baby 
 dragon with one red eye . 

 almost in the act of step on board , Gabriel Syme turn 
 to the gap Gregory . 

 " you have keep your word , " he say gently , with his face in shadow . 
 " you be a man of honour , and I thank you . you have keep it even down 
 to a small particular . there be one special thing you promise I 
 at the beginning of the affair , and which you have certainly give I 
 by the end of it . " 

 " what do you mean ? " cry the chaotic Gregory . " what do I promise you ? " 

 " a very entertaining evening , " say Syme , and he make a military salute 
 with the sword - stick as the steamboat slide away . 



  CHAPTER IV 

  the tale of a detective 


 GABRIEL SYME be not merely a detective who pretend to be 
 a poet ; he be really a poet who have become a detective . 
 nor be his hatred of anarchy hypocritical . he be one 
 of those who be drive early in life into too conservative 
 an attitude by the bewilder folly of most revolutionist . 
 he have not attain it by any tame tradition . his respectability 
 be spontaneous and sudden , a rebellion against rebellion . 
 he come of a family of crank , in which all the old people 
 have all the new notion . one of his uncle always walk 
 about without a hat , and another have make an unsuccessful attempt 
 to walk about with a hat and nothing else . his father cultivate 
 art and self - realisation ; his mother go in for simplicity 
 and hygiene . hence the child , during his tenderer year , 
 be wholly unacquainted with any drink between the extreme 
 of absinth and cocoa , of both of which he have a healthy dislike . 
 the more his mother preach a more than Puritan abstinence 
 the more do his father expand into a more than pagan latitude ; 
 and by the time the former have come to enforce vegetarianism , 
 the latter have pretty well reach the point of defend cannibalism . 

 be surround with every conceivable kind of revolt from infancy , 
 Gabriel have to revolt into something , so he revolt into the only 
 thing leave - sanity . but there be just enough in he of the blood 
 of these fanatic to make even his protest for common sense a little 
 too fierce to be sensible . his hatred of modern lawlessness 
 have be crown also by an accident . it happen that he be 
 walk in a side street at the instant of a dynamite outrage . 
 he have be blind and deaf for a moment , and then see , 
 the smoke clearing , the break window and the bleeding face . 
 after that he go about as usual - quiet , courteous , rather gentle ; 
 but there be a spot on his mind that be not sane . 
 he do not regard anarchist , as most of we do , as a handful 
 of morbid man , combine ignorance with intellectualism . 
 he regard they as a huge and pitiless peril , like a chinese invasion . 

 he pour perpetually into newspaper and their waste - paper basket 
 a torrent of tale , verse and violent article , warn man 
 of this deluge of barbaric denial . but he seem to be get 
 no nearer his enemy , and , what be bad , no nearer a living . 
 as he pace the Thames embankment , bitterly bite a cheap cigar 
 and brood on the advance of Anarchy , there be no anarchist 
 with a bomb in his pocket so savage or so solitary as he . 
 indeed , he always feel that Government stand alone and desperate , 
 with its back to the wall . he be too quixotic to have care 
 for it otherwise . 

 he walk on the Embankment once under a dark red sunset . 
 the red river reflect the red sky , and they both reflect 
 his anger . the sky , indeed , be so swarthy , and the light 
 on the river relatively so lurid , that the water almost 
 seem of fiercer flame than the sunset it mirror . 
 it look like a stream of literal fire wind under the vast 
 cavern of a subterranean country . 

 Syme be shabby in those day . he wear an old - fashioned black 
 chimney - pot hat ; he be wrap in a yet more old - fashioned cloak , 
 black and ragged ; and the combination give he the look of the early 
 villain in Dickens and Bulwer Lytton . also his yellow beard and hair 
 be more unkempt and leonine than when they appear long afterwards , 
 cut and point , on the lawn of Saffron Park . a long , lean , 
 black cigar , buy in Soho for twopence , stand out from between 
 his tightened tooth , and altogether he look a very satisfactory 
 speciman of the anarchist upon whom he have vow a holy war . 
 perhaps this be why a policeman on the Embankment speak to he , 
 and say " good evening . " 

 Syme , at a crisis of his morbid fear for humanity , seem sting by the mere 
 stolidity of the automatic official , a mere bulk of blue in the twilight . 

 " a good evening be it ? " he say sharply . " you fellow would call the end of 
 the world a good evening . look at that bloody red sun and that bloody river ! 
 I tell you that if that be literally human blood , spilt and shin , 
 you would still be stand here as solid as ever , look out for some poor 
 harmless tramp whom you could move on . you policeman be cruel to the poor , 
 but I could forgive you even your cruelty if it be not for your calm . " 

 " if we be calm , " reply the policeman , " it be the calm 
 of organise resistance . " 

 " Eh ? " say Syme , star . 

 " the soldier must be calm in the thick of the battle , " pursue the policeman . 
 " the composure of an army be the anger of a nation . " 

 " Good God , the Board Schools ! " say Syme . " be this 
 undenominational education ? " 

 " no , " say the policeman sadly , " I never have any of those advantage . 
 the Board Schools come after my time . what education I have be very rough 
 and old - fashioned , I be afraid . " 

 " where do you have it ? " ask Syme , wonder . 

 " oh , at Harrow , " say the policeman 

 the class sympathy which , false as they be , be the true thing 
 in so many man , break out of Syme before he could control they . 

 " but , good Lord , man , " he say , " you ought not   to be a policeman ! " 

 the policeman sigh and shake his head . 

 " I know , " he say solemnly , " I know I be not worthy . " 

 " but why do you join the police ? " ask Syme with rude curiosity . 

 " for much the same reason that you abuse the police , " reply the other . 
 " I find that there be a special opening in the service for those whose 
 fear for humanity be concern rather with the aberration of the 
 scientific intellect than with the normal and excusable , though excessive , 
 outbreak of the human will . I trust I make myself clear . " 

 " if you mean that you make your opinion clear , " say Syme , " I suppose you do . 
 but as for make yourself clear , it be the last thing you do . 
 how come a man like you to be talk philosophy in a blue helmet 
 on the Thames embankment ? 

 " you have evidently not hear of the late development in our 
 police system , " reply the other . " I be not surprised at it . 
 we be keep it rather dark from the educate class , 
 because that class contain most of our enemy . 
 but you seem to be exactly in the right frame of mind . 
 I think you might almost join we . " 

 " join you in what ? " ask Syme . 

 " I will tell you , " say the policeman slowly . " this be the situation : 
 the head of one of our department , one of the most celebrated 
 detective in Europe , have long be of opinion that a purely 
 intellectual conspiracy would soon threaten the very existence 
 of civilisation . he be certain that the scientific and 
 artistic world be silently bind in a crusade against 
 the Family and the state . he have , therefore , form a special 
 corps of policeman , policeman who be also philosopher . 
 it be their business to watch the beginning of this conspiracy , 
 not merely in a criminal but in a controversial sense . 
 I be a democrat myself , and I be fully aware of the value 
 of the ordinary man in matter of ordinary valour or virtue . 
 but it would obviously be undesirable to employ the common 
 policeman in an investigation which be also a heresy hunt . " 

 Syme 's eye be bright with a sympathetic curiosity . 

 " what do you do , then ? " he say . 

 " the work of the philosophical policeman , " reply the man in blue , 
 " be at once bold and more subtle than that of the ordinary detective . 
 the ordinary detective go to pot - house to arrest thief ; we go 
 to artistic tea - party to detect pessimist . the ordinary detective 
 discover from a ledger or a diary that a crime have be commit . 
 we discover from a book of sonnet that a crime will be commit . 
 we have to trace the origin of those dreadful thought that drive 
 man on at last to intellectual fanaticism and intellectual crime . 
 we be only just in time to prevent the assassination at Hartle pool , 
 and that be entirely due to the fact that our Mr. Wilks   a smart 
 young fellow   thoroughly understand a triolet . " 

 " do you mean , " ask Syme , " that there be really as much connection 
 between crime and the modern intellect as all that ? " 

 " you be not sufficiently democratic , " answer the policeman , 
 " but you be right when you say just now that our ordinary 
 treatment of the poor criminal be a pretty brutal business . 
 I tell you I be sometimes sick of my trade when I see how perpetually 
 it mean merely a war upon the ignorant and the desperate . 
 but this new movement of ours be a very different affair . 
 we deny the snobbish English assumption that the uneducated be 
 the dangerous criminal . we remember the Roman Emperors . we remember 
 the great poisoning prince of the Renaissance . we say 
 that the dangerous criminal be the educate criminal . 
 we say that the most dangerous criminal now be the entirely 
 lawless modern philosopher . compare to he , burglar and 
 bigamist be essentially moral man ; my heart go out to they . 
 they accept the essential ideal of man ; they merely seek it wrongly . 
 thief respect property . they merely wish the property 
 to become their property that they may more perfectly 
 respect it . but philosopher dislike property as property ; 
 they wish to destroy the very idea of personal possession . 
 bigamist respect marriage , or they would not go through 
 the highly ceremonial and even ritualistic formality of bigamy . 
 but philosopher despise marriage as marriage . murderer respect 
 human life ; they merely wish to attain a great fulness 
 of human life in themselves by the sacrifice of what seem 
 to they to be less life . but philosopher hate life itself , 
 their own as much as other people 's . " 

 Syme strike his hand together . 

 " how true that be , " he cry . " I have feel it from my boyhood , 
 but never could state the verbal antithesis . the common criminal 
 be a bad man , but at least he be , as it be , a conditional 
 good man . he say that if only a certain obstacle be remove - 
 say a wealthy uncle - he be then prepared to accept the universe 
 and to praise God . he be a reformer , but not an anarchist . 
 he wish to cleanse the edifice , but not to destroy it . 
 but the evil philosopher be not try to alter thing , but to 
 annihilate they . yes , the modern world have retain all those 
 part of police work which be really oppressive and ignominious , 
 the harrying of the poor , the spying upon the unfortunate . 
 it have give up its more dignified work , the punishment 
 of powerful traitor the in the State and powerful heresiarch 
 in the Church . the modern say we must not punish heretic . 
 my only doubt be whether we have a right to punish anybody else . " 

 " but this be absurd ! " cry the policeman , clasp his hand with 
 an excitement uncommon in person of his figure and costume , " but it 
 be intolerable ! I do not   know what you be do , but you be waste 
 your life . you must , you shall , join our special army against anarchy . 
 their army be on our frontier . their bolt be ready to fall . 
 a moment more , and you may lose the glory of work with we , 
 perhaps the glory of die with the last hero of the world . " 

 " it be a chance not to be miss , certainly , " assent Syme , 
 " but still I do not quite understand . I know as well 
 as anybody that the modern world be full of lawless little 
 man and mad little movement . but , beastly as they be , 
 they generally have the one merit of disagree with each other . 
 how can you talk of their lead one army or hurl one bolt . 
 what be this anarchy ? " 

 " do not confuse it , " reply the constable , " with those chance 
 dynamite outbreak from Russia or from Ireland , which be really 
 the outbreak of oppress , if mistaken , man . this be a vast 
 philosophic movement , consist of an outer and an inner ring . 
 you might even call the outer ring the laity and the inner ring 
 the priesthood . I prefer to call the outer ring the innocent section , 
 the inner ring the supremely guilty section . the outer ring - 
 the main mass of their supporter - be merely anarchist ; 
 that be , man who believe that rule and formula have destroy 
 human happiness . they believe that all the evil result of human 
 crime be the result of the system that have call it crime . 
 they do not believe that the crime create the punishment . 
 they believe that the punishment have create the crime . 
 they believe that if a man seduce seven woman he would 
 naturally walk away as blameless as the flower of spring . 
 they believe that if a man pick a pocket he would naturally 
 feel exquisitely good . these I call the innocent section . " 

 " oh ! " say Syme . 

 " naturally , therefore , these people talk about ' a happy 
 time come ' ; ' the paradise of the future ' ; ' mankind free 
 from the bondage of vice and the bondage of virtue , ' and so on . 
 and so also the man of the inner circle speak - the sacred priesthood . 
 they also speak to applaud crowd of the happiness of 
 the future , and of mankind free at last . but in their mouth " - 
 and the policeman lower his voice - " in their mouth these happy 
 phrase have a horrible meaning . they be under no illusion ; 
 they be too intellectual to think that man upon this earth 
 can ever be quite free of original sin and the struggle . 
 and they mean death . when they say that mankind shall be 
 free at last , they mean that mankind shall commit suicide . 
 when they talk of a paradise without right or wrong , 
 they mean the grave . 

 they have but two object , to destroy first humanity and then themselves . 
 that be why they throw bomb instead of fire pistol . the innocent 
 rank and file be disappoint because the bomb have not kill the king ; 
 but the high - priesthood be happy because it have kill somebody . " 

 " how can I join you ? " ask Syme , with a sort of passion . 

 " I know for a fact that there be a vacancy at the moment , " 
 say the policeman , " as I have the honour to be somewhat 
 in the confidence of the chief of whom I have speak . 
 you should really come and see he . or rather , I should not 
 say see he , nobody ever see he ; but you can talk to he 
 if you like . " 

 " Telephone ? " inquire Syme , with interest . 

 " no , " say the policeman placidly , " he have a fancy for always sit 
 in a pitch - dark room . he say it make his thought brighter . 
 do come along . " 

 somewhat daze and considerably excited , Syme allow himself to be lead 
 to a side - door in the long row of building of Scotland Yard . almost before 
 he know what he be do , he have be pass through the hand of 
 about four intermediate official , and be suddenly show into a room , 
 the abrupt blackness of which startle he like a blaze of light . 
 it be not the ordinary darkness , in which form can be faintly trace ; 
 it be like go suddenly stone - blind . 

 " be you the new recruit ? " ask a heavy voice . 

 and in some strange way , though there be not the shadow of a shape 
 in the gloom , Syme know two thing : first , that it come from a man 
 of massive stature ; and second , that the man have his back to he . 

 " be you the new recruit ? " say the invisible chief , 
 who seem to have hear all about it . " all right . 
 you be engage . " 

 Syme , quite sweep off his foot , make a feeble fight against 
 this irrevocable phrase . 

 " I really have no experience , " he begin . 

 " no one have any experience , " say the other , " of the Battle of Armageddon . " 

 " but I be really unfit - " 

 " you be willing , that be enough , " say the unknown . 

 " well , really , " say Syme , " I do not   know any profession of which mere 
 willingness be the final test . " 

 " I do , " say the other - " martyr . I be condemn you to death . 
 good day . " 

 thus it be that when Gabriel Syme come out again into the crimson 
 light of evening , in his shabby black hat and shabby , lawless cloak , 
 he come out a member of the New Detective Corps for the frustration 
 of the great conspiracy . act under the advice of his friend 
 the policeman   who be professionally inclined to neatness , 
 he trim his hair and beard , buy a good hat , clothe himself in an 
 exquisite summer suit of light blue - grey , with a pale yellow flower 
 in the button - hole , and , in short , become that elegant and rather 
 insupportable person whom Gregory have first encounter in the little 
 garden of Saffron Park . before he finally leave the police premise 
 his friend provide he with a small blue card , on which be write , 
 " the last crusade , " and a number , the sign of his official authority . 
 he put this carefully in his upper waistcoat pocket , light a cigarette , 
 and go forth to track and fight the enemy in all the drawing - room 
 of London . where his adventure ultimately lead he we have already see . 
 at about half - past one on a February night he find himself steam 
 in a small tug up the silent Thames , arm with swordstick and revolver , 
 the duly elect Thursday of the Central Council of Anarchists . 

 when Syme step out on to the steam - tug he have a singular sensation 
 of step out into something entirely new ; not merely into the 
 landscape of a new land , but even into the landscape of a new planet . 
 this be mainly due to the insane yet solid decision of that evening , 
 though partly also to an entire change in the weather and the sky 
 since he enter the little tavern some two hour before . 
 every trace of the passionate plumage of the cloudy sunset 
 have be sweep away , and a naked moon stand in a naked sky . 
 the moon be so strong and full that   by a paradox often to be notice 
 it seem like a weak sun . it give , not the sense of bright moonshine , 
 but rather of a dead daylight . 

 over the whole landscape lie a luminous and unnatural discoloration , as of 
 that disastrous twilight which Milton speak of as shed by the sun in eclipse ; 
 so that Syme fall easily into his first thought , that he be actually 
 on some other and emptier planet , which circle round some sad star . 
 but the more he feel this glitter desolation in the moonlit land , 
 the more his own chivalric folly glow in the night like a great fire . 
 even the common thing he carry with he - the food and the brandy and 
 the loaded pistol - take on exactly that concrete and material poetry which 
 a child feel when he take a gun upon a journey or a bun with he to bed . 
 the sword - stick and the brandy - flask , though in themselves only the tool of 
 morbid conspirator , become the expression of his own more healthy romance . 
 the sword - stick become almost the sword of chivalry , and the brandy the wine 
 of the stirrup - cup . for even the most dehumanise modern fantasy depend on 
 some old and simple figure ; the adventure may be mad , but the adventurer 
 must be sane . the dragon without St. George would not even be grotesque . 
 so this inhuman landscape be only imaginative by the presence of a man 
 really human . to Syme 's exaggerative mind the bright , bleak house 
 and terrace by the Thames look as empty as the mountain of the moon . 
 but even the moon be only poetical because there be a man in the moon . 

 the tug be work by two man , and with much toil go comparatively slowly . 
 the clear moon that have light up Chiswick have go down by the time that they 
 pass Battersea , and when they come under the enormous bulk of Westminster 
 day have already begin to break . it break like the splitting of great bar 
 of lead , show bar of silver ; and these have brighten like white fire 
 when the tug , change its onward course , turn inward to a large landing 
 stage rather beyond Charing Cross . 

 the great stone of the Embankment seem equally dark and gigantic as Syme 
 look up at they . they be big and black against the huge white dawn . 
 they make he feel that he be land on the colossal step of some 
 egyptian palace ; and , indeed , the thing suit his mood , for he be , 
 in his own mind , mount to attack the solid throne of horrible 
 and heathen king . he leap out of the boat on to one slimy step , 
 and stand , a dark and slender figure , amid the enormous masonry . 
 the two man in the tug put she off again and turn up stream . 
 they have never speak a word . 



  CHAPTER V 

  the FEAST of fear 


 AT first the large stone stair seem to Syme as desert as a pyramid ; 
 but before he reach the top he have realise that there be a man lean 
 over the parapet of the Embankment and look out across the river . 
 as a figure he be quite conventional , clothe in a silk hat and frock - coat 
 of the more formal type of fashion ; he have a red flower in his buttonhole . 
 as Syme draw near to he step by step , he do not even move a hair ; 
 and Syme could come close enough to notice even in the dim , pale morning 
 light that his face be long , pale and intellectual , and end in a small 
 triangular tuft of dark beard at the very point of the chin , all else 
 be clean - shaven . this scrap of hair almost seem a mere oversight ; 
 the rest of the face be of the type that be good shaven - clear - cut , ascetic , 
 and in its way noble . Syme draw close and close , note all this , 
 and still the figure do not stir . 

 at first an instinct have tell Syme that this be the man whom 
 he be mean to meet . then , see that the man make no sign , 
 he have conclude that he be not . and now again he have come back to 
 a certainty that the man have something to do with his mad adventure . 
 for the man remain more still than would have be natural 
 if a stranger have come so close . he be as motionless as a 
 wax - work , and get on the nerve somewhat in the same way . 
 Syme look again and again at the pale , dignified and delicate face , 
 and the face still look blankly across the river . 
 then he take out of his pocket the note from Buttons prove 
 his election , and put it before that sad and beautiful face . 
 then the man smile , and his smile be a shock , for it be all 
 on one side , go up in the right cheek and down in the left . 

 there be nothing , rationally speak , to scare anyone about this . 
 many people have this nervous trick of a crooked smile , and in many it 
 be even attractive . but in all Syme 's circumstance , with the dark dawn 
 and the deadly errand and the loneliness on the great dripping stone , 
 there be something unnerving in it . 

 there be the silent river and the silent man , a man of even classic face . 
 and there be the last nightmare touch that his smile suddenly go wrong . 

 the spasm of smile be instantaneous , and the man 's face drop at once into 
 its harmonious melancholy . he speak without further explanation or inquiry , 
 like a man speak to an old colleague . 

 " if we walk up towards Leicester Square , " he say , " we shall just be 
 in time for breakfast . Sunday always insist on an early breakfast . 
 have you have any sleep ? " 

 " no , " say Syme . 

 " nor have I , " answer the man in an ordinary tone . 
 " I shall try to get to bed after breakfast . " 

 he speak with casual civility , but in an utterly dead voice that contradict 
 the fanaticism of his face . it seem almost as if all friendly word 
 be to he lifeless convenience , and that his only life be hate . 
 after a pause the man speak again . 

 " of course , the Secretary of the branch tell you everything that can 
 be tell . but the one thing that can never be tell be the last notion 
 of the President , for his notion grow like a tropical forest . 
 so in case you do not   know , I would well tell you that he be carry 
 out his notion of conceal ourselves by not conceal ourselves 
 to the most extraordinary length just now . originally , of course , 
 we meet in a cell underground , just as your branch do . 
 then Sunday make we take a private room at an ordinary restaurant . 
 he say that if you do not   seem to be hide nobody hunt you out . 
 well , he be the only man on earth , I know ; but sometimes I 
 really think that his huge brain be go a little mad in its 
 old age . for now we flaunt ourselves before the public . 
 we have our breakfast on a balcony - on a balcony , if you please - 
 overlook Leicester Square . " 

 " and what do the people say ? " ask Syme . 

 " it be quite simple what they say , " answer his guide . 

 " they say we be a lot of jolly gentleman who pretend they be anarchist . " 

 " it seem to I a very clever idea , " say Syme . 

 " Clever ! God blast your impudence ! clever ! " cry out the other in a sudden , 
 shrill voice which be as startling and discordant as his crooked smile . 
 " when you have   see Sunday for a split second you will leave off 
 call he clever . " 

 with this they emerge out of a narrow street , and see the early sunlight 
 fill Leicester Square . it will never be know , I suppose , why this 
 square itself should look so alien and in some way so continental . 
 it will never be know whether it be the foreign look that attract 
 the foreigner or the foreigner who give it the foreign look . 
 but on this particular morning the effect seem singularly bright and clear . 
 between the open square and the sunlit leaf and the statue and 
 the saracenic outline of the Alhambra , it look the replica of some 
 French or even spanish public place . and this effect increase in Syme 
 the sensation , which in many shape he have have through the whole adventure , 
 the eerie sensation of have stray into a new world . as a fact , 
 he have buy bad cigar round Leicester Square ever since he be a boy . 
 but as he turn that corner , and see the tree and the moorish cupola , 
 he could have swear that he be turn into an unknown Place de something 
 or other in some foreign town . 

 at one corner of the square there project a kind of angle of a prosperous 
 but quiet hotel , the bulk of which belong to a street behind . 
 in the wall there be one large french window , probably the window of a 
 large coffee - room ; and outside this window , almost literally overhang 
 the square , be a formidably buttress balcony , big enough to contain 
 a dining - table . in fact , it do contain a dining - table , or more strictly 
 a breakfast - table ; and round the breakfast - table , glow in the sunlight 
 and evident to the street , be a group of noisy and talkative man , 
 all dress in the insolence of fashion , with white waistcoat and expensive 
 button - hole . some of their joke could almost be hear across the square . 
 then the grave Secretary give his unnatural smile , and Syme know that this 
 boisterous breakfast party be the secret conclave of the European Dynamiters . 

 then , as Syme continue to stare at they , he see something that he have 
 not see before . he have not see it literally because it be too large 
 to see . at the near end of the balcony , block up a great part 
 of the perspective , be the back of a great mountain of a man . 
 when Syme have see he , his first thought be that the weight of he 
 must break down the balcony of stone . his vastness do not lie only 
 in the fact that he be abnormally tall and quite incredibly fat . 
 this man be plan enormously in his original proportion , 
 like a statue carve deliberately as colossal . his head , crown with 
 white hair , as see from behind look big than a head ought to be . 
 the ear that stand out from it look large than human ear . 
 he be enlarge terribly to scale ; and this sense of size be 
 so staggering , that when Syme see he all the other figure seem 
 quite suddenly to dwindle and become dwarfish . they be still sit 
 there as before with their flower and frock - coat , but now it look 
 as if the big man be entertain five child to tea . 

 as Syme and the guide approach the side door of the hotel , 
 a waiter come out smile with every tooth in his head . 

 " the gentleman be up there , sare , " he say . " they do talk and they do laugh 
 at what they talk . they do say they will throw bomb at ze king . " 

 and the waiter hurry away with a napkin over his arm , much please 
 with the singular frivolity of the gentleman upstairs . 

 the two man mount the stair in silence . 

 Syme have never think of ask whether the monstrous man 
 who almost fill and break the balcony be the great president 
 of whom the other stand in awe . he know it be so , with an 
 unaccountable but instantaneous certainty . Syme , indeed , be one 
 of those man who be open to all the more nameless psychological 
 influence in a degree a little dangerous to mental health . 
 utterly devoid of fear in physical danger , he be a great 
 deal too sensitive to the smell of spiritual evil . 
 twice already that night little unmeaning thing have peep 
 out at he almost pruriently , and give he a sense of draw 
 nearer and near to the head - quarter of hell . and this sense 
 become overpower as he draw near to the great President . 

 the form it take be a childish and yet hateful fancy . 
 as he walk across the inner room towards the balcony , 
 the large face of Sunday grow large and large ; and Syme be 
 grip with a fear that when he be quite close the face would 
 be too big to be possible , and that he would scream aloud . 
 he remember that as a child he would not look at the mask 
 of Memnon in the British Museum , because it be a face , 
 and so large . 

 by an effort , braver than that of leap over a cliff , 
 he go to an empty seat at the breakfast - table and sit down . 
 the man greet he with good - humour raillery as if they 
 have always know he . he sober himself a little by look 
 at their conventional coat and solid , shin coffee - pot ; 
 then he look again at Sunday . his face be very large , 
 but it be still possible to humanity . 

 in the presence of the President the whole company look 
 sufficiently commonplace ; nothing about they catch the eye at first , 
 except that by the President 's caprice they have be dress up with a 
 festive respectability , which give the meal the look of a wedding breakfast . 
 one man indeed stand out at even a superficial glance . he at least 
 be the common or garden Dynamiter . he wear , indeed , the high 
 white collar and satin tie that be the uniform of the occasion ; 
 but out of this collar there spring a head quite unmanageable and 
 quite unmistakable , a bewilder bush of brown hair and beard that almost 
 obscure the eye like those of a skye terrier . but the eye do look 
 out of the tangle , and they be the sad eye of some russian serf . 
 the effect of this figure be not terrible like that of the President , 
 but it have every diablerie that can come from the utterly grotesque . 
 if out of that stiff tie and collar there have come abruptly the head 
 of a cat or a dog , it could not have be a more idiotic contrast . 

 the man 's name , it seem , be Gogol ; he be a Pole , and in this circle 
 of day he be call Tuesday . his soul and speech be incurably tragic ; 
 he could not force himself to play the prosperous and frivolous part demand 
 of he by President Sunday . and , indeed , when Syme come in the President , 
 with that daring disregard of public suspicion which be his policy , 
 be actually chaff Gogol upon his inability to assume conventional grace . 

 " our friend Tuesday , " say the President in a deep voice at once of 
 quietude and volume , " our friend Tuesday do not   seem to grasp the idea . 
 he dress up like a gentleman , but he seem to be too great a soul 
 to behave like one . he insist on the way of the stage conspirator . 
 now if a gentleman go about London in a top hat and a frock - coat , 
 no one need know that he be an anarchist . but if a gentleman put on 
 a top hat and a frock - coat , and then go about on his hand and knee - 
 well , he may attract attention . that be what Brother Gogol do . 
 he go about on his hand and knee with such inexhaustible diplomacy , 
 that by this time he find it quite difficult to walk upright . " 

 " I be not good at goncealment , " say Gogol sulkily , with a thick 
 foreign accent ; " I be not ashamed of the cause . " 

 " yes you be , my boy , and so be the cause of you , " say the President 
 good - naturedly . " you hide as much as anybody ; but you can not   do it , you see , 
 you be such an ass ! you try to combine two inconsistent method . 
 when a householder find a man under his bed , he will probably pause to note 
 the circumstance . but if he find a man under his bed in a top hat , you will 
 agree with I , my dear Tuesday , that he be not likely even to forget it . 
 now when you be find under Admiral Biffin 's bed - " 

 " I be not good at deception , " say Tuesday gloomily , flush . 

 " right , my boy , right , " say the President with a ponderous heartiness , 
 " you be not   good at anything . " 

 while this stream of conversation continue , Syme be look 
 more steadily at the man around he . as he do so , he gradually 
 feel all his sense of something spiritually queer return . 

 he have think at first that they be all of common stature and costume , 
 with the evident exception of the hairy Gogol . but as he look 
 at the other , he begin to see in each of they exactly what he have 
 see in the man by the river , a demoniac detail somewhere . 
 that lop - sided laugh , which would suddenly disfigure the fine 
 face of his original guide , be typical of all these type . 
 each man have something about he , perceive perhaps at the tenth or 
 twentieth glance , which be not normal , and which seem hardly human . 
 the only metaphor he could think of be this , that they all look 
 as man of fashion and presence would look , with the additional 
 twist give in a false and curved mirror . 

 only the individual example will express this half - conceal eccentricity . 
 Syme 's original cicerone bore the title of Monday ; he be the Secretary 
 of the Council , and his twisted smile be regard with more terror 
 than anything , except the President 's horrible , happy laughter . 
 but now that Syme have more space and light to observe he , there be 
 other touch . his fine face be so emaciated , that Syme think it 
 must be waste with some disease ; yet somehow the very distress of his 
 dark eye deny this . it be no physical ill that trouble he . 
 his eye be alive with intellectual torture , as if pure thought be pain . 

 he be typical of each of the tribe ; each man be subtly and 
 differently wrong . next to he sit Tuesday , the tousle - head Gogol , 
 a man more obviously mad . Next be Wednesday , a certain 
 Marquis de St. Eustache , a sufficiently characteristic figure . 
 the first few glance find nothing unusual about he , 
 except that he be the only man at table who wear the fashionable 
 clothe as if they be really his own . he have a black French 
 beard cut square and a black english frock - coat cut even square . 
 but Syme , sensitive to such thing , feel somehow that the man carry 
 a rich atmosphere with he , a rich atmosphere that suffocate . 
 it remind one irrationally of drowsy odour and of die lamp 
 in the dark poem of Byron and Poe . with this go a sense 
 of his be clothe , not in light colour , but in soft material ; 
 his black seem rich and warm than the black shade about he , 
 as if it be compound of profound colour . his black coat 
 look as if it be only black by be too dense a purple . 
 his black beard look as if it be only black by be too deep a blue . 
 and in the gloom and thickness of the beard his dark red mouth show 
 sensual and scornful . whatever he be he be not a Frenchman ; 
 he might be a Jew ; he might be something deep yet in the dark heart 
 of the East . in the bright coloured persian tile and picture 
 show tyrant hunting , you may see just those almond eye , 
 those blue - black beard , those cruel , crimson lip . 

 then come Syme , and next a very old man , Professor de Worms , 
 who still keep the chair of Friday , though every day it 
 be expect that his death would leave it empty . save for 
 his intellect , he be in the last dissolution of senile decay . 
 his face be as grey as his long grey beard , his forehead 
 be lift and fix finally in a furrow of mild despair . 
 in no other case , not even that of Gogol , do the bridegroom 
 brilliancy of the morning dress express a more painful contrast . 
 for the red flower in his button - hole show up against a face 
 that be literally discolour like lead ; the whole hideous effect 
 be as if some drunken dandy have put their clothe upon a corpse . 
 when he rise or sit down , which be with long labour and peril , 
 something bad be express than mere weakness , something 
 indefinably connect with the horror of the whole scene . 
 it do not express decrepitude merely , but corruption . 
 another hateful fancy cross Syme 's quivering mind . 
 he could not help think that whenever the man move a leg 
 or arm might fall off . 

 right at the end sit the man call Saturday , the simple and 
 the most baffling of all . he be a short , square man with a dark , 
 square face clean - shaven , a medical practitioner go by the name 
 of Bull . he have that combination of savoir - faire with a sort 
 of well - groom coarseness which be not uncommon in young doctor . 
 he carry his fine clothe with confidence rather than ease , and he 
 mostly wear a set smile . there be nothing whatever odd about he , 
 except that he wear a pair of dark , almost opaque spectacle . 
 it may have be merely a crescendo of nervous fancy that have 
 go before , but those black disc be dreadful to Syme ; 
 they remind he of half - remember ugly tale , of some 
 story about penny be put on the eye of the dead . 
 Syme 's eye always catch the black glass and the blind grin . 
 have the die Professor wear they , or even the pale Secretary , 
 they would have be appropriate . but on the young and gross man 
 they seem only an enigma . they take away the key of the face . 
 you could not tell what his smile or his gravity mean . 
 partly from this , and partly because he have a vulgar 
 virility want in most of the other it seem to Syme 
 that he might be the wicked of all those wicked man . 
 Syme even have the thought that his eye might be cover up 
 because they be too frightful to see . 



  CHAPTER VI 

  the exposure 


 SUCH be the six man who have swear to destroy the world . 
 again and again Syme strove to pull together his common sense 
 in their presence . sometimes he see for an instant that these 
 notion be subjective , that he be only look at ordinary man , 
 one of whom be old , another nervous , another short - sighted . the 
 sense of an unnatural symbolism always settle back on he again . 
 each figure seem to be , somehow , on the borderland of thing , 
 just as their theory be on the borderland of thought . 
 he know that each one of these man stand at the extreme end , 
 so to speak , of some wild road of reasoning . he could 
 only fancy , as in some old - world fable , that if a man go 
 westward to the end of the world he would find something - 
 say a tree - that be more or less than a tree , a tree possess 
 by a spirit ; and that if he go east to the end of the world 
 he would find something else that be not wholly itself - 
 a tower , perhaps , of which the very shape be wicked . 
 so these figure seem to stand up , violent and unaccountable , 
 against an ultimate horizon , vision from the verge . 
 the end of the earth be close in . 

 Talk have be go on steadily as he take in the scene ; and not the least 
 of the contrast of that bewildering breakfast - table be the contrast 
 between the easy and unobtrusive tone of talk and its terrible purport . 
 they be deep in the discussion of an actual and immediate plot . 
 the waiter downstair have speak quite correctly when he say that they 
 be talk about bomb and king . only three day afterwards 
 the Czar be to meet the President of the French Republic in Paris , 
 and over their bacon and egg upon their sunny balcony these beam 
 gentleman have decide how both should die . even the instrument be choose ; 
 the black - bearded Marquis , it appear , be to carry the bomb . 

 ordinarily speak , the proximity of this positive and objective crime 
 would have sober Syme , and cure he of all his merely mystical tremor . 
 he would have think of nothing but the need of save at least two 
 human body from be rip in piece with iron and roar gas . 
 but the truth be that by this time he have begin to feel a third kind 
 of fear , more pierce and practical than either his moral revulsion 
 or his social responsibility . very simply , he have no fear to spare 
 for the french President or the Czar ; he have begin to fear for himself . 
 Most of the talker take little heed of he , debate now with their face 
 close together , and almost uniformly grave , save when for an instant 
 the smile of the Secretary run aslant across his face as the jagged 
 lightning run aslant across the sky . but there be one persistent thing 
 which first trouble Syme and at last terrify he . the President be 
 always look at he , steadily , and with a great and baffle interest . 
 the enormous man be quite quiet , but his blue eye stand out of his head . 
 and they be always fix on Syme . 

 Syme feel move to spring up and leap over the balcony . 
 when the President 's eye be on he he feel as if he be make 
 of glass . he have hardly the shred of a doubt that in some silent 
 and extraordinary way Sunday have find out that he be a spy . 
 he look over the edge of the balcony , and see a policeman , 
 stand abstractedly just beneath , star at the bright 
 railing and the sunlit tree . 

 then there fall upon he the great temptation that be to torment he 
 for many day . in the presence of these powerful and repulsive man , 
 who be the prince of anarchy , he have almost forget the frail 
 and fanciful figure of the poet Gregory , the mere aesthete of anarchism . 
 he even think of he now with an old kindness , as if they have 
 play together when child . but he remember that he be still 
 tie to Gregory by a great promise . he have promise never to do 
 the very thing that he now feel himself almost in the act of do . 
 he have promise not to jump over that balcony and speak to that policeman . 
 he take his cold hand off the cold stone balustrade . his soul sway 
 in a vertigo of moral indecision . he have only to snap the thread 
 of a rash vow make to a villainous society , and all his life could be 
 as open and sunny as the square beneath he . he have , on the other hand , 
 only to keep his antiquated honour , and be deliver inch by inch 
 into the power of this great enemy of mankind , whose very intellect 
 be a torture - chamber . whenever he look down into the square he see 
 the comfortable policeman , a pillar of common sense and common order . 
 whenever he look back at the breakfast - table he see the President 
 still quietly study he with big , unbearable eye . 

 in all the torrent of his thought there be two thought that never 
 cross his mind . first , it never occur to he to doubt that the 
 President and his Council could crush he if he continue to stand alone . 
 the place might be public , the project might seem impossible . 
 but Sunday be not the man who would carry himself thus easily 
 without have , somehow or somewhere , set open his iron trap . 
 either by anonymous poison or sudden street accident , by hypnotism 
 or by fire from hell , Sunday could certainly strike he . 
 if he defy the man he be probably dead , either strike stiff 
 there in his chair or long afterwards as by an innocent ailment . 
 if he call in the police promptly , arrest everyone , 
 tell all , and set against they the whole energy of England , 
 he would probably escape ; certainly not otherwise . they be 
 a balconyful of gentleman overlook a bright and busy square ; 
 but he feel no more safe with they than if they have be a boatful 
 of armed pirate overlook an empty sea . 

 there be a second thought that never come to he . 
 it never occur to he to be spiritually win over to the enemy . 
 many modern , inure to a weak worship of intellect and force , 
 might have waver in their allegiance under this oppression of a 
 great personality . they might have call Sunday the super - man . if 
 any such creature be conceivable , he look , indeed , somewhat like it , 
 with his earth - shake abstraction , as of a stone statue walking . 
 he might have be call something above man , with his large plan , 
 which be too obvious to be detect , with his large face , 
 which be too frank to be understand . but this be a kind of modern 
 meanness to which Syme could not sink even in his extreme morbidity . 
 like any man , he be coward enough to fear great force ; but he be 
 not quite coward enough to admire it . 

 the man be eat as they talk , and even in this they be typical . 
 Dr. Bull and the Marquis eat casually and conventionally of the good 
 thing on the table - cold pheasant or Strasbourg pie . but the Secretary 
 be a vegetarian , and he speak earnestly of the project murder 
 over half a raw tomato and three quarter of a glass of tepid water . 
 the old Professor have such slop as suggest a sicken second childhood . 
 and even in this President Sunday preserve his curious predominance of 
 mere mass . for he eat like twenty man ; he eat incredibly , with a frightful 
 freshness of appetite , so that it be like watch a sausage factory . 
 yet continually , when he have swallow a dozen crumpet or drunk a quart 
 of coffee , he would be find with his great head on one side star at Syme . 

 " I have often wonder , " say the Marquis , take a great bite out of a 
 slice of bread and jam , " whether it would not   be well for I to do it 
 with a knife . Most of the good thing have be bring off with a knife . 
 and it would be a new emotion to get a knife into a french president 
 and wriggle it round . " 

 " you be wrong , " say the Secretary , draw his black 
 brow together . " the knife be merely the expression 
 of the old personal quarrel with a personal tyrant . 
 Dynamite be not only our good tool , but our good symbol . 
 it be as perfect a symbol of we as be incense of the prayer of 
 the Christians . it expand ; it only destroy because it broaden ; 
 even so , think only destroy because it broaden . 
 a man 's brain be a bomb , " he cry out , loosen suddenly 
 his strange passion and strike his own skull with violence . 
 " my brain feel like a bomb , night and day . it must expand ! 
 it must expand ! a man 's brain must expand , if it break 
 up the universe . " 

 " I do not   want the universe break up just yet , " drawl 
 the Marquis . " I want to do a lot of beastly thing before I die . 
 I think of one yesterday in bed . " 

 " no , if the only end of the thing be nothing , " say Dr. Bull 
 with his sphinx - like smile , " it hardly seem worth do . " 

 the old Professor be star at the ceiling with dull eye . 

 " every man know in his heart , " he say , " that nothing be worth do . " 

 there be a singular silence , and then the Secretary say - 

 " we be wander , however , from the point . 
 the only question be how Wednesday be to strike the blow . 
 I take it we should all agree with the original notion of a bomb . 
 as to the actual arrangement , I should suggest that tomorrow 
 morning he should go first of all to - " 

 the speech be break off short under a vast shadow . 
 President Sunday have rise to his foot , seem to fill 
 the sky above they . 

 " before we discuss that , " he say in a small , quiet voice , " let we go 
 into a private room . I have something vent particular to say . " 

 Syme stand up before any of the other . the instant 
 of choice have come at last , the pistol be at his head . 
 on the pavement before he could hear the policeman idly stir 
 and stamp , for the morning , though bright , be cold . 

 a barrel - organ in the street suddenly spring with a jerk into a jovial tune . 
 Syme stand up taut , as if it have be a bugle before the battle . 
 he find himself fill with a supernatural courage that come from nowhere . 
 that jingle music seem full of the vivacity , the vulgarity , and the 
 irrational valour of the poor , who in all those unclean street be all 
 cling to the decency and the charity of Christendom . his youthful 
 prank of be a policeman have fade from his mind ; he do not think 
 of himself as the representative of the corp of gentleman turn into 
 fancy constable , or of the old eccentric who live in the dark room . 
 but he do feel himself as the ambassador of all these common and kindly 
 people in the street , who every day march into battle to the music 
 of the barrel - organ . and this high pride in be human have lift he 
 unaccountably to an infinite height above the monstrous man around he . 
 for an instant , at least , he look down upon all their sprawl 
 eccentricity from the starry pinnacle of the commonplace . 
 he feel towards they all that unconscious and elementary superiority that a 
 brave man feel over powerful beast or a wise man over powerful error . 
 he know that he have neither the intellectual nor the physical strength 
 of President Sunday ; but in that moment he mind it no more than 
 the fact that he have not the muscle of a tiger or a horn on his nose 
 like a rhinoceros . all be swallow up in an ultimate certainty 
 that the President be wrong and that the barrel - organ be right . 
 there clang in his mind that unanswerable and terrible truism 
 in the song of Roland - 


 " Pagens ont tort et Chretiens ont droit . " 


 which in the old nasal French have the clang and groan of great iron . 
 this liberation of his spirit from the load of his weakness go 
 with a quite clear decision to embrace death . if the people of 
 the barrel - organ could keep their old - world obligation , so could he . 
 this very pride in keep his word be that he be keep it to miscreant . 
 it be his last triumph over these lunatic to go down into their dark 
 room and die for something that they could not even understand . 
 the barrel - organ seem to give the march tune with the energy 
 and the mingled noise of a whole orchestra ; and he could hear deep 
 and roll , under all the trumpet of the pride of life , the drum 
 of the pride of death . 

 the conspirator be already file through the open window 
 and into the room behind . Syme go last , outwardly calm , 
 but with all his brain and body throb with romantic rhythm . 
 the President lead they down an irregular side stair , such as 
 might be use by servant , and into a dim , cold , empty room , 
 with a table and bench , like an abandon boardroom . 
 when they be all in , he close and lock the door . 

 the first to speak be Gogol , the irreconcilable , who seem burst 
 with inarticulate grievance . 

 " Zso ! Zso ! " he cry , with an obscure excitement , his heavy Polish 
 accent become almost impenetrable . " you zay you nod ' ide . 
 you zay you show himselve . it be all nuzzink . Ven you vant 
 talk importance you run yourself in a dark box ! " 

 the President seem to take the foreigner 's incoherent satire 
 with entire good humour . 

 " you can not   get hold of it yet , Gogol , " he say in a fatherly way . 
 " when once they have hear we talk nonsense on that balcony 
 they will not care where we go afterwards . if we have come 
 here first , we should have have the whole staff at the keyhole . 
 you do not   seem to know anything about mankind . " 

 " I die for zem , " cry the Pole in thick excitement , " and I slay 
 zare oppressor . I care not for these game of gonzealment . 
 I would zmite ze tyrant in ze open square . " 

 " I see , I see , " say the President , nod kindly as he seat 
 himself at the top of a long table . " you die for mankind first , 
 and then you get up and smite their oppressor . so that be all right . 
 and now may I ask you to control your beautiful sentiment , 
 and sit down with the other gentleman at this table . 
 for the first time this morning something intelligent be go 
 to be say . " 

 Syme , with the perturb promptitude he have show since 
 the original summon , sit down first . Gogol sit down last , 
 grumble in his brown beard about gombromise . no one except Syme 
 seem to have any notion of the blow that be about to fall . 
 as for he , he have merely the feeling of a man mount the scaffold 
 with the intention , at any rate , of make a good speech . 

 " comrade , " say the President , suddenly rise , " we have spin 
 out this farce long enough . I have call you down here to tell 
 you something so simple and shocking that even the waiter upstairs 
  long inure to our levity   might hear some new seriousness 
 in my voice . comrade , we be discuss plan and name place . 
 I propose , before say anything else , that those plan 
 and place should not be vote by this meeting , but should 
 be leave wholly in the control of some one reliable member . 
 I suggest Comrade Saturday , Dr. Bull . " 

 they all star at he ; then they all start in their seat , for the 
 next word , though not loud , have a living and sensational emphasis . 
 Sunday strike the table . 

 " not one word more about the plan and place must be say at this meeting . 
 not one tiny detail more about what we mean to do must be mention 
 in this company . " 

 Sunday have spend his life in astonish his follower ; 
 but it seem as if he have never really astonish they until now . 
 they all move feverishly in their seat , except Syme . he sit stiff in his , 
 with his hand in his pocket , and on the handle of his loaded revolver . 
 when the attack on he come he would sell his life dear . 
 he would find out at least if the President be mortal . 

 Sunday go on smoothly - 

 " you will probably understand that there be only one possible 
 motive for forbid free speech at this festival of freedom . 
 stranger overhear we matter nothing . they assume that we 
 be joke . but what would matter , even unto death , be this , 
 that there should be one actually among we who be not of we , 
 who know our grave purpose , but do not share it , who - " 

 the Secretary scream out suddenly like a woman . 

 " it can not   be ! " he cry , leap . " there can not   - " 

 the President flap his large flat hand on the table like the fin 
 of some huge fish . 

 " yes , " he say slowly , " there be a spy in this room . 
 there be a traitor at this table . I will waste no more word . 
 his name - " 

 Syme half rise from his seat , his finger firm on the trigger . 

 " his name be Gogol , " say the President . " he be that hairy humbug 
 over there who pretend to be a Pole . " 

 Gogol spring to his foot , a pistol in each hand . 
 with the same flash three man spring at his throat . 
 even the Professor make an effort to rise . but Syme see little 
 of the scene , for he be blind with a beneficent darkness ; 
 he have sink down into his seat shuddering , in a palsy 
 of passionate relief . 



  CHAPTER VII 

  the unaccountable conduct of PROFESSOR DE WORMS 


 " SIT down ! " say Sunday in a voice that he use once or twice in his life , 
 a voice that make man drop draw sword . 

 the three who have rise fall away from Gogol , and that equivocal person 
 himself resume his seat . 

 " well , my man , " say the President briskly , address he as one address 
 a total stranger , " will you oblige I by put your hand in your upper 
 waistcoat pocket and show I what you have there ? " 

 the alleged Pole be a little pale under his tangle of dark hair , 
 but he put two finger into the pocket with apparent coolness 
 and pull out a blue strip of card . when Syme see it lie 
 on the table , he wake up again to the world outside he . 
 for although the card lie at the other extreme of the table , 
 and he could read nothing of the inscription on it , it bear 
 a startling resemblance to the blue card in his own pocket , 
 the card which have be give to he when he join 
 the anti - anarchist constabulary . 

 " Pathetic Slav , " say the President , " tragic child of Poland , be you 
 prepare in the presence of that card to deny that you be in this company - 
 shall we say de trop ? " 

 " right oh ! " say the late Gogol . it make everyone jump to hear a clear , 
 commercial and somewhat cockney voice come out of that forest 
 of foreign hair . it be irrational , as if a Chinaman have suddenly 
 speak with a Scotch accent . 

 " I gather that you fully understand your position , " say Sunday . 

 " you bet , " answer the Pole . " I see it be a fair cop . 
 all I say be , I do not   believe any Pole could have imitate 
 my accent like I do his . " 

 " I concede the point , " say Sunday . " I believe your own accent 
 to be inimitable , though I shall practise it in my bath . 
 do you mind leave your beard with your card ? " 

 " not a bit , " answer Gogol ; and with one finger he rip off the whole of 
 his shaggy head - covering , emerge with thin red hair and a pale , pert face . 
 " it be hot , " he add . 

 " I will do you the justice to say , " say Sunday , not without 
 a sort of brutal admiration , " that you seem to have keep 
 pretty cool under it . now listen to I . I like you . 
 the consequence be that it would annoy I for just about two 
 and a half minute if I hear that you have die in torment . 
 well , if you ever tell the police or any human soul about we , 
 I shall have that two and a half minute of discomfort . 
 on your discomfort I will not dwell . good day . mind the step . " 

 the red - haired detective who have masquerade as Gogol rise to his foot without 
 a word , and walk out of the room with an air of perfect nonchalance . 
 yet the astonish Syme be able to realise that this ease be 
 suddenly assume ; for there be a slight stumble outside the door , 
 which show that the depart detective have not mind the step . 

 " Time be fly , " say the President in his gay manner , after glance at 
 his watch , which like everything about he seem big than it ought to be . 
 " I must go off at once ; I have to take the chair at a humanitarian meeting . " 

 the Secretary turn to he with working eyebrow . 

 " would it not be well , " he say a little sharply , " to discuss far 
 the detail of our project , now that the spy have leave we ? " 

 " no , I think not , " say the President with a yawn like an 
 unobtrusive earthquake . " leave it as it be . let Saturday settle it . 
 I must be off . breakfast here next Sunday . " 

 but the late loud scene have whip up the almost naked nerve 
 of the Secretary . he be one of those man who be conscientious 
 even in crime . 

 " I must protest , President , that the thing be irregular , " he say . 
 " it be a fundamental rule of our society that all plan shall be debate 
 in full council . of course , I fully appreciate your forethought 
 when in the actual presence of a traitor - " 

 " Secretary , " say the President seriously , " if you would take your head 
 home and boil it for a turnip it might be useful . I can not   say . 
 but it might . 

 the Secretary rear back in a kind of equine anger . 

 " I really fail to understand - " he begin in high offense . 

 " that be it , that be it , " say the President , nod a 
 great many time . " that be where you fail right enough . 
 you fail to understand . why , you dance donkey , " he roar , 
 rise , " you do not   want to be overhear by a spy , do not   you ? 
 how do you know you be not   overhear now ? " 

 and with these word he shoulder his way out of the room , 
 shake with incomprehensible scorn . 

 four of the man leave behind gap after he without any 
 apparent glimmering of his meaning . Syme alone have even 
 a glimmering , and such as it be it freeze he to the bone . 
 if the last word of the President mean anything , 
 they mean that he have not after all pass unsuspected . 
 they mean that while Sunday could not denounce he like Gogol , 
 he still could not trust he like the other . 

 the other four get to their foot grumble more or less , and betook 
 themselves elsewhere to find lunch , for it be already well 
 past midday . the Professor go last , very slowly and painfully . 
 Syme sit long after the rest have go , revolve his strange position . 
 he have escape a thunderbolt , but he be still under a cloud . 
 at last he rise and make his way out of the hotel into 
 Leicester Square . the bright , cold day have grow increasingly cold , 
 and when he come out into the street he be surprise by a few 
 flake of snow . while he still carry the sword - stick and the rest 
 of Gregory 's portable luggage , he have throw the cloak down and leave 
 it somewhere , perhaps on the steam - tug , perhaps on the balcony . 
 hop , therefore , that the snow - shower might be slight , 
 he step back out of the street for a moment and stand up 
 under the doorway of a small and greasy hair - dresser 's shop , 
 the front window of which be empty , except for a sickly wax lady 
 in evening dress . 

 Snow , however , begin to thicken and fall fast ; and Syme , 
 have find one glance at the wax lady quite sufficient to depress 
 his spirit , star out instead into the white and empty street . 
 he be considerably astonish to see , stand quite still 
 outside the shop and star into the window , a man . 
 his top hat be load with snow like the hat of Father Christmas , 
 the white drift be rise round his boot and ankle ; 
 but it seem as if nothing could tear he away from the 
 contemplation of the colourless wax doll in dirty evening dress . 
 that any human being should stand in such weather look 
 into such a shop be a matter of sufficient wonder to Syme ; 
 but his idle wonder turn suddenly into a personal shock ; 
 for he realise that the man stand there be the paralytic old 
 Professor de Worms . it scarcely seem the place for a person 
 of his year and infirmity . 

 Syme be ready to believe anything about the perversion of this 
 dehumanize brotherhood ; but even he could not believe that 
 the Professor have fall in love with that particular wax lady . 
 he could only suppose that the man 's malady   whatever it be 
 involve some momentary fit of rigidity or trance . 
 he be not inclined , however , to feel in this case any very 
 compassionate concern . on the contrary , he rather congratulate 
 himself that the Professor 's stroke and his elaborate and 
 limping walk would make it easy to escape from he and leave 
 he mile behind . for Syme thirst first and last to get 
 clear of the whole poisonous atmosphere , if only for an hour . 
 then he could collect his thought , formulate his policy , 
 and decide finally whether he should or should not keep 
 faith with Gregory . 

 he stroll away through the dancing snow , turn up two or 
 three street , down through two or three other , and enter 
 a small Soho restaurant for lunch . he partook reflectively 
 of four small and quaint course , drink half a bottle of red wine , 
 and end up over black coffee and a black cigar , still think . 
 he have take his seat in the upper room of the restaurant , 
 which be full of the chink of knife and the chatter of foreigner . 
 he remember that in old day he have imagine that all these 
 harmless and kindly alien be anarchist . he shudder , 
 remember the real thing . but even the shudder have the delightful 
 shame of escape . the wine , the common food , the familiar place , 
 the face of natural and talkative man , make he almost feel 
 as if the Council of the Seven Days have be a bad dream ; 
 and although he know it be nevertheless an objective reality , 
 it be at least a distant one . tall house and populous street 
 lie between he and his last sight of the shameful seven ; 
 he be free in free London , and drink wine among the free . 
 with a somewhat easy action , he take his hat and stick 
 and stroll down the stair into the shop below . 

 when he enter that low room he stand stricken and root to the spot . 
 at a small table , close up to the blank window and the white 
 street of snow , sit the old anarchist Professor over a glass 
 of milk , with his lift livid face and pendent eyelid . 
 for an instant Syme stand as rigid as the stick he leant upon . 
 then with a gesture as of blind hurry , he brush past the Professor , 
 dash open the door and slam it behind he , and stand outside 
 in the snow . 

 " can that old corpse be follow I ? " he ask himself , 
 bite his yellow moustache . " I stop too long up in 
 that room , so that even such leaden foot could catch I up . 
 one comfort be , with a little brisk walking I can put a man 
 like that as far away as timbuctoo . or be I too fanciful ? 
 be he really follow I ? surely Sunday would not be such 
 a fool as to send a lame man ? " 

 he set off at a smart pace , twisting and whirl his stick , in the direction 
 of Covent Garden . as he cross the great market the snow increase , 
 grow blind and bewildering as the afternoon begin to darken . 
 the snow - flake torment he like a swarm of silver bee . 
 get into his eye and beard , they add their unremitting futility 
 to his already irritated nerve ; and by the time that he have come 
 at a swing pace to the beginning of Fleet Street , he lose patience , 
 and find a Sunday teashop , turn into it to take shelter . 
 he order another cup of black coffee as an excuse . Scarcely have 
 he do so , when Professor de Worms hobble heavily into the shop , 
 sit down with difficulty and order a glass of milk . 

 Syme 's walking - stick have fall from his hand with a great clang , 
 which confess the conceal steel . but the Professor do 
 not look round . Syme , who be commonly a cool character , 
 be literally gap as a rustic gape at a conjuring trick . 
 he have see no cab follow ; he have hear no wheel outside 
 the shop ; to all mortal appearance the man have come on foot . 
 but the old man could only walk like a snail , and Syme have 
 walk like the wind . he start up and snatch his stick , 
 half crazy with the contradiction in mere arithmetic , and swung 
 out of the swing door , leave his coffee untasted . an omnibus 
 go to the Bank go rattle by with an unusual rapidity . 
 he have a violent run of a hundred yard to reach it ; 
 but he manage to spring , sway upon the splash - board and , 
 pause for an instant to pant , he climb on to the top . 
 when he have be seat for about half a minute , he hear behind 
 he a sort of heavy and asthmatic breathing . 

 turn sharply , he see rise gradually high and high up 
 the omnibus step a top hat soil and dripping with snow , 
 and under the shadow of its brim the short - sighted face and shaky 
 shoulder of Professor de Worms . he let himself into a seat 
 with characteristic care , and wrap himself up to the chin 
 in the mackintosh rug . 

 every movement of the old man 's tottering figure and vague hand , every 
 uncertain gesture and panic - stricken pause , seem to put it beyond question 
 that he be helpless , that he be in the last imbecility of the body . 
 he move by inch , he let himself down with little gasp of caution . 
 and yet , unless the philosophical entity call time and space have no 
 vestige even of a practical existence , it appear quite unquestionable 
 that he have run after the omnibus . 

 Syme spring erect upon the rock car , and after star wildly at 
 the wintry sky , that grow gloomy every moment , he run down the step . 
 he have repress an elemental impulse to leap over the side . 

 too bewildered to look back or to reason , he rush into one of the little 
 court at the side of Fleet Street as a rabbit rush into a hole . 
 he have a vague idea , if this incomprehensible old Jack - in - the - box be 
 really pursue he , that in that labyrinth of little street he could 
 soon throw he off the scent . he dive in and out of those crooked lane , 
 which be more like crack than thoroughfare ; and by the time 
 that he have complete about twenty alternate angle and describe 
 an unthinkable polygon , he pause to listen for any sound of pursuit . 
 there be none ; there could not in any case have be much , for the 
 little street be thick with the soundless snow . somewhere behind 
 Red Lion Court , however , he notice a place where some energetic 
 citizen have clear away the snow for a space of about twenty yard , 
 leave the wet , glisten cobble - stone . he think little of this 
 as he pass it , only plunge into yet another arm of the maze . 
 but when a few hundred yard far on he stand still again to listen , 
 his heart stand still also , for he hear from that space of rugged 
 stone the clink crutch and labour foot of the infernal cripple . 

 the sky above be load with the cloud of snow , leave London 
 in a darkness and oppression premature for that hour of the evening . 
 on each side of Syme the wall of the alley be blind 
 and featureless ; there be no little window or any kind of eve . 
 he feel a new impulse to break out of this hive of house , and to 
 get once more into the open and lamp - light street . yet he ramble 
 and dodge for a long time before he strike the main thoroughfare . 
 when he do so , he strike it much far up than he have fancy . 
 he come out into what seem the vast and void of Ludgate Circus , 
 and see St. Paul 's Cathedral sit in the sky . 

 at first he be startled to find these great road 
 so empty , as if a pestilence have sweep through the city . 
 then he tell himself that some degree of emptiness be natural ; 
 first because the snow - storm be even dangerously deep , and secondly 
 because it be Sunday . and at the very word Sunday he bite his lip ; 
 the word be henceforth for hire like some indecent pun . 
 under the white fog of snow high up in the heaven the whole atmosphere 
 of the city be turn to a very queer kind of green twilight , 
 as of man under the sea . the sealed and sullen sunset behind 
 the dark dome of St. Paul 's have in it smoky and sinister colour - 
 colour of sickly green , dead red or decay bronze , that be 
 just bright enough to emphasise the solid whiteness of the snow . 
 but right up against these dreary colour rise the black 
 bulk of the cathedral ; and upon the top of the cathedral 
 be a random splash and great stain of snow , still cling 
 as to an Alpine peak . it have fall accidentally , but just 
 so fallen as to half drape the dome from its very topmost point , 
 and to pick out in perfect silver the great orb and the cross . 
 when Syme see it he suddenly straighten himself , and make 
 with his sword - stick an involuntary salute . 

 he know that that evil figure , his shadow , be creep quickly 
 or slowly behind he , and he do not care . 

 it seem a symbol of human faith and valour that while the sky 
 be darken that high place of the earth be bright . the devil 
 might have capture heaven , but they have not yet capture the cross . 
 he have a new impulse to tear out the secret of this dancing , 
 jump and pursue paralytic ; and at the entrance of the court as it 
 open upon the Circus he turn , stick in hand , to face his pursuer . 

 Professor de Worms come slowly round the corner of the irregular alley 
 behind he , his unnatural form outline against a lonely gas - lamp , 
 irresistibly recall that very imaginative figure in the nursery rhyme , 
 " the crooked man who go a crooked mile . " he really look as if he have 
 be twist out of shape by the tortuous street he have be thread . 
 he come near and nearer , the lamplight shin on his lift spectacle , 
 his lift , patient face . Syme wait for he as St. George wait 
 for the dragon , as a man wait for a final explanation or for death . 
 and the old Professor come right up to he and pass he like a 
 total stranger , without even a blink of his mournful eyelid . 

 there be something in this silent and unexpected innocence that leave Syme 
 in a final fury . the man 's colourless face and manner seem to assert 
 that the whole following have be an accident . Syme be galvanise with an 
 energy that be something between bitterness and a burst of boyish derision . 
 he make a wild gesture as if to knock the old man 's hat off , call out 
 something like " catch I if you can , " and go race away across the white , 
 open Circus . Concealment be impossible now ; and look back over 
 his shoulder , he could see the black figure of the old gentleman come 
 after he with long , swing stride like a man win a mile race . 
 but the head upon that bounding body be still pale , grave and professional , 
 like the head of a lecturer upon the body of a harlequin . 

 this outrageous chase speed across Ludgate Circus , up Ludgate Hill , 
 round St. Paul 's Cathedral , along Cheapside , Syme remember all 
 the nightmare he have ever know . then Syme break away towards the river , 
 and end almost down by the dock . he see the yellow pane of a low , 
 light public - house , fling himself into it and order beer . 
 it be a foul tavern , sprinkle with foreign sailor , a place where opium 
 might be smoke or knife draw . 

 a moment later Professor de Worms enter the place , sit down carefully , 
 and ask for a glass of milk . 



  CHAPTER VIII 

  the PROFESSOR explain 


 when Gabriel Syme find himself finally establish in a chair , 
 and opposite to he , fixed and final also , the lift eyebrow 
 and leaden eyelid of the Professor , his fear fully return . 
 this incomprehensible man from the fierce council , after all , 
 have certainly pursue he . if the man have one character as a 
 paralytic and another character as a pursuer , the antithesis 
 might make he more interesting , but scarcely more soothing . 
 it would be a very small comfort that he could not find the Professor out , 
 if by some serious accident the Professor should find he out . 
 he empty a whole pewter pot of ale before the professor have 
 touch his milk . 

 one possibility , however , keep he hopeful and yet helpless . 
 it be just possible that this escapade signify something 
 other than even a slight suspicion of he . perhaps it be some 
 regular form or sign . perhaps the foolish scamper be some 
 sort of friendly signal that he ought to have understand . 
 perhaps it be a ritual . perhaps the new Thursday be always 
 chase along Cheapside , as the new Lord Mayor be always 
 escort along it . he be just select a tentative inquiry , 
 when the old Professor opposite suddenly and simply cut he short . 
 before Syme could ask the first diplomatic question , the old 
 anarchist have ask suddenly , without any sort of preparation - 

 " be you a policeman ? " 

 whatever else Syme have expect , he have never expect anything so brutal 
 and actual as this . even his great presence of mind could only manage 
 a reply with an air of rather blunder jocularity . 

 " a policeman ? " he say , laugh vaguely . " whatever make you 
 think of a policeman in connection with I ? " 

 " the process be simple enough , " answer the Professor patiently . 
 " I think you look like a policeman . I think so now . " 

 " do I take a policeman 's hat by mistake out of the restaurant ? " 
 ask Syme , smile wildly . " have I by any chance get a number 
 stick on to I somewhere ? have my boot get that watchful look ? 
 why must I be a policeman ? do , do let I be a postman . " 

 the old Professor shake his head with a gravity that give no hope , 
 but Syme run on with a feverish irony . 

 " but perhaps I misunderstood the delicacy of your 
 german philosophy . perhaps policeman be a relative term . 
 in an evolutionary sense , sir , the ape fade so gradually 
 into the policeman , that I myself can never detect the shade . 
 the monkey be only the policeman that may be . perhaps a maiden 
 lady on Clapham Common be only the policeman that might have be . 
 I do not   mind be the policeman that might have be . 
 I do not   mind be anything in german thought . " 

 " be you in the police service ? " say the old man , 
 ignore all Syme 's improvised and desperate raillery . 
 " be you a detective ? " 

 Syme 's heart turn to stone , but his face never change . 

 " your suggestion be ridiculous , " he begin . " why on earth - " 

 the old man strike his palsied hand passionately on the rickety table , 
 nearly break it . 

 " do you hear I ask a plain question , you pattering spy ? " 
 he shriek in a high , crazy voice . " be you , or be you not , 
 a police detective ? " 

 " no ! " answer Syme , like a man stand on the hangman 's drop . 

 " you swear it , " say the old man , lean across to he , his dead 
 face become as it be loathsomely alive . " you swear it ! 
 you swear it ! if you swear falsely , will you be damn ? 
 will you be sure that the devil dance at your funeral ? 
 will you see that the nightmare sit on your grave ? 
 will there really be no mistake ? you be an anarchist , you be 
 a dynamiter ! above all , you be not in any sense a detective ? 
 you be not in the british police ? " 

 he lean his angular elbow far across the table , and put up his large 
 loose hand like a flap to his ear . 

 " I be not in the british police , " say Syme with insane calm . 

 Professor de Worms fall back in his chair with a curious air 
 of kindly collapse . 

 " that be a pity , " he say , " because I be . " 

 Syme spring up straight , send back the bench behind he with a crash . 

 " because you be what ? " he say thickly . " you be what ? " 

 " I be a policeman , " say the Professor with his first broad smile . 
 and beam through his spectacle . " but as you think policeman 
 only a relative term , of course I have nothing to do with you . 
 I be in the british police force ; but as you tell I you be 
 not in the british police force , I can only say that I meet you 
 in a dynamiter ' club . I suppose I ought to arrest you . " 
 and with these word he lay on the table before Syme an exact 
 facsimile of the blue card which Syme have in his own waistcoat pocket , 
 the symbol of his power from the police . 

 Syme have for a flash the sensation that the cosmo have turn 
 exactly upside down , that all tree be grow downward 
 and that all star be under his foot . then come slowly 
 the opposite conviction . for the last twenty - four hour the cosmo 
 have really be upside down , but now the capsize universe 
 have come right side up again . this devil from whom he have be 
 flee all day be only an eld brother of his own house , 
 who on the other side of the table lie back and laugh at he . 
 he do not for the moment ask any question of detail ; 
 he only know the happy and silly fact that this shadow , 
 which have pursue he with an intolerable oppression of peril , 
 be only the shadow of a friend try to catch he up . 
 he know simultaneously that he be a fool and a free man . 
 for with any recovery from morbidity there must go 
 a certain healthy humiliation . there come a certain point 
 in such condition when only three thing be possible : 
 first a perpetuation of satanic pride , secondly tear , 
 and third laughter . Syme 's egotism hold hard to the first 
 course for a few second , and then suddenly adopt the third . 
 take his own blue police ticket from his own waist coat pocket , 
 he toss it on to the table ; then he fling his head back 
 until his spike of yellow beard almost point at the ceiling , 
 and shout with a barbaric laughter . 

 even in that close den , perpetually fill with the din of knife , 
 plate , can , clamorous voice , sudden struggle and stampede , 
 there be something homeric in Syme 's mirth which make many 
 half - drunken man look round . 

 " what yer laugh at , guv'nor ? " ask one wonder labourer 
 from the dock . 

 " at myself , " answer Syme , and go off again into the agony 
 of his ecstatic reaction . 

 " pull yourself together , " say the Professor , " or you will get hysterical . 
 have some more beer . I will join you . " 

 " you have not   drunk your milk , " say Syme . 

 " my milk ! " say the other , in tone of wither and 
 unfathomable contempt , " my milk ! do you think I would look at 
 the beastly stuff when I be out of sight of the bloody anarchist ? 
 we be all Christians in this room , though perhaps , " he add , 
 glance around at the reeling crowd , " not strict one . 
 finish my milk ? great blaze ! yes , I will finish it right enough ! " 
 and he knock the tumbler off the table , make a crash of glass 
 and a splash of silver fluid . 

 Syme be star at he with a happy curiosity . 

 " I understand now , " he cry ; " of course , you be not an old man at all . " 

 " I can not   take my face off here , " reply Professor de Worms . " it be rather 
 an elaborate make - up . as to whether I be an old man , that be not for I to say . 
 I be thirty - eight last birthday . " 

 " yes , but I mean , " say Syme impatiently , " there be nothing 
 the matter with you . " 

 " yes , " answer the other dispassionately . " I be subject to cold . " 

 Syme 's laughter at all this have about it a wild weakness of relief . 
 he laugh at the idea of the paralytic Professor be really a young 
 actor dress up as if for the foot - light . but he feel that he would 
 have laugh as loudly if a pepperpot have fall over . 

 the false Professor drank and wipe his false beard . 

 " do you know , " he ask , " that that man Gogol be one of we ? " 

 " I ? no , I do not   know it , " answer Syme in some surprise . 
 " but do not   you ? " 

 " I know no more than the dead , " reply the man who call 
 himself de Worms . " I think the President be talk about I , 
 and I rattle in my boot . " 

 " and I think he be talk about I , " say Syme , with his rather 
 reckless laughter . " I have my hand on my revolver all the time . " 

 " so have I , " say the Professor grimly ; ' so have Gogol evidently . " 

 Syme strike the table with an exclamation . 

 " why , there be three of we there ! " he cry . " three out of seven 
 be a fighting number . if we have only know that we be three ! " 

 the face of Professor de Worms darken , and he do not look up . 

 " we be three , " he say . " if we have be three hundred we could 
 still have do nothing . " 

 " not if we be three hundred against four ? " ask Syme , 
 jeer rather boisterously . 

 " no , " say the Professor with sobriety , " not if we be three 
 hundred against Sunday . " 

 and the mere name strike Syme cold and serious ; his laughter 
 have die in his heart before it could die on his lip . 
 the face of the unforgettable President spring into his mind 
 as startling as a coloured photograph , and he remark this 
 difference between Sunday and all his satellite , that their face , 
 however fierce or sinister , become gradually blur by memory 
 like other human face , whereas Sunday 's seem almost to grow 
 more actual during absence , as if a man 's paint portrait 
 should slowly come alive . 

 they be both silent for a measure of moment , and then Syme 's 
 speech come with a rush , like the sudden foaming of champagne . 

 " Professor , " he cry , " it be intolerable . be you afraid of this man ? " 

 the Professor lift his heavy lid , and gaze at Syme with large , 
 wide - open , blue eye of an almost ethereal honesty . 

 " yes , I be , " he say mildly . " so be you . " 

 Syme be dumb for an instant . then he rise to his foot erect , 
 like an insulted man , and thrust the chair away from he . 

 " yes , " he say in a voice indescribable , " you be right . 
 I be afraid of he . therefore I swear by God that I will seek out 
 this man whom I fear until I find he , and strike he on the mouth . 
 if heaven be his throne and the earth his footstool , I swear 
 that I would pull he down . " 

 " how ? " ask the star Professor . " why ? " 

 " because I be afraid of he , " say Syme ; " and no man should leave 
 in the universe anything of which he be afraid . " 

 De Worms blink at he with a sort of blind wonder . 
 he make an effort to speak , but Syme go on in a low voice , 
 but with an undercurrent of inhuman exaltation - 

 " who would condescend to strike down the mere thing that he do not fear ? 
 who would debase himself to be merely brave , like any common prizefighter ? 
 who would stoop to be fearless - like a tree ? fight the thing that you fear . 
 you remember the old tale of the english clergyman who give the last rite 
 to the brigand of Sicily , and how on his death - bed the great robber say , 
 ' I can give you no money , but I can give you advice for a lifetime : 
 your thumb on the blade , and strike upwards . ' so I say to you , 
 strike upwards , if you strike at the star . " 

 the other look at the ceiling , one of the trick of his pose . 

 " Sunday be a fix star , " he say . 

 " you shall see he a fall star , " say Syme , and put on his hat . 

 the decision of his gesture draw the Professor vaguely to his foot . 

 " have you any idea , " he ask , with a sort of benevolent bewilderment , 
 " exactly where you be go ? " 

 " yes , " reply Syme shortly , " I be go to prevent this bomb 
 be throw in Paris . " 

 " have you any conception how ? " inquire the other . 

 " no , " say Syme with equal decision . 

 " you remember , of course , " resume the soi - disant de Worms , pull his 
 beard and look out of the window , " that when we break up rather 
 hurriedly the whole arrangement for the atrocity be leave in the private 
 hand of the Marquis and Dr. Bull . the Marquis be by this time probably 
 cross the Channel . but where he will go and what he will do it 
 be doubtful whether even the President know ; certainly we do not   know . 
 the only man who do know be Dr. Bull . 

 " confound it ! " cry Syme . " and we do not   know where he be . " 

 " yes , " say the other in his curious , absent - minded way , 
 " I know where he be myself . " 

 " will you tell I ? " ask Syme with eager eye . 

 " I will take you there , " say the Professor , and take down his own 
 hat from a peg . 

 Syme stand look at he with a sort of rigid excitement . 

 " what do you mean ? " he ask sharply . " will you join I ? 
 will you take the risk ? " 

 " young man , " say the Professor pleasantly , " I be amuse to observe 
 that you think I be a coward . as to that I will say only one word , 
 and that shall be entirely in the manner of your own philosophical rhetoric . 
 you think that it be possible to pull down the President . I know that it 
 be impossible , and I be go to try it , " and open the tavern door , 
 which let in a blast of bitter air , they go out together into the dark 
 street by the dock . 

 Most of the snow be melt or trample to mud , but here and there 
 a clot of it still show grey rather than white in the gloom . 
 the small street be sloppy and full of pool , which reflect 
 the flame lamp irregularly , and by accident , like fragment 
 of some other and fallen world . Syme feel almost daze as 
 he step through this grow confusion of light and shadow ; 
 but his companion walk on with a certain briskness , towards where , 
 at the end of the street , an inch or two of the lamplit river 
 look like a bar of flame . 

 " where be you go ? " Syme inquire . 

 " just now , " answer the Professor , " I be go just round 
 the corner to see whether Dr. Bull have go to bed . 
 he be hygienic , and retire early . " 

 " Dr. Bull ! " exclaim Syme . " do he live round the corner ? " 

 " no , " answer his friend . " as a matter of fact he live some way off , 
 on the other side of the river , but we can tell from here whether he have 
 go to bed . " 

 turn the corner as he speak , and face the dim river , 
 fleck with flame , he point with his stick to the other bank . 
 on the Surrey side at this point there run out into the Thames , 
 seem almost to overhang it , a bulk and cluster 
 of those tall tenement , dot with light window , 
 and rise like factory chimney to an almost insane height . 
 their special poise and position make one block of building 
 especially look like a Tower of Babel with a hundred eye . 
 Syme have never see any of the sky - scrap building in America , 
 so he could only think of the building in a dream . 

 even as he star , the high light in this innumerably light 
 turret abruptly go out , as if this black Argus have wink at he 
 with one of his innumerable eye . 

 Professor de Worms swing round on his heel , and strike his stick 
 against his boot . 

 " we be too late , " he say , " the hygienic Doctor have go to bed . " 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Syme . " do he live over there , then ? " 

 " yes , " say de Worms , " behind that particular window which you can not   see . 
 come along and get some dinner . we must call on he to - morrow morning . " 

 without further parley , he lead the way through several by - way until they come 
 out into the flare and clamour of the East India Dock Road . the Professor , 
 who seem to know his way about the neighbourhood , proceed to a place where 
 the line of light shop fall back into a sort of abrupt twilight and quiet , 
 in which an old white inn , all out of repair , stand back some twenty foot 
 from the road . 

 " you can find good english inn leave by accident everywhere , like fossil , " 
 explain the Professor . " I once find a decent place in the West End . " 

 " I suppose , " say Syme , smile , " that this be the corresponding decent 
 place in the East End ? " 

 " it be , " say the Professor reverently , and go in . 

 in that place they din and sleep , both very thoroughly . 
 the bean and bacon , which these unaccountable people cook well , 
 the astonishing emergence of Burgundy from their cellar , 
 crown Syme 's sense of a new comradeship and comfort . 
 through all this ordeal his root horror have be isolation , and there 
 be no word to express the abyss between isolation and have one ally . 
 it may be concede to the mathematician that four be twice two . 
 but two be not twice one ; two be two thousand time one . 
 that be why , in spite of a hundred disadvantage , the world 
 will always return to monogamy . 

 Syme be able to pour out for the first time the whole of his 
 outrageous tale , from the time when Gregory have take he 
 to the little tavern by the river . he do it idly and amply , 
 in a luxuriant monologue , as a man speak with very old friend . 
 on his side , also , the man who have impersonate Professor de 
 Worms be not less communicative . his own story be almost 
 as silly as Syme 's . 

 " that be a good get - up of your , " say Syme , drain a glass of Macon ; 
 " a lot well than old Gogol 's . even at the start I think he be 
 a bit too hairy . " 

 " a difference of artistic theory , " reply the Professor pensively . 
 " Gogol be an idealist . he make up as the abstract or platonic ideal 
 of an anarchist . but I be a realist . I be a portrait painter . 
 but , indeed , to say that I be a portrait painter be an inadequate expression . 
 I be a portrait . " 

 " I do not   understand you , " say Syme . 

 " I be a portrait , " repeat the Professor . " I be a portrait of the celebrated 
 Professor de Worms , who be , I believe , in Naples . " 

 " you mean you be make up like he , " say Syme . " but do not 
 he know that you be take his nose in vain ? " 

 " he know it right enough , " reply his friend cheerfully . 

 " then why do not   he denounce you ? " 

 " I have denounce he , " answer the Professor . 

 " do explain yourself , " say Syme . 

 " with pleasure , if you do not   mind hear my story , " 
 reply the eminent foreign philosopher . " I be by profession 
 an actor , and my name be Wilks . when I be on the stage I 
 mix with all sort of bohemian and blackguard company . 
 sometimes I touch the edge of the turf , sometimes the riff - raff 
 of the art , and occasionally the political refugee . 
 in some den of exiled dreamer I be introduce to the great 
 German Nihilist philosopher , Professor de Worms . I do 
 not gather much about he beyond his appearance , 
 which be very disgusting , and which I study carefully . 
 I understand that he have prove that the destructive principle 
 in the universe be God ; hence he insist on the need for a 
 furious and incessant energy , rend all thing in piece . 
 Energy , he say , be the all . he be lame , shortsighted , 
 and partially paralytic . when I meet he I be in a frivolous mood , 
 and I dislike he so much that I resolve to imitate he . 
 if I have be a draughtsman I would have draw a caricature . 
 I be only an actor , I could only act a caricature . 
 I make myself up into what be mean for a wild exaggeration 
 of the old Professor 's dirty old self . when I go into the room 
 full of his supporter I expect to be receive with a roar 
 of laughter , or   if they be too far go   with a roar of 
 indignation at the insult . I can not describe the surprise I feel 
 when my entrance be receive with a respectful silence , follow 
  when I have first open my lip   with a murmur of admiration . 
 the curse of the perfect artist have fall upon I . 
 I have be too subtle , I have be too true . they think I 
 really be the great Nihilist Professor . I be a healthy - minded 
 young man at the time , and I confess that it be a blow . 
 before I could fully recover , however , two or three of these 
 admirer run up to I radiate indignation , and tell I 
 that a public insult have be put upon I in the next room . 
 I inquire its nature . it seem that an impertinent fellow 
 have dress himself up as a preposterous parody of myself . 
 I have drink more champagne than be good for I , and in a 
 flash of folly I decide to see the situation through . 
 consequently it be to meet the glare of the company and my own 
 lift eyebrow and freeze eye that the real Professor come 
 into the room . 

 " I need hardly say there be a collision . the pessimist 
 all round I look anxiously from one Professor to the other 
 Professor to see which be really the more feeble . but I win . 
 an old man in poor health , like my rival , could not be expect 
 to be so impressively feeble as a young actor in the prime of life . 
 you see , he really have paralysis , and work within this 
 definite limitation , he could not   be so jolly paralytic as I be . 
 then he try to blast my claim intellectually . 
 I counter that by a very simple dodge . whenever he say 
 something that nobody but he could understand , I reply 
 with something which I could not even understand myself . 
 ' I do not   fancy , ' he say , ' that you could have work out 
 the principle that evolution be only negation , since there 
 inhere in it the introduction of lacuna , which be an essential 
 of differentiation . ' I reply quite scornfully , ' you read 
 all that up in pinckwert ; the notion that involution function 
 eugenically be expose long ago by Glumpe . ' it be unnecessary 
 for I to say that there never be such people as pinckwert 
 and Glumpe . but the people all round   rather to my surprise 
 seem to remember they quite well , and the Professor , 
 find that the learned and mysterious method leave he rather 
 at the mercy of an enemy slightly deficient in scruple , 
 fall back upon a more popular form of wit . ' I see , ' he sneer , 
 ' you prevail like the false pig in Aesop . ' ' and you fail , ' 
 I answer , smile , ' like the hedgehog in Montaigne . ' need I 
 say that there be no hedgehog in Montaigne ? ' your claptrap 
 come off , ' he say ; ' so would your beard . ' I have no intelligent 
 answer to this , which be quite true and rather witty . 
 but I laugh heartily , answer , ' like the Pantheist 's boot , ' 
 at random , and turn on my heel with all the honour of victory . 
 the real Professor be throw out , but not with violence , 
 though one man try very patiently to pull off his nose . 
 he be now , I believe , receive everywhere in Europe as a 
 delightful impostor . his apparent earnestness and anger , 
 you see , make he all the more entertaining . " 

 " well , " say Syme , " I can understand your putting on his dirty 
 old beard for a night 's practical joke , but I do not   understand 
 your never take it off again . " 

 " that be the rest of the story , " say the impersonator . 
 " when I myself leave the company , follow by reverent applause , 
 I go limp down the dark street , hop that I should soon 
 be far enough away to be able to walk like a human being . 
 to my astonishment , as I be turn the corner , I feel 
 a touch on the shoulder , and turning , find myself under 
 the shadow of an enormous policeman . he tell I I be want . 
 I strike a sort of paralytic attitude , and cry in a high 
 german accent , ' yes , I be want - by the oppressed of the world . 
 you be arrest I on the charge of be the great anarchist , 
 Professor de Worms . ' the policeman impassively consult 
 a paper in his hand , ' no , sir , ' he say civilly , ' at least , 
 not exactly , sir . I be arrest you on the charge of not be 
 the celebrated anarchist , Professor de Worms . ' this charge , 
 if it be criminal at all , be certainly the light of the two , 
 and I go along with the man , doubtful , but not greatly dismayed . 
 I be show into a number of room , and eventually into 
 the presence of a police officer , who explain that a serious 
 campaign have be open against the centre of anarchy , 
 and that this , my successful masquerade , might be of considerable 
 value to the public safety . he offer I a good salary 
 and this little blue card . though our conversation be short , 
 he strike I as a man of very massive common sense and humour ; 
 but I can not tell you much about he personally , because - " 

 Syme lay down his knife and fork . 

 " I know , " he say , " because you talk to he in a dark room . " 

 Professor de Worms nod and drain his glass . 



  CHAPTER IX 

  the MAN in SPECTACLES 


 " BURGUNDY be a jolly thing , " say the Professor sadly , as he set 
 his glass down . 

 " you do not   look as if it be , " say Syme ; " you drink it 
 as if it be medicine . " 

 " you must excuse my manner , " say the Professor dismally , " my position be 
 rather a curious one . inside I be really burst with boyish merriment ; 
 but I act the paralytic Professor so well , that now I can not   leave off . 
 so that when I be among friend , and have no need at all to disguise 
 myself , I still can not   help speak slow and wrinkle my forehead - 
 just as if it be my forehead . I can be quite happy , you understand , 
 but only in a paralytic sort of way . the most buoyant exclamation 
 leap up in my heart , but they come out of my mouth quite different . 
 you should hear I say , ' buck up , old cock ! ' it would bring tear 
 to your eye . " 

 " it do , " say Syme ; " but I can not help think that apart 
 from all that you be really a bit worried . " 

 the Professor start a little and look at he steadily . 

 " you be a very clever fellow , " he say , " it be a pleasure 
 to work with you . yes , I have rather a heavy cloud in my head . 
 there be a great problem to face , " and he sink his bald brow 
 in his two hand . 

 then he say in a low voice - 

 " can you play the piano ? " 

 " yes , " say Syme in simple wonder , " I be suppose to have a good touch . " 

 then , as the other do not speak , he add - 

 " I trust the great cloud be lift . " 

 after a long silence , the Professor say out of the cavernous 
 shadow of his hand - 

 " it would have do just as well if you could work a typewriter . " 

 " thank you , " say Syme , " you flatter I . " 

 " listen to I , " say the other , " and remember whom we have to see tomorrow . 
 you and I be go to - morrow to attempt something which be very much more 
 dangerous than try to steal the Crown Jewels out of the Tower . we be 
 try to steal a secret from a very sharp , very strong , and very wicked man . 
 I believe there be no man , except the President , of course , who be so 
 seriously startling and formidable as that little grin fellow in goggle . 
 he have not perhaps the white - hot enthusiasm unto death , the mad martyrdom 
 for anarchy , which mark the Secretary . but then that very fanaticism 
 in the Secretary have a human pathos , and be almost a redeem trait . 
 but the little doctor have a brutal sanity that be more shocking than the 
 Secretary 's disease . do not   you notice his detestable virility and vitality . 
 he bounce like an india - rubber ball . depend on it , Sunday be not asleep 
  I wonder if he ever sleep ?   when he lock up all the plan of this 
 outrage in the round , black head of Dr. Bull . " 

 " and you think , " say Syme , " that this unique monster will be soothe 
 if I play the piano to he ? " 

 " do not   be an ass , " say his mentor . " I mention the piano 
 because it give one quick and independent finger . Syme , if we 
 be to go through this interview and come out sane or alive , we must 
 have some code of signal between we that this brute will not see . 
 I have make a rough alphabetical cypher correspond to the five finger - 
 like this , see , " and he ripple with his finger on the wooden 
 table - " b a d , bad , a word we may frequently require . " 

 Syme pour himself out another glass of wine , and begin to study the scheme . 
 he be abnormally quick with his brain at puzzle , and with his hand 
 at conjuring , and it do not take he long to learn how he might convey 
 simple message by what would seem to be idle tap upon a table or knee . 
 but wine and companionship have always the effect of inspire he to a 
 farcical ingenuity , and the Professor soon find himself struggle with 
 the too vast energy of the new language , as it pass through the heated 
 brain of Syme . 

 " we must have several word - sign , " say Syme seriously - " word 
 that we be likely to want , fine shade of meaning . 
 my favourite word be ' coeval . ' what be your ? " 

 " do stop play the goat , " say the Professor plaintively . 
 " you do not   know how serious this be . " 

 " ' lush , ' too , " say Syme , shake his head sagaciously , 
 " we must have ' lush ' - word apply to grass , do not   you know ? " 

 " do you imagine , " ask the Professor furiously , " that we be go 
 to talk to Dr. Bull about grass ? " 

 " there be several way in which the subject could be approach , " 
 say Syme reflectively , " and the word introduce without appear force . 
 we might say , ' Dr. Bull , as a revolutionist , you remember that a tyrant 
 once advise we to eat grass ; and indeed many of we , look on the fresh 
 lush grass of summer ' " 

 " do you understand , " say the other , " that this be a tragedy ? " 

 " perfectly , " reply Syme ; " always be comic in a tragedy . what the deuce 
 else can you do ? I wish this language of yours have a wide scope . 
 I suppose we could not extend it from the finger to the toe ? 
 that would involve pull off our boot and sock during the conversation , 
 which however unobtrusively perform - " 

 " Syme , " say his friend with a stern simplicity , " go to bed ! " 

 Syme , however , sit up in bed for a considerable time master the new code . 
 he be awaken next morning while the east be still seal with darkness , 
 and find his grey - bearded ally stand like a ghost beside his bed . 

 Syme sit up in bed blink ; then slowly collect his thought , 
 throw off the bed - clothe , and stand up . it seem to he in some 
 curious way that all the safety and sociability of the night before fall 
 with the bedclothe off he , and he stand up in an air of cold danger . 
 he still feel an entire trust and loyalty towards his companion ; 
 but it be the trust between two man go to the scaffold . 

 " well , " say Syme with a forced cheerfulness as he pull 
 on his trouser , " I dream of that alphabet of your . 
 do it take you long to make it up ? " 

 the Professor make no answer , but gaze in front of he with eye 
 the colour of a wintry sea ; so Syme repeat his question . 

 " I say , do it take you long to invent all this ? I be consider 
 good at these thing , and it be a good hour 's grind . 
 do you learn it all on the spot ? " 

 the Professor be silent ; his eye be wide open , and he wear 
 a fixed but very small smile . 

 " how long do it take you ? " 

 the Professor do not move . 

 " confound you , can not   you answer ? " call out Syme , 
 in a sudden anger that have something like fear underneath . 
 whether or no the Professor could answer , he do not . 

 Syme stand star back at the stiff face like parchment and the blank , 
 blue eye . his first thought be that the Professor have go mad , 
 but his second thought be more frightful . after all , what do 
 he know about this queer creature whom he have heedlessly accept 
 as a friend ? what do he know , except that the man have be 
 at the anarchist breakfast and have tell he a ridiculous tale ? 
 how improbable it be that there should be another friend there 
 beside Gogol ! be this man 's silence a sensational way of declare war ? 
 be this adamantine stare after all only the awful sneer 
 of some threefold traitor , who have turn for the last time ? 
 he stand and strain his ear in this heartless silence . 
 he almost fancy he could hear dynamiter come to capture he 
 shift softly in the corridor outside . 

 then his eye stray downwards , and he burst out laugh . 
 though the Professor himself stand there as voiceless as a statue , 
 his five dumb finger be dance alive upon the dead table . 
 Syme watch the twinkle movement of the talk hand , 
 and read clearly the message - 

 " I will only talk like this . we must get use to it . " 

 he rap out the answer with the impatience of relief - 

 " all right . let us get out to breakfast . " 

 they take their hat and stick in silence ; but as Syme take 
 his sword - stick , he hold it hard . 

 they pause for a few minute only to stuff down coffee and coarse 
 thick sandwich at a coffee stall , and then make their way 
 across the river , which under the grey and grow light look 
 as desolate as Acheron . they reach the bottom of the huge 
 block of building which they have see from across the river , 
 and begin in silence to mount the naked and numberless stone step , 
 only pause now and then to make short remark on the rail of 
 the banister . at about every other flight they pass a window ; 
 each window show they a pale and tragic dawn lift itself 
 laboriously over London . from each the innumerable roof of slate 
 look like the leaden surge of a grey , troubled sea after rain . 
 Syme be increasingly conscious that his new adventure have somehow 
 a quality of cold sanity bad than the wild adventure of the past . 
 last night , for instance , the tall tenement have seem to he like a 
 tower in a dream . as he now go up the weary and perpetual step , 
 he be daunt and bewilder by their almost infinite series . 
 but it be not the hot horror of a dream or of anything that might 
 be exaggeration or delusion . their infinity be more like the empty 
 infinity of arithmetic , something unthinkable , yet necessary to think . 
 or it be like the stunning statement of astronomy about the distance 
 of the fix star . he be ascend the house of reason , a thing 
 more hideous than unreason itself . 

 by the time they reach Dr. Bull 's landing , a last window show 
 they a harsh , white dawn edge with bank of a kind of coarse red , 
 more like red clay than red cloud . and when they enter Dr. Bull 's 
 bare garret it be full of light . 

 Syme have be haunt by a half historic memory in connection 
 with these empty room and that austere daybreak . 
 the moment he see the garret and Dr. Bull sitting 
 writing at a table , he remember what the memory be - 
 the French Revolution . there should have be the black outline 
 of a guillotine against that heavy red and white of the morning . 
 Dr. Bull be in his white shirt and black breech only ; 
 his cropped , dark head might well have just come out of its wig ; 
 he might have be Marat or a more slipshod Robespierre . 

 yet when he be see properly , the french fancy fall away . the Jacobins 
 be idealist ; there be about this man a murderous materialism . 
 his position give he a somewhat new appearance . the strong , 
 white light of morning come from one side create sharp shadow , 
 make he seem both more pale and more angular than he have look 
 at the breakfast on the balcony . thus the two black glass that 
 encase his eye might really have be black cavity in his skull , 
 make he look like a death' - head . and , indeed , if ever Death 
 himself sit write at a wooden table , it might have be he . 

 he look up and smile brightly enough as the man come in , and rise 
 with the resilient rapidity of which the Professor have speak . 
 he set chair for both of they , and go to a peg behind the door , 
 proceed to put on a coat and waistcoat of rough , dark tweed ; 
 he button it up neatly , and come back to sit down at his table . 

 the quiet good humour of his manner leave his two opponent helpless . 
 it be with some momentary difficulty that the Professor break 
 silence and begin , " I be sorry to disturb you so early , comrade , " 
 say he , with a careful resumption of the slow de Worms manner . 
 " you have no doubt make all the arrangement for the Paris affair ? " 
 then he add with infinite slowness , " we have information which 
 render intolerable anything in the nature of a moment 's delay . " 

 Dr. Bull smile again , but continue to gaze on they without speak . 
 the Professor resume , a pause before each weary word - 

 " please do not think I excessively abrupt ; but I advise 
 you to alter those plan , or if it be too late for that , 
 to follow your agent with all the support you can get for he . 
 Comrade Syme and I have have an experience which it would take 
 more time to recount than we can afford , if we be to act on it . 
 I will , however , relate the occurrence in detail , even at 
 the risk of lose time , if you really feel that it be essential 
 to the understanding of the problem we have to discuss . " 

 he be spin out his sentence , make they intolerably long 
 and linger , in the hope of madden the practical little 
 doctor into an explosion of impatience which might show his hand . 
 but the little Doctor continue only to stare and smile , 
 and the monologue be uphill work . Syme begin to feel 
 a new sickness and despair . the Doctor 's smile and silence 
 be not at all like the cataleptic stare and horrible silence 
 which he have confront in the Professor half an hour before . 
 about the Professor 's makeup and all his antic there 
 be always something merely grotesque , like a gollywog . 
 Syme remember those wild woe of yesterday as one remember 
 be afraid of Bogy in childhood . but here be daylight ; 
 here be a healthy , square - shoulder man in tweed , not odd 
 save for the accident of his ugly spectacle , not glare 
 or grin at all , but smile steadily and not say a word . 
 the whole have a sense of unbearable reality . under the 
 increase sunlight the colour of the Doctor 's complexion , 
 the pattern of his tweed , grow and expand outrageously , 
 as such thing grow too important in a realistic novel . 
 but his smile be quite slight , the pose of his head polite ; 
 the only uncanny thing be his silence . 

 " as I say , " resume the Professor , like a man toil through heavy sand , 
 " the incident that have occur to we and have lead we to ask for information 
 about the Marquis , be one which you may think it well to have narrate ; 
 but as it come in the way of Comrade Syme rather than I - " 

 his word he seem to be drag out like word in an anthem ; 
 but Syme , who be watch , see his long finger rattle quickly on 
 the edge of the crazy table . he read the message , " you must go on . 
 this devil have suck I dry ! " 

 Syme plunge into the breach with that bravado of improvisation 
 which always come to he when he be alarmed . 

 " yes , the thing really happen to I , " he say hastily . 
 " I have the good fortune to fall into conversation with a detective 
 who take I , thank to my hat , for a respectable person . 
 wish to clinch my reputation for respectability , I take he 
 and make he very drunk at the Savoy . under this influence 
 he become friendly , and tell I in so many word that within 
 a day or two they hope to arrest the Marquis in France . 

 so unless you or I can get on his track - " 

 the Doctor be still smile in the most friendly way , 
 and his protect eye be still impenetrable . the Professor 
 signal to Syme that he would resume his explanation , 
 and he begin again with the same elaborate calm . 

 " Syme immediately bring this information to I , and we come 
 here together to see what use you would be incline to make of it . 
 it seem to I unquestionably urgent that - " 

 all this time Syme have be star at the doctor almost as steadily 
 as the doctor star at the Professor , but quite without the smile . 
 the nerve of both comrade - in - arm be near snap under that 
 strain of motionless amiability , when Syme suddenly leant forward 
 and idly tap the edge of the table . his message to his ally run , 
 " I have an intuition . " 

 the Professor , with scarcely a pause in his monologue , signal back , 
 " then sit on it . " 

 Syme telegraph , " it be quite extraordinary . " 

 the other answer , " extraordinary rot ! " 

 Syme say , " I be a poet . " 

 the other retort , " you be a dead man . " 

 Syme have go quite red up to his yellow hair , and his eye 
 be burn feverishly . as he say he have an intuition , 
 and it have rise to a sort of lightheaded certainty . 
 resume his symbolic tap , he signal to his friend , 
 " you scarcely realise how poetic my intuition be . it have 
 that sudden quality we sometimes feel in the coming of spring . " 

 he then study the answer on his friend 's finger . 
 the answer be , " go to hell ! " 

 the Professor then resume his merely verbal monologue address 
 to the Doctor . 

 " perhaps I should rather say , " say Syme on his finger , 
 " that it resemble that sudden smell of the sea which may be 
 find in the heart of lush wood . " 

 his companion disdain to reply . 

 " or yet again , " tap Syme , " it be positive , as be the passionate red hair 
 of a beautiful woman . " 

 the Professor be continue his speech , but in the middle of it 
 Syme decide to act . he leant across the table , and say in a voice 
 that could not be neglect - 

 " Dr. Bull ! " 

 the Doctor 's sleek and smile head do not move , but they could have swear 
 that under his dark glass his eye dart towards Syme . 

 " Dr. Bull , " say Syme , in a voice peculiarly precise and courteous , 
 " would you do I a small favour ? would you be so kind as to take 
 off your spectacle ? " 

 the Professor swing round on his seat , and star at Syme with a sort 
 of frozen fury of astonishment . Syme , like a man who have throw 
 his life and fortune on the table , lean forward with a fiery face . 
 the Doctor do not move . 

 for a few second there be a silence in which one could hear 
 a pin drop , split once by the single hoot of a distant steamer 
 on the Thames . then Dr. Bull rise slowly , still smile , 
 and take off his spectacle . 

 Syme spring to his foot , step backwards a little , 
 like a chemical lecturer from a successful explosion . 
 his eye be like star , and for an instant he could only 
 point without speak . 

 the Professor have also start to his foot , forgetful of his 
 suppose paralysis . he leant on the back of the chair and star doubtfully 
 at Dr. Bull , as if the doctor have be turn into a toad before his eye . 
 and indeed it be almost as great a transformation scene . 

 the two detective see sit in the chair before they a very boyish - look 
 young man , with very frank and happy hazel eye , an open expression , 
 cockney clothe like those of a city clerk , and an unquestionable 
 breath about he of be very good and rather commonplace . 
 the smile be still there , but it might have be the first smile 
 of a baby . 

 " I know I be a poet , " cry Syme in a sort of ecstasy . 
 " I know my intuition be as infallible as the Pope . it be 
 the spectacle that do it ! it be all the spectacle . 
 give those beastly black eye , and all the rest of he his health 
 and his jolly look , make he a live devil among dead one . " 

 " it certainly do make a queer difference , " say the Professor shakily . 
 " but as regard the project of Dr. Bull - " 

 " project be damn ! " roar Syme , beside himself . " look at he ! 
 look at his face , look at his collar , look at his bless boot ! 
 you do not   suppose , do you , that that thing be an anarchist ? " 

 " Syme ! " cry the other in an apprehensive agony . 

 " why , by God , " say Syme , " I will take the risk of that myself ! 
 Dr. Bull , I be a police officer . there be my card , " and he fling 
 down the blue card upon the table . 

 the Professor still fear that all be lose ; but he be loyal . 
 he pull out his own official card and put it beside his friend 's . 
 then the third man burst out laugh , and for the first time 
 that morning they hear his voice . 

 " I be awfully glad you chap have come so early , " he say , with a sort 
 of schoolboy flippancy , " for we can all start for France together . 
 yes , I be in the force right enough , " and he flick a blue card towards 
 they lightly as a matter of form . 

 clap a brisk bowler on his head and resume his goblin glass , 
 the Doctor move so quickly towards the door , that the other 
 instinctively follow he . Syme seem a little distrait , 
 and as he pass under the doorway he suddenly strike his stick 
 on the stone passage so that it ring . 

 " but Lord God Almighty , " he cry out , " if this be all right , 
 there be more damned detective than there be damned dynamiter 
 at the damned Council ! " 

 " we might have fight easily , " say Bull ; " we be four against three . " 

 the Professor be descend the stair , but his voice come up from below . 

 " no , " say the voice , " we be not four against three - we be not so lucky . 
 we be four against one . " 

 the other go down the stair in silence . 

 the young man call Bull , with an innocent courtesy characteristic 
 of he , insist on go last until they reach the street ; 
 but there his own robust rapidity assert itself unconsciously , 
 and he walk quickly on ahead towards a railway inquiry office , 
 talk to the other over his shoulder . 

 " it be jolly to get some pal , " he say . " I have   be half dead 
 with the jump , be quite alone . I nearly fling my arm 
 round Gogol and embrace he , which would have be imprudent . 
 I hope you will not   despise I for have be in a blue funk . " 

 " all the blue devil in blue hell , " say Syme , " contribute to my blue funk ! 
 but the bad devil be you and your infernal goggle . " 

 the young man laugh delightedly . 

 " be not   it a rag ? " he say . " such a simple idea - not my own . 
 I have not   get the brain . you see , I want to go into 
 the detective service , especially the anti - dynamite business . 
 but for that purpose they want someone to dress up as a dynamiter ; 
 and they all swear by blaze that I could never look like a dynamiter . 
 they say my very walk be respectable , and that see from behind 
 I look like the British Constitution . they say I look 
 too healthy and too optimistic , and too reliable and benevolent ; 
 they call I all sort of name at Scotland Yard . they say 
 that if I have be a criminal , I might have make my fortune 
 by look so like an honest man ; but as I have the misfortune 
 to be an honest man , there be not even the remote chance 
 of my assist they by ever look like a criminal . 
 but as last I be bring before some old josser who be high 
 up in the force , and who seem to have no end of a head on 
 his shoulder . and there the other all talk hopelessly . 
 one ask whether a bushy beard would hide my nice smile ; another say 
 that if they black my face I might look like a negro anarchist ; 
 but this old chap chip in with a most extraordinary remark . 
 ' a pair of smoke spectacle will do it , ' he say positively . 
 ' look at he now ; he look like an angelic office boy . 
 put he on a pair of smoke spectacle , and child will scream 
 at the sight of he . ' and so it be , by George ! when once 
 my eye be cover , all the rest , smile and big shoulder 
 and short hair , make I look a perfect little devil . 
 as I say , it be simple enough when it be do , like miracle ; 
 but that be not   the really miraculous part of it . 
 there be one really staggering thing about the business , 
 and my head still turn at it . " 

 " what be that ? " ask Syme . 

 " I will tell you , " answer the man in spectacle . 
 " this big pot in the police who size I up so that he know 
 how the goggle would go with my hair and sock - by God , 
 he never see I at all ! " 

 Syme 's eye suddenly flash on he . 

 " how be that ? " he ask . " I think you talk to he . " 

 " so I do , " say Bull brightly ; " but we talk in a pitch - dark room 
 like a coalcellar . there , you would never have guess that . " 

 " I could not have conceive it , " say Syme gravely . 

 " it be indeed a new idea , " say the Professor . 

 their new ally be in practical matter a whirlwind . 
 at the inquiry office he ask with businesslike brevity about 
 the train for Dover . have get his information , he bundle 
 the company into a cab , and put they and himself inside a railway 
 carriage before they have properly realise the breathless process . 
 they be already on the Calais boat before conversation flow freely . 

 " I have already arrange , " he explain , " to go to France for 
 my lunch ; but I be delighted to have someone to lunch with I . 
 you see , I have to send that beast , the Marquis , over with his bomb , 
 because the President have his eye on I , though God know how . 
 I will tell you the story some day . it be perfectly choke . 
 whenever I try to slip out of it I see the President somewhere , 
 smile out of the bow - window of a club , or take off his 
 hat to I from the top of an omnibus . I tell you , you can 
 say what you like , that fellow sell himself to the devil ; 
 he can be in six place at once . " 

 " so you send the Marquis off , I understand , " ask the Professor . " be it 
 long ago ? shall we be in time to catch he ? " 

 " yes , " answer the new guide , " I have   time it all . 
 he will still be at Calais when we arrive . " 

 " but when we do catch he at Calais , " say the Professor , 
 " what be we go to do ? " 

 at this question the countenance of Dr. Bull fall for the first time . 
 he reflect a little , and then say - 

 " theoretically , I suppose , we ought to call the police . " 

 " not I , " say Syme . " theoretically I ought to drown myself first . 
 I promise a poor fellow , who be a real modern pessimist , 
 on my word of honour not to tell the police . I be no hand 
 at casuistry , but I can not   break my word to a modern pessimist . 
 it be like break one 's word to a child . " 

 " I be in the same boat , " say the Professor . " I try to tell 
 the police and I could not , because of some silly oath I take . 
 you see , when I be an actor I be a sort of all - round beast . 
 Perjury or treason be the only crime I have not   commit . 
 if I do that I should not   know the difference between 
 right and wrong . " 

 " I have   be through all that , " say Dr. Bull , " and I have   make up my mind . 
 I give my promise to the Secretary - you know he , man who smile upside down . 
 my friend , that man be the most utterly unhappy man that be ever human . 
 it may be his digestion , or his conscience , or his nerve , or his philosophy 
 of the universe , but he be damned , he be in hell ! well , I can not   turn 
 on a man like that , and hunt he down . it be like whip a leper . 
 I may be mad , but that be how I feel ; and there be jolly well the end of it . " 

 " I do not   think you be mad , " say Syme . " I know you would decide 
 like that when first you - " 

 " Eh ? " say Dr. Bull . 

 " when first you take off your spectacle . " 

 Dr. Bull smile a little , and stroll across the deck to look at the 
 sunlit sea . then he stroll back again , kick his heel carelessly , 
 and a companionable silence fall between the three man . 

 " well , " say Syme , " it seem that we have all the same kind of morality 
 or immorality , so we have well face the fact that come of it . " 

 " yes , " assent the Professor , " you be quite right ; and we must hurry up , 
 for I can see the Grey Nose stand out from France . " 

 " the fact that come of it , " say Syme seriously , " be this , that we 
 three be alone on this planet . Gogol have go , God know where ; 
 perhaps the President have smash he like a fly . on the Council we 
 be three man against three , like the Romans who hold the bridge . 
 but we be bad off than that , first because they can appeal to their 
 organization and we can not appeal to ours , and second because - " 

 " because one of those other three man , " say the Professor , 
 " be not a man . " 

 Syme nod and be silent for a second or two , then he say - 

 " my idea be this . we must do something to keep the Marquis in Calais 
 till tomorrow midday . I have turn over twenty scheme in my head . 
 we can not denounce he as a dynamiter ; that be agree . 
 we can not get he detain on some trivial charge , for we 
 should have to appear ; he know we , and he would smell a rat . 
 we can not pretend to keep he on anarchist business ; he might swallow 
 much in that way , but not the notion of stop in Calais while 
 the Czar go safely through Paris . we might try to kidnap he , 
 and lock he up ourselves ; but he be a well - know man here . 
 he have a whole bodyguard of friend ; he be very strong and brave , 
 and the event be doubtful . the only thing I can see to do be actually 
 to take advantage of the very thing that be in the Marquis 's favour . 
 I be go to profit by the fact that he be a highly respected nobleman . 
 I be go to profit by the fact that he have many friend and move 
 in the good society . " 

 " what the devil be you talk about ? " ask the Professor . 

 " the Symes be first mention in the fourteenth century , " 
 say Syme ; " but there be a tradition that one of they ride behind 
 Bruce at Bannockburn . since 1350 the tree be quite clear . " 

 " he be go off his head , " say the little doctor , star . 

 " our bearing , " continue Syme calmly , " be ' argent a chevron 
 gule charge with three cross crosslet of the field . ' 
 the motto vary . " 

 the Professor seize Syme roughly by the waistcoat . 

 " we be just inshore , " he say . " be you seasick or joke 
 in the wrong place ? " 

 " my remark be almost painfully practical , " answer Syme , 
 in an unhurrie manner . " the house of St. Eustache also be 
 very ancient . the Marquis can not deny that he be a gentleman . 
 he can not deny that I be a gentleman . and in order to put 
 the matter of my social position quite beyond a doubt , 
 I propose at the early opportunity to knock his hat off . 
 but here we be in the harbour . " 

 they go on shore under the strong sun in a sort of daze . 
 Syme , who have now take the lead as Bull have take it in London , 
 lead they along a kind of marine parade until he come to some cafe , 
 embower in a bulk of greenery and overlook the sea . 
 as he go before they his step be slightly swaggering , 
 and he swing his stick like a sword . he be make apparently 
 for the extreme end of the line of cafe , but he stop abruptly . 
 with a sharp gesture he motion they to silence , but he 
 point with one gloved finger to a cafe table under a bank 
 of flower foliage at which sit the Marquis de St. Eustache , 
 his tooth shin in his thick , black beard , and his bold , 
 brown face shadow by a light yellow straw hat and outline 
 against the violet sea . 



  CHAPTER X 

  the DUEL 


 SYME sit down at a cafe table with his companion , his blue eye 
 sparkle like the bright sea below , and order a bottle of saumur 
 with a pleased impatience . he be for some reason in a condition 
 of curious hilarity . his spirit be already unnaturally high ; 
 they rise as the Saumur sank , and in half an hour his talk be 
 a torrent of nonsense . he profess to be make out a plan 
 of the conversation which be go to ensue between himself 
 and the deadly Marquis . he jot it down wildly with a pencil . 
 it be arrange like a print catechism , with question and answer , 
 and be deliver with an extraordinary rapidity of utterance . 

 " I shall approach . before take off his hat , I shall take off my own . 
 I shall say , ' the Marquis de Saint Eustache , I believe . ' 
 he will say , ' the celebrate Mr. Syme , I presume . ' 
 he will say in the most exquisite French , ' how be you ? ' 
 I shall reply in the most exquisite cockney , ' oh , just the Syme - ' " 

 " oh , shut it , " say the man in spectacle . " pull yourself together , 
 and chuck away that bit of paper . what be you really go to do ? " 

 " but it be a lovely catechism , " say Syme pathetically . 
 " do let I read it you . it have only forty - three question and answer , 
 and some of the Marquis 's answer be wonderfully witty . 
 I like to be just to my enemy . " 

 " but what be the good of it all ? " ask Dr. Bull in exasperation . 

 " it lead up to my challenge , do not   you see , " say Syme , beam . 
 " when the Marquis have give the thirty - ninth reply , which run - " 

 " have it by any chance occur to you , " ask the Professor , 
 with a ponderous simplicity , " that the Marquis may not say 
 all the forty - three thing you have put down for he ? 
 in that case , I understand , your own epigram may appear 
 somewhat more forced . " 

 Syme strike the table with a radiant face . 

 " why , how true that be , " he say , " and I never think 
 of it . Sir , you have an intellect beyond the common . 
 you will make a name . " 

 " oh , you be as drunk as an owl ! " say the Doctor . 

 " it only remain , " continue Syme quite unperturbed , " to adopt 
 some other method of break the ice   if I may so express it 
 between myself and the man I wish to kill . and since the course 
 of a dialogue can not be predict by one of its party alone 
  as you have point out with such recondite acuman , 
 the only thing to be do , I suppose , be for the one party , 
 as far as possible , to do all the dialogue by himself . 
 and so I will , by George ! " and he stand up suddenly , his yellow 
 hair blow in the slight sea breeze . 

 a band be play in a cafe chantant hide somewhere among the tree , 
 and a woman have just stop sing . on Syme 's heated head the bray 
 of the brass band seem like the jar and jingle of that barrel - organ 
 in Leicester Square , to the tune of which he have once stand up to die . 
 he look across to the little table where the Marquis sit . 
 the man have two companion now , solemn Frenchmen in frock - coat 
 and silk hat , one of they with the red rosette of the Legion 
 of Honour , evidently people of a solid social position . 
 besides these black , cylindrical costume , the Marquis , in his loose 
 straw hat and light spring clothe , look bohemian and even barbaric ; 
 but he look the Marquis . indeed , one might say that he look 
 the king , with his animal elegance , his scornful eye , and his proud 
 head lift against the purple sea . but he be no christian king , 
 at any rate ; he be , rather , some swarthy despot , half greek , 
 half Asiatic , who in the day when slavery seem natural look 
 down on the Mediterranean , on his galley and his groan slave . 
 just so , Syme think , would the brown - gold face of such a tyrant 
 have show against the dark green olive and the burn blue . 

 " be you go to address the meeting ? " ask the Professor peevishly , 
 see that Syme still stand up without move . 

 Syme drain his last glass of sparkle wine . 

 " I be , " he say , point across to the Marquis and his companion , 
 " that meeting . that meeting displease I . I be go to pull 
 that meeting 's great ugly , mahogany - colour nose . " 

 he step across swiftly , if not quite steadily . the Marquis , 
 see he , arch his black assyrian eyebrow in surprise , 
 but smile politely . 

 " you be Mr. Syme , I think , " he say . 

 Syme bow . 

 " and you be the Marquis de Saint Eustache , " he say gracefully . 
 " permit I to pull your nose . " 

 he leant over to do so , but the Marquis start backwards , 
 upset his chair , and the two man in top hat hold Syme back 
 by the shoulder . 

 " this man have insult I ! " say Syme , with gesture of explanation . 

 " insulted you ? " cry the gentleman with the red rosette , " when ? " 

 " oh , just now , " say Syme recklessly . " he insult my mother . " 

 " insulted your mother ! " exclaim the gentleman incredulously . 

 " well , anyhow , " say Syme , concede a point , " my aunt . " 

 " but how can the Marquis have insult your aunt just now ? " 
 say the second gentleman with some legitimate wonder . 
 " he have be sit here all the time . " 

 " ah , it be what he say ! " say Syme darkly . 

 " I say nothing at all , " say the Marquis , " except something about the band . 
 I only say that I like Wagner play well . " 

 " it be an allusion to my family , " say Syme firmly . 
 " my aunt play Wagner badly . it be a painful subject . 
 we be always be insult about it . " 

 " this seem most extraordinary , " say the gentleman who be decore , 
 look doubtfully at the Marquis . 

 " oh , I assure you , " say Syme earnestly , " the whole of your conversation 
 be simply pack with sinister allusion to my aunt 's weakness . " 

 " this be nonsense ! " say the second gentleman . " I for one have say 
 nothing for half an hour except that I like the singing of that girl 
 with black hair . " 

 " well , there you be again ! " say Syme indignantly . 
 " my aunt 's be red . " 

 " it seem to I , " say the other , " that you be simply seek 
 a pretext to insult the Marquis . " 

 " by George ! " say Syme , face round and look at he , 
 " what a clever chap you be ! " 

 the Marquis start up with eye flame like a tiger 's . 

 " seek a quarrel with I ! " he cry . " seek a fight with I ! 
 by God ! there be never a man who have to seek long . these gentleman 
 will perhaps act for I . there be still four hour of daylight . 
 let we fight this evening . " 

 Syme bow with a quite beautiful graciousness . 

 " Marquis , " he say , " your action be worthy of your fame and blood . 
 permit I to consult for a moment with the gentleman in whose hand 
 I shall place myself . " 

 in three long stride he rejoin his companion , and they , 
 who have see his champagne - inspire attack and listen to his 
 idiotic explanation , be quite startled at the look of he . 
 for now that he come back to they he be quite sober , a little pale , 
 and he speak in a low voice of passionate practicality . 

 " I have do it , " he say hoarsely . " I have fix a fight on the beast . 
 but look here , and listen carefully . there be no time for talk . 
 you be my second , and everything must come from you . 
 now you must insist , and insist absolutely , on the duel come off 
 after seven to - morrow , so as to give I the chance of prevent he 
 from catch the 7.45 for Paris . if he miss that he miss his crime . 
 he can not   refuse to meet you on such a small point of time and place . 
 but this be what he will do . he will choose a field somewhere 
 near a wayside station , where he can pick up the train . 
 he be a very good swordsman , and he will trust to kill I 
 in time to catch it . but I can fence well too , and I think I 
 can keep he in play , at any rate , until the train be lose . 
 then perhaps he may kill I to console his feeling . you understand ? 
 very well then , let I introduce you to some charming friend of mine , " 
 and lead they quickly across the parade , he present they to 
 the Marquis 's second by two very aristocratic name of which they 
 have not previously hear . 

 Syme be subject to spasm of singular common sense , not otherwise a part 
 of his character . they be   as he say of his impulse about the spectacle 
 poetic intuition , and they sometimes rise to the exaltation of prophecy . 

 he have correctly calculate in this case the policy of his opponent . 
 when the Marquis be inform by his second that Syme could only fight 
 in the morning , he must fully have realise that an obstacle have suddenly 
 arise between he and his bomb - throw business in the capital . 
 naturally he could not explain this objection to his friend , so he choose 
 the course which Syme have predict . he induce his second to settle 
 on a small meadow not far from the railway , and he trust to the fatality 
 of the first engagement . 

 when he come down very coolly to the field of honour , no one 
 could have guess that he have any anxiety about a journey ; 
 his hand be in his pocket , his straw hat on the back 
 of his head , his handsome face brazen in the sun . but it might 
 have strike a stranger as odd that there appear in his train , 
 not only his second carry the sword - case , but two of his 
 servant carry a portmanteau and a luncheon basket . 

 early as be the hour , the sun soak everything in warmth , 
 and Syme be vaguely surprised to see so many spring flower 
 burn gold and silver in the tall grass in which the whole 
 company stand almost knee - deep . 

 with the exception of the Marquis , all the man be in sombre 
 and solemn morning - dress , with hat like black chimney - pot ; 
 the little doctor especially , with the addition of his 
 black spectacle , look like an undertaker in a farce . 
 Syme could not help feel a comic contrast between this funereal 
 church parade of apparel and the rich and glisten meadow , 
 grow wild flower everywhere . but , indeed , this comic contrast 
 between the yellow blossom and the black hat be but a symbol of the 
 tragic contrast between the yellow blossom and the black business . 
 on his right be a little wood ; far away to his left lay 
 the long curve of the railway line , which he be , so to speak , 
 guard from the Marquis , whose goal and escape it be . 
 in front of he , behind the black group of his opponent , 
 he could see , like a tinted cloud , a small almond bush in flower 
 against the faint line of the sea . 

 the member of the Legion of Honour , whose name it seem be Colonel Ducroix , 
 approach the Professor and Dr. Bull with great politeness , and suggest 
 that the play should terminate with the first considerable hurt . 

 Dr. Bull , however , have be carefully coach by Syme upon this 
 point of policy , insist , with great dignity and in very bad French , 
 that it should continue until one of the combatant be disable . 
 Syme have make up his mind that he could avoid disable the Marquis 
 and prevent the Marquis from disable he for at least twenty minute . 
 in twenty minute the Paris train would have go by . 

 " to a man of the well - know skill and valour of Monsieur de 
 St. Eustache , " say the Professor solemnly , " it must be a matter 
 of indifference which method be adopt , and our principal 
 have strong reason for demand the long encounter , 
 reason the delicacy of which prevent I from be explicit , 
 but for the just and honourable nature of which I can - " 

 " peste ! " break from the Marquis behind , whose face have suddenly darken , 
 " let we stop talk and begin , " and he slash off the head of a tall 
 flower with his stick . 

 Syme understand his rude impatience and instinctively look 
 over his shoulder to see whether the train be come in sight . 
 but there be no smoke on the horizon . 

 Colonel Ducroix kneel down and unlock the case , take out a pair of 
 twin sword , which take the sunlight and turn to two streak of white fire . 
 he offer one to the Marquis , who snatch it without ceremony , 
 and another to Syme , who take it , bent it , and poise it with as much 
 delay as be consistent with dignity . 

 then the Colonel take out another pair of blade , and take one himself 
 and give another to Dr. Bull , proceed to place the man . 

 both combatant have throw off their coat and waistcoat , 
 and stand sword in hand . the second stand on each side 
 of the line of fight with draw sword also , but still sombre 
 in their dark frock - coat and hat . the principal salute . 
 the Colonel say quietly , " Engage ! " and the two blade 
 touch and tingle . 

 when the jar of the joined iron run up Syme 's arm , 
 all the fantastic fear that have be the subject of this 
 story fall from he like dream from a man wake up in bed . 
 he remember they clearly and in order as mere delusion 
 of the nerve - how the fear of the Professor have be the fear 
 of the tyrannic accident of nightmare , and how the fear of 
 the Doctor have be the fear of the airless vacuum of science . 
 the first be the old fear that any miracle might happen , the second 
 the more hopeless modern fear that no miracle can ever happen . 
 but he see that these fear be fancy , for he find himself 
 in the presence of the great fact of the fear of death , 
 with its coarse and pitiless common sense . he feel like a 
 man who have dream all night of fall over precipice , 
 and have wake up on the morning when he be to be hang . 
 for as soon as he have see the sunlight run down the channel 
 of his foe 's foreshortened blade , and as soon as he have feel 
 the two tongue of steel touch , vibrate like two live thing , 
 he know that his enemy be a terrible fighter , and that probably 
 his last hour have come . 

 he feel a strange and vivid value in all the earth around he , 
 in the grass under his foot ; he feel the love of life in all live thing . 
 he could almost fancy that he hear the grass grow ; he could 
 almost fancy that even as he stand fresh flower be spring 
 up and break into blossom in the meadow - flower blood red and 
 burn gold and blue , fulfil the whole pageant of the spring . 
 and whenever his eye stray for a flash from the calm , star , 
 hypnotic eye of the Marquis , they see the little tuft of almond tree 
 against the sky - line . he have the feeling that if by some miracle 
 he escape he would be ready to sit for ever before that almond tree , 
 desire nothing else in the world . 

 but while earth and sky and everything have the live beauty 
 of a thing lose , the other half of his head be as clear as glass , 
 and he be parry his enemy 's point with a kind of clockwork 
 skill of which he have hardly suppose himself capable . 
 once his enemy 's point run along his wrist , leave a slight streak 
 of blood , but it either be not notice or be tacitly ignore . 
 every now and then he riposte , and once or twice he could 
 almost fancy that he feel his point go home , but as there 
 be no blood on blade or shirt he suppose he be mistaken . 
 then come an interruption and a change . 

 at the risk of lose all , the Marquis , interrupt his quiet stare , 
 flash one glance over his shoulder at the line of railway on his right . 
 then he turn on Syme a face transfigure to that of a fiend , and begin 
 to fight as if with twenty weapon . the attack come so fast and furious , 
 that the one shin sword seem a shower of shin arrow . 
 Syme have no chance to look at the railway ; but also he have no need . 
 he could guess the reason of the Marquis 's sudden madness of battle - 
 the Paris train be in sight . 

 but the Marquis 's morbid energy over - reach itself . 
 Twice Syme , parrying , knock his opponent 's point far out 
 of the fighting circle ; and the third time his riposte be 
 so rapid , that there be no doubt about the hit this time . 
 Syme 's sword actually bend under the weight of the Marquis 's body , 
 which it have pierce . 

 Syme be as certain that he have stick his blade into his enemy 
 as a gardener that he have stick his spade into the ground . 
 yet the Marquis spring back from the stroke without a stagger , 
 and Syme stand star at his own sword - point like an idiot . 
 there be no blood on it at all . 

 there be an instant of rigid silence , and then Syme in his turn 
 fall furiously on the other , fill with a flaming curiosity . 
 the Marquis be probably , in a general sense , a well fencer 
 than he , as he have surmise at the beginning , but at the moment 
 the Marquis seem distraught and at a disadvantage . 
 he fight wildly and even weakly , and he constantly look 
 away at the railway line , almost as if he fear the train 
 more than the pointed steel . Syme , on the other hand , 
 fight fiercely but still carefully , in an intellectual fury , 
 eager to solve the riddle of his own bloodless sword . 
 for this purpose , he aim less at the Marquis 's body , 
 and more at his throat and head . a minute and a half afterwards 
 he feel his point enter the man 's neck below the jaw . 
 it come out clean . half mad , he thrust again , and make 
 what should have be a bloody scar on the Marquis 's cheek . 
 but there be no scar . 

 for one moment the heaven of Syme again grow black with supernatural terror . 
 surely the man have a charmed life . but this new spiritual dread be a more 
 awful thing than have be the mere spiritual topsy - turvydom symbolise 
 by the paralytic who pursue he . the Professor be only a goblin ; 
 this man be a devil - perhaps he be the Devil ! anyhow , this be certain , 
 that three time have a human sword be drive into he and make no mark . 
 when Syme have that thought he draw himself up , and all that be good 
 in he sing high up in the air as a high wind sing in the tree . 
 he think of all the human thing in his story - of the chinese lantern 
 in Saffron Park , of the girl 's red hair in the garden , of the honest , 
 beer - swill sailor down by the dock , of his loyal companion stand by . 
 perhaps he have be choose as a champion of all these fresh 
 and kindly thing to cross sword with the enemy of all creation . 
 " after all , " he say to himself , " I be more than a devil ; I be a man . 
 I can do the one thing which Satan himself can not do - I can die , " 
 and as the word go through his head , he hear a faint and far - off hoot , 
 which would soon be the roar of the Paris train . 

 he fall to fight again with a supernatural levity , like a Mohammedan 
 panting for Paradise . as the train come near and near he fancy he could 
 see people put up the floral arch in Paris ; he join in the grow 
 noise and the glory of the great Republic whose gate he be guard 
 against Hell . his thought rise higher and high with the rise roar 
 of the train , which end , as if proudly , in a long and pierce whistle . 
 the train stop . 

 suddenly , to the astonishment of everyone the Marquis sprang 
 back quite out of sword reach and throw down his sword . 
 the leap be wonderful , and not the less wonderful because Syme 
 have plunge his sword a moment before into the man 's thigh . 

 " stop ! " say the Marquis in a voice that compel a momentary obedience . 
 " I want to say something . " 

 " what be the matter ? " ask Colonel Ducroix , star . 
 " have there be foul play ? " 

 " there have be foul play somewhere , " say Dr. Bull , who be a little pale . 
 " our principal have wound the Marquis four time at least , and he be none 
 the bad . " 

 the Marquis put up his hand with a curious air of ghastly patience . 

 " please let I speak , " he say . " it be rather important . 
 Mr. Syme , " he continue , turn to his opponent , " we be 
 fight to - day , if I remember right , because you express 
 a wish   which I think irrational   to pull my nose . 
 would you oblige I by pull my nose now as quickly as possible ? 
 I have to catch a train . " 

 " I protest that this be most irregular , " say Dr. Bull indignantly . 

 " it be certainly somewhat opposed to precedent , " say Colonel Ducroix , 
 look wistfully at his principal . " there be , I think , one case on record 
  Captain Bellegarde and the Baron Zumpt   in which the weapon be change 
 in the middle of the encounter at the request of one of the combatant . 
 but one can hardly call one 's nose a weapon . " 

 " will you or will you not pull my nose ? " say the Marquis 
 in exasperation . " come , come , Mr. Syme ! you want to do it , do it ! 
 you can have no conception of how important it be to I . 
 do not   be so selfish ! pull my nose at once , when I ask you ! " 
 and he bend slightly forward with a fascinating smile . 
 the Paris train , pant and groaning , have grate into a little 
 station behind the neighbouring hill . 

 Syme have the feeling he have more than once have in these adventure - 
 the sense that a horrible and sublime wave lift to heaven be just 
 topple over . walk in a world he half understand , he take two 
 pace forward and seize the roman nose of this remarkable nobleman . 
 he pull it hard , and it come off in his hand . 

 he stand for some second with a foolish solemnity , with the 
 pasteboard proboscis still between his finger , look at it , 
 while the sun and the cloud and the woode hill look down 
 upon this imbecile scene . 

 the Marquis break the silence in a loud and cheerful voice . 

 " if anyone have any use for my left eyebrow , " he say , 
 " he can have it . Colonel Ducroix , do accept my left eyebrow ! 
 it be the kind of thing that might come in useful any day , " 
 and he gravely tear off one of his swarthy assyrian brow , 
 bring about half his brown forehead with it , and politely offer 
 it to the Colonel , who stand crimson and speechless with rage . 

 " if I have know , " he splutter , " that I be act for a poltroon who pad 
 himself to fight - " 

 " oh , I know , I know ! " say the Marquis , recklessly throw 
 various part of himself right and leave about the field . 
 " you be make a mistake ; but it can not   be explain just now . 
 I tell you the train have come into the station ! " 

 " yes , " say Dr. Bull fiercely , " and the train shall go out of the station . 
 it shall go out without you . we know well enough for what devil 's work - " 

 the mysterious Marquis lift his hand with a desperate gesture . 
 he be a strange scarecrow standing there in the sun with half his old face 
 peel off , and half another face glare and grin from underneath . 

 " will you drive I mad ? " he cry . " the train - " 

 " you shall not go by the train , " say Syme firmly , and grasp his sword . 

 the wild figure turn towards Syme , and seem to be gather 
 itself for a sublime effort before speak . 

 " you great fat , blasted , blear - eye , blundering , thundering , brainless , 
 Godforsaken , doddering , damned fool ! " he say without take breath . 
 " you great silly , pink - face , towheaded turnip ! you - " 

 " you shall not go by this train , " repeat Syme . 

 " and why the infernal blaze , " roar the other , ' should I want 
 to go by the train ? " 

 " we know all , " say the Professor sternly . " you be go to Paris 
 to throw a bomb ! " 

 " go to Jericho to throw a Jabberwock ! " cry the other , tear his hair , 
 which come off easily . 

 " have you all get soften of the brain , that you do not   realise 
 what I be ? do you really think I want to catch that train ? 
 twenty Paris train might go by for I . Damn Paris train ! " 

 " then what do you care about ? " begin the Professor . 

 " what do I care about ? I do not   care about catch the train ; 
 I care about whether the train catch I , and now , by God ! it 
 have catch I . " 

 " I regret to inform you , " say Syme with restraint , 
 " that your remark convey no impression to my mind . 
 perhaps if you be to remove the remain of your original forehead 
 and some portion of what be once your chin , your meaning would 
 become clear . mental lucidity fulfil itself in many way . 
 what do you mean by say that the train have catch you ? 
 it may be my literary fancy , but somehow I feel that it ought 
 to mean something . " 

 " it mean everything , " say the other , " and the end of everything . 
 Sunday have we now in the hollow of his hand . " 

 " Us ! " repeat the Professor , as if stupefy . " what do you mean by ' we ' ? " 

 " the police , of course ! " say the Marquis , and tear off his scalp 
 and half his face . 

 the head which emerge be the blonde , well brush , 
 smooth - haired head which be common in the english constabulary , 
 but the face be terribly pale . 

 " I be Inspector Ratcliffe , " he say , with a sort of haste 
 that verge on harshness . " my name be pretty well know to 
 the police , and I can see well enough that you belong to they . 
 but if there be any doubt about my position , I have a card " 
 and he begin to pull a blue card from his pocket . 

 the Professor give a tired gesture . 

 " oh , do not   show it we , " he say wearily ; " we have   get enough of they 
 to equip a paper - chase . " 

 the little man name Bull , have , like many man who seem to be 
 of a mere vivacious vulgarity , sudden movement of good taste . 
 here he certainly save the situation . in the midst of this 
 staggering transformation scene he step forward with all 
 the gravity and responsibility of a second , and address 
 the two second of the Marquis . 

 " gentleman , " he say , " we all owe you a serious apology ; but I assure 
 you that you have not be make the victim of such a low joke as 
 you imagine , or indeed of anything undignifie in a man of honour . 
 you have not waste your time ; you have help to save the world . 
 we be not buffoon , but very desperate man at war with a vast conspiracy . 
 a secret society of anarchist be hunt we like hare ; not such 
 unfortunate madman as may here or there throw a bomb through starvation 
 or german philosophy , but a rich and powerful and fanatical church , a church 
 of eastern pessimism , which hold it holy to destroy mankind like vermin . 
 how hard they hunt we you can gather from the fact that we be drive 
 to such disguise as those for which I apologise , and to such prank 
 as this one by which you suffer . " 

 the young second of the Marquis , a short man with a black moustache , 
 bow politely , and say - 

 " of course , I accept the apology ; but you will in your turn forgive 
 I if I decline to follow you far into your difficulty , 
 and permit myself to say good morning ! the sight of an acquaintance 
 and distinguish fellow - townsman come to piece in the open 
 air be unusual , and , upon the whole , sufficient for one day . 
 Colonel Ducroix , I would in no way influence your action , 
 but if you feel with I that our present society be a little abnormal , 
 I be now go to walk back to the town . " 

 Colonel Ducroix move mechanically , but then tug abruptly at his white 
 moustache and break out - 

 " no , by George ! I will not . if these gentleman be really in a mess 
 with a lot of low wrecker like that , I will see they through it . 
 I have fight for France , and it be hard if I can not   fight for civilization . " 

 Dr. Bull take off his hat and wave it , cheer as at a public meeting . 

 " do not   make too much noise , " say Inspector Ratcliffe , " Sunday may hear you . " 

 " Sunday ! " cry Bull , and drop his hat . 

 " yes , " retort Ratcliffe , " he may be with they . " 

 " with whom ? " ask Syme . 

 " with the people out of that train , " say the other . 

 " what you say seem utterly wild , " begin Syme . " why , as a matter 
 of fact - but , my God , " he cry out suddenly , like a man who see 
 an explosion a long way off , " by God ! if this be true the whole bally 
 lot of we on the Anarchist Council be against anarchy ! every bear 
 man be a detective except the President and his personal secretary . 
 what can it mean ? " 

 " mean ! " say the new policeman with incredible violence . 
 " it mean that we be strike dead ! do not   you know Sunday ? do not   you 
 know that his joke be always so big and simple that one have 
 never think of they ? can you think of anything more like Sunday 
 than this , that he should put all his powerful enemy on 
 the Supreme Council , and then take care that it be not supreme ? 
 I tell you he have buy every trust , he have capture every cable , 
 he have control of every railway line - especially of that railway line ! " 
 and he point a shake finger towards the small wayside station . 
 " the whole movement be control by he ; half the world be 
 ready to rise for he . but there be just five people , perhaps , 
 who would have resist he . . . and the old devil put they on 
 the Supreme Council , to waste their time in watch each other . 
 idiot that we be , he plan the whole of our idiocy ! 
 Sunday know that the Professor would chase Syme through London , 
 and that Syme would fight I in France . and he be combine 
 great mass of capital , and seize great line of telegraphy , 
 while we five idiot be run after each other like a lot 
 of confounded baby play blind man 's buff . " 

 " well ? " ask Syme with a sort of steadiness . 

 " well , " reply the other with sudden serenity , " he have find we play blind 
 man 's buff to - day in a field of great rustic beauty and extreme solitude . 
 he have probably capture the world ; it only remain to he to capture 
 this field and all the fool in it . and since you really want to know 
 what be my objection to the arrival of that train , I will tell you . 
 my objection be that Sunday or his Secretary have just this moment get 
 out of it . " 

 Syme utter an involuntary cry , and they all turn their eye 
 towards the far - off station . it be quite true that a considerable 
 bulk of people seem to be move in their direction . 
 but they be too distant to be distinguish in any way . 

 " it be a habit of the late Marquis de St. Eustache , " say the new policeman , 
 produce a leather case , " always to carry a pair of opera glass . 
 either the President or the Secretary be come after we with that mob . 
 they have catch we in a nice quiet place where we be under no 
 temptation to break our oath by call the police . Dr. Bull , I have 
 a suspicion that you will see well through these than through your own 
 highly decorative spectacle . " 

 he hand the field - glass to the Doctor , who immediately take 
 off his spectacle and put the apparatus to his eye . 

 " it can not be as bad as you say , " say the Professor , somewhat shaken . 
 " there be a good number of they certainly , but they may easily 
 be ordinary tourist . " 

 " do ordinary tourist , " ask Bull , with the fieldglasse to his eye , 
 " wear black mask half - way down the face ? " 

 Syme almost tear the glass out of his hand , and look through they . 
 Most man in the advance mob really look ordinary enough ; 
 but it be quite true that two or three of the leader 
 in front wear black half - mask almost down to their mouth . 
 this disguise be very complete , especially at such a distance , 
 and Syme find it impossible to conclude anything from the 
 clean - shaven jaw and chin of the man talk in the front . 
 but presently as they talk they all smile and one of they 
 smile on one side . 



  CHAPTER XI 

  the criminal CHASE the POLICE 


 SYME put the field - glass from his eye with an almost ghastly relief . 

 " the President be not with they , anyhow , " he say , and wipe his forehead . 

 " but surely they be right away on the horizon , " say the bewildered Colonel , 
 blink and but half recover from Bull 's hasty though polite explanation . 
 " could you possibly know your President among all those people ? " 

 " could I know a white elephant among all those people ! " 
 answer Syme somewhat irritably . " as you very truly say , 
 they be on the horizon ; but if he be walk with they . . 
 . by God ! I believe this ground would shake . " 

 after an instant 's pause the new man call Ratcliffe say 
 with gloomy decision - 

 " of course the President be not   with they . I wish to Gemini he be . 
 much more likely the President be rid in triumph through Paris , 
 or sit on the ruin of St. Paul 's Cathedral . " 

 " this be absurd ! " say Syme . " something may have happen in our absence ; 
 but he can not have carry the world with a rush like that . 
 it be quite true , " he add , frown dubiously at the distant field 
 that lie towards the little station , " it be certainly true that there 
 seem to be a crowd come this way ; but they be not all the army 
 that you make out . " 

 " oh , they , " say the new detective contemptuously ; 
 " no they be not a very valuable force . but let I tell you 
 frankly that they be precisely calculate to our value - 
 we be not much , my boy , in Sunday 's universe . 
 he have get hold of all the cable and telegraphs himself . 
 but to kill the Supreme Council he regard as a trivial matter , 
 like a post card ; it may be leave to his private secretary , " 
 and he spit on the grass . 

 then he turn to the other and say somewhat austerely - 

 " there be a great deal to be say for death ; but if anyone have 
 any preference for the other alternative , I strongly advise he 
 to walk after I . " 

 with these word , he turn his broad back and strode with silent energy 
 towards the wood . the other give one glance over their shoulder , 
 and see that the dark cloud of man have detach itself from the station 
 and be move with a mysterious discipline across the plain . 
 they see already , even with the naked eye , black blot on the foremost face , 
 which mark the mask they wear . they turn and follow their leader , 
 who have already strike the wood , and disappear among the twinkling tree . 

 the sun on the grass be dry and hot . so in plunge into the wood they 
 have a cool shock of shadow , as of diver who plunge into a dim pool . 
 the inside of the wood be full of shattered sunlight and shake shadow . 
 they make a sort of shudder veil , almost recall the dizziness of 
 a cinematograph . even the solid figure walk with he Syme could hardly 
 see for the pattern of sun and shade that dance upon they . now a man 's 
 head be light as with a light of Rembrandt , leave all else obliterate ; 
 now again he have strong and star white hand with the face of a negro . 
 the ex - Marquis have pull the old straw hat over his eye , 
 and the black shade of the brim cut his face so squarely in two that it 
 seem to be wear one of the black half - mask of their pursuer . 
 the fancy tint Syme 's overwhelming sense of wonder . be he wear a mask ? 
 be anyone wear a mask ? be anyone anything ? this wood of witchery , 
 in which man 's face turn black and white by turn , in which their figure 
 first swell into sunlight and then fade into formless night , this mere 
 chaos of chiaroscuro   after the clear daylight outside , seem to Syme 
 a perfect symbol of the world in which he have be move for three day , 
 this world where man take off their beard and their spectacle and 
 their nose , and turn into other people . that tragic self - confidence 
 which he have feel when he believe that the Marquis be a devil have 
 strangely disappear now that he know that the Marquis be a friend . 
 he feel almost inclined to ask after all these bewilderment what be a friend 
 and what an enemy . be there anything that be apart from what it seem ? 
 the Marquis have take off his nose and turn out to be a detective . 
 might he not just as well take off his head and turn out to be a hobgoblin ? 
 be not everything , after all , like this bewilder woodland , this dance 
 of dark and light ? everything only a glimpse , the glimpse always unforeseen , 
 and always forget . for Gabriel Syme have find in the heart 
 of that sun - splash wood what many modern painter have find there . 
 he have find the thing which the modern people call Impressionism , 
 which be another name for that final scepticism which can find no floor 
 to the universe . 

 as a man in an evil dream strain himself to scream and wake , Syme strove 
 with a sudden effort to fle off this last and bad of his fancy . 
 with two impatient stride he overtake the man in the Marquis 's straw hat , 
 the man whom he have come to address as Ratcliffe . in a voice exaggeratively 
 loud and cheerful , he break the bottomless silence and make conversation . 

 " may I ask , " he say , " where on earth we be all go to ? " 

 so genuine have be the doubt of his soul , that he be quite 
 glad to hear his companion speak in an easy , human voice . 

 " we must get down through the town of Lancy to the sea , " he say . 
 " I think that part of the country be least likely to be with they . " 

 " what can you mean by all this ? " cry Syme . " they can not   be run 
 the real world in that way . surely not many work man be anarchist , 
 and surely if they be , mere mob could not beat modern army and police . " 

 " mere mob ! " repeat his new friend with a snort of scorn . 
 " so you talk about mob and the working class as if they 
 be the question . you have   get that eternal idiotic idea that 
 if anarchy come it would come from the poor . why should it ? 
 the poor have be rebel , but they have never be anarchist ; 
 they have more interest than anyone else in there be some 
 decent government . the poor man really have a stake in the country . 
 the rich man have not ; he can go away to New Guinea in a yacht . 
 the poor have sometimes object to be govern badly ; 
 the rich have always object to be govern at all . 
 aristocrat be always anarchist , as you can see from 
 the baron ' war . " 

 " as a lecture on english history for the little one , " say Syme , 
 " this be all very nice ; but I have not yet grasp its application . " 

 " its application be , " say his informant , " that most of old Sunday 's 
 right - hand man be south african and american millionaire . 
 that be why he have get hold of all the communication ; 
 and that be why the last four champion of the anti - anarchist 
 police force be run through a wood like rabbit . " 

 " millionaire I can understand , " say Syme thoughtfully , " they be nearly 
 all mad . but get hold of a few wicked old gentleman with hobby 
 be one thing ; get hold of great christian nation be another . 
 I would bet the nose off my face   forgive the allusion   that Sunday would 
 stand perfectly helpless before the task of convert any ordinary 
 healthy person anywhere . " 

 " well , " say the other , " it rather depend what sort of person you mean . " 

 " well , for instance , " say Syme , " he could never convert that person , " 
 and he point straight in front of he . 

 they have come to an open space of sunlight , which seem 
 to express to Syme the final return of his own good sense ; 
 and in the middle of this forest clearing be a figure that might 
 well stand for that common sense in an almost awful actuality . 
 burn by the sun and stain with perspiration , and grave 
 with the bottomless gravity of small necessary toil , 
 a heavy french peasant be cut wood with a hatchet . 
 his cart stand a few yard off , already half full of timber ; 
 and the horse that crop the grass be , like his master , 
 valorous but not desperate ; like his master , he be 
 even prosperous , but yet be almost sad . the man be a Norman , 
 tall than the average of the french and very angular ; 
 and his swarthy figure stand dark against a square of sunlight , 
 almost like some allegoric figure of labour fresco on a 
 ground of gold . 

 " Mr. Syme be say , " call out Ratcliffe to the French Colonel , 
 " that this man , at least , will never be an anarchist . " 

 " Mr. Syme be right enough there , " answer Colonel Ducroix , laugh , 
 " if only for the reason that he have plenty of property to defend . 
 but I forget that in your country you be not use to peasant be wealthy . " 

 " he look poor , " say Dr. Bull doubtfully . 

 " quite so , " say the Colonel ; " that be why he be rich . " 

 " I have an idea , " call out Dr. Bull suddenly ; " how much would 
 he take to give we a lift in his cart ? those dog be all on foot , 
 and we could soon leave they behind . " 

 " oh , give he anything ! " say Syme eagerly . " I have pile 
 of money on I . " 

 " that will never do , " say the Colonel ; " he will never have any respect 
 for you unless you drive a bargain . " 

 " oh , if he haggle ! " begin Bull impatiently . 

 " erie haggle because he be a free man , " say the other . 
 " you do not understand ; he would not see the meaning of generosity . 
 he be not be tip . " 

 and even while they seem to hear the heavy foot of their strange 
 pursuer behind they , they have to stand and stamp while the French Colonel 
 talk to the french wood - cutter with all the leisurely badinage 
 and bickering of market - day . at the end of the four minute , however , 
 they see that the Colonel be right , for the wood - cutter enter into 
 their plan , not with the vague servility of a tout too - well pay , 
 but with the seriousness of a solicitor who have be pay the proper fee . 
 he tell they that the good thing they could do be to make their way 
 down to the little inn on the hill above Lancy , where the innkeeper , 
 an old soldier who have become devot in his latter year , would be certain 
 to sympathise with they , and even to take risk in their support . 
 the whole company , therefore , pile themselves on top of the stack 
 of wood , and go rock in the rude cart down the other and steeper 
 side of the woodland . heavy and ramshackle as be the vehicle , 
 it be drive quickly enough , and they soon have the exhilarate 
 impression of distance altogether those , whoever they be , 
 who be hunt they . for , after all , the riddle as to where 
 the anarchist have get all these follower be still unsolved . 
 one man 's presence have suffice for they ; they have flee at the first 
 sight of the deformed smile of the Secretary . syme every now and then 
 look back over his shoulder at the army on their track . 

 as the wood grow first thin and then small with distance , 
 he could see the sunlit slope beyond it and above it ; and across 
 these be still move the square black mob like one monstrous beetle . 
 in the very strong sunlight and with his own very strong eye , 
 which be almost telescopic , Syme could see this mass of man 
 quite plainly . he could see they as separate human figure ; 
 but he be increasingly surprised by the way in which they 
 move as one man . they seem to be dress in dark clothe 
 and plain hat , like any common crowd out of the street ; 
 but they do not spread and sprawl and trail by various line 
 to the attack , as would be natural in an ordinary mob . 
 they move with a sort of dreadful and wicked woodenness , 
 like a star army of automaton . 

 Syme point this out to Ratcliffe . 

 " yes , " reply the policeman , " that be discipline . that be Sunday . he be 
 perhaps five hundred mile off , but the fear of he be on all of they , 
 like the finger of God . yes , they be walk regularly ; and you bet 
 your boot that they be talk regularly , yes , and think regularly . 
 but the one important thing for we be that they be disappear regularly . " 

 Syme nod . it be true that the black patch of the pursue man 
 be grow small and small as the peasant belabour his horse . 

 the level of the sunlit landscape , though flat as a whole , fall away 
 on the farth side of the wood in billow of heavy slope towards 
 the sea , in a way not unlike the low slope of the Sussex down . 
 the only difference be that in Sussex the road would have be 
 broken and angular like a little brook , but here the white 
 french road fall sheer in front of they like a waterfall . 
 down this direct descent the cart clatter at a considerable angle , 
 and in a few minute , the road grow yet steeper , they see below 
 they the little harbour of Lancy and a great blue arc of the sea . 
 the travel cloud of their enemy have wholly disappear 
 from the horizon . 

 the horse and cart take a sharp turn round a clump of elm , and the horse 's 
 nose nearly strike the face of an old gentleman who be sit on the bench 
 outside the little cafe of " Le Soleil d'Or . " the peasant grunt an apology , 
 and get down from his seat . the other also descend one by one , and speak 
 to the old gentleman with fragmentary phrase of courtesy , for it be quite 
 evident from his expansive manner that he be the owner of the little tavern . 

 he be a white - haired , apple - face old boy , with sleepy eye 
 and a grey moustache ; stout , sedentary , and very innocent , 
 of a type that may often be find in France , but be still commoner 
 in Catholic Germany . everything about he , his pipe , his pot of beer , 
 his flower , and his beehive , suggest an ancestral peace ; 
 only when his visitor look up as they enter the inn - parlour , 
 they see the sword upon the wall . 

 the Colonel , who greet the innkeeper as an old friend , pass rapidly 
 into the inn - parlour , and sit down order some ritual refreshment . 
 the military decision of his action interested Syme , who sit next to he , 
 and he take the opportunity when the old innkeeper have go out of 
 satisfy his curiosity . 

 " may I ask you , Colonel , " he say in a low voice , " why we have come here ? " 

 Colonel Ducroix smile behind his bristly white moustache . 

 " for two reason , sir , " he say ; " and I will give first , 
 not the most important , but the most utilitarian . 
 we come here because this be the only place within twenty mile 
 in which we can get horse . " 

 " horse ! " repeat Syme , look up quickly . 

 " yes , " reply the other ; " if you people be really to distance 
 your enemy it be horse or nothing for you , unless of course 
 you have bicycle and motor - car in your pocket . " 

 " and where do you advise we to make for ? " ask Syme doubtfully . 

 " beyond question , " reply the Colonel , " you have well 
 make all haste to the police station beyond the town . 
 my friend , whom I second under somewhat deceptive circumstance , 
 seem to I to exaggerate very much the possibility of a 
 general rising ; but even he would hardly maintain , I suppose , 
 that you be not safe with the gendarme . " 

 Syme nod gravely ; then he say abruptly - 

 " and your other reason for come here ? " 

 " my other reason for come here , " say Ducroix soberly , 
 " be that it be just as well to see a good man or two when one 
 be possibly near to death . " 

 Syme look up at the wall , and see a crudely - paint and pathetic 
 religious picture . then he say - 

 " you be right , " and then almost immediately afterwards , 
 " have anyone see about the horse ? " 

 " yes , " answer Ducroix , " you may be quite certain that I give order 
 the moment I come in . those enemy of yours give no impression of hurry , 
 but they be really move wonderfully fast , like a well - train army . 
 I have no idea that the anarchist have so much discipline . 
 you have not a moment to waste . " 

 almost as he speak , the old innkeeper with the blue eye and white hair come 
 amble into the room , and announce that six horse be saddle outside . 

 by Ducroix 's advice the five other equip themselves with some portable 
 form of food and wine , and keep their duel sword as the only 
 weapon available , they clatter away down the steep , white road . 
 the two servant , who have carry the Marquis 's luggage when he be 
 a marquis , be leave behind to drink at the cafe by common consent , 
 and not at all against their own inclination . 

 by this time the afternoon sun be slant westward , and by its ray 
 Syme could see the sturdy figure of the old innkeeper grow small 
 and small , but still stand and look after they quite silently , 
 the sunshine in his silver hair . Syme have a fix , superstitious fancy , 
 leave in his mind by the chance phrase of the Colonel , that this 
 be indeed , perhaps , the last honest stranger whom he should ever see 
 upon the earth . 

 he be still look at this dwindle figure , which stand as a mere grey 
 blot touch with a white flame against the great green wall of the steep 
 down behind he . and as he star over the top of the down behind 
 the innkeeper , there appear an army of black - clothe and march man . 
 they seem to hang above the good man and his house like a black cloud 
 of locust . the horse have be saddle none too soon . 



  CHAPTER XII 

  the EARTH in ANARCHY 


 urge the horse to a gallop , without respect to the rather rugged 
 descent of the road , the horseman soon regain their advantage over 
 the man on the march , and at last the bulk of the first building 
 of Lancy cut off the sight of their pursuer . nevertheless , the ride 
 have be a long one , and by the time they reach the real town 
 the west be warm with the colour and quality of sunset . 
 the Colonel suggest that , before make finally for the police station , 
 they should make the effort , in pass , to attach to themselves 
 one more individual who might be useful . 

 " four out of the five rich man in this town , " he say , " be common swindler . 
 I suppose the proportion be pretty equal all over the world . 
 the fifth be a friend of mine , and a very fine fellow ; and what be even 
 more important from our point of view , he own a motor - car . " 

 " I be afraid , " say the Professor in his mirthful way , look back along 
 the white road on which the black , crawl patch might appear at any moment , 
 " I be afraid we have hardly time for afternoon call . " 

 " Doctor Renard 's house be only three minute off , " say the Colonel . 

 " our danger , " say Dr. Bull , " be not two minute off . " 

 " yes , " say Syme , " if we ride on fast we must leave they behind , 
 for they be on foot . " 

 " he have a motor - car , " say the Colonel . 

 " but we may not get it , " say Bull . 

 " yes , he be quite on your side . " 

 " but he might be out . " 

 " hold your tongue , " say Syme suddenly . " what be that noise ? " 

 for a second they all sit as still as equestrian statue , and for a second - 
 for two or three or four second - heaven and earth seem equally still . 
 then all their ear , in an agony of attention , hear along the road that 
 indescribable thrill and throb that mean only one thing - horse ! 

 the Colonel 's face have an instantaneous change , as if lightning have strike it , 
 and yet leave it scatheless . 

 " they have do we , " he say , with brief military irony . 
 " prepare to receive cavalry ! " 

 " where can they have get the horse ? " ask Syme , as he mechanically 
 urge his steed to a canter . 

 the Colonel be silent for a little , then he say in a strained voice - 

 " I be speak with strict accuracy when I say that the ' Soleil d'Or ' 
 be the only place where one can get horse within twenty mile . " 

 " no ! " say Syme violently , " I do not   believe he would do it . 
 not with all that white hair . " 

 " he may have be force , " say the Colonel gently . 
 " they must be at least a hundred strong , for which reason we 
 be all go to see my friend Renard , who have a motor - car . " 

 with these word he swing his horse suddenly round a street corner , 
 and go down the street with such thunder speed , that the other , 
 though already well at the gallop , have difficulty in follow the fly 
 tail of his horse . 

 Dr. Renard inhabit a high and comfortable house at the top of a 
 steep street , so that when the rider alight at his door they could 
 once more see the solid green ridge of the hill , with the white 
 road across it , stand up above all the roof of the town . 
 they breathe again to see that the road as yet be clear , 
 and they ring the bell . 

 Dr. Renard be a beam , brown - bearded man , a good example of that silent but 
 very busy professional class which France have preserve even more perfectly 
 than England . when the matter be explain to he he pooh - poohe the panic 
 of the ex - Marquis altogether ; he say , with the solid french scepticism , 
 that there be no conceivable probability of a general anarchist rise . 
 " Anarchy , " he say , shrug his shoulder , " it be childishness ! " 

 " et can , " cry out the Colonel suddenly , point over the other 's shoulder , 
 " and that be childishness , be not   it ? " 

 they all look round , and see a curve of black cavalry come sweep 
 over the top of the hill with all the energy of Attila . swiftly as 
 they ride , however , the whole rank still keep well together , and they could 
 see the black vizard of the first line as level as a line of uniform . 
 but although the main black square be the same , though travel fast , 
 there be now one sensational difference which they could see clearly upon 
 the slope of the hill , as if upon a slanted map . the bulk of the rider 
 be in one block ; but one rider fly far ahead of the column , and with 
 frantic movement of hand and heel urge his horse fast and fast , 
 so that one might have fancy that he be not the pursuer but the pursued . 
 but even at that great distance they could see something so fanatical , 
 so unquestionable in his figure , that they know it be the Secretary himself . 
 " I be sorry to cut short a cultured discussion , " say the Colonel , 
 " but can you lend I your motor - car now , in two minute ? " 

 " I have a suspicion that you be all mad , " say Dr. Renard , smile sociably ; 
 " but God forbid that madness should in any way interrupt friendship . 
 let we go round to the garage . " 

 Dr. Renard be a mild man with monstrous wealth ; his room be 
 like the Musee de Cluny , and he have three motor - car . these , 
 however , he seem to use very sparingly , have the simple 
 taste of the french middle class , and when his impatient 
 friend come to examine they , it take they some time to assure 
 themselves that one of they even could be make to work . 
 this with some difficulty they bring round into the street 
 before the Doctor 's house . when they come out of the dim 
 garage they be startled to find that twilight have already 
 fall with the abruptness of night in the tropic . 
 either they have be long in the place than they imagine , 
 or some unusual canopy of cloud have gather over the town . 
 they look down the steep street , and seem to see a slight 
 mist come up from the sea . 

 " it be now or never , " say Dr. Bull . " I hear horse . " 

 " no , " correct the Professor , " a horse . " 

 and as they listen , it be evident that the noise , rapidly come 
 nearer on the rattle stone , be not the noise of the whole 
 cavalcade but that of the one horseman , who have leave it far behind - 
 the insane Secretary . 

 Syme 's family , like most of those who end in the simple life , 
 have once own a motor , and he know all about they . 
 he have leap at once into the chauffeur 's seat , and with flushed 
 face be wrench and tug at the disuse machinery . 
 he bend his strength upon one handle , and then say quite quietly - 

 " I be afraid it be no go . " 

 as he speak , there sweep round the corner a man rigid on 
 his rush horse , with the rush and rigidity of an arrow . 
 he have a smile that thrust out his chin as if it be dislocate . 
 he sweep alongside of the stationary car , into which its 
 company have crowd , and lay his hand on the front . 
 it be the Secretary , and his mouth go quite straight 
 in the solemnity of triumph . 

 Syme be lean hard upon the steering wheel , and there be no 
 sound but the rumble of the other pursuer rid into the town . 
 then there come quite suddenly a scream of scrap iron , 
 and the car leapt forward . it pluck the Secretary clean 
 out of his saddle , as a knife be whip out of its sheath , 
 trail he kick terribly for twenty yard , and leave he 
 fling flat upon the road far in front of his frightened horse . 
 as the car take the corner of the street with a splendid curve , 
 they could just see the other anarchist fill the street 
 and raise their fallen leader . 

 " I can not   understand why it have grow so dark , " say the Professor 
 at last in a low voice . 

 " go to be a storm , I think , " say Dr. Bull . " I say , it be a pity 
 we have not   get a light on this car , if only to see by . " 

 " we have , " say the Colonel , and from the floor of the car he fish up 
 a heavy , old - fashion , carve iron lantern with a light inside it . 
 it be obviously an antique , and it would seem as if its original use 
 have be in some way semi - religious , for there be a rude moulding 
 of a cross upon one of its side . 

 " where on earth do you get that ? " ask the Professor . 

 " I get it where I get the car , " answer the Colonel , chuckle , 
 " from my good friend . while our friend here be fight with 
 the steering wheel , I run up the front step of the house and speak 
 to Renard , who be stand in his own porch , you will remember . 
 ' I suppose , ' I say , ' there be no time to get a lamp . ' he look up , 
 blink amiably at the beautiful arched ceiling of his own front hall . 
 from this be suspend , by chain of exquisite ironwork , 
 this lantern , one of the hundred treasure of his treasure house . 
 by sheer force he tear the lamp out of his own ceiling , shatter the 
 paint panel , and bring down two blue vas with his violence . 
 then he hand I the iron lantern , and I put it in the car . 
 be I not right when I say that Dr. Renard be worth know ? " 

 " you be , " say Syme seriously , and hang the heavy lantern over the front . 
 there be a certain allegory of their whole position in the contrast 
 between the modern automobile and its strange ecclesiastical lamp . 
 Hitherto they have pass through the quiet part of the town , meet at 
 most one or two pedestrian , who could give they no hint of the peace or 
 the hostility of the place . now , however , the window in the house begin 
 one by one to be light up , give a great sense of habitation and humanity . 
 Dr. Bull turn to the new detective who have lead their flight , and permit 
 himself one of his natural and friendly smile . 

 " these light make one feel more cheerful . " 

 Inspector Ratcliffe draw his brow together . 

 " there be only one set of light that make I more cheerful , " 
 he say , " and they be those light of the police station 
 which I can see beyond the town . please God we may be there 
 in ten minute . " 

 then all Bull 's boil good sense and optimism break suddenly out of he . 

 " oh , this be all rave nonsense ! " he cry . " if you really 
 think that ordinary people in ordinary house be anarchist , 
 you must be madder than an anarchist yourself . if we turn 
 and fight these fellow , the whole town would fight for we . " 

 " no , " say the other with an immovable simplicity , " the whole 
 town would fight for they . we shall see . ' 

 while they be speak the Professor have leant forward 
 with sudden excitement . 

 " what be that noise ? " he say . 

 " oh , the horse behind we , I suppose , " say the Colonel . " I think we 
 have get clear of they . " 

 " the horse behind we ! no , " say the Professor , " it be not horse , 
 and it be not behind we . " 

 almost as he speak , across the end of the street before they two shin 
 and rattle shape shoot past . they be go almost in a flash , 
 but everyone could see that they be motor - car , and the Professor stand 
 up with a pale face and swear that they be the other two motor - car 
 from Dr. Renard 's garage . 

 " I tell you they be his , " he repeat , with wild eye , 
 " and they be full of man in mask ! " 

 " Absurd ! " say the Colonel angrily . " Dr. Renard would never give 
 they his car . " 

 " he may have be force , " say Ratcliffe quietly . 
 " the whole town be on their side . " 

 " you still believe that , " ask the Colonel incredulously . 

 " you will all believe it soon , " say the other with a hopeless calm . 

 there be a puzzled pause for some little time , and then the Colonel 
 begin again abruptly - 

 " no , I can not   believe it . the thing be nonsense . 
 the plain people of a peaceable french town - " 

 he be cut short by a bang and a blaze of light , which seem close 
 to his eye . as the car speed on it leave a float patch of white 
 smoke behind it , and Syme have hear a shot shriek past his ear . 

 " my God ! " say the Colonel , ' someone have shoot at we . " 

 " it need not interrupt conversation , " say the gloomy Ratcliffe . " pray resume 
 your remark , Colonel . you be talk , I think , about the plain people 
 of a peaceable french town . " 

 the star Colonel be long past mind satire . 
 he roll his eye all round the street . 

 " it be extraordinary , " he say , " most extraordinary . " 

 " a fastidious person , " say Syme , " might even call it unpleasant . 
 however , I suppose those light out in the field beyond this street 
 be the Gendarmerie . we shall soon get there . " 

 " no , " say Inspector Ratcliffe , " we shall never get there . " 

 he have be stand up and look keenly ahead of he . 
 now he sit down and smooth his sleek hair with a weary gesture . 

 " what do you mean ? " ask Bull sharply . 

 " I mean that we shall never get there , " say the pessimist placidly . 
 " they have two row of armed man across the road already ; I can see 
 they from here . the town be in arm , as I say it be . 

 I can only wallow in the exquisite comfort of my own exactitude . " 

 and Ratcliffe sit down comfortably in the car and light a cigarette , 
 but the other rise excitedly and star down the road . 
 Syme have slow down the car as their plan become doubtful , 
 and he bring it finally to a standstill just at the corner 
 of a side street that run down very steeply to the sea . 

 the town be mostly in shadow , but the sun have not sink ; wherever its 
 level light could break through , it paint everything a burn gold . 
 up this side street the last sunset light shine as sharp 
 and narrow as the shaft of artificial light at the theatre . 
 it strike the car of the five friend , and light it like a burn chariot . 
 but the rest of the street , especially the two end of it , be in 
 the deep twilight , and for some second they could see nothing . 
 then Syme , whose eye be the keen , break into a little 
 bitter whistle , and say 

 " it be quite true . there be a crowd or an army or some such thing across 
 the end of that street . " 

 " well , if there be , " say Bull impatiently , " it must be 
 something else - a sham fight or the mayor 's birthday or something . 
 I can not and will not believe that plain , jolly people in a 
 place like this walk about with dynamite in their pocket . 
 get on a bit , Syme , and let we look at they . " 

 the car crawl about a hundred yard far , and then they be all startle 
 by Dr. Bull break into a high crow of laughter . 

 " why , you silly mug ! " he cry , " what do I tell you . 
 that crowd 's as law - abide as a cow , and if it be not , it be 
 on our side . " 

 " how do you know ? " ask the professor , star . 

 " you blind bat , " cry Bull , " do not   you see who be lead they ? " 

 they peer again , and then the Colonel , with a catch in his voice , cry out - 

 " why , it be Renard ! " 

 there be , indeed , a rank of dim figure run across the road , and they 
 could not be clearly see ; but far enough in front to catch the accident 
 of the evening light be stalk up and down the unmistakable Dr. Renard , 
 in a white hat , stroke his long brown beard , and hold a revolver 
 in his left hand . 

 " what a fool I have   be ! " exclaim the Colonel . " of course , 
 the dear old boy have turn out to help we . " 

 Dr. Bull be bubble over with laughter , swing the sword 
 in his hand as carelessly as a cane . he jump out of the car 
 and run across the intervene space , call out - 

 " Dr. Renard ! Dr. Renard ! " 

 an instant after Syme think his own eye have go mad in his head . 
 for the philanthropic Dr. Renard have deliberately raise his revolver 
 and fire twice at Bull , so that the shot ring down the road . 

 almost at the same second as the puff of white cloud go up 
 from this atrocious explosion a long puff of white cloud go 
 up also from the cigarette of the cynical Ratcliffe . like all 
 the rest he turn a little pale , but he smile . Dr. Bull , 
 at whom the bullet have be fire , just miss his scalp , 
 stand quite still in the middle of the road without a sign of fear , 
 and then turn very slowly and crawl back to the car , 
 and climb in with two hole through his hat . 

 " well , " say the cigarette smoker slowly , " what do you think now ? " 

 " I think , " say Dr. Bull with precision , " that I be lie in bed at 
 no . 217 Peabody Buildings , and that I shall soon wake up with a jump ; 
 or , if that be not it , I think that I be sit in a small cushion 
 cell in Hanwell , and that the doctor can not   make much of my case . 
 but if you want to know what I do not   think , I will tell you . 
 I do not   think what you think . I do not   think , and I never shall think , 
 that the mass of ordinary man be a pack of dirty modern thinker . 
 no , sir , I be a democrat , and I still do not   believe that Sunday could 
 convert one average navvy or counter - jumper . no , I may be mad , 
 but humanity be not . " 

 Syme turn his bright blue eye on Bull with an earnestness which he do 
 not commonly make clear . 

 " you be a very fine fellow , " he say . " you can believe in a sanity 
 which be not merely your sanity . and you be right enough about humanity , 
 about peasant and people like that jolly old innkeeper . 
 but you be not right about Renard . I suspect he from the first . 
 he be rationalistic , and , what be bad , he be rich . when duty 
 and religion be really destroy , it will be by the rich . " 

 " they be really destroy now , " say the man with a cigarette , 
 and rise with his hand in his pocket . " the devil be come on ! " 

 the man in the motor - car look anxiously in the direction of his 
 dreamy gaze , and they see that the whole regiment at the end of the road 
 be advance upon they , Dr. Renard march furiously in front , 
 his beard fly in the breeze . 

 the Colonel spring out of the car with an intolerant exclamation . 

 " gentleman , " he cry , " the thing be incredible . 
 it must be a practical joke . if you know Renard as I do - 
 it be like call Queen Victoria a dynamiter . if you have get 
 the man 's character into your head - " 

 " Dr. Bull , " say Syme sardonically , " have at least get it into his hat . " 

 " I tell you it can not   be ! " cry the Colonel , stamp . 

 " renard shall explain it . he shall explain it to I , " 
 and he stride forward . 

 " do not   be in such a hurry , " drawl the smoker . " he will very soon 
 explain it to all of we . " 

 but the impatient Colonel be already out of earshot , advance towards 
 the advance enemy . the excited Dr. Renard lift his pistol again , 
 but perceive his opponent , hesitate , and the Colonel come face to face 
 with he with frantic gesture of remonstrance . 

 " it be no good , " say Syme . " he will never get anything out 
 of that old heathen . I vote we drive bang through the thick 
 of they , bang as the bullet go through Bull 's hat . 
 we may all be kill , but we must kill a tidy number of they . " 

 " I will not   ' ave it , " say Dr. Bull , grow more vulgar in the sincerity 
 of his virtue . " the poor chap may be make a mistake . 
 give the Colonel a chance . " 

 " shall we go back , then ? " ask the Professor . 

 " no , " say Ratcliffe in a cold voice , " the street behind we be hold too . 
 in fact , I seem to see there another friend of your , Syme . " 

 Syme spin round smartly , and star backwards at the track 
 which they have travel . he see an irregular body of 
 horseman gathering and gallop towards they in the gloom . 
 he see above the foremost saddle the silver gleam of a sword , 
 and then as it grow near the silver gleam of an old man 's hair . 
 the next moment , with shatter violence , he have swing the motor 
 round and send it dash down the steep side street to the sea , 
 like a man that desire only to die . 

 " what the devil be up ? " cry the Professor , seize his arm . 

 " the morning star have fall ! " say Syme , as his own car go 
 down the darkness like a fall star . 

 the other do not understand his word , but when they look back at 
 the street above they see the hostile cavalry come round the corner 
 and down the slope after they ; and foremost of all ride the good innkeeper , 
 flush with the fiery innocence of the evening light . 

 " the world be insane ! " say the Professor , and bury his face 
 in his hand . 

 " no , " say Dr. Bull in adamantine humility , " it be i. " 

 " what be we go to do ? " ask the Professor . 

 " at this moment , " say Syme , with a scientific detachment , 
 " I think we be go to smash into a lamppost . " 

 the next instant the automobile have come with a catastrophic jar 
 against an iron object . the instant after that four man have crawl 
 out from under a chaos of metal , and a tall lean lamp - post that 
 have stand up straight on the edge of the marine parade stand out , 
 bent and twisted , like the branch of a broken tree . 

 " well , we smash something , " say the Professor , with a faint smile . 
 " that be some comfort . " 

 " you be become an anarchist , " say Syme , dust his clothe 
 with his instinct of daintiness . 

 " everyone be , " say Ratcliffe . 

 as they speak , the white - haired horseman and his follower come 
 thunder from above , and almost at the same moment a dark string 
 of man run shout along the sea - front . Syme snatch a sword , 
 and take it in his tooth ; he stick two other under his arm - pit , 
 take a fourth in his left hand and the lantern in his right , 
 and leapt off the high parade on to the beach below . 

 the other leapt after he , with a common acceptance of such decisive action , 
 leave the debris and the gathering mob above they . 

 " we have one more chance , " say Syme , take the steel out of his mouth . 
 " whatever all this pandemonium mean , I suppose the police station 
 will help we . we can not   get there , for they hold the way . 
 but there be a pier or breakwater run out into the sea just here , 
 which we could defend long than anything else , like Horatius 
 and his bridge . we must defend it till the Gendarmerie turn out . 
 keep after I . " 

 they follow he as he go crunch down the beach , and in a second 
 or two their boot break not on the sea gravel , but on broad , flat stone . 
 they march down a long , low jetty , run out in one arm into the dim , 
 boiling sea , and when they come to the end of it they feel that they have 
 come to the end of their story . they turn and face the town . 

 that town be transfigure with uproar . all along the high parade from 
 which they have just descend be a dark and roaring stream of humanity , 
 with toss arm and fiery face , grope and glare towards they . 
 the long dark line be dot with torch and lantern ; but even where 
 no flame light up a furious face , they could see in the farth figure , 
 in the most shadowy gesture , an organise hate . it be clear that they 
 be the accursed of all man , and they know not why . 

 two or three man , look little and black like monkey , 
 leapt over the edge as they have do and drop on to the beach . 
 these come plough down the deep sand , shout horribly , 
 and strove to wade into the sea at random . the example be follow , 
 and the whole black mass of man begin to run and drip over the edge 
 like black treacle . 

 foremost among the man on the beach Syme see the peasant who have drive 
 their cart . he splash into the surf on a huge cart - horse , and shake 
 his axe at they . 

 " the peasant ! " cry Syme . " they have not rise since the Middle Ages . " 

 " even if the police do come now , " say the Professor mournfully , 
 " they can do nothing with this mob . " 

 " nonsence ! " say Bull desperately ; " there must be some people 
 leave in the town who be human . " 

 " no , " say the hopeless inspector , " the human being will soon be extinct . 
 we be the last of mankind . " 

 " it may be , " say the Professor absently . then he add in his dreamy voice , 
 " what be all that at the end of the ' Dunciad ' ? 


 nor public flame ; nor private , dare to shine ; 

 nor human light be leave , nor glimpse divine ! 

 Lo ! thy dread Empire , Chaos , be restore ; 

 light die before thine uncreating word : 

 Thy hand , great Anarch , let the curtain fall ; 

 and universal darkness burie all . " ' 


 " stop ! " cry Bull suddenly , " the gendarme be out . " 

 the low light of the police station be indeed blot and break 
 with hurrying figure , and they hear through the darkness the clash 
 and jingle of a disciplined cavalry . 

 ' they be charge the mob ! " cry Bull in ecstacy or alarm . 

 " no , " say Syme , " they be form along the parade . " 

 " they have unsling their carbine , " cry Bull dancing with excitement . 

 " yes , " say Ratcliffe , " and they be go to fire on we . " 

 as he speak there come a long crackle of musketry , and bullet seem 
 to hop like hailstone on the stone in front of they . 

 ' the gendarme have join they ! " cry the Professor , 
 and strike his forehead . 

 " I be in the padded cell , " say Bull solidly . 

 there be a long silence , and then Ratcliffe say , look out over 
 the swollen sea , all a sort of grey purple - 

 " what do it matter who be mad or who be sane ? we shall all be dead soon . " 

 Syme turn to he and say - 

 " you be quite hopeless , then ? " 

 Mr. Ratcliffe keep a stony silence ; then at last he say quietly - 

 " no ; oddly enough I be not quite hopeless . there be one 
 insane little hope that I can not get out of my mind . 
 the power of this whole planet be against we , yet I can not help 
 wonder whether this one silly little hope be hopeless yet . " 

 " in what or whom be your hope ? " ask Syme with curiosity . 

 " in a man I never see , " say the other , look at the leaden sea . 

 " I know what you mean , " say Syme in a low voice , " the man in the dark room . 
 but Sunday must have kill he by now . " 

 " perhaps , " say the other steadily ; " but if so , he be the only man 
 whom Sunday find it hard to kill . " 

 " I hear what you say , " say the Professor , with his back turn . 
 " I also be hold hard on to the thing I never see . " 

 all of a sudden Syme , who be stand as if blind with introspective thought , 
 swing round and cry out , like a man wake from sleep - 

 " where be the Colonel ? I think he be with we ! " 

 " the Colonel ! yes , " cry Bull , " where on earth be the Colonel ? " 

 " he go to speak to Renard , " say the Professor . 

 " we can not leave he among all those beast , " cry Syme . " let we 
 die like gentleman if - " 

 " do not pity the Colonel , " say Ratcliffe , with a pale sneer . 
 " he be extremely comfortable . he be - " 

 " no ! no ! no ! " cry Syme in a kind of frenzy , " not the Colonel too ! 
 I will never believe it ! " 

 " will you believe your eye ? " ask the other , and point to the beach . 

 many of their pursuer have wad into the water shake their fist , 
 but the sea be rough , and they could not reach the pier . 
 two or three figure , however , stand on the beginning of the 
 stone footway , and seem to be cautiously advance down it . 
 the glare of a chance lantern light up the face of the two foremost . 
 one face wear a black half - mask , and under it the mouth be 
 twist about in such a madness of nerve that the black 
 tuft of beard wriggle round and round like a restless , 
 living thing . the other be the red face and white moustache 
 of Colonel Ducroix . they be in earnest consultation . 

 " yes , he be go too , " say the Professor , and sit down on a stone . 
 " everything be go . I be go ! I can not   trust my own bodily machinery . 
 I feel as if my own hand might fly up and strike I . " 

 " when my hand fly up , " say Syme , " it will strike somebody else , " 
 and he stride along the pier towards the Colonel , the sword in one hand 
 and the lantern in the other . 

 as if to destroy the last hope or doubt , the Colonel , who see 
 he come , point his revolver at he and fire . the shot 
 miss Syme , but strike his sword , break it short at the hilt . 
 Syme rush on , and swing the iron lantern above his head . 

 " Judas before Herod ! " he say , and strike the Colonel down upon the stone . 
 then he turn to the Secretary , whose frightful mouth be almost 
 foaming now , and hold the lamp high with so rigid and arrest a gesture , 
 that the man be , as it be , freeze for a moment , and force to hear . 

 " do you see this lantern ? " cry Syme in a terrible voice . 
 " do you see the cross carve on it , and the flame inside ? 
 you do not make it . you do not light it , well man than you , 
 man who could believe and obey , twist the entrail of iron and 
 preserve the legend of fire . there be not a street you walk on , 
 there be not a thread you wear , that be not make as this 
 lantern be , by deny your philosophy of dirt and rat . 
 you can make nothing . you can only destroy . you will 
 destroy mankind ; you will destroy the world . let that suffice you . 
 yet this one old christian lantern you shall not destroy . 
 it shall go where your empire of ape will never have the wit 
 to find it . " 

 he strike the Secretary once with the lantern so that he stagger ; 
 and then , whirl it twice round his head , send it fly far out to sea , 
 where it flare like a roar rocket and fall . 

 " sword ! " shout Syme , turn his flame face ; to the three behind he . 
 " let we charge these dog , for our time have come to die . " 

 his three companion come after he sword in hand . Syme 's sword be break , 
 but he rent a bludgeon from the fist of a fisherman , fling he down . 
 in a moment they would have fling themselves upon the face of the mob 
 and perish , when an interruption come . the Secretary , ever since 
 Syme 's speech , have stand with his hand to his stricken head as if daze ; 
 now he suddenly pull off his black mask . 

 the pale face thus peel in the lamplight reveal not so much rage 
 as astonishment . he put up his hand with an anxious authority . 

 " there be some mistake , " he say . " Mr. Syme , I hardly think you understand 
 your position . I arrest you in the name of the law . " 

 " of the law ? " say Syme , and drop his stick . 

 " certainly ! " say the Secretary . " I be a detective from Scotland Yard , " 
 and he take a small blue card from his pocket . 

 " and what do you suppose we be ? " ask the Professor , and throw 
 up his arm . 

 " you , " say the Secretary stiffly , " be , as I know for a fact , 
 member of the Supreme Anarchist Council . disguise as one 
 of you , I - " 

 Dr. Bull toss his sword into the sea . 

 " there never be any Supreme Anarchist Council , " he say . 
 " we be all a lot of silly policeman look at each other . 
 and all these nice people who have be pepper we with shot 
 think we be the dynamiter . I know I could not   be wrong 
 about the mob , " he say , beam over the enormous multitude , 
 which stretch away to the distance on both side . 
 " vulgar people be never mad . I be vulgar myself , and I know . 
 I be now go on shore to stand a drink to everybody here . " 



  CHAPTER XIII 

  the PURSUIT of the PRESIDENT 


 NEXT morning five bewildered but hilarious people take the boat 
 for Dover . the poor old Colonel might have have some cause 
 to complain , have be first force to fight for two faction 
 that do not   exist , and then knock down with an iron lantern . 
 but he be a magnanimous old gentleman , and be much 
 relieve that neither party have anything to do with dynamite , 
 he see they off on the pier with great geniality . 

 the five reconcile detective have a hundred detail to explain 
 to each other . the Secretary have to tell Syme how they have come 
 to wear mask originally in order to approach the suppose 
 enemy as fellow - conspirator ; 

 Syme have to explain how they have flee with such swiftness 
 through a civilised country . but above all these matter 
 of detail which could be explain , rise the central mountain 
 of the matter that they could not explain . what do it all mean ? 
 if they be all harmless officer , what be Sunday ? if he have 
 not seize the world , what on earth have he be up to ? 
 Inspector Ratcliffe be still gloomy about this . 

 " I can not   make head or tail of old Sunday 's little game any more than you can , " 
 he say . " but whatever else Sunday be , he be not   a blameless citizen . 
 damn it ! do you remember his face ? " 

 " I grant you , " answer Syme , " that I have never be able to forget it . " 

 " well , " say the Secretary , " I suppose we can find out soon , 
 for to - morrow we have our next general meeting . you will excuse I , " 
 he say , with a rather ghastly smile , " for be well acquaint 
 with my secretarial duty . " 

 " I suppose you be right , " say the Professor reflectively . 
 " I suppose we might find it out from he ; but I confess that I 
 should feel a bit afraid of ask Sunday who he really be . " 

 " why , " ask the Secretary , " for fear of bomb ? " 

 " no , " say the Professor , " for fear he might tell I . " 

 " let we have some drink , " say Dr. Bull , after a silence . 

 throughout their whole journey by boat and train they be 
 highly convivial , but they instinctively keep together . 
 Dr. Bull , who have always be the optimist of the party , 
 endeavour to persuade the other four that the whole 
 company could take the same hansom cab from Victoria ; 
 but this be over - rule , and they go in a four - wheeler , 
 with Dr. Bull on the box , singing . they finish their journey 
 at an hotel in Piccadilly Circus , so as to be close to the early 
 breakfast next morning in Leicester Square . yet even 
 then the adventure of the day be not entirely over . 
 Dr. Bull , discontent with the general proposal to go to bed , 
 have stroll out of the hotel at about eleven to see and taste 
 some of the beauty of London . twenty minute afterwards , 
 however , he come back and make quite a clamour in the hall . 
 Syme , who try at first to soothe he , be force at last 
 to listen to his communication with quite new attention . 

 " I tell you I have   see he ! " say Dr. Bull , with thick emphasis . 

 " Whom ? " ask Syme quickly . " not the President ? " 

 " not so bad as that , " say Dr. Bull , with unnecessary laughter , 
 " not so bad as that . I have   get he here . " 

 " get whom here ? " ask Syme impatiently . 

 " hairy man , " say the other lucidly , " man that use to be 
 hairy man - gogol . here he be , " and he pull forward by a 
 reluctant elbow the identical young man who five day before have 
 march out of the Council with thin red hair and a pale face , 
 the first of all the sham anarchist who have be expose . 

 " why do you worry with I ? " he cry . " you have expel I as a spy . " 

 " we be all spy ! " whisper Syme . 

 " we be all spy ! " shout Dr. Bull . " come and have a drink . " 

 next morning the battalion of the reunited six march stolidly 
 towards the hotel in Leicester Square . 

 " this be more cheerful , " say Dr. Bull ; " we be six man go 
 to ask one man what he mean . " 

 " I think it be a bit queerer than that , " say Syme . " I think 
 it be six man go to ask one man what they mean . " 

 they turn in silence into the Square , and though 
 the hotel be in the opposite corner , they see at once 
 the little balcony and a figure that look too big for it . 
 he be sit alone with bent head , pore over a newspaper . 
 but all his councillor , who have come to vote he down , 
 cross that Square as if they be watch out of heaven 
 by a hundred eye . 

 they have dispute much upon their policy , about whether they 
 should leave the unmasked Gogol without and begin diplomatically , 
 or whether they should bring he in and blow up the gunpowder at once . 
 the influence of Syme and Bull prevail for the latter course , 
 though the Secretary to the last ask they why they attack 
 Sunday so rashly . 

 " my reason be quite simple , " say Syme . " I attack he rashly 
 because I be afraid of he . " 

 they follow Syme up the dark stair in silence , and they all come 
 out simultaneously into the broad sunlight of the morning and the broad 
 sunlight of Sunday 's smile . 

 " Delightful ! " he say . " so pleased to see you all . 
 what an exquisite day it be . be the Czar dead ? " 

 the Secretary , who happen to be foremost , draw himself together 
 for a dignified outburst . 

 " no , sir , " he say sternly " there have be no massacre . 
 I bring you news of no such disgusting spectacle . " 

 " disgusting spectacle ? " repeat the President , with a bright , 
 inquire smile . " you mean Dr. Bull 's spectacle ? " 

 the Secretary choke for a moment , and the President go on with a sort 
 of smooth appeal - 

 " of course , we all have our opinion and even our eye , 
 but really to call they disgusting before the man himself - " 

 Dr. Bull tear off his spectacle and break they on the table . 

 " my spectacle be blackguardly , " he say , " but I be not . 
 look at my face . " 

 " I dare say it be the sort of face that grow on one , " say the President , 
 " in fact , it grow on you ; and who be I to quarrel with the wild fruit 
 upon the Tree of Life ? I dare say it will grow on I some day . " 

 " we have no time for tomfoolery , " say the Secretary , break in savagely . 
 " we have come to know what all this mean . who be you ? what be you ? 
 why do you get we all here ? do you know who and what we be ? 
 be you a half - witted man play the conspirator , or be you a clever 
 man play the fool ? answer I , I tell you . " 

 " candidate , " murmur Sunday , " be only require to answer 
 eight out of the seventeen question on the paper . 
 as far as I can make out , you want I to tell you what I be , 
 and what you be , and what this table be , and what this 
 Council be , and what this world be for all I know . 
 well , I will go so far as to rend the veil of one mystery . 
 if you want to know what you be , you be a set of highly 
 well - intentione young jackass . " 

 " and you , " say Syme , lean forward , " what be you ? " 

 " I ? what be I ? " roar the President , and he rise slowly to an incredible 
 height , like some enormous wave about to arch above they and break . 
 " you want to know what I be , do you ? Bull , you be a man of science . 
 Grub in the root of those tree and find out the truth about they . 
 Syme , you be a poet . stare at those morning cloud . 
 but I tell you this , that you will have find out the truth of 
 the last tree and the top - most cloud before the truth about I . 
 you will understand the sea , and I shall be still a riddle ; 
 you shall know what the star be , and not know what I be . 
 since the beginning of the world all man have hunt I like a wolf - 
 king and sage , and poet and lawgiver , all the church , 
 and all the philosophy . but I have never be catch yet , 
 and the sky will fall in the time I turn to bay . 
 I have give they a good run for their money , and I will now . " 

 before one of they could move , the monstrous man have swing himself 
 like some huge ourang - outang over the balustrade of the balcony . 
 yet before he drop he pull himself up again as on a horizontal bar , 
 and thrust his great chin over the edge of the balcony , say solemnly - 

 " there be one thing I will tell you though about who I be . 
 I be the man in the dark room , who make you all policeman . " 

 with that he fall from the balcony , bounce on the stone below like 
 a great ball of india - rubber , and go bound off towards the corner 
 of the Alhambra , where he hail a hansom - cab and spring inside it . 
 the six detective have be stand thunderstruck and livid in 
 the light of his last assertion ; but when he disappear into the cab , 
 Syme 's practical sens return to he , and leap over the balcony 
 so recklessly as almost to break his leg , he call another cab . 

 he and Bull spring into the cab together , the Professor and 
 the Inspector into another , while the Secretary and the late Gogol 
 scramble into a third just in time to pursue the fly Syme , 
 who be pursue the fly President . Sunday lead they a wild chase 
 towards the north - west , his cabman , evidently under the influence 
 of more than common inducement , urge the horse at breakneck speed . 
 but Syme be in no mood for delicacy , and he stand up 
 in his own cab shouting , " stop thief ! " until crowd run along 
 beside his cab , and policeman begin to stop and ask question . 
 all this have its influence upon the President 's cabman , 
 who begin to look dubious , and to slow down to a trot . 
 he open the trap to talk reasonably to his fare , and in so 
 do let the long whip droop over the front of the cab . 
 Sunday leant forward , seize it , and jerk it violently out 
 of the man 's hand . then stand up in front of the cab himself , 
 he lash the horse and roar aloud , so that they go down 
 the street like a fly storm . through street after street 
 and square after square go whirl this preposterous vehicle , 
 in which the fare be urge the horse and the driver try 
 desperately to stop it . the other three cab come after it 
  if the phrase be permissible of a cab   like pant hound . 
 shop and street shoot by like rattle arrow . 

 at the high ecstacy of speed , Sunday turn round 
 on the splashboard where he stand , and stick his great 
 grinning head out of the cab , with white hair whistle 
 in the wind , he make a horrible face at his pursuer , 
 like some colossal urchin . then raise his right hand swiftly , 
 he fling a ball of paper in Syme 's face and vanish . 
 Syme catch the thing while instinctively ward it off , 
 and discover that it consist of two crumpled paper . 
 one be address to himself , and the other to Dr. Bull , 
 with a very long , and it be to be fear partly ironical , 
 string of letter after his name . Dr. Bull 's address be , 
 at any rate , considerably long than his communication , 
 for the communication consist entirely of the word : - 


 " what about Martin Tupper now ? " 


 " what do the old maniac mean ? " ask Bull , star at the word . 
 " what do yours say , Syme ? " 

 Syme 's message be , at any rate , long , and run as follow : - 

 " no one would regret anything in the nature of an interference 
 by the Archdeacon more than I. I trust it will not come 
 to that . but , for the last time , where be your golosh ? 
 the thing be too bad , especially after what uncle say . " 

 the President 's cabman seem to be regain some control 
 over his horse , and the pursuer gain a little as they sweep 
 round into the Edgware Road . and here there occur what seem 
 to the ally a providential stoppage . traffic of every kind 
 be swerve to right or leave or stop , for down the long road 
 be come the unmistakable roar announce the fire - engine , 
 which in a few second go by like a brazen thunderbolt . 
 but quick as it go by , Sunday have bound out of his cab , 
 spring at the fire - engine , catch it , sling himself on to it , 
 and be see as he disappear in the noisy distance talk 
 to the astonished fireman with explanatory gesture . 

 " after he ! " howl Syme . " he can not   go astray now . 
 there be no mistaking a fire - engine . " 

 the three cabman , who have be stun for a moment , whip up 
 their horse and slightly decrease the distance between themselves 
 and their disappear prey . the President acknowledge this 
 proximity by come to the back of the car , bow repeatedly , 
 kiss his hand , and finally fling a neatly - fold note into 
 the bosom of Inspector Ratcliffe . when that gentleman open it , 
 not without impatience , he find it contain the word : - 


 " fly at once . the truth about your trouser - stretcher be know . - a FRIEND . " 


 the fire - engine have strike still far to the north , 
 into a region that they do not recognise ; and as it run 
 by a line of high railing shadow with tree , the six friend 
 be startle , but somewhat relieved , to see the President 
 leap from the fire - engine , though whether through another whim 
 or the increase protest of his entertainer they could not see . 
 before the three cab , however , could reach up to the spot , 
 he have go up the high railing like a huge grey cat , 
 toss himself over , and vanish in a darkness of leaf . 

 Syme with a furious gesture stop his cab , jump out , 
 and spring also to the escalade . when he have one leg over 
 the fence and his friend be follow , he turn a face 
 on they which shine quite pale in the shadow . 

 " what place can this be ? " he ask . " can it be the old devil 's house ? 
 I have   hear he have a house in North London . " 

 " all the well , " say the Secretary grimly , plant a foot in a foothold , 
 " we shall find he at home . " 

 " no , but it be not   that , " say Syme , knit his brow . 
 " I hear the most horrible noise , like devil laugh and sneeze 
 and blow their devilish nose ! " 

 " his dog bark , of course , " say the Secretary . 

 " why not say his black - beetle barking ! " say Syme furiously , 
 ' snail barking ! geranium barking ! do you ever hear a dog 
 bark like that ? " 

 he hold up his hand , and there come out of the thicket a long 
 growling roar that seem to get under the skin and freeze the flesh - 
 a low thrilling roar that make a throbbing in the air all about they . 

 " the dog of Sunday would be no ordinary dog , " say Gogol , and shudder . 

 Syme have jump down on the other side , but he still 
 stand listen impatiently . 

 " well , listen to that , " he say , " be that a dog - anybody 's dog ? " 

 there break upon their ear a hoarse scream as of thing protest 
 and clamour in sudden pain ; and then , far off like an echo , 
 what sound like a long nasal trumpet . 

 " well , his house ought to be hell ! " say the Secretary ; 
 " and if it be hell , I be go in ! " and he spring over the tall 
 railing almost with one swing . 

 the other follow . they break through a tangle of plant and shrub , 
 and come out on an open path . nothing be in sight , but Dr. Bull suddenly 
 strike his hand together . 

 " why , you asse , " he cry , " it be the Zoo ! " 

 as they be look round wildly for any trace of their wild quarry , 
 a keeper in uniform come run along the path with a man in plain clothe . 

 " have it come this way ? " gasp the keeper . 

 " have what ? " ask Syme . 

 " the elephant ! " cry the keeper . " an elephant have go mad 
 and run away ! " 

 " he have run away with an old gentleman , " say the other stranger breathlessly , 
 " a poor old gentleman with white hair ! " 

 " what sort of old gentleman ? " ask Syme , with great curiosity . 

 " a very large and fat old gentleman in light grey clothe , " 
 say the keeper eagerly . 

 " well , " say Syme , " if he be that particular kind of old gentleman , 
 if you be quite sure that he be a large and fat old gentleman in grey clothe , 
 you may take my word for it that the elephant have not run away with he . 
 he have run away with the elephant . the elephant be not make by God 
 that could run away with he if he do not consent to the elopement . 
 and , by thunder , there he be ! " 

 there be no doubt about it this time . clean across the space of grass , 
 about two hundred yard away , with a crowd scream and scamper vainly at 
 his heel , go a huge grey elephant at an awful stride , with his trunk throw 
 out as rigid as a ship 's bowsprit , and trumpet like the trumpet of doom . 
 on the back of the bellowing and plunging animal sit President Sunday with 
 all the placidity of a sultan , but goad the animal to a furious speed 
 with some sharp object in his hand . 

 " stop he ! " scream the populace . " he will be out of the gate ! " 

 " stop a landslide ! " say the keeper . " he be out of the gate ! " 

 and even as he speak , a final crash and roar of terror announce that the 
 great grey elephant have break out of the gate of the Zoological Gardens , 
 and be careen down Albany Street like a new and swift sort of omnibus . 

 " Great Lord ! " cry Bull , " I never know an elephant could go so fast . 
 well , it must be hansom - cab again if we be to keep he in sight . " 

 as they race along to the gate out of which the elephant 
 have vanish , Syme feel a glaring panorama of the strange animal 
 in the cage which they pass . afterwards he think it queer 
 that he should have see they so clearly . he remember especially 
 see pelican , with their preposterous , pendant throat . 
 he wonder why the pelican be the symbol of charity , except it 
 be that it want a good deal of charity to admire a pelican . 
 he remember a hornbill , which be simply a huge yellow beak with 
 a small bird tie on behind it . the whole give he a sensation , 
 the vividness of which he could not explain , that nature be always 
 make quite mysterious joke . Sunday have tell they that they 
 would understand he when they have understand the star . 
 he wonder whether even the archangel understand the hornbill . 

 the six unhappy detective fling themselves into cab and follow 
 the elephant share the terror which he spread through the long 
 stretch of the street . this time Sunday do not turn round , 
 but offer they the solid stretch of his unconscious back , 
 which madden they , if possible , more than his previous mockery . 
 just before they come to Baker Street , however , he be see to 
 throw something far up into the air , as a boy do a ball meaning 
 to catch it again . but at their rate of race it fall far behind , 
 just by the cab contain Gogol ; and in faint hope of a clue or for 
 some impulse unexplainable , he stop his cab so as to pick it up . 
 it be address to himself , and be quite a bulky parcel . 
 on examination , however , its bulk be find to consist of thirty - three 
 piece of paper of no value wrap one round the other . 
 when the last covering be tear away it reduce itself to a small 
 slip of paper , on which be write : - 


 " the word , I fancy , should be ' pink ' . " 


 the man once know as Gogol say nothing , but the movement of his hand 
 and foot be like those of a man urge a horse to renew effort . 

 through street after street , through district after district , 
 go the prodigy of the fly elephant , call crowd 
 to every window , and drive the traffic leave and right . 
 and still through all this insane publicity the three cab toil 
 after it , until they come to be regard as part of a procession , 
 and perhaps the advertisement of a circus . they go at such 
 a rate that distance be shorten beyond belief , and Syme see 
 the Albert Hall in Kensington when he think that he be still 
 in Paddington . the animal 's pace be even more fast and free 
 through the empty , aristocratic street of South Kensington , 
 and he finally head towards that part of the sky - line 
 where the enormous Wheel of Earl 's Court stand up in the sky . 
 the wheel grow large and large , till it fill heaven like 
 the wheel of star . 

 the beast outstrip the cab . they lose he round several corner , 
 and when they come to one of the gate of the Earl 's Court Exhibition they 
 find themselves finally block . in front of they be an enormous crowd ; 
 in the midst of it be an enormous elephant , heave and shudder as such 
 shapeless creature do . but the President have disappear . 

 " where have he go to ? " ask Syme , slip to the ground . 

 " Gentleman rush into the exhibition , sir ! " say an official 
 in a daze manner . then he add in an injure voice : 
 " funny gentleman , sir . ask I to hold his horse , 
 and give I this . " 

 he hold out with distaste a piece of fold paper , address : 
 " to the Secretary of the Central Anarchist Council . " 

 the Secretary , rag , rent it open , and find write inside it : - 


 " when the herring run a mile , 

 let the Secretary smile ; 

 when the herring try to fly , 

 let the Secretary die . 
  Rustic Proverb . " 


 " why the eternal crikey , " begin the Secretary , " do you let the man in ? 
 do people commonly come to your exhibition riding on mad elephant ? do - " 

 " look ! " shout Syme suddenly . " look over there ! " 

 " look at what ? " ask the Secretary savagely . 

 " look at the captive balloon ! " say Syme , and point in a frenzy . 

 " why the blaze should I look at a captive balloon ? ' 
 demand the Secretary . " what be there queer about 
 a captive balloon ? " 

 " nothing , " say Syme , " except that it be not   captive ! ' 

 they all turn their eye to where the balloon swing and swell 
 above the exhibition on a string , like a child 's balloon . 
 a second afterwards the string come in two just under the car , 
 and the balloon , break loose , float away with the freedom 
 of a soap bubble . 

 " ten thousand devil ! " shriek the Secretary . " he be get into it ! " 
 and he shake his fist at the sky . 

 the balloon , bear by some chance wind , come right above they , 
 and they could see the great white head of the President peer 
 over the side and look benevolently down on they . 

 " God bless my soul ! " say the Professor with the elderly manner that 
 he could never disconnect from his bleached beard and parchment face . 
 " God bless my soul ! I seem to fancy that something fall on the top 
 of my hat ! " 

 he put up a trembling hand and take from that shelf a piece of twisted paper , 
 which he open absently only to find it inscribe with a true lover 's 
 knot and , the word : - 

 " your beauty have not leave I indifferent . - from little SNOWDROP . 
 " 

 there be a short silence , and then Syme say , bite his beard - 

 " I be not beat yet . the blasted thing must come down somewhere . 
 let us follow it ! " 



  CHAPTER XIV 

  the SIX philosopher 


 across green field , and break through bloom hedge , toil six 
 draggle detective , about five mile out of London . the optimist 
 of the party have at first propose that they should follow the balloon 
 across South England in hansom - cab . but he be ultimately convince 
 of the persistent refusal of the balloon to follow the road , 
 and the still more persistent refusal of the cabman to follow the balloon . 
 consequently the tireless though exasperate traveller break through 
 black thicket and plough through plough field till each be 
 turn into a figure too outrageous to be mistake for a tramp . 
 those green hill of Surrey see the final collapse and tragedy 
 of the admirable light grey suit in which Syme have set out from 
 Saffron Park . his silk hat be break over his nose by a swing bough , 
 his coat - tail be tear to the shoulder by arrest thorn , 
 the clay of England be splash up to his collar ; but he still carry 
 his yellow beard forward with a silent and furious determination , 
 and his eye be still fix on that float ball of gas , which in 
 the full flush of sunset seem colour like a sunset cloud . 

 " after all , " he say , " it be very beautiful ! " 

 " it be singularly and strangely beautiful ! " say the Professor . " I wish 
 the beastly gas - bag would burst ! " 

 " no , " say Dr. Bull , " I hope it will not . it might hurt the old boy . " 

 " hurt he ! " say the vindictive Professor , " hurt he ! 
 not as much as I would hurt he if I could get up with he . 
 Little Snowdrop ! " 

 " I do not   want he hurt , somehow , " say Dr. Bull . 

 " what ! " cry the Secretary bitterly . " do you believe 
 all that tale about his be our man in the dark room ? 
 Sunday would say he be anybody . " 

 " I do not   know whether I believe it or not , " say Dr. Bull . " but it be not 
 that that I mean . I can not   wish old Sunday 's balloon to burst because - " 

 " well , " say Syme impatiently , " because ? " 

 " well , because he be so jolly like a balloon himself , " 
 say Dr. Bull desperately . " I do not   understand a word of all that 
 idea of his be the same man who give we all our blue card . 
 it seem to make everything nonsense . but I do not   care who know it , 
 I always have a sympathy for old Sunday himself , wicke as he be . 
 just as if he be a great bounce baby . how can I explain what my 
 queer sympathy be ? it do not   prevent my fighting he like hell ! 
 shall I make it clear if I say that I like he because he be so fat ? " 

 " you will not , " say the Secretary . 

 " I have   get it now , " cry Bull , " it be because he be so fat and so light . 
 just like a balloon . we always think of fat people as heavy , 
 but he could have dance against a sylph . I see now what I mean . 
 moderate strength be show in violence , supreme strength be show in levity . 
 it be like the old speculation - what would happen if an elephant could 
 leap up in the sky like a grasshopper ? " 

 " our elephant , " say Syme , look upwards , " have leap into the sky 
 like a grasshopper . " 

 " and somehow , " conclude Bull , " that be why I can not   help like 
 old Sunday . no , it be not an admiration of force , or any silly thing 
 like that . there be a kind of gaiety in the thing , as if he be burst 
 with some good news . have not   you sometimes feel it on a spring day ? 
 you know nature play trick , but somehow that day prove they be 
 good - natured trick . I never read the Bible myself , but that part 
 they laugh at be literal truth , ' why leap ye , ye high hill ? ' 
 the hill do leap - -at least , they try to .... why do I like Sunday ? 
 . . . how can I tell you ? . . . because he be such a Bounder . " 

 there be a long silence , and then the Secretary say in 
 a curious , strained voice - 

 " you do not know Sunday at all . perhaps it be because you be 
 well than I , and do not know hell . I be a fierce fellow , 
 and a trifle morbid from the first . the man who sit in darkness , 
 and who choose we all , choose I because I have all the crazy look 
 of a conspirator - because my smile go crooked , and my eye 
 be gloomy , even when I smile . but there must have be something 
 in I that answer to the nerve in all these anarchic man . 
 for when I first see Sunday he express to I , not your airy vitality , 
 but something both gross and sad in the Nature of thing . I find he 
 smoking in a twilight room , a room with brown blind down , infinitely more 
 depressing than the genial darkness in which our master live . 
 he sit there on a bench , a huge heap of a man , dark and out of shape . 
 he listen to all my word without speak or even stir . 
 I pour out my most passionate appeal , and ask my most 
 eloquent question . then , after a long silence , the thing begin 
 to shake , and I think it be shake by some secret malady . 
 it shake like a loathsome and live jelly . it remind I of everything 
 I have ever read about the base body that be the origin of life - 
 the deep sea lump and protoplasm . it seem like the final 
 form of matter , the most shapeless and the most shameful . 
 I could only tell myself , from its shuddering , that it be something 
 at least that such a monster could be miserable . and then it break 
 upon I that the bestial mountain be shake with a lonely laughter , 
 and the laughter be at I . do you ask I to forgive he that ? 
 it be no small thing to be laugh at by something at once low 
 and strong than oneself . " 

 " surely you fellow be exaggerate wildly , " cut in the clear voice 
 of Inspector Ratcliffe . " President Sunday be a terrible fellow 
 for one 's intellect , but he be not such a Barnum 's freak physically 
 as you make out . he receive I in an ordinary office , in a grey 
 check coat , in broad daylight . he talk to I in an ordinary way . 
 but I will tell you what be a trifle creepy about Sunday . his room 
 be neat , his clothe be neat , everything seem in order ; but he be 
 absent - minded . sometimes his great bright eye go quite blind . 
 for hour he forget that you be there . now absent - mindedness be just 
 a bit too awful in a bad man . we think of a wicked man as vigilant . 
 we can not   think of a wicked man who be honestly and sincerely dreamy , 
 because we dare not   think of a wicked man alone with himself . 
 an absentminded man mean a good - natured man . it mean a man who , 
 if he happen to see you , will apologise . but how will you bear 
 an absentminded man who , if he happen to see you , will kill you ? 
 that be what try the nerve , abstraction combine with cruelty . 
 man have feel it sometimes when they go through wild forest , 
 and feel that the animal there be at once innocent and pitiless . 
 they might ignore or slay . how would you like to pass ten mortal 
 hour in a parlour with an absent - minded tiger ? " 

 " and what do you think of Sunday , Gogol ? " ask Syme . 

 " I do not   think of Sunday on principle , " say Gogol simply , 
 " any more than I stare at the sun at noonday . " 

 " well , that be a point of view , " say Syme thoughtfully . 
 " what do you say , Professor ? " 

 the Professor be walk with bent head and trail stick , 
 and he do not answer at all . 

 " wake up , Professor ! " say Syme genially . " tell we what you 
 think of Sunday . " 

 the Professor speak at last very slowly . 

 " I think something , " he say , " that I can not say clearly . 
 or , rather , I think something that I can not even think clearly . 
 but it be something like this . my early life , as you know , 
 be a bit too large and loose . 

 well , when I see Sunday 's face I think it be too large - 
 everybody do , but I also think it be too loose . the face 
 be so big , that one could not   focus it or make it a face at all . 
 the eye be so far away from the nose , that it be not   an eye . 
 the mouth be so much by itself , that one have to think of it by itself . 
 the whole thing be too hard to explain . " 

 he pause for a little , still trail his stick , and then go on - 

 " but put it this way . walk up a road at night , 
 I have see a lamp and a lighted window and a cloud 
 make together a most complete and unmistakable face . 
 if anyone in heaven have that face I shall know he again . 
 yet when I walk a little far I find that there be no face , 
 that the window be ten yard away , the lamp ten hundred yard , 
 the cloud beyond the world . well , Sunday 's face escape I ; 
 it run away to right and leave , as such chance picture run away . 
 and so his face have make I , somehow , doubt whether there be any face . 
 I do not   know whether your face , Bull , be a face or a combination 
 in perspective . perhaps one black disc of your beastly glass 
 be quite close and another fifty mile away . oh , the doubt 
 of a materialist be not worth a dump . Sunday have teach I 
 the last and the bad doubt , the doubt of a spiritualist . 
 I be a Buddhist , I suppose ; and Buddhism be not a creed , it be a doubt . 
 my poor dear Bull , I do not believe that you really have a face . 
 I have not faith enough to believe in matter . " 

 Syme 's eye be still fix upon the errant orb , which , redden in 
 the evening light , look like some rosy and more innocent world . 

 " have you notice an odd thing , " he say , " about all your description ? 
 each man of you find Sunday quite different , yet each man of you 
 can only find one thing to compare he to - the universe itself . 
 Bull find he like the earth in spring , Gogol like the sun at noonday . 
 the Secretary be remind of the shapeless protoplasm , 
 and the Inspector of the carelessness of virgin forest . 
 the Professor say he be like a change landscape . this be queer , 
 but it be queerer still that I also have have my odd notion about 
 the President , and I also find that I think of Sunday as I think 
 of the whole world . " 

 " get on a little fast , Syme , " say Bull ; " never mind the balloon . " 

 " when I first see Sunday , " say Syme slowly , " I only see his back ; 
 and when I see his back , I know he be the bad man in the world . 
 his neck and shoulder be brutal , like those of some apish god . 
 his head have a stoop that be hardly human , like the stoop of an ox . 
 in fact , I have at once the revolting fancy that this be not a man at all , 
 but a beast dress up in man 's clothe . " 

 " get on , " say Dr. Bull . 

 " and then the queer thing happen . I have see his back 
 from the street , as he sit in the balcony . then I enter 
 the hotel , and come round the other side of he , see his face 
 in the sunlight . his face frighten I , as it do everyone ; 
 but not because it be brutal , not because it be evil . 
 on the contrary , it frighten I because it be so beautiful , 
 because it be so good . " 

 " Syme , " exclaim the Secretary , " be you ill ? " 

 " it be like the face of some ancient archangel , judge justly 
 after heroic war . there be laughter in the eye , and in 
 the mouth honour and sorrow . there be the same white hair , 
 the same great , grey - clothe shoulder that I have see from behind . 
 but when I see he from behind I be certain he be an animal , 
 and when I see he in front I know he be a god . " 

 " Pan , " say the Professor dreamily , " be a god and an animal . " 

 " then , and again and always , " go on Syme like a man talk 
 to himself , " that have be for I the mystery of Sunday , and it 
 be also the mystery of the world . when I see the horrible back , 
 I be sure the noble face be but a mask . when I see the face 
 but for an instant , I know the back be only a jest . 
 Bad be so bad , that we can not but think good an accident ; 
 good be so good , that we feel certain that evil could be explain . 
 but the whole come to a kind of crest yesterday when I race 
 Sunday for the cab , and be just behind he all the way . " 

 " have you time for think then ? " ask Ratcliffe . 

 " Time , " reply Syme , " for one outrageous thought . I be suddenly 
 possess with the idea that the blind , blank back of his head 
 really be his face - an awful , eyeless face star at I ! 
 and I fancy that the figure run in front of I be really 
 a figure run backwards , and dance as he run . " 

 " horrible ! " say Dr. Bull , and shudder . 

 " horrible be not the word , " say Syme . " it be exactly the bad 
 instant of my life . and yet ten minute afterwards , when he put 
 his head out of the cab and make a grimace like a gargoyle , 
 I know that he be only like a father play hide - and - seek 
 with his child . " 

 " it be a long game , " say the Secretary , and frown at his broken boot . 

 " listen to I , " cry Syme with extraordinary emphasis . 
 " shall I tell you the secret of the whole world ? it be that we 
 have only know the back of the world . we see everything 
 from behind , and it look brutal . that be not a tree , but the back 
 of a tree . that be not a cloud , but the back of a cloud . 
 can not you see that everything be stoop and hide a face ? 
 if we could only get round in front - " 

 " look ! " cry out Bull clamorously , " the balloon be come down ! " 

 there be no need to cry out to Syme , who have never take his eye off it . 
 he see the great luminous globe suddenly stagg in the sky , right itself , 
 and then sink slowly behind the tree like a set sun . 

 the man call Gogol , who have hardly speak through all their weary travel , 
 suddenly throw up his hand like a lost spirit . 

 " he be dead ! " he cry . " and now I know he be my friend - 
 my friend in the dark ! " 

 " dead ! " snort the Secretary . " you will not find he dead easily . 
 if he have be tip out of the car , we shall find he roll 
 as a colt roll in a field , kick his leg for fun . " 

 " clash his hoof , " say the Professor . " the colt do , 
 and so do Pan . " 

 " Pan again ! " say Dr. Bull irritably . " you seem to think Pan be everything . " 

 " so he be , " say the Professor , " in Greek . he mean everything . " 

 " do not   forget , " say the Secretary , look down , " that he also mean Panic . " 

 Syme have stand without hear any of the exclamation . 

 " it fall over there , " he say shortly . " let we follow it ! " 

 then he add with an indescribable gesture - 

 " oh , if he have cheat we all by get kill ! 
 it would be like one of his lark . " 

 he stride off towards the distant tree with a new energy , 
 his rag and ribbon flutter in the wind . the other 
 follow he in a more footsore and dubious manner . 
 and almost at the same moment all six man realise that they 
 be not alone in the little field . 

 across the square of turf a tall man be advance 
 towards they , lean on a strange long staff like a sceptre . 
 he be clothe in a fine but old - fashioned suit with knee - breech ; 
 its colour be that shade between blue , violet and grey 
 which can be see in certain shadow of the woodland . 
 his hair be whitish grey , and at the first glance , take along 
 with his knee - breech , look as if it be powdered . 
 his advance be very quiet ; but for the silver frost upon his head , 
 he might have be one to the shadow of the wood . 

 " gentleman , " he say , " my master have a carriage wait for you 
 in the road just by . " 

 " who be your master ? " ask Syme , stand quite still . 

 " I be tell you know his name , " say the man respectfully . 

 there be a silence , and then the Secretary say - 

 " where be this carriage ? " 

 " it have be wait only a few moment , " say the stranger . 
 " my master have only just come home . " 

 Syme look left and right upon the patch of green field 
 in which he find himself . the hedge be ordinary hedge , 
 the tree seem ordinary tree ; yet he feel like a man 
 entrap in fairyland . 

 he look the mysterious ambassador up and down , but he could 
 discover nothing except that the man 's coat be the exact colour 
 of the purple shadow , and that the man 's face be the exact 
 colour of the red and brown and golden sky . 

 " show we the place , " Syme say briefly , and without a word the man 
 in the violet coat turn his back and walk towards a gap in the hedge , 
 which let in suddenly the light of a white road . 

 as the six wanderer break out upon this thoroughfare , they see 
 the white road block by what look like a long row of carriage , 
 such a row of carriage as might close the approach to some house 
 in Park Lane . along the side of these carriage stand a rank 
 of splendid servant , all dress in the grey - blue uniform , 
 and all have a certain quality of stateliness and freedom 
 which would not commonly belong to the servant of a gentleman , 
 but rather to the official and ambassador of a great king . 
 there be no less than six carriage wait , one for each 
 of the tattered and miserable band . all the attendant 
  as if in court - dress   wear sword , and as each man crawl 
 into his carriage they draw they , and salute with a sudden 
 blaze of steel . 

 " what can it all mean ? " ask Bull of Syme as they separate . 
 " be this another joke of Sunday 's ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Syme as he sink wearily back in the cushion 
 of his carriage ; " but if it be , it be one of the joke you talk about . 
 it be a good - natured one . " 

 the six adventurer have pass through many adventure , 
 but not one have carry they so utterly off their foot as this 
 last adventure of comfort . they have all become inure to thing 
 go roughly ; but thing suddenly go smoothly swamp they . 
 they could not even feebly imagine what the carriage be ; 
 it be enough for they to know that they be carriage , 
 and carriage with cushion . they could not conceive who the old 
 man be who have lead they ; but it be quite enough that he have 
 certainly lead they to the carriage . 

 Syme drive through a drift darkness of tree in utter abandonment . 
 it be typical of he that while he have carry his bearded chin forward 
 fiercely so long as anything could be do , when the whole business be 
 take out of his hand he fall back on the cushion in a frank collapse . 

 very gradually and very vaguely he realise into what rich road 
 the carriage be carry he . he see that they pass the stone 
 gate of what might have be a park , that they begin gradually 
 to climb a hill which , while woode on both side , be somewhat more 
 orderly than a forest . then there begin to grow upon he , as upon 
 a man slowly wake from a healthy sleep , a pleasure in everything . 
 he feel that the hedge be what hedge should be , live wall ; 
 that a hedge be like a human army , discipline , but all the more alive . 
 he see high elm behind the hedge , and vaguely think how happy boy 
 would be climb there . then his carriage take a turn of the path , 
 and he see suddenly and quietly , like a long , low , sunset cloud , 
 a long , low house , mellow in the mild light of sunset . 
 all the six friend compare note afterwards and quarrel ; 
 but they all agree that in some unaccountable way the place remind 
 they of their boyhood . it be either this elm - top or that crooked path , 
 it be either this scrap of orchard or that shape of a window ; 
 but each man of they declare that he could remember this place 
 before he could remember his mother . 

 when the carriage eventually roll up to a large , low , cavernous gateway , 
 another man in the same uniform , but wear a silver star on the grey 
 breast of his coat , come out to meet they . this impressive person say 
 to the bewildered Syme - 

 " Refreshments be provide for you in your room . " 

 Syme , under the influence of the same mesmeric sleep of amazement , 
 go up the large oaken stair after the respectful attendant . 
 he enter a splendid suite of apartment that seem to be design 
 specially for he . he walk up to a long mirror with the ordinary 
 instinct of his class , to pull his tie straight or to smooth his hair ; 
 and there he see the frightful figure that he be - blood run 
 down his face from where the bough have strike he , his hair stand 
 out like yellow rag of rank grass , his clothe tear into long , 
 waver tatter . at once the whole enigma spring up , simply as 
 the question of how he have get there , and how he be to get out again . 
 exactly at the same moment a man in blue , who have be appoint 
 as his valet , say very solemnly - 

 " I have put out your clothe , sir . " 

 " clothe ! " say Syme sardonically . " I have no clothe except these , " 
 and he lift two long strip of his frock - coat in fascinating festoon , 
 and make a movement as if to twirl like a ballet girl . 

 " my master ask I to say , " say the attendant , that there be a fancy 
 dress ball to - night , and that he desire you to put on the costume 
 that I have lay out . meanwhile , sir , there be a bottle of Burgundy 
 and some cold pheasant , which he hop you will not refuse , as it 
 be some hour before supper . " 

 " cold pheasant be a good thing , " say Syme reflectively , 
 " and Burgundy be a spanking good thing . but really I do not want 
 either of they so much as I want to know what the devil all 
 this mean , and what sort of costume you have get lay out for I . 
 where be it ? " 

 the servant lift off a kind of ottoman a long peacock - blue drapery , 
 rather of the nature of a domino , on the front of which be emblazon 
 a large golden sun , and which be splash here and there with flame 
 star and crescent . 

 " you be to be dress as Thursday , sir , " say the valet somewhat affably . 

 " dress as Thursday ! " say Syme in meditation . " it do not 
 sound a warm costume . " 

 " oh , yes , sir , " say the other eagerly , " the Thursday costume 
 be quite warm , sir . it fasten up to the chin . " 

 " well , I do not   understand anything , " say Syme , sigh . " I have be use 
 so long to uncomfortable adventure that comfortable adventure knock I out . 
 still , I may be allow to ask why I should be particularly like Thursday 
 in a green frock spot all over with the sun and moon . those orb , I think , 
 shine on other day . I once see the moon on Tuesday , I remember . " 

 " Beg pardon , sir , " say the valet , " Bible also provide for you , " 
 and with a respectful and rigid finger he point out a passage 
 in the first chapter of Genesis . Syme read it wonder . 
 it be that in which the fourth day of the week be associate 
 with the creation of the sun and moon . here , however , they reckon 
 from a Christian Sunday . 

 " this be get wilder and wilder , " say Syme , as he sit down in a chair . 
 " who be these people who provide cold pheasant and Burgundy , and green 
 clothe and bible ? do they provide everything ? " 

 " yes , sir , everything , " say the attendant gravely . 
 " shall I help you on with your costume ? " 

 " oh , hitch the bally thing on ! " say Syme impatiently . 

 but though he affect to despise the mummery , he feel a curious freedom 
 and naturalness in his movement as the blue and gold garment fall about he ; 
 and when he find that he have to wear a sword , it stir a boyish dream . 
 as he pass out of the room he fling the fold across his shoulder with 
 a gesture , his sword stand out at an angle , and he have all the swagger 
 of a troubadour . for these disguise do not disguise , but reveal . 



  CHAPTER XV 

  the ACCUSER 


 as Syme stride along the corridor he see the Secretary stand at 
 the top of a great flight of stair . the man have never look so noble . 
 he be drape in a long robe of starless black , down the centre of which 
 fall a band or broad stripe of pure white , like a single shaft of light . 
 the whole look like some very severe ecclesiastical vestment . 
 there be no need for Syme to search his memory or the Bible in order 
 to remember that the first day of creation mark the mere creation 
 of light out of darkness . the vestment itself would alone have suggest 
 the symbol ; and Syme feel also how perfectly this pattern of pure 
 white and black express the soul of the pale and austere Secretary , 
 with his inhuman veracity and his cold frenzy , which make he so easily 
 make war on the anarchist , and yet so easily pass for one of they . 
 Syme be scarcely surprised to notice that , amid all the ease and 
 hospitality of their new surrounding , this man 's eye be still stern . 
 no smell of ale or orchard could make the Secretary cease to ask 
 a reasonable question . 

 if Syme have be able to see himself , he would have realise 
 that he , too , seem to be for the first time himself and no one else . 
 for if the Secretary stand for that philosopher who love the original 
 and formless light , Syme be a type of the poet who seek always 
 to make the light in special shape , to split it up into sun and star . 
 the philosopher may sometimes love the infinite ; the poet always love 
 the finite . for he the great moment be not the creation of light , 
 but the creation of the sun and moon . 

 as they descend the broad stair together they overtake Ratcliffe , 
 who be clothe in spring green like a huntsman , and the pattern 
 upon whose garment be a green tangle of tree . for he stand 
 for that third day on which the earth and green thing be make , 
 and his square , sensible face , with its not unfriendly cynicism , 
 seem appropriate enough to it . 

 they be lead out of another broad and low gateway into a very large 
 old english garden , full of torch and bonfire , by the break light 
 of which a vast carnival of people be dance in motley dress . 
 Syme seem to see every shape in Nature imitate in some crazy costume . 
 there be a man dress as a windmill with enormous sail , a man dress 
 as an elephant , a man dress as a balloon ; the two last , together , 
 seem to keep the thread of their farcical adventure . Syme even see , 
 with a queer thrill , one dancer dress like an enormous hornbill , 
 with a beak twice as big as himself - the queer bird which have fix itself 
 on his fancy like a live question while he be rush down the long road at 
 the Zoological Gardens . there be a thousand other such object , however . 
 there be a dancing lamp - post , a dancing apple tree , a dancing ship . 
 one would have think that the untamable tune of some mad musician have 
 set all the common object of field and street dance an eternal jig . 
 and long afterwards , when Syme be middle - aged and at rest , he could 
 never see one of those particular object - a lamppost , or an apple tree , 
 or a windmill - without think that it be a stray reveller from 
 that revel of masquerade . 

 on one side of this lawn , alive with dancer , be a sort of green bank , 
 like the terrace in such old - fashioned garden . 

 along this , in a kind of crescent , stand seven great chair , the throne 
 of the seven day . Gogol and Dr. Bull be already in their seat ; 
 the Professor be just mount to his . Gogol , or Tuesday , 
 have his simplicity well symbolise by a dress design upon 
 the division of the water , a dress that separate upon his forehead 
 and fall to his foot , grey and silver , like a sheet of rain . 
 the Professor , whose day be that on which the bird and fish - 
 the ruder form of life - be create , have a dress of dim purple , 
 over which sprawl goggle - eyed fish and outrageous tropical bird , 
 the union in he of unfathomable fancy and of doubt . 
 Dr. Bull , the last day of Creation , wear a coat cover with 
 heraldic animal in red and gold , and on his crest a man rampant . 
 he lie back in his chair with a broad smile , the picture of an 
 optimist in his element . 

 one by one the wanderer ascend the bank and sit in their strange seat . 
 as each of they sit down a roar of enthusiasm rise from the carnival , 
 such as that with which crowd receive king . cup be clash and 
 torch shake , and feather hat fling in the air . the man for whom 
 these throne be reserve be man crown with some extraordinary laurel . 
 but the central chair be empty . 

 Syme be on the left hand of it and the Secretary on the right . 
 the Secretary look across the empty throne at Syme , and say , 
 compress his lip - 

 " we do not know yet that he be not dead in a field . " 

 almost as Syme hear the word , he see on the sea of human face 
 in front of he a frightful and beautiful alteration , as if heaven 
 have open behind his head . but Sunday have only pass silently 
 along the front like a shadow , and have sit in the central seat . 
 he be drape plainly , in a pure and terrible white , and his hair 
 be like a silver flame on his forehead . 

 for a long time - it seem for hour - that huge masquerade of mankind 
 sway and stamp in front of they to march and exultant music . 
 every couple dancing seem a separate romance ; it might be 
 a fairy dance with a pillar - box , or a peasant girl dancing 
 with the moon ; but in each case it be , somehow , as absurd 
 as Alice in Wonderland , yet as grave and kind as a love story . 
 at last , however , the thick crowd begin to thin itself . 
 couple stroll away into the garden - walk , or begin to drift 
 towards that end of the building where stand smoke , in huge pot 
 like fish - kettle , some hot and scented mixture of old ale or wine . 
 above all these , upon a sort of black framework on the roof 
 of the house , roar in its iron basket a gigantic bonfire , 
 which light up the land for mile . it fling the homely effect 
 of firelight over the face of vast forest of grey or brown , 
 and it seem to fill with warmth even the emptiness of upper night . 
 yet this also , after a time , be allow to grow fainter ; the dim 
 group gather more and more round the great cauldron , or pass , 
 laugh and clattering , into the inner passage of that ancient house . 
 soon there be only some ten loiterer in the garden ; soon only four . 
 finally the last stray merry - maker run into the house whooping to 
 his companion . the fire fade , and the slow , strong star come out . 
 and the seven strange man be leave alone , like seven stone statue 
 on their chair of stone . not one of they have speak a word . 

 they seem in no haste to do so , but hear in silence the hum 
 of insect and the distant song of one bird . then Sunday speak , 
 but so dreamily that he might have be continue a conversation 
 rather than begin one . 

 " we will eat and drink later , " he say . " let we remain together a little , 
 we who have love each other so sadly , and have fight so long . 
 I seem to remember only century of heroic war , in which you 
 be always hero - epic on epic , iliad on iliad , and you always 
 brother in arm . whether it be but recently   for time be 
 nothing , or at the beginning of the world , I send you out to war . 
 I sit in the darkness , where there be not any create thing , and to 
 you I be only a voice command valour and an unnatural virtue . 
 you hear the voice in the dark , and you never hear it again . 
 the sun in heaven deny it , the earth and sky deny it , 
 all human wisdom deny it . and when I meet you in the daylight I 
 deny it myself . " 

 Syme stir sharply in his seat , but otherwise there be silence , 
 and the incomprehensible go on . 

 " but you be man . you do not forget your secret honour , 
 though the whole cosmos turn an engine of torture 
 to tear it out of you . I know how near you be to hell . 
 I know how you , Thursday , cross sword with King Satan , 
 and how you , Wednesday , name I in the hour without hope . " 

 there be complete silence in the starlit garden , and then 
 the black - browed Secretary , implacable , turn in his chair 
 towards Sunday , and say in a harsh voice - 

 " who and what be you ? " 

 " I be the Sabbath , " say the other without move . 
 " I be the peace of God . " 

 the Secretary start up , and stand crush his costly robe in his hand . 

 " I know what you mean , " he cry , " and it be exactly that that I can not 
 forgive you . I know you be contentment , optimism , what do they call 
 the thing , an ultimate reconciliation . well , I be not reconcile . 
 if you be the man in the dark room , why be you also Sunday , 
 an offense to the sunlight ? if you be from the first our 
 father and our friend , why be you also our great enemy ? 
 we weep , we flee in terror ; the iron enter into our soul - 
 and you be the peace of God ! oh , I can forgive God his anger , 
 though it destroy nation ; but I can not forgive he his peace . " 

 Sunday answer not a word , but very slowly he turn his face of stone 
 upon Syme as if ask a question . 

 " no , " say Syme , " I do not feel fierce like that . I be grateful to you , 
 not only for wine and hospitality here , but for many a fine scamper and 
 free fight . but I should like to know . my soul and heart be as happy 
 and quiet here as this old garden , but my reason be still cry out . 
 I should like to know . " 

 Sunday look at Ratcliffe , whose clear voice say - 

 " it seem so silly that you should have be on both side 
 and fight yourself . " 

 Bull say - 

 " I understand nothing , but I be happy . in fact , I be go to sleep . " 

 " I be not happy , " say the Professor with his head in his hand , 
 " because I do not understand . you let I stray a little too 
 near to hell . " 

 and then Gogol say , with the absolute simplicity of a child - 

 " I wish I know why I be hurt so much . " 

 still Sunday say nothing , but only sit with his mighty chin upon his hand , 
 and gaze at the distance . then at last he say - 

 " I have hear your complaint in order . and here , I think , 
 come another to complain , and we will hear he also . " 

 the fall fire in the great cresset throw a last long gleam , 
 like a bar of burn gold , across the dim grass . 
 against this fiery band be outline in utter black the advance 
 leg of a black - clothe figure . he seem to have a fine close suit 
 with knee - breech such as that which be wear by the servant 
 of the house , only that it be not blue , but of this absolute sable . 
 he have , like the servant , a kind of word by his side . 
 it be only when he have come quite close to the crescent of 
 the seven and fling up his face to look at they , that Syme see , 
 with thunder - strike clearness , that the face be the broad , 
 almost ape - like face of his old friend Gregory , with its rank 
 red hair and its insulting smile . 

 " Gregory ! " gasp Syme , half - rise from his seat . 
 " why , this be the real anarchist ! " 

 " yes , " say Gregory , with a great and dangerous restraint , 
 " I be the real anarchist . " 

 " ' now there be a day , ' " murmur Bull , who seem really 
 to have fall asleep , " ' when the son of God come to present 
 themselves before the Lord , and Satan come also among they . ' " 

 " you be right , " say Gregory , and gaze all round . " I be a destroyer . 
 I would destroy the world if I could . " 

 a sense of a pathos far under the earth stir up in Syme , 
 and he speak brokenly and without sequence . 

 " oh , most unhappy man , " he cry , " try to be happy ! 
 you have red hair like your sister . " 

 " my red hair , like red flame , shall burn up the world , " 
 say Gregory . " I think I hat everything more than common 
 man can hate anything ; but I find that I do not hate everything 
 so much as I hate you ! " 

 " I never hat you , " say Syme very sadly . 

 then out of this unintelligible creature the last thunder break . 

 " you ! " he cry . " you never hat because you never live . 
 I know what you be all of you , from first to last - 
 you be the people in power ! you be the police - the great fat , 
 smile man in blue and button ! you be the Law , and you have 
 never be break . but be there a free soul alive that do 
 not long to break you , only because you have never be break ? 
 we in revolt talk all kind of nonsense doubtless about this 
 crime or that crime of the Government . it be all folly ! 
 the only crime of the Government be that it govern . 
 the unpardonable sin of the supreme power be that it be supreme . 
 I do not curse you for be cruel . I do not curse you 
  though I might   for be kind . I curse you for be safe ! 
 you sit in your chair of stone , and have never come down from they . 
 you be the seven angel of heaven , and you have have no trouble . 
 oh , I could forgive you everything , you that rule all mankind , 
 if I could feel for once that you have suffer for one hour 
 a real agony such as I - " 

 Syme spring to his foot , shake from head to foot . 

 " I see everything , " he cry , " everything that there be . 
 why do each thing on the earth war against each other thing ? 
 why do each small thing in the world have to fight against 
 the world itself ? why do a fly have to fight the whole universe ? 
 why do a dandelion have to fight the whole universe ? 
 for the same reason that I have to be alone in the dreadful 
 Council of the day . so that each thing that obey law 
 may have the glory and isolation of the anarchist . 
 so that each man fight for order may be as brave and good 
 a man as the dynamiter . so that the real lie of Satan may be 
 fling back in the face of this blasphemer , so that by tear 
 and torture we may earn the right to say to this man , ' you lie ! ' 
 no agony can be too great to buy the right to say to this accuser , 
 ' we also have suffer . ' 

 " it be not true that we have never be break . we have be 
 break upon the wheel . it be not true that we have never 
 descend from these throne . we have descend into hell . 
 we be complain of unforgettable misery even at the very moment 
 when this man enter insolently to accuse we of happiness . 
 I repel the slander ; we have not be happy . I can answer 
 for every one of the great guard of Law whom he have accuse . 
 at least - " 

 he have turn his eye so as to see suddenly the great face of Sunday , 
 which wear a strange smile . 

 " have you , " he cry in a dreadful voice , " have you ever suffer ? " 

 as he gaze , the great face grow to an awful size , grow large than 
 the colossal mask of Memnon , which have make he scream as a child . 
 it grow large and large , fill the whole sky ; then everything go black . 
 only in the blackness before it entirely destroy his brain he seem to hear 
 a distant voice say a commonplace text that he have hear somewhere , 
 " can ye drink of the cup that I drink of ? " 

      


 when man in book awake from a vision , they commonly find 
 themselves in some place in which they might have fall asleep ; 
 they yawn in a chair , or lift themselves with bruise limb 
 from a field . Syme 's experience be something much more 
 psychologically strange if there be indeed anything unreal , 
 in the earthly sense , about the thing he have go through . 
 for while he could always remember afterwards that he have 
 swoon before the face of Sunday , he could not remember have 
 ever come to at all . he could only remember that gradually 
 and naturally he know that he be and have be walk along 
 a country lane with an easy and conversational companion . 
 that companion have be a part of his recent drama ; it be 
 the red - haired poet Gregory . they be walk like old friend , 
 and be in the middle of a conversation about some triviality . 
 but Syme could only feel an unnatural buoyancy in his body 
 and a crystal simplicity in his mind that seem to be superior 
 to everything that he say or do . he feel he be in possession 
 of some impossible good news , which make every other thing 
 a triviality , but an adorable triviality . 

 Dawn be break over everything in colour at once clear and timid ; 
 as if Nature make a first attempt at yellow and a first attempt at rose . 
 a breeze blow so clean and sweet , that one could not think that it 
 blow from the sky ; it blow rather through some hole in the sky . 
 Syme feel a simple surprise when he see rise all round he on both 
 side of the road the red , irregular building of Saffron Park . he have 
 no idea that he have walk so near London . he walk by instinct 
 along one white road , on which early bird hop and sing , and find 
 himself outside a fence garden . there he see the sister of Gregory , 
 the girl with the gold - red hair , cut lilac before breakfast , 
 with the great unconscious gravity of a girl . 







