nostromo 
 A tale of the SEABOARD 
 by Joseph Conrad 
 " so foul a sky clear not without a storm . " - SHAKESPEARE 
 to JOHN GALSWORTHY 
 AUTHOR 's note 
 " Nostromo " be the most anxiously meditate of the long novel which 
 belong to the period follow upon the publication of the " Typhoon " 
 volume of short story . 
 I do not   mean to say that I become then conscious of any impending change 
 in my mentality and in my attitude towards the task of my writing 
 life . and perhaps there be never any change , except in that mysterious , 
 extraneous thing which have nothing to do with the theory of art ; a 
 subtle change in the nature of the inspiration ; a phenomenon for which I 
 can not in any way be hold responsible . what , however , do cause I some 
 concern be that after finish the last story of the " Typhoon " volume 
 it seem somehow that there be nothing more in the world to write 
 about . 
 this so strangely negative but disturb mood last some little 
 time ; and then , as with many of my long story , the first hint for 
 " Nostromo " come to I in the shape of a vagrant anecdote completely 
 destitute of valuable detail . 
 as a matter of fact in 1875 or ' 6 , when very young , in the West Indies 
 or rather in the Gulf of Mexico , for my contact with land be short , 
 few , and fleeting , I hear the story of some man who be suppose to 
 have steal single - hand a whole light - full of silver , somewhere on 
 the Tierra Firme seaboard during the trouble of a revolution . 
 on the face of it this be something of a feat . but I hear no detail , 
 and have no particular interest in crime qua crime I be not likely to 
 keep that one in my mind . and I forget it till twenty - six or seven 
 year afterwards I come upon the very thing in a shabby volume pick 
 up outside a second - hand book - shop . it be the life story of an american 
 seaman write by himself with the assistance of a journalist . in the 
 course of his wandering that american sailor work for some month on 
 board a schooner , the master and owner of which be the thief of whom I 
 have hear in my very young day . I have no doubt of that because there 
 could hardly have be two exploit of that peculiar kind in the same 
 part of the world and both connect with a south american revolution . 
 the fellow have actually manage to steal a light with silver , and 
 this , it seem , only because he be implicitly trust by his employer , 
 who must have be singularly poor judge of character . in the sailor 's 
 story he be represent as an unmitigated rascal , a small cheat , 
 stupidly ferocious , morose , of mean appearance , and altogether unworthy 
 of the greatness this opportunity have thrust upon he . what be 
 interesting be that he would boast of it openly . 
 he use to say : " People think I make a lot of money in this schooner of 
 mine . but that be nothing . I do not   care for that . now and then I go 
 away quietly and lift a bar of silver . I must get rich slowly - you 
 understand . " 
 there be also another curious point about the man . once in the course 
 of some quarrel the sailor threaten he : " what be to prevent I 
 report ashore what you have tell I about that silver ? " 
 the cynical ruffian be not alarmed in the least . he actually laugh . 
 " you fool , if you dare talk like that on shore about I you will get a 
 knife stuck in your back . every man , woman , and child in that port be 
 my friend . and who be to prove the light be not   sink ? I do not   show you 
 where the silver be hide . do I ? so you know nothing . and suppose I 
 lie ? eh ? " 
 ultimately the sailor , disgust with the sordid meanness of that 
 impenitent thief , desert from the schooner . the whole episode take 
 about three page of his autobiography . nothing to speak of ; but as I 
 look they over , the curious confirmation of the few casual word 
 hear in my early youth evoke the memory of that distant time when 
 everything be so fresh , so surprising , so venturesome , so interesting ; 
 bit of strange coast under the star , shadow of hill in the 
 sunshine , man 's passion in the dusk , gossip half - forget , face grow 
 dim . . . . perhaps , perhaps , there still be in the world something to 
 write about . yet I do not see anything at first in the mere story . a 
 rascal steal a large parcel of a valuable commodity - so people say . 
 it be either true or untrue ; and in any case it have no value in itself . 
 to invent a circumstantial account of the robbery do not appeal to I , 
 because my talent not run that way I do not think that the game 
 be worth the candle . it be only when it dawn upon I that the 
 purloiner of the treasure need not necessarily be a confirm rogue , 
 that he could be even a man of character , an actor and possibly a victim 
 in the change scene of a revolution , it be only then that I have the 
 first vision of a twilight country which be to become the province 
 of Sulaco , with its high shadowy Sierra and its misty Campo for mute 
 witness of event flow from the passion of man short - sighted in 
 good and evil . 
 such be in very truth the obscure origin of " Nostromo " - the book . from 
 that moment , I suppose , it have to be . yet even then I hesitate , as if 
 warn by the instinct of self - preservation from venture on a distant 
 and toilsome journey into a land full of intrigue and revolution . but 
 it have to be do . 
 it take the good part of the year 1903 - 4 to do ; with many interval 
 of renew hesitation , lest I should lose myself in the ever - enlarge 
 vista opening before I as I progress deeply in my knowledge of the 
 country . often , also , when I have think myself to a standstill over the 
 tangle - up affair of the Republic , I would , figuratively speak , pack 
 my bag , rush away from Sulaco for a change of air and write a few page 
 of the " Mirror of the Sea . " but generally , as I have   say before , my 
 sojourn on the Continent of Latin America , fame for its hospitality , 
 last for about two year . on my return I find   speak somewhat in 
 the style of Captain Gulliver   my family all well , my wife heartily 
 glad to learn that the fuss be all over , and our small boy considerably 
 grow during my absence . 
 my principal authority for the history of Costaguana be , of course , my 
 venerate friend , the late Don Jose Avellanos , Minister to the Courts of 
 England and Spain , etc . , etc . , in his impartial and eloquent " history of 
 fifty Years of Misrule . " that work be never publish - the reader will 
 discover why - and I be in fact the only person in the world possess 
 of its content . I have master they in not a few hour of earnest 
 meditation , and I hope that my accuracy will be trust . in justice to 
 myself , and to allay the fear of prospective reader , I beg to point 
 out that the few historical allusion be never drag in for the 
 sake of parade my unique erudition , but that each of they be closely 
 relate to actuality ; either throw a light on the nature of current 
 event or affect directly the fortune of the people of whom I speak . 
 as to their own history I have try to set they down , Aristocracy 
 and People , man and woman , Latin and Anglo - Saxon , bandit and politician , 
 with as cool a hand as be possible in the heat and clash of my own 
 conflicting emotion . and after all this be also the story of their 
 conflict . it be for the reader to say how far they be deserve of 
 interest in their action and in the secret purpose of their heart 
 reveal in the bitter necessity of the time . I confess that , for I , 
 that time be the time of firm friendship and unforgotten hospitality . 
 and in my gratitude I must mention here Mrs. Gould , " the first lady 
 of Sulaco , " whom we may safely leave to the secret devotion of Dr. 
 Monygham , and Charles Gould , the idealist - creator of Material Interests 
 whom we must leave to his Mine - from which there be no escape in this 
 world . 
 about Nostromo , the second of the two racially and socially contrast 
 man , both capture by the silver of the San Tome Mine , I feel bound to 
 say something more . 
 I do not hesitate to make that central figure an italian . first of 
 all the thing be perfectly credible : Italians be swarm into the 
 Occidental Province at the time , as anybody who will read far can 
 see ; and secondly , there be no one who could stand so well by the side 
 of Giorgio Viola the Garibaldino , the idealist of the old , humanitarian 
 revolution . for myself I need there a Man of the People as free as 
 possible from his class - convention and all settle mode of thinking . 
 this be not a side snarl at convention . my reason be not moral but 
 artistic . have he be an Anglo - Saxon he would have try to get into 
 local politic . but Nostromo do not aspire to be a leader in a 
 personal game . he do not want to raise himself above the mass . he be 
 content to feel himself a power - within the People . 
 but mainly Nostromo be what he be because I receive the inspiration for 
 he in my early day from a Mediterranean sailor . those who have read 
 certain page of mine will see at once what I mean when I say that 
 Dominic , the padrone of the Tremolino , might under give circumstance 
 have be a Nostromo . at any rate Dominic would have understand the 
 young man perfectly - if scornfully . he and I be engage together in 
 a rather absurd adventure , but the absurdity do not matter . it be a 
 real satisfaction to think that in my very young day there must , after 
 all , have be something in I worthy to command that man 's half - bitter 
 fidelity , his half - ironic devotion . many of Nostromo 's speech I have 
 hear first in Dominic 's voice . his hand on the tiller and his fearless 
 eye roam the horizon from within the monkish hood shadow his 
 face , he would utter the usual exordium of his remorseless wisdom : " vous 
 autre gentilhomme ! " in a caustic tone that hang on my ear yet . like 
 Nostromo ! " you hombre fino ! " very much like Nostromo . but Dominic the 
 Corsican nurse a certain pride of ancestry from which my Nostromo be 
 free ; for Nostromo 's lineage have to be more ancient still . he be a man 
 with the weight of countless generation behind he and no parentage to 
 boast of . . . . like the People . 
 in his firm grip on the earth he inherit , in his improvidence and 
 generosity , in his lavishness with his gift , in his manly vanity , in 
 the obscure sense of his greatness and in his faithful devotion with 
 something despair as well as desperate in its impulse , he be a man 
 of the People , their very own unenvious force , disdain to lead but 
 ruling from within . year afterwards , grow old as the famous Captain 
 Fidanza , with a stake in the country , go about his many affair 
 follow by respectful glance in the modernized street of Sulaco , 
 call on the widow of the cargador , attend the Lodge , listen in 
 unmoved silence to anarchist speech at the meeting , the enigmatical 
 patron of the new revolutionary agitation , the trust , the wealthy 
 comrade Fidanza with the knowledge of his moral ruin lock up in his 
 breast , he remain essentially a man of the People . in his mingled 
 love and scorn of life and in the bewildered conviction of have be 
 betray , of die betray he hardly know by what or by whom , he be 
 still of the People , their undoubted Great Man - with a private history 
 of his own . 
 one more figure of those stir time I would like to mention : and 
 that be Antonia Avellanos - the " beautiful Antonia . " whether she be a 
 possible variation of Latin - american girlhood I would not   dare to affirm . 
 but , for I , she be . always a little in the background by the side of 
 her father   my venerate friend   I hope she have yet relief enough to 
 make intelligible what I be go to say . of all the people who have see 
 with I the birth of the Occidental Republic , she be the only one 
 who have keep in my memory the aspect of continued life . Antonia the 
 Aristocrat and Nostromo the Man of the People be the artisan of the 
 New Era , the true creator of the New State ; he by his legendary and 
 daring feat , she , like a woman , simply by the force of what she be : 
 the only be capable of inspire a sincere passion in the heart of a 
 trifl . 
 if anything could induce I to revisit Sulaco   I should hate to see all 
 these change   it would be Antonia . and the true reason for that - why 
 not be frank about it ? - the true reason be that I have model she on 
 my first love . how we , a band of tallish schoolboy , the chum of 
 her two brother , how we use to look up to that girl just out of the 
 schoolroom herself , as the standard - bearer of a faith to which we all 
 be bear but which she alone know how to hold aloft with an unflinche 
 hope ! she have perhaps more glow and less serenity in her soul than 
 Antonia , but she be an uncompromise Puritan of patriotism with no 
 taint of the slight worldliness in her thought . I be not the only 
 one in love with she ; but it be I who have to hear oftenest her scathing 
 criticism of my levity - very much like poor Decoud - or stand the 
 brunt of her austere , unanswerable invective . she do not quite 
 understand - but never mind . that afternoon when I come in , a shrinking 
 yet defiant sinner , to say the final good - bye I receive a hand - squeeze 
 that make my heart leap and see a tear that take my breath away . she be 
 soften at the last as though she have suddenly perceive   we be such 
 child still !   that I be really go away for good , go very far 
 away - even as far as Sulaco , lie unknown , hide from our eye in the 
 darkness of the Placid Gulf . 
 that be why I long sometimes for another glimpse of the " beautiful 
 Antonia "   or can it be the Other ?   move in the dimness of the great 
 cathedral , say a short prayer at the tomb of the first and last 
 Cardinal - Archbishop of Sulaco , standing absorb in filial devotion 
 before the monument of Don Jose Avellanos , and , with a linger , 
 tender , faithful glance at the medallion - memorial to Martin Decoud , 
 go out serenely into the sunshine of the Plaza with her upright 
 carriage and her white head ; a relic of the past disregard by man 
 await impatiently the Dawns of other New Eras , the come of more 
 Revolutions . 
 but this be the idle of dream ; for I do understand perfectly well 
 at the time that the moment the breath leave the body of the Magnificent 
 Capataz , the Man of the People , free at last from the toil of love and 
 wealth , there be nothing more for I to do in Sulaco . 
 J. C. 
 October , 1917 . 
 content 
 part first the silver of the mine 
 part second the isabel 
 PART THIRD the lighthouse 
 NOSTROMO 
 part first the silver of the mine 
 CHAPTER one 
 in the time of spanish rule , and for many year afterwards , the town of 
 Sulaco - the luxuriant beauty of the orange gardens bear witness to its 
 antiquity - have never be commercially anything more important than a 
 coast port with a fairly large local trade in ox - hide and indigo . 
 the clumsy deep - sea galleon of the conqueror that , need a brisk 
 gale to move at all , would lie becalm , where your modern ship build on 
 clipper line forge ahead by the mere flapping of her sail , have be 
 bar out of Sulaco by the prevail calm of its vast gulf . some 
 harbour of the earth be make difficult of access by the treachery 
 of sunken rock and the tempest of their shore . Sulaco have find an 
 inviolable sanctuary from the temptation of a trading world in 
 the solemn hush of the deep Golfo Placido as if within an enormous 
 semi - circular and unroofed temple open to the ocean , with its wall of 
 lofty mountain hang with the mourning drapery of cloud . 
 on one side of this broad curve in the straight seaboard of the Republic 
 of Costaguana , the last spur of the coast range form an insignificant 
 cape whose name be Punta Mala . from the middle of the gulf the point of 
 the land itself be not visible at all ; but the shoulder of a steep hill 
 at the back can be make out faintly like a shadow on the sky . 
 on the other side , what seem to be an isolated patch of blue mist 
 float lightly on the glare of the horizon . this be the peninsula 
 of Azuera , a wild chaos of sharp rock and stony level cut about by 
 vertical ravine . it lie far out to sea like a rough head of stone 
 stretch from a green - clothe coast at the end of a slender neck of 
 sand cover with thicket of thorny scrub . utterly waterless , for the 
 rainfall run off at once on all side into the sea , it have not soil 
 enough - it be say - to grow a single blade of grass , as if it be 
 blight by a curse . the poor , associate by an obscure instinct of 
 consolation the idea of evil and wealth , will tell you that it be 
 deadly because of its forbidden treasure . the common folk of the 
 neighbourhood , peon of the estancias , vaquero of the seaboard plain , 
 tame Indians come mile to market with a bundle of sugar - cane or a 
 basket of maize worth about threepence , be well aware that heap of 
 shin gold lie in the gloom of the deep precipice cleave the stony 
 level of Azuera . tradition have it that many adventurer of olden time 
 have perish in the search . the story go also that within man 's memory 
 two wandering sailor - Americanos , perhaps , but gringo of some sort for 
 certain - talk over a gambling , good - for - nothing mozo , and the three 
 steal a donkey to carry for they a bundle of dry stick , a water - skin , 
 and provision enough to last a few day . thus accompany , and with 
 revolver at their belt , they have start to chop their way with 
 machete through the thorny scrub on the neck of the peninsula . 
 on the second evening an upright spiral of smoke   it could only have 
 be from their camp - fire   be see for the first time within memory of 
 man stand up faintly upon the sky above a razor - back ridge on the 
 stony head . the crew of a coast schooner , lie becalm three mile 
 off the shore , star at it with amazement till dark . a negro fisherman , 
 live in a lonely hut in a little bay near by , have see the start and 
 be on the lookout for some sign . he call to his wife just as the 
 sun be about to set . they have watch the strange portent with envy , 
 incredulity , and awe . 
 the impious adventurer give no other sign . the sailor , the Indian , 
 and the steal burro be never see again . as to the mozo , a Sulaco 
 man - his wife pay for some mass , and the poor four - footed beast , 
 be without sin , have be probably permit to die ; but the two 
 gringo , spectral and alive , be believe to be dwell to this day 
 amongst the rock , under the fatal spell of their success . their soul 
 can not tear themselves away from their body mount guard over the 
 discover treasure . they be now rich and hungry and thirsty - a strange 
 theory of tenacious gringo ghost suffer in their starve and parch 
 flesh of defiant heretic , where a Christian would have renounce and 
 be release . 
 these , then , be the legendary inhabitant of Azuera guard its 
 forbid wealth ; and the shadow on the sky on one side with the round 
 patch of blue haze blur the bright skirt of the horizon on the 
 other , mark the two outermost point of the bend which bear the name of 
 Golfo Placido , because never a strong wind have be know to blow upon 
 its water . 
 on cross the imaginary line draw from Punta Mala to Azuera the 
 ship from Europe bind to Sulaco lose at once the strong breeze of the 
 ocean . they become the prey of capricious air that play with they for 
 thirty hour at a stretch sometimes . before they the head of the calm 
 gulf be fill on most day of the year by a great body of motionless 
 and opaque cloud . on the rare clear morning another shadow be cast 
 upon the sweep of the gulf . the dawn break high behind the tower 
 and serrate wall of the Cordillera , a clear - cut vision of dark peak 
 rear their steep slope on a lofty pedestal of forest rise from the 
 very edge of the shore . amongst they the white head of Higuerota rise 
 majestically upon the blue . bare cluster of enormous rock sprinkle 
 with tiny black dot the smooth dome of snow . 
 then , as the midday sun withdraw from the gulf the shadow of the 
 mountain , the cloud begin to roll out of the low valley . they 
 swathe in sombre tatter the naked crag of precipice above the woode 
 slope , hide the peak , smoke in stormy trail across the snow of 
 Higuerota . the Cordillera be go from you as if it have dissolve itself 
 into great pile of grey and black vapour that travel out slowly to 
 seaward and vanish into thin air all along the front before the blaze 
 heat of the day . the waste edge of the cloud - bank always strive for , 
 but seldom win , the middle of the gulf . the sun - as the sailor say - be 
 eat it up . unless perchance a sombre thunder - head break away from 
 the main body to career all over the gulf till it escape into the 
 offing beyond Azuera , where it burst suddenly into flame and crash 
 like a sinster pirate - ship of the air , hove - to above the horizon , 
 engage the sea . 
 at night the body of cloud advance higher up the sky smother the 
 whole quiet gulf below with an impenetrable darkness , in which the sound 
 of the fall shower can be hear begin and cease abruptly - now 
 here , now there . indeed , these cloudy night be proverbial with the 
 seaman along the whole west coast of a great continent . sky , land , and 
 sea disappear together out of the world when the Placido - as the saying 
 be - go to sleep under its black poncho . the few star leave below the 
 seaward frown of the vault shine feebly as into the mouth of a black 
 cavern . in its vastness your ship float unseen under your foot , her 
 sail flutter invisible above your head . the eye of God himself - they 
 add with grim profanity - could not find out what work a man 's hand be 
 do in there ; and you would be free to call the devil to your aid with 
 impunity if even his malice be not defeat by such a blind darkness . 
 the shore on the gulf be steep - to all round ; three uninhabited islet 
 bask in the sunshine just outside the cloud veil , and opposite the 
 entrance to the harbour of Sulaco , bear the name of " the Isabels . " 
 there be the Great Isabel ; the Little Isabel , which be round ; and 
 Hermosa , which be the small . 
 that last be no more than a foot high , and about seven pace across , 
 a mere flat top of a grey rock which smoke like a hot cinder after 
 a shower , and where no man would care to venture a naked sole before 
 sunset . on the Little Isabel an old ragged palm , with a thick bulging 
 trunk rough with spine , a very witch amongst palm tree , rustle a 
 dismal bunch of dead leaf above the coarse sand . the Great Isabel have 
 a spring of fresh water issue from the overgrown side of a ravine . 
 resemble an emerald green wedge of land a mile long , and lay flat 
 upon the sea , it bear two forest tree stand close together , with 
 a wide spread of shade at the foot of their smooth trunk . a ravine 
 extend the whole length of the island be full of bush ; and 
 present a deep tangle cleft on the high side spread itself out on 
 the other into a shallow depression abut on a small strip of sandy 
 shore . 
 from that low end of the Great Isabel the eye plunge through an opening 
 two mile away , as abrupt as if chop with an axe out of the regular 
 sweep of the coast , right into the harbour of Sulaco . it be an oblong , 
 lake - like piece of water . on one side the short woode spur and valley 
 of the Cordillera come down at right angle to the very strand ; on 
 the other the open view of the great Sulaco plain pass into the opal 
 mystery of great distance overhang by dry haze . the town of Sulaco 
 itself - top of wall , a great cupola , gleams of white mirador in a 
 vast grove of orange tree - lie between the mountain and the plain , 
 at some little distance from its harbour and out of the direct line of 
 sight from the sea . 
 CHAPTER two 
 the only sign of commercial activity within the harbour , visible from 
 the beach of the Great Isabel , be the square blunt end of the wooden 
 jetty which the Oceanic Steam Navigation Company   the O.S.N. of familiar 
 speech   have throw over the shallow part of the bay soon after they have 
 resolve to make of Sulaco one of their port of call for the Republic 
 of Costaguana . the State possess several harbour on its long 
 seaboard , but except Cayta , an important place , all be either small 
 and inconvenient inlet in an iron - bind coast - like Esmeralda , for 
 instance , sixty mile to the south - or else mere open roadstead expose 
 to the wind and fret by the surf . 
 perhaps the very atmospheric condition which have keep away the 
 merchant fleet of bygone age induce the O.S.N. Company to violate the 
 sanctuary of peace shelter the calm existence of Sulaco . the variable 
 air sport lightly with the vast semicircle of water within the head 
 of Azuera could not baffle the steam power of their excellent fleet . 
 year after year the black hull of their ship have go up and down 
 the coast , in and out , past Azuera , past the Isabels , past Punta 
 Mala - disregard everything but the tyranny of time . their name , the 
 name of all mythology , become the household word of a coast that have 
 never be rule by the god of Olympus . the Juno be know only for 
 her comfortable cabin amidship , the Saturn for the geniality of her 
 captain and the painted and gilt luxuriousness of her saloon , whereas 
 the Ganymede be fit out mainly for cattle transport , and to be 
 avoid by coastwise passenger . the humblest Indian in the obscure 
 village on the coast be familiar with the Cerberus , a little black 
 puffer without charm or living accommodation to speak of , whose mission 
 be to creep inshore along the woode beach close to mighty ugly 
 rock , stop obligingly before every cluster of hut to collect 
 produce , down to three - pound parcel of indiarubber bind in a wrapper 
 of dry grass . 
 and as they seldom fail to account for the small package , rarely 
 lose a bullock , and have never drown a single passenger , the name of 
 the O.S.N. stand very high for trustworthiness . People declare that 
 under the Company 's care their life and property be safe on the 
 water than in their own house on shore . 
 the O.S.N. 's superintendent in Sulaco for the whole Costaguana section 
 of the service be very proud of his company 's standing . he resume it 
 in a saying which be very often on his lip , " we never make mistake . " 
 to the company 's officer it take the form of a severe injunction , " we 
 must make no mistake . I will have no mistake here , no matter what Smith 
 may do at his end . " 
 Smith , on whom he have never set eye in his life , be the other 
 superintendent of the service , quarter some fifteen hundred mile away 
 from Sulaco . " do not   talk to I of your Smith . " 
 then , calm down suddenly , he would dismiss the subject with studied 
 negligence . 
 " Smith know no more of this continent than a baby . " 
 " our excellent Senor Mitchell " for the business and official world of 
 Sulaco ; " Fussy Joe " for the commander of the Company 's ship , Captain 
 Joseph Mitchell pride himself on his profound knowledge of man and 
 thing in the country - cosas de Costaguana . amongst these last he 
 account as most unfavourable to the orderly work of his company 
 the frequent change of government bring about by revolution of the 
 military type . 
 the political atmosphere of the Republic be generally stormy in these 
 day . the fugitive patriot of the defeat party have the knack of 
 turn up again on the coast with half a steamer 's load of small arm 
 and ammunition . such resourcefulness Captain Mitchell consider as 
 perfectly wonderful in view of their utter destitution at the time of 
 flight . he have observe that " they never seem to have enough change 
 about they to pay for their passage ticket out of the country . " and 
 he could speak with knowledge ; for on a memorable occasion he have be 
 call upon to save the life of a dictator , together with the life of a 
 few Sulaco official - the political chief , the director of the custom , 
 and the head of police - belong to an overturned government . poor 
 Senor Ribiera   such be the dictator 's name   have come pelt eighty 
 mile over mountain track after the lost battle of Socorro , in the hope 
 of out - distance the fatal news - which , of course , he could not manage 
 to do on a lame mule . the animal , moreover , expire under he at the end 
 of the Alameda , where the military band play sometimes in the evening 
 between the revolution . " Sir , " Captain Mitchell would pursue with 
 portentous gravity , " the ill - timed end of that mule attract attention 
 to the unfortunate rider . his feature be recognize by several 
 deserter from the dictatorial army amongst the rascally mob already 
 engage in smash the window of the Intendencia . " 
 early on the morning of that day the local authority of Sulaco have 
 flee for refuge to the O.S.N. Company 's office , a strong building 
 near the shore end of the jetty , leave the town to the mercy of a 
 revolutionary rabble ; and as the dictator be execrate by the populace 
 on account of the severe recruitment law his necessity have compel 
 he to enforce during the struggle , he stand a good chance of be 
 tear to piece . providentially , Nostromo - invaluable fellow - with some 
 italian workman , import to work upon the National Central Railway , 
 be at hand , and manage to snatch he away - for the time at least . 
 ultimately , Captain Mitchell succeed in take everybody off in his 
 own gig to one of the Company 's steamer - it be the Minerva - just then , 
 as luck would have it , enter the harbour . 
 he have to lower these gentleman at the end of a rope out of a hole in 
 the wall at the back , while the mob which , pour out of the town , have 
 spread itself all along the shore , howl and foam at the foot of the 
 building in front . he have to hurry they then the whole length of the 
 jetty ; it have be a desperate dash , neck or nothing - and again it be 
 Nostromo , a fellow in a thousand , who , at the head , this time , of the 
 Company 's body of lighterman , hold the jetty against the rush of the 
 rabble , thus give the fugitive time to reach the gig lie ready 
 for they at the other end with the Company 's flag at the stern . stick , 
 stone , shot fly ; knife , too , be throw . Captain Mitchell exhibit 
 willingly the long cicatrice of a cut over his left ear and temple , make 
 by a razor - blade fasten to a stick - a weapon , he explain , very much 
 in favour with the " bad kind of nigger out here . " 
 Captain Mitchell be a thick , elderly man , wear high , pointed collar 
 and short side - whisker , partial to white waistcoat , and really very 
 communicative under his air of pompous reserve . 
 " these gentleman , " he would say , star with great solemnity , " have 
 to run like rabbit , sir . I run like a rabbit myself . certain form of 
 death be - er - distasteful to a - a - er - respectable man . they would have 
 pound I to death , too . a crazy mob , sir , do not discriminate . under 
 providence we owe our preservation to my Capataz de Cargadores , as they 
 call he in the town , a man who , when I discover his value , sir , be 
 just the bos'n of an italian ship , a big genoese ship , one of the few 
 european ship that ever come to Sulaco with a general cargo before the 
 building of the National Central . he leave she on account of some very 
 respectable friend he make here , his own countryman , but also , I 
 suppose , to well himself . Sir , I be a pretty good judge of character . 
 I engage he to be the foreman of our lighterman , and caretaker of our 
 jetty . that be all that he be . but without he Senor Ribiera would have 
 be a dead man . this Nostromo , sir , a man absolutely above reproach , 
 become the terror of all the thief in the town . we be infest , 
 infest , overrun , sir , here at that time by ladrone and matrero , 
 thief and murderer from the whole province . on this occasion they 
 have be flock into Sulaco for a week past . they have scent the end , 
 sir . fifty per cent . of that murder mob be professional bandit 
 from the Campo , sir , but there be not   one that have not   hear of Nostromo . 
 as to the town leperos , sir , the sight of his black whisker and white 
 tooth be enough for they . they quail before he , sir . that be what the 
 force of character will do for you . " 
 it could very well be say that it be Nostromo alone who save the 
 life of these gentleman . Captain Mitchell , on his part , never leave they 
 till he have see they collapse , pant , terrified , and exasperate , 
 but safe , on the luxuriant velvet sofas in the first - class saloon of the 
 Minerva . to the very last he have be careful to address the ex - dictator 
 as " your Excellency . " 
 " Sir , I could do no other . the man be down - ghastly , livid , one mass of 
 scratch . " 
 the Minerva never let go her anchor that call . the superintendent 
 order she out of the harbour at once . no cargo could be land , of 
 course , and the passenger for Sulaco naturally refuse to go ashore . 
 they could hear the firing and see plainly the fight go on at the 
 edge of the water . the repulsed mob devote its energy to an attack 
 upon the Custom House , a dreary , unfinished - look structure with many 
 window two hundred yard away from the O.S.N. Offices , and the only 
 other building near the harbour . Captain Mitchell , after direct the 
 commander of the Minerva to land " these gentleman " in the first port of 
 call outside Costaguana , go back in his gig to see what could be do 
 for the protection of the Company 's property . that and the property 
 of the railway be preserve by the european resident ; that be , by 
 Captain Mitchell himself and the staff of engineer build the road , 
 aid by the italian and basque workman who rally faithfully round 
 their english chief . the Company 's lighterman , too , native of the 
 Republic , behave very well under their Capataz . an outcast lot of 
 very mixed blood , mainly negroe , everlastingly at feud with the other 
 customer of low grog shop in the town , they embrace with delight 
 this opportunity to settle their personal score under such favourable 
 auspex . there be not one of they that have not , at some time or other , 
 look with terror at Nostromo 's revolver poke very close at his face , 
 or be otherwise daunt by Nostromo 's resolution . he be " much of a 
 man , " their Capataz be , they say , too scornful in his temper ever to 
 utter abuse , a tireless taskmaster , and the more to be fear because 
 of his aloofness . and behold ! there he be that day , at their head , 
 condescend to make jocular remark to this man or the other . 
 such leadership be inspirit , and in truth all the harm the 
 mob manage to achieve be to set fire to one - only one - stack of 
 railway - sleeper , which , be creosote , burn well . the main attack 
 on the railway yard , on the O.S.N. Offices , and especially on the 
 Custom House , whose strong room , it be well know , contain a large 
 treasure in silver ingot , fail completely . even the little hotel keep 
 by old Giorgio , stand alone halfway between the harbour and the town , 
 escape looting and destruction , not by a miracle , but because with the 
 safe in view they have neglect it at first , and afterwards find no 
 leisure to stop . Nostromo , with his Cargadores , be press they too 
 hard then . 
 CHAPTER three 
 it might have be say that there he be only protect his own . from 
 the first he have be admit to live in the intimacy of the family 
 of the hotel - keeper who be a countryman of his . Old Giorgio Viola , 
 a Genoese with a shaggy white leonine head - often call simply " the 
 Garibaldino "   as Mohammedans be call after their prophet   - be , to 
 use Captain Mitchell 's own word , the " respectable married friend " by 
 whose advice Nostromo have leave his ship to try for a run of shore luck 
 in Costaguana . 
 the old man , full of scorn for the populace , as your austere republican 
 so often be , have disregard the preliminary sound of trouble . he 
 go on that day as usual pottering about the " casa " in his slipper , 
 mutter angrily to himself his contempt of the non - political nature of 
 the riot , and shrug his shoulder . in the end he be take unawares 
 by the out - rush of the rabble . it be too late then to remove his 
 family , and , indeed , where could he have run to with the portly Signora 
 Teresa and two little girl on that great plain ? so , barricade every 
 opening , the old man sit down sternly in the middle of the darken cafe 
 with an old shot - gun on his knee . his wife sit on another chair by his 
 side , mutter pious invocation to all the saint of the calendar . 
 the old republican do not believe in saint , or in prayer , or in 
 what he call " priest 's religion . " Liberty and Garibaldi be his 
 divinity ; but he tolerate ' superstition " in woman , preserve in 
 these matter a lofty and silent attitude . 
 his two girl , the eld fourteen , and the other two year young , 
 crouch on the sanded floor , on each side of the Signora Teresa , with 
 their head on their mother 's lap , both scar , but each in her own 
 way , the dark - haired Linda indignant and angry , the fair Giselle , the 
 young , bewilder and resign . the Patrona remove her arm , which 
 embrace her daughter , for a moment to cross herself and wring she 
 hand hurriedly . she moan a little louder . 
 " oh ! Gian ' Battista , why art thou not here ? oh ! why art thou not here ? " 
 she be not then invoke the saint himself , but call upon Nostromo , 
 whose patron he be . and Giorgio , motionless on the chair by her side , 
 would be provoke by these reproachful and distracted appeal . 
 " peace , woman ! where be the sense of it ? there be his duty , " he murmur 
 in the dark ; and she would retort , pant - 
 " eh ! I have no patience . duty ! what of the woman who have be like a 
 mother to he ? I bent my knee to he this morning ; do not   you go out , 
 Gian ' Battista - stop in the house , Battistino - look at those two little 
 innocent child ! " 
 Mrs. Viola be an italian , too , a native of Spezzia , and though 
 considerably young than her husband , already middle - aged . she have a 
 handsome face , whose complexion have turn yellow because the climate 
 of Sulaco do not suit she at all . her voice be a rich contralto . when , 
 with her arm fold tight under her ample bosom , she scold the squat , 
 thick - legged China girl handle linen , pluck fowl , pound corn 
 in wooden mortar amongst the mud outbuilding at the back of the house , 
 she could bring out such an impassione , vibrating , sepulchral note that 
 the chain watch - dog bolt into his kennel with a great rattle . Luis , 
 a cinnamon - colour mulatto with a sprout moustache and thick , dark 
 lip , would stop sweep the cafe with a broom of palm - leaf to let 
 a gentle shudder run down his spine . his languish almond eye would 
 remain closed for a long time . 
 this be the staff of the Casa Viola , but all these people have flee 
 early that morning at the first sound of the riot , prefer to hide 
 on the plain rather than trust themselves in the house ; a preference for 
 which they be in no way to blame , since , whether true or not , it 
 be generally believe in the town that the Garibaldino have some money 
 bury under the clay floor of the kitchen . the dog , an irritable , 
 shaggy brute , bark violently and whine plaintively in turn at the 
 back , run in and out of his kennel as rage or fear prompt he . 
 burst of great shouting rise and die away , like wild gust of wind on 
 the plain round the barricaded house ; the fitful popping of shot 
 grow louder above the yelling . sometimes there be interval of 
 unaccountable stillness outside , and nothing could have be more gaily 
 peaceful than the narrow bright line of sunlight from the crack in the 
 shutter , rule straight across the cafe over the disarrange chair 
 and table to the wall opposite . Old Giorgio have choose that bare , 
 whitewash room for a retreat . it have only one window , and its only 
 door swing out upon the track of thick dust fence by aloe hedge 
 between the harbour and the town , where clumsy cart use to creak along 
 behind slow yoke of oxen guide by boy on horseback . 
 in a pause of stillness Giorgio cock his gun . the ominous sound wring 
 a low moan from the rigid figure of the woman sit by his side . a 
 sudden outbreak of defiant yelling quite near the house sink all at once 
 to a confused murmur of growl . somebody run along ; the loud catch of 
 his breath be hear for an instant pass the door ; there be hoarse 
 mutter and footstep near the wall ; a shoulder rub against the 
 shutter , efface the bright line of sunshine pencil across the 
 whole breadth of the room . Signora Teresa 's arm throw about the 
 kneeling form of her daughter embrace they close with a convulsive 
 pressure . 
 the mob , drive away from the Custom House , have break up into several 
 band , retreat across the plain in the direction of the town . the 
 subdue crash of irregular volley fire in the distance be answer by 
 faint yell far away . in the interval the single shot rang feebly , and 
 the low , long , white building blind in every window seem to be 
 the centre of a turmoil widen in a great circle about its close - up 
 silence . but the cautious movement and whisper of a rout party 
 seek a momentary shelter behind the wall make the darkness of the 
 room , strip by thread of quiet sunlight , alight with evil , stealthy 
 sound . the Violas have they in their ear as though invisible ghost 
 hover about their chair have consult in mutter as to the 
 advisability of set fire to this foreigner 's casa . 
 it be try to the nerve . Old Viola have rise slowly , gun in hand , 
 irresolute , for he do not see how he could prevent they . already voice 
 could be hear talk at the back . Signora Teresa be beside herself 
 with terror . 
 " ah ! the traitor ! the traitor ! " she mumble , almost inaudibly . " now we 
 be go to be burn ; and I bent my knee to he . no ! he must run at the 
 heel of his English . " 
 she seem to think that Nostromo 's mere presence in the house would 
 have make it perfectly safe . so far , she , too , be under the spell of 
 that reputation the Capataz de Cargadores have make for himself by 
 the waterside , along the railway line , with the English and with the 
 populace of Sulaco . to his face , and even against her husband , she 
 invariably affect to laugh it to scorn , sometimes good - naturedly , 
 more often with a curious bitterness . but then woman be unreasonable in 
 their opinion , as Giorgio use to remark calmly on fitting occasion . 
 on this occasion , with his gun hold at ready before he , he stoop down 
 to his wife 's head , and , keep his eye steadfastly on the barricaded 
 door , he breathe out into her ear that Nostromo would have be 
 powerless to help . what could two man shut up in a house do against 
 twenty or more bent upon set fire to the roof ? Gian ' Battista be 
 think of the casa all the time , he be sure . 
 " he think of the casa ! he ! " gasp Signora Viola , crazily . she strike 
 her breast with her open hand . " I know he . he think of nobody but 
 himself . " 
 a discharge of firearm near by make she throw her head back and close 
 her eye . Old Giorgio set his tooth hard under his white moustache , and 
 his eye begin to roll fiercely . several bullet strike the end of the 
 wall together ; piece of plaster could be hear fall outside ; a voice 
 scream " here they come ! " and after a moment of uneasy silence there 
 be a rush of run foot along the front . 
 then the tension of old Giorgio 's attitude relax , and a smile of 
 contemptuous relief come upon his lip of an old fighter with a leonine 
 face . these be not a people strive for justice , but thief . even to 
 defend his life against they be a sort of degradation for a man who have 
 be one of Garibaldi 's immortal thousand in the conquest of Sicily . he 
 have an immense scorn for this outbreak of scoundrel and lepero , who 
 do not know the meaning of the word " liberty . " 
 he ground his old gun , and , turn his head , glance at the colour 
 lithograph of Garibaldi in a black frame on the white wall ; a thread 
 of strong sunshine cut it perpendicularly . his eye , accustom to the 
 luminous twilight , make out the high colouring of the face , the red of 
 the shirt , the outline of the square shoulder , the black patch of the 
 Bersagliere hat with cock 's feather curl over the crown . an immortal 
 hero ! this be your liberty ; it give you not only life , but immortality 
 as well ! 
 for that one man his fanaticism have suffer no diminution . in the 
 moment of relief from the apprehension of the great danger , perhaps , 
 his family have be expose to in all their wandering , he have turn to 
 the picture of his old chief , first and only , then lay his hand on his 
 wife 's shoulder . 
 the child kneel on the floor have not move . Signora Teresa open 
 her eye a little , as though he have awaken she from a very deep and 
 dreamless slumber . before he have time in his deliberate way to say a 
 reassuring word she jump up , with the child cling to she , one on 
 each side , gasp for breath , and let out a hoarse shriek . 
 it be simultaneous with the bang of a violent blow strike on the 
 outside of the shutter . they could hear suddenly the snorting of a 
 horse , the restive tramping of hoof on the narrow , hard path in front 
 of the house ; the toe of a boot strike at the shutter again ; a spur 
 jingle at every blow , and an excited voice shout , " Hola ! hola , in 
 there ! " 
 CHAPTER FOUR 
 all the morning Nostromo have keep his eye from afar on the Casa Viola , 
 even in the thick of the hot scrimmage near the Custom House . " if 
 I see smoke rise over there , " he think to himself , " they be lose . " 
 directly the mob have break he press with a small band of italian 
 workman in that direction , which , indeed , be the short line towards 
 the town . that part of the rabble he be pursue seem to think of 
 make a stand under the house ; a volley fire by his follower from 
 behind an aloe hedge make the rascal fly . in a gap chop out for 
 the rail of the harbour branch line Nostromo appear , mount on 
 his silver - grey mare . he shout , send after they one shot from his 
 revolver , and gallop up to the cafe window . he have an idea that old 
 Giorgio would choose that part of the house for a refuge . 
 his voice have penetrate to they , sound breathlessly hurry : " Hola ! 
 Vecchio ! O , Vecchio ! be it all well with you in there ? " 
 " you see - " murmur old Viola to his wife . Signora Teresa be silent 
 now . outside Nostromo laugh . 
 " I can hear the padrona be not dead . " 
 " you have do your good to kill I with fear , " cry Signora Teresa . 
 she want to say something more , but her voice fail she . 
 Linda raise her eye to her face for a moment , but old Giorgio shout 
 apologetically - 
 " she be a little upset . " 
 Outside Nostromo shout back with another laugh - 
 " she can not upset I . " 
 Signora Teresa find her voice . 
 " it be what I say . you have no heart - and you have no conscience , Gian ' 
 Battista - " 
 they hear he wheel his horse away from the shutter . the party he lead 
 be babble excitedly in italian and Spanish , incite each other to 
 the pursuit . he put himself at their head , cry , " Avanti ! " 
 " he have not stop very long with we . there be no praise from stranger 
 to be get here , " Signora Teresa say tragically . " Avanti ! yes ! that be 
 all he care for . to be first somewhere - somehow - to be first with these 
 English . they will be show he to everybody . ' this be our Nostromo ! ' " 
 she laugh ominously . " what a name ! what be that ? Nostromo ? he would 
 take a name that be properly no word from they . " 
 Meantime Giorgio , with tranquil movement , have be unfastening the 
 door ; the flood of light fall on Signora Teresa , with her two girl 
 gather to her side , a picturesque woman in a pose of maternal 
 exaltation . behind she the wall be dazzlingly white , and the crude 
 colour of the Garibaldi lithograph pal in the sunshine . 
 Old Viola , at the door , move his arm upwards as if refer all his 
 quick , fleeting thought to the picture of his old chief on the wall . 
 even when he be cook for the " Signori Inglesi " - the engineer   he 
 be a famous cook , though the kitchen be a dark place   - he be , as 
 it be , under the eye of the great man who have lead he in a glorious 
 struggle where , under the wall of Gaeta , tyranny would have expire 
 for ever have it not be for that accurse piedmontese race of king 
 and minister . when sometimes a frying - pan catch fire during a delicate 
 operation with some shredded onion , and the old man be see back 
 out of the doorway , swear and cough violently in an acrid cloud 
 of smoke , the name of Cavour - the arch intriguer sell to king and 
 tyrant - could be hear involve in imprecation against the China 
 girl , cook in general , and the brute of a country where he be 
 reduce to live for the love of liberty that traitor have strangle . 
 then Signora Teresa , all in black , issue from another door , advanced , 
 portly and anxious , incline her fine , black - browed head , open her 
 arm , and cry in a profound tone - 
 " Giorgio ! thou passionate man ! Misericordia Divina ! in the sun like 
 this ! he will make himself ill . " 
 at her foot the hen make off in all direction , with immense stride ; 
 if there be any engineer from up the line stay in Sulaco , a young 
 english face or two would appear at the billiard - room occupy one end 
 of the house ; but at the other end , in the cafe , Luis , the mulatto , take 
 good care not to show himself . the indian girl , with hair like flow 
 black mane , and dress only in a shift and short petticoat , star 
 dully from under the square - cut fringe on their forehead ; the noisy 
 frizzling of fat have stop , the fume float upwards in sunshine , 
 a strong smell of burn onion hang in the drowsy heat , envelop the 
 house ; and the eye lose itself in a vast flat expanse of grass to the 
 west , as if the plain between the Sierra overtop Sulaco and the 
 coast range away there towards Esmeralda have be as big as half the 
 world . 
 Signora Teresa , after an impressive pause , remonstrate - 
 " Eh , Giorgio ! leave Cavour alone and take care of yourself now we be 
 lose in this country all alone with the two child , because you can not 
 live under a king . " 
 and while she look at he she would sometimes put her hand hastily 
 to her side with a short twitch of her fine lip and a knitting of 
 her black , straight eyebrow like a flicker of angry pain or an angry 
 thought on her handsome , regular feature . 
 it be pain ; she suppress the twinge . it have come to her first a few 
 year after they have leave Italy to emigrate to America and settle at 
 last in Sulaco after wander from town to town , try shopkeeping 
 in a small way here and there ; and once an organized enterprise of 
 fishing - in Maldonado - for Giorgio , like the great Garibaldi , have be a 
 sailor in his time . 
 sometimes she have no patience with pain . for year its gnawing have be 
 part of the landscape embrace the glitter of the harbour under 
 the woode spur of the range ; and the sunshine itself be heavy and 
 dull - heavy with pain - not like the sunshine of her girlhood , in which 
 middle - aged Giorgio have woo she gravely and passionately on the shore 
 of the gulf of Spezzia . 
 " you go in at once , Giorgio , " she direct . " one would think you do not 
 wish to have any pity on I - with four Signori Inglesi stay in the 
 house . " " Va bene , va bene , " Giorgio would mutter . he obey . the Signori 
 Inglesi would require their midday meal presently . he have be one 
 of the immortal and invincible band of liberator who have make the 
 mercenary of tyranny fly like chaff before a hurricane , " un uragano 
 terribile . " but that be before he be married and have child ; and 
 before tyranny have rear its head again amongst the traitor who have 
 imprison Garibaldi , his hero . 
 there be three door in the front of the house , and each afternoon the 
 Garibaldino could be see at one or another of they with his big bush of 
 white hair , his arm fold , his leg cross , lean back his leonine 
 head against the side , and look up the woode slope of the foothill 
 at the snowy dome of Higuerota . the front of his house throw off a black 
 long rectangle of shade , broaden slowly over the soft ox - cart track . 
 through the gap , chop out in the oleander hedge , the harbour branch 
 railway , lay out temporarily on the level of the plain , curve away its 
 shin parallel ribbon on a belt of scorch and wither grass within 
 sixty yard of the end of the house . in the evening the empty material 
 train of flat car circle round the dark green grove of Sulaco , 
 and run , undulate slightly with white jet of steam , over the plain 
 towards the Casa Viola , on their way to the railway yard by the 
 harbour . the italian driver salute he from the foot - plate with raise 
 hand , while the negro brakesman sit carelessly on the brake , look 
 straight forward , with the rim of their big hat flap in the wind . 
 in return Giorgio would give a slight sideways jerk of the head , without 
 unfold his arm . 
 on this memorable day of the riot his arm be not fold on his chest . 
 his hand grasp the barrel of the gun ground on the threshold ; he 
 do not look up once at the white dome of Higuerota , whose cool purity 
 seem to hold itself aloof from a hot earth . his eye examine the 
 plain curiously . tall trail of dust subside here and there . in 
 a speckless sky the sun hang clear and blind . knot of man run 
 headlong ; other make a stand ; and the irregular rattle of firearm come 
 ripple to his ear in the fiery , still air . single figure on foot 
 race desperately . horseman gallop towards each other , wheel round 
 together , separate at speed . Giorgio see one fall , rider and horse 
 disappear as if they have gallop into a chasm , and the movement of 
 the animate scene be like the passage of a violent game play upon 
 the plain by dwarf mount and on foot , yell with tiny throat , 
 under the mountain that seem a colossal embodiment of silence . never 
 before have Giorgio see this bit of plain so full of active life ; his 
 gaze could not take in all its detail at once ; he shade his eye with 
 his hand , till suddenly the thundering of many hoof near by startle 
 he . 
 a troop of horse have break out of the fence paddock of the Railway 
 Company . they come on like a whirlwind , and dash over the line 
 snorting , kicking , squeal in a compact , piebald , toss mob of bay , 
 brown , grey back , eye star , neck extend , nostril red , long 
 tail streaming . as soon as they have leap upon the road the thick dust 
 fly upwards from under their hoof , and within six yard of Giorgio 
 only a brown cloud with vague form of neck and crupper roll by , 
 make the soil tremble on its passage . 
 Viola cough , turn his face away from the dust , and shake his head 
 slightly . 
 " there will be some horse - catch to be do before to - night , " he 
 mutter . 
 in the square of sunlight fall through the door Signora Teresa , 
 kneeling before the chair , have bow her head , heavy with a twisted 
 mass of ebony hair streak with silver , into the palm of her hand . 
 the black lace shawl she use to drape about her face have drop to 
 the ground by her side . the two girl have get up , hand - in - hand , in short 
 skirt , their loose hair fall in disorder . the young have throw 
 her arm across her eye , as if afraid to face the light . Linda , with 
 her hand on the other 's shoulder , star fearlessly . Viola look at his 
 child . the sun bring out the deep line on his face , and , energetic 
 in expression , it have the immobility of a carving . it be impossible to 
 discover what he think . bushy grey eyebrow shade his dark glance . 
 " well ! and do you not pray like your mother ? " 
 Linda pout , advance her red lip , which be almost too red ; but she 
 have admirable eye , brown , with a sparkle of gold in the iris , full of 
 intelligence and meaning , and so clear that they seem to throw a glow 
 upon her thin , colourless face . there be bronze glint in the sombre 
 cluster of her hair , and the eyelash , long and coal black , make she 
 complexion appear still more pale . 
 " Mother be go to offer up a lot of candle in the church . she always 
 do when Nostromo have be away fight . I shall have some to carry up 
 to the Chapel of the Madonna in the Cathedral . " 
 she say all this quickly , with great assurance , in an animate , 
 penetrate voice . then , give her sister 's shoulder a slight shake , 
 she add - 
 " and she will be make to carry one , too ! " 
 " why make ? " inquire Giorgio , gravely . " do she not want to ? " 
 " she be timid , " say Linda , with a little burst of laughter . " People 
 notice her fair hair as she go along with we . they call out after 
 she , ' look at the Rubia ! look at the Rubiacita ! ' they call out in the 
 street . she be timid . " 
 " and you ? you be not timid - eh ? " the father pronounce , slowly . 
 she toss back all her dark hair . 
 " nobody call out after I . " 
 Old Giorgio contemplate his child thoughtfully . there be two year 
 difference between they . they have be bear to he late , year after 
 the boy have die . have he live he would have be nearly as old as Gian ' 
 Battista - he whom the English call Nostromo ; but as to his daughter , 
 the severity of his temper , his advance age , his absorption in his 
 memory , have prevent his take much notice of they . he love his 
 child , but girl belong more to the mother , and much of his affection 
 have be expend in the worship and service of liberty . 
 when quite a youth he have desert from a ship trading to La Plata , to 
 enlist in the navy of Montevideo , then under the command of Garibaldi . 
 afterwards , in the italian legion of the Republic struggle against the 
 encroach tyranny of Rosas , he have take part , on great plain , on the 
 bank of immense river , in the fierce fighting perhaps the world have 
 ever know . he have live amongst man who have declaim about liberty , 
 suffer for liberty , die for liberty , with a desperate exaltation , and 
 with their eye turn towards an oppress Italy . his own enthusiasm 
 have be feed on scene of carnage , on the example of lofty devotion , on 
 the din of armed struggle , on the inflame language of proclamation . 
 he have never part from the chief of his choice - the fiery apostle of 
 independence - keeping by his side in America and in Italy till after 
 the fatal day of Aspromonte , when the treachery of king , emperor , 
 and minister have be reveal to the world in the wounding and 
 imprisonment of his hero - a catastrophe that have instill into he 
 a gloomy doubt of ever be able to understand the way of Divine 
 justice . 
 he do not deny it , however . it require patience , he would say . though 
 he dislike priest , and would not put his foot inside a church for 
 anything , he believe in God . be not the proclamation against tyrant 
 address to the people in the name of God and liberty ? " God for 
 man - religion for woman , " he mutter sometimes . in Sicily , an 
 Englishman who have turn up in Palermo after its evacuation by the army 
 of the king , have give he a Bible in Italian - the publication of the 
 british and Foreign Bible Society , bind in a dark leather cover . 
 in period of political adversity , in the pause of silence when the 
 revolutionist issue no proclamation , Giorgio earn his living with 
 the first work that come to hand - as sailor , as dock labourer on the 
 quay of Genoa , once as a hand on a farm in the hill above Spezzia - and 
 in his spare time he study the thick volume . he carry it with 
 he into battle . now it be his only reading , and in order not to be 
 deprive of it   the print be small   he have consent to accept the 
 present of a pair of silver - mount spectacle from Senora Emilia Gould , 
 the wife of the Englishman who manage the silver mine in the mountain 
 three league from the town . she be the only Englishwoman in Sulaco . 
 Giorgio Viola have a great consideration for the English . this feeling , 
 bear on the battlefield of Uruguay , be forty year old at the very 
 least . several of they have pour their blood for the cause of freedom 
 in America , and the first he have ever know he remember by the name of 
 Samuel ; he command a negro company under Garibaldi , during the famous 
 siege of Montevideo , and die heroically with his negro at the fording 
 of the Boyana . he , Giorgio , have reach the rank of ensign - alferez - and 
 cook for the general . later , in Italy , he , with the rank of 
 lieutenant , ride with the staff and still cook for the general . he have 
 cook for he in lombardy through the whole campaign ; on the march to 
 Rome he have lasso his beef in the Campagna after the american manner ; 
 he have be wound in the defence of the Roman Republic ; he be one of 
 the four fugitive who , with the general , carry out of the wood the 
 inanimate body of the general 's wife into the farmhouse where she die , 
 exhaust by the hardship of that terrible retreat . he have survive 
 that disastrous time to attend his general in Palermo when the 
 Neapolitan shell from the castle crash upon the town . he have cook 
 for he on the field of Volturno after fight all day . and everywhere 
 he have see englishman in the front rank of the army of freedom . 
 he respect their nation because they love Garibaldi . their very 
 countess and princess have kiss the general 's hand in London , it 
 be say . he could well believe it ; for the nation be noble , and the 
 man be a saint . it be enough to look once at his face to see the 
 divine force of faith in he and his great pity for all that be poor , 
 suffering , and oppress in this world . 
 the spirit of self - forgetfulness , the simple devotion to a vast 
 humanitarian idea which inspire the thought and stress of that 
 revolutionary time , have leave its mark upon Giorgio in a sort of austere 
 contempt for all personal advantage . this man , whom the low class in 
 Sulaco suspect of have a bury hoard in his kitchen , have all his 
 life despise money . the leader of his youth have live poor , have die 
 poor . it have be a habit of his mind to disregard to - morrow . it be 
 engender partly by an existence of excitement , adventure , and wild 
 warfare . but mostly it be a matter of principle . it do not resemble 
 the carelessness of a condottiere , it be a puritanism of conduct , bear 
 of stern enthusiasm like the puritanism of religion . 
 this stern devotion to a cause have cast a gloom upon Giorgio 's old 
 age . it cast a gloom because the cause seem lost . too many king and 
 emperor flourish yet in the world which God have mean for the people . 
 he be sad because of his simplicity . though always ready to help his 
 countryman , and greatly respect by the italian emigrant wherever he 
 live   in his exile he call it , he could not conceal from himself 
 that they care nothing for the wrong of down - trodden nation . they 
 listen to his tale of war readily , but seem to ask themselves what 
 he have get out of it after all . there be nothing that they could see . 
 " we want nothing , we suffer for the love of all humanity ! " he cry 
 out furiously sometimes , and the powerful voice , the blaze eye , the 
 shaking of the white mane , the brown , sinewy hand pointing upwards as 
 if to call heaven to witness , impress his hearer . after the old man 
 have break off abruptly with a jerk of the head and a movement of the 
 arm , mean clearly , " but what be the good of talk to you ? " they 
 nudge each other . there be in old Giorgio an energy of feeling , a 
 personal quality of conviction , something they call " terribilita " - " an 
 old lion , " they use to say of he . some slight incident , a chance 
 word would set he off talk on the beach to the italian fisherman of 
 Maldonado , in the little shop he keep afterwards   in Valparaiso   to his 
 countryman customer ; of an evening , suddenly , in the cafe at one end of 
 the Casa Viola   the other be reserve for the english engineer   to the 
 select clientele of engine - driver and foreman of the railway shop . 
 with their handsome , bronzed , lean face , shiny black ringlet , 
 glisten eye , broad - cheste , bearded , sometimes a tiny gold ring in 
 the lobe of the ear , the aristocracy of the railway work listen 
 to he , turn away from their card or domino . here and there a 
 fair - haired Basque study his hand meantime , wait without protest . 
 no native of Costaguana intrude there . this be the italian stronghold . 
 even the Sulaco policeman on a night patrol let their horse pace softly 
 by , bend low in the saddle to glance through the window at the head 
 in a fog of smoke ; and the drone of old Giorgio 's declamatory narrative 
 seem to sink behind they into the plain . only now and then the 
 assistant of the chief of police , some broad - face , brown little 
 gentleman , with a great deal of Indian in he , would put in an 
 appearance . leave his man outside with the horse he advance with a 
 confident , sly smile , and without a word up to the long trestle table . 
 he point to one of the bottle on the shelf ; Giorgio , thrust his 
 pipe into his mouth abruptly , serve he in person . nothing would be 
 hear but the slight jingle of the spur . his glass empty , he would 
 take a leisurely , scrutinize look all round the room , go out , and ride 
 away slowly , circle towards the town . 
 CHAPTER five 
 in this way only be the power of the local authority vindicate 
 amongst the great body of strong - limbed foreigner who dig the earth , 
 blast the rock , drive the engine for the " progressive and 
 patriotic undertaking . " in these very word eighteen month before the 
 Excellentissimo Senor don Vincente Ribiera , the Dictator of Costaguana , 
 have describe the National Central Railway in his great speech at the 
 turning of the first sod . 
 he have come on purpose to Sulaco , and there be a one - o'clock 
 dinner - party , a convite offer by the O.S.N. Company on board the Juno 
 after the function on shore . Captain Mitchell have himself steer the 
 cargo lighter , all drape with flag , which , in tow of the Juno 's steam 
 launch , take the Excellentissimo from the jetty to the ship . everybody 
 of note in Sulaco have be invite - the one or two foreign merchant , 
 all the representative of the old spanish family then in town , the 
 great owner of estate on the plain , grave , courteous , simple man , 
 caballero of pure descent , with small hand and foot , conservative , 
 hospitable , and kind . the Occidental Province be their stronghold ; 
 their Blanco party have triumph now ; it be their President - Dictator , 
 a Blanco of the Blancos , who sit smile urbanely between the 
 representative of two friendly foreign power . they have come with he 
 from Sta . Marta to countenance by their presence the enterprise in 
 which the capital of their country be engage . the only lady of that 
 company be Mrs. Gould , the wife of Don Carlos , the administrator of the 
 San Tome silver mine . the lady of Sulaco be not advanced enough to 
 take part in the public life to that extent . they have come out strongly 
 at the great ball at the Intendencia the evening before , but Mrs. Gould 
 alone have appear , a bright spot in the group of black coat behind the 
 President - Dictator , on the crimson cloth - cover stage erect under a 
 shady tree on the shore of the harbour , where the ceremony of turn 
 the first sod have take place . she have come off in the cargo lighter , 
 full of notability , sit under the flutter of gay flag , in the 
 place of honour by the side of Captain Mitchell , who steer , and her 
 clear dress give the only truly festive note to the sombre gathering in 
 the long , gorgeous saloon of the Juno . 
 the head of the chairman of the railway board   from London , handsome 
 and pale in a silvery mist of white hair and clip beard , hover near 
 her shoulder attentive , smile , and fatigue . the journey from London 
 to Sta . Marta in mail boat and the special carriage of the Sta . 
 Marta coast - line   the only railway so far   have be tolerable - even 
 pleasant - quite tolerable . but the trip over the mountain to Sulaco be 
 another sort of experience , in an old diligencia over impassable road 
 skirt awful precipice . 
 " we have be upset twice in one day on the brink of very deep ravine , " 
 he be tell Mrs. Gould in an undertone . " and when we arrive here 
 at last I do not   know what we should have do without your hospitality . 
 what an out - of - the - way place Sulaco be ! - and for a harbour , too ! 
 astonishing ! " 
 " ah , but we be very proud of it . it use to be historically important . 
 the high ecclesiastical court for two viceroyalty , sit here in the 
 olden time , " she instruct he with animation . 
 " I be impressed . I do not   mean to be disparage . you seem very 
 patriotic . " 
 " the place be lovable , if only by its situation . perhaps you do not   know 
 what an old resident I be . " 
 " how old , I wonder , " he murmur , look at she with a slight smile . 
 Mrs. Gould 's appearance be make youthful by the mobile intelligence of 
 her face . " we can not   give you your ecclesiastical court back again ; but 
 you shall have more steamer , a railway , a telegraph - cable - a future 
 in the great world which be worth infinitely more than any amount 
 of ecclesiastical past . you shall be bring in touch with something 
 great than two viceroyalty . but I have no notion that a place on 
 a sea - coast could remain so isolated from the world . if it have be a 
 thousand mile inland now - most remarkable ! have anything ever happen 
 here for a hundred year before to - day ? " 
 while he talk in a slow , humorous tone , she keep she little smile . 
 agree ironically , she assure he that certainly not - nothing ever 
 happen in Sulaco . even the revolution , of which there have be two in 
 her time , have respect the repose of the place . their course run in the 
 more populous southern part of the Republic , and the great valley of 
 Sta . Marta , which be like one great battlefield of the party , with 
 the possession of the capital for a prize and an outlet to another 
 ocean . they be more advanced over there . here in Sulaco they hear 
 only the echo of these great question , and , of course , their official 
 world change each time , come to they over their rampart of mountain 
 which he himself have traverse in an old diligencia , with such a risk to 
 life and limb . 
 the chairman of the railway have be enjoy her hospitality for 
 several day , and he be really grateful for it . it be only since he 
 have leave Sta . Marta that he have utterly lose touch with the feeling 
 of european life on the background of his exotic surrounding . in the 
 capital he have be the guest of the Legation , and have be keep busy 
 negotiate with the member of Don Vincente 's government - cultured man , 
 man to whom the condition of civilized business be not unknown . 
 what concern he most at the time be the acquisition of land for the 
 railway . in the Sta . Marta Valley , where there be already one line in 
 existence , the people be tractable , and it be only a matter of price . 
 a commission have be nominate to fix the value , and the difficulty 
 resolve itself into the judicious influencing of the Commissioners . 
 but in Sulaco - the Occidental Province for whose very development the 
 railway be intend - there have be trouble . it have be lie for age 
 ensconce behind its natural barrier , repel modern enterprise by 
 the precipice of its mountain range , by its shallow harbour open 
 into the everlasting calm of a gulf full of cloud , by the benighted 
 state of mind of the owner of its fertile territory - all these 
 aristocratic old spanish family , all those Don Ambrosios this and Don 
 Fernandos that , who seem actually to dislike and distrust the coming 
 of the railway over their land . it have happen that some of the 
 survey party scatter all over the province have be warn off 
 with threat of violence . in other case outrageous pretension as to 
 price have be raise . but the man of railway pride himself on be 
 equal to every emergency . since he be meet by the inimical sentiment of 
 blind conservatism in Sulaco he would meet it by sentiment , too , before 
 take his stand on his right alone . the Government be bind to carry 
 out its part of the contract with the board of the new railway company , 
 even if it have to use force for the purpose . but he desire nothing less 
 than an armed disturbance in the smooth working of his plan . they 
 be much too vast and far - reach , and too promising to leave a stone 
 unturned ; and so he imagine to get the President - Dictator over there 
 on a tour of ceremony and speech , culminate in a great function 
 at the turning of the first sod by the harbour shore . after all he be 
 their own creature - that Don Vincente . he be the embodied triumph of 
 the good element in the State . these be fact , and , unless fact 
 mean nothing , Sir John argue to himself , such a man 's influence must 
 be real , and his personal action would produce the conciliatory effect 
 he require . he have succeed in arrange the trip with the help of a 
 very clever advocate , who be know in Sta . Marta as the agent of the 
 Gould silver mine , the big thing in Sulaco , and even in the whole 
 Republic . it be indeed a fabulously rich mine . its so - call agent , 
 evidently a man of culture and ability , seem , without official 
 position , to possess an extraordinary influence in the high 
 Government sphere . he be able to assure Sir John that the 
 President - Dictator would make the journey . he regret , however , in 
 the course of the same conversation , that General Montero insist upon 
 go , too . 
 General Montero , whom the beginning of the struggle have find an obscure 
 army captain employ on the wild eastern frontier of the State , have 
 throw in his lot with the Ribiera party at a moment when special 
 circumstance have give that small adhesion a fortuitous importance . 
 the fortune of war serve he marvellously , and the victory of Rio Seco 
  after a day of desperate fighting   put a seal to his success . at the 
 end he emerge General , Minister of War , and the military head of the 
 Blanco party , although there be nothing aristocratic in his descent . 
 indeed , it be say that he and his brother , orphan , have be bring 
 up by the munificence of a famous european traveller , in whose service 
 their father have lose his life . another story be that their father 
 have be nothing but a charcoal burner in the wood , and their mother a 
 baptise indian woman from the far interior . 
 however that might be , the Costaguana Press be in the habit of style 
 Montero 's forest march from his commandancia to join the Blanco force 
 at the beginning of the trouble , the " most heroic military exploit of 
 modern time . " about the same time , too , his brother have turn up from 
 Europe , where he have go apparently as secretary to a consul . have , 
 however , collect a small band of outlaw , he show some talent as 
 guerilla chief and have be reward at the pacification by the post of 
 Military Commandant of the capital . 
 the Minister of War , then , accompany the dictator . the board of the 
 O.S.N. Company , work hand - in - hand with the railway people for the 
 good of the Republic , have on this important occasion instruct Captain 
 Mitchell to put the mail - boat Juno at the disposal of the distinguished 
 party . Don Vincente , journey south from Sta . Marta , have embark at 
 Cayta , the principal port of Costaguana , and come to Sulaco by sea . 
 but the chairman of the railway company have courageously cross the 
 mountain in a ramshackle diligencia , mainly for the purpose of meeting 
 his engineer - in - chief engage in the final survey of the road . 
 for all the indifference of a man of affair to nature , whose hostility 
 can always be overcome by the resource of finance , he could not help 
 be impress by his surrounding during his halt at the surveying 
 camp establish at the high point his railway be to reach . he spend 
 the night there , arrive just too late to see the last dying glow of 
 sunlight upon the snowy flank of Higuerota . pillare mass of black 
 basalt frame like an open portal a portion of the white field lie 
 aslant against the west . in the transparent air of the high altitude 
 everything seem very near , steep in a clear stillness as in an 
 imponderable liquid ; and with his ear ready to catch the first sound of 
 the expected diligencia the engineer - in - chief , at the door of a hut of 
 rough stone , have contemplate the change hue on the enormous side 
 of the mountain , think that in this sight , as in a piece of inspired 
 music , there could be find together the utmost delicacy of shade 
 expression and a stupendous magnificence of effect . 
 Sir John arrive too late to hear the magnificent and inaudible strain 
 sing by the sunset amongst the high peak of the Sierra . it have sing 
 itself out into the breathless pause of deep dusk before , climb down 
 the fore wheel of the diligencia with stiff limb , he shake hand with 
 the engineer . 
 they give he his dinner in a stone hut like a cubical boulder , with no 
 door or window in its two opening ; a bright fire of stick   bring 
 on muleback from the first valley below   burn outside , send in a 
 wavering glare ; and two candle in tin candlestick - light , it be 
 explain to he , in his honour - stand on a sort of rough camp table , at 
 which he sit on the right hand of the chief . he know how to be amiable ; 
 and the young man of the engineering staff , for whom the surveying of 
 the railway track have the glamour of the first step on the path of 
 life , sit there , too , listen modestly , with their smooth face tan 
 by the weather , and very pleased to witness so much affability in so 
 great a man . 
 afterwards , late at night , pace to and fro outside , he have a long talk 
 with his chief engineer . he know he well of old . this be not the first 
 undertaking in which their gift , as elementally different as fire 
 and water , have work in conjunction . from the contact of these two 
 personality , who have not the same vision of the world , there be 
 generate a power for the world 's service - a subtle force that could 
 set in motion mighty machine , man 's muscle , and awaken also in human 
 breast an unbounded devotion to the task . of the young fellow at the 
 table , to whom the survey of the track be like the tracing of the path 
 of life , more than one would be call to meet death before the work be 
 do . but the work would be do : the force would be almost as strong 
 as a faith . not quite , however . in the silence of the sleeping camp upon 
 the moonlit plateau form the top of the pass like the floor of a 
 vast arena surround by the basalt wall of precipice , two stroll 
 figure in thick ulster stand still , and the voice of the engineer 
 pronounce distinctly the word - 
 " we can not   move mountain ! " 
 Sir John , raise his head to follow the pointing gesture , feel the full 
 force of the word . the white Higuerota soar out of the shadow of 
 rock and earth like a frozen bubble under the moon . all be still , till 
 near by , behind the wall of a corral for the camp animal , build 
 roughly of loose stone in the form of a circle , a pack mule stamp his 
 forefoot and blow heavily twice . 
 the engineer - in - chief have use the phrase in answer to the chairman 's 
 tentative suggestion that the tracing of the line could , perhaps , be 
 alter in deference to the prejudice of the Sulaco landowner . 
 the chief engineer believe that the obstinacy of man be the less 
 obstacle . moreover , to combat that they have the great influence of 
 Charles Gould , whereas tunnelling under Higuerota would have be a 
 colossal undertaking . 
 " ah , yes ! Gould . what sort of a man be he ? " 
 Sir John have hear much of Charles Gould in Sta . Marta , and want to 
 know more . the engineer - in - chief assure he that the administrator of 
 the San Tome silver mine have an immense influence over all these spanish 
 don . he have also one of the good house in Sulaco , and the Gould 
 hospitality be beyond all praise . 
 " they receive I as if they have know I for year , " he say . " the 
 little lady be kindness personify . I stay with they for a month . he 
 help I to organize the survey party . his practical ownership of 
 the San Tome silver mine give he a special position . he seem to have 
 the ear of every provincial authority apparently , and , as I say , he can 
 wind all the hidalgo of the province round his little finger . if you 
 follow his advice the difficulty will fall away , because he want the 
 railway . of course , you must be careful in what you say . he be English , 
 and besides he must be immensely wealthy . the Holroyd house be in with 
 he in that mine , so you may imagine - " 
 he interrupt himself as , from before one of the little fire burn 
 outside the low wall of the corral , arise the figure of a man wrap in 
 a poncho up to the neck . the saddle which he have be use for a pillow 
 make a dark patch on the ground against the red glow of ember . 
 " I shall see Holroyd himself on my way back through the States , " say 
 Sir John . " I have   ascertain that he , too , want the railway . " 
 the man who , perhaps disturb by the proximity of the voice , have 
 arise from the ground , strike a match to light a cigarette . the flame 
 show a bronzed , black - whisker face , a pair of eye gaze straight ; 
 then , rearrange his wrapping , he sink full length and lay his head 
 again on the saddle . 
 " that be our camp - master , whom I must send back to Sulaco now we 
 be go to carry our survey into the Sta . Marta Valley , " say the 
 engineer . " a most useful fellow , lend I by Captain Mitchell of the 
 O.S.N. Company . it be very good of Mitchell . Charles Gould tell I I 
 could not   do well than take advantage of the offer . he seem to know 
 how to rule all these muleteer and peon . we have not the slight 
 trouble with our people . he shall escort your diligencia right into 
 Sulaco with some of our railway peon . the road be bad . to have he at 
 hand may save you an upset or two . he promise I to take care of your 
 person all the way down as if you be his father . " 
 this camp - master be the italian sailor whom all the Europeans in 
 Sulaco , follow Captain Mitchell 's mispronunciation , be in the 
 habit of call Nostromo . and indeed , taciturn and ready , he do take 
 excellent care of his charge at the bad part of the road , as Sir John 
 himself acknowledge to Mrs. Gould afterwards . 
 CHAPTER SIX 
 at that time Nostromo have be already long enough in the country 
 to raise to the high pitch Captain Mitchell 's opinion of the 
 extraordinary value of his discovery . clearly he be one of those 
 invaluable subordinate whom to possess be a legitimate cause of 
 boasting . Captain Mitchell plume himself upon his eye for man - but 
 he be not selfish - and in the innocence of his pride be already 
 develop that mania for " lend you my Capataz de Cargadores " which 
 be to bring Nostromo into personal contact , soon or later , with 
 every European in Sulaco , as a sort of universal factotum - a prodigy of 
 efficiency in his own sphere of life . 
 " the fellow be devoted to I , body and soul ! " Captain Mitchell be 
 give to affirm ; and though nobody , perhaps , could have explain why it 
 should be so , it be impossible on a survey of their relation to throw 
 doubt on that statement , unless , indeed , one be a bitter , eccentric 
 character like Dr. Monygham - for instance - whose short , hopeless laugh 
 express somehow an immense mistrust of mankind . not that Dr. Monygham 
 be a prodigal either of laughter or of word . he be bitterly taciturn 
 when at his good . at his bad people fear the open scornfulness of 
 his tongue . only Mrs. Gould could keep his unbelief in man 's motif 
 within due bound ; but even to she   on an occasion not connect with 
 Nostromo , and in a tone which for he be gentle , even to she , he have 
 say once , " really , it be most unreasonable to demand that a man 
 should think of other people so much well than he be able to think of 
 himself . " 
 and Mrs. Gould have hasten to drop the subject . there be strange 
 rumour of the english doctor . year ago , in the time of Guzman Bento , 
 he have be mix up , it be whisper , in a conspiracy which be 
 betray and , as people express it , drown in blood . his hair have 
 turn grey , his hairless , seam face be of a brick - dust colour ; the 
 large check pattern of his flannel shirt and his old stain Panama hat 
 be an established defiance to the conventionality of Sulaco . have 
 it not be for the immaculate cleanliness of his apparel he might have 
 be take for one of those shiftless Europeans that be a moral eyesore 
 to the respectability of a foreign colony in almost every exotic part of 
 the world . the young lady of Sulaco , adorn with cluster of pretty 
 face the balcony along the Street of the Constitution , when they see 
 he pass , with his limping gait and bow head , a short linen jacket 
 draw on carelessly over the flannel check shirt , would remark to each 
 other , " here be the Senor doctor go to call on Dona Emilia . he have 
 get his little coat on . " the inference be true . its deep meaning be 
 hide from their simple intelligence . moreover , they expend no 
 store of thought on the doctor . he be old , ugly , learn - and a little 
 " loco " - mad , if not a bit of a sorcerer , as the common people suspect 
 he of be . the little white jacket be in reality a concession 
 to Mrs. Gould 's humanizing influence . the doctor , with his habit of 
 sceptical , bitter speech , have no other mean of show his profound 
 respect for the character of the woman who be know in the country as 
 the English Senora . he present this tribute very seriously indeed ; 
 it be no trifle for a man of his habit . Mrs. Gould feel that , too , 
 perfectly . she would never have think of impose upon he this marked 
 show of deference . 
 she keep her old spanish house   one of the fine specimen in Sulaco 
 open for the dispensation of the small grace of existence . she 
 dispense they with simplicity and charm because she be guide by an 
 alert perception of value . she be highly gifted in the art of human 
 intercourse which consist in delicate shade of self - forgetfulness and 
 in the suggestion of universal comprehension . Charles Gould   the Gould 
 family , establish in Costaguana for three generation , always go to 
 England for their education and for their wife   imagine that he have 
 fall in love with a girl 's sound common sense like any other man , 
 but these be not exactly the reason why , for instance , the whole 
 surveying camp , from the young of the young man to their mature 
 chief , should have find occasion to allude to Mrs. Gould 's house 
 so frequently amongst the high peak of the Sierra . she would have 
 protest that she have do nothing for they , with a low laugh and 
 a surprised widening of her grey eye , have anybody tell she how 
 convincingly she be remember on the edge of the snow - line above 
 Sulaco . but directly , with a little capable air of set her wit to 
 work , she would have find an explanation . " of course , it be such a 
 surprise for these boy to find any sort of welcome here . and I suppose 
 they be homesick . I suppose everybody must be always just a little 
 homesick . " 
 she be always sorry for homesick people . 
 bear in the country , as his father before he , spare and tall , with 
 a flame moustache , a neat chin , clear blue eye , auburn hair , and a 
 thin , fresh , red face , Charles Gould look like a new arrival from over 
 the sea . his grandfather have fight in the cause of independence under 
 Bolivar , in that famous english legion which on the battlefield of 
 Carabobo have be salute by the great Liberator as Saviours of his 
 country . one of Charles Gould 's uncle have be the elect President 
 of that very province of Sulaco   then call a state   in the day of 
 Federation , and afterwards have be put up against the wall of a church 
 and shoot by the order of the barbarous unionist general , Guzman Bento . 
 it be the same Guzman Bento who , become later Perpetual President , 
 fame for his ruthless and cruel tyranny , readie his apotheosis in the 
 popular legend of a sanguinary land - haunt spectre whose body have be 
 carry off by the devil in person from the brick mausoleum in the nave 
 of the Church of Assumption in Sta . Marta . thus , at least , the priest 
 explain its disappearance to the barefooted multitude that stream 
 in , awestruck , to gaze at the hole in the side of the ugly box of brick 
 before the great altar . 
 Guzman Bento of cruel memory have put to death great number of people 
 besides Charles Gould 's uncle ; but with a relative martyr in the cause 
 of aristocracy , the Sulaco Oligarchs   this be the phraseology of Guzman 
 Bento 's time ; now they be call Blancos , and have give up the federal 
 idea , which mean the family of pure spanish descent , consider 
 Charles as one of themselves . with such a family record , no one could 
 be more of a Costaguanero than Don Carlos Gould ; but his aspect be 
 so characteristic that in the talk of common people he be just the 
 Inglez - the Englishman of Sulaco . he look more english than a casual 
 tourist , a sort of heretic pilgrim , however , quite unknown in Sulaco . 
 he look more english than the last arrive batch of young railway 
 engineer , than anybody out of the hunting - field picture in the number 
 of Punch reach his wife 's drawing - room two month or so after date . 
 it astonish you to hear he talk Spanish   Castillan , as the native 
 say   or the indian dialect of the country - people so naturally . his 
 accent have never be English ; but there be something so indelible 
 in all these ancestral Goulds - liberator , explorer , coffee 
 planter , merchant , revolutionist - of Costaguana , that he , the only 
 representative of the third generation in a continent possess its 
 own style of horsemanship , go on look thoroughly english even 
 on horseback . this be not say of he in the mocking spirit of the 
 Llaneros - man of the great plain - who think that no one in the world 
 know how to sit a horse but themselves . Charles Gould , to use the 
 suitably lofty phrase , ride like a centaur . rid for he be not a 
 special form of exercise ; it be a natural faculty , as walk straight 
 be to all man sound of mind and limb ; but , all the same , when canter 
 beside the rutty ox - cart track to the mine he look in his english 
 clothe and with his import saddlery as though he have come this moment 
 to Costaguana at his easy swift pasotrote , straight out of some green 
 meadow at the other side of the world . 
 his way would lie along the old spanish road - the Camino Real of popular 
 speech - the only remain vestige of a fact and name leave by that 
 royalty old Giorgio Viola hat , and whose very shadow have depart from 
 the land ; for the big equestrian statue of Charles IV . at the entrance 
 of the Alameda , tower white against the tree , be only know to the 
 folk from the country and to the beggar of the town that sleep on the 
 step around the pedestal , as the Horse of Stone . the other Carlos , 
 turn off to the left with a rapid clatter of hoof on the disjoint 
 pavement - Don Carlos Gould , in his english clothe , look as 
 incongruous , but much more at home than the kingly cavalier reining in 
 his steed on the pedestal above the sleep lepero , with his marble 
 arm raise towards the marble rim of a plumed hat . 
 the weather - stain effigy of the mount king , with its vague 
 suggestion of a saluting gesture , seem to present an inscrutable 
 breast to the political change which have rob it of its very name ; 
 but neither do the other horseman , well know to the people , keen and 
 alive on his well - shape , slate - colour beast with a white eye , wear 
 his heart on the sleeve of his english coat . his mind preserve its 
 steady poise as if shelter in the passionless stability of private 
 and public decency at home in Europe . he accept with a like calm the 
 shocking manner in which the Sulaco lady smother their face with 
 pearl powder till they look like white plaster cast with beautiful 
 live eye , the peculiar gossip of the town , and the continuous 
 political change , the constant ' saving of the country , " which to his 
 wife seem a puerile and bloodthirsty game of murder and rapine play 
 with terrible earnestness by depraved child . in the early day of 
 her Costaguana life , the little lady use to clench her hand with 
 exasperation at not be able to take the public affair of the country 
 as seriously as the incidental atrocity of method deserve . she see in 
 they a comedy of naive pretence , but hardly anything genuine except 
 her own appalled indignation . Charles , very quiet and twist his long 
 moustache , would decline to discuss they at all . once , however , he 
 observe to she gently - 
 " my dear , you seem to forget that I be bear here . " these few word make 
 her pause as if they have be a sudden revelation . perhaps the mere 
 fact of be bear in the country do make a difference . she have a great 
 confidence in her husband ; it have always be very great . he have strike 
 her imagination from the first by his unsentimentalism , by that very 
 quietude of mind which she have erect in her thought for a sign of 
 perfect competency in the business of living . Don Jose Avellanos , their 
 neighbour across the street , a statesman , a poet , a man of culture , who 
 have represent his country at several European Courts   and have suffer 
 untold indignity as a state prisoner in the time of the tyrant Guzman 
 Bento , use to declare in Dona Emilia 's drawing - room that Carlos have 
 all the english quality of character with a truly patriotic heart . 
 Mrs. Gould , raise her eye to her husband 's thin , red and tan face , 
 could not detect the slight quiver of a feature at what he must have 
 hear say of his patriotism . perhaps he have just dismount on his 
 return from the mine ; he be English enough to disregard the hot 
 hour of the day . Basilio , in a livery of white linen and a red sash , 
 have squat for a moment behind his heel to unstrap the heavy , blunt 
 spur in the patio ; and then the Senor Administrator would go up the 
 staircase into the gallery . row of plant in pot , range on the 
 balustrade between the pilaster of the arch , screen the corredor 
 with their leaf and flower from the quadrangle below , whose paved 
 space be the true hearthstone of a south american house , where the quiet 
 hour of domestic life be mark by the shifting of light and shadow on 
 the flagstone . 
 Senor Avellanos be in the habit of cross the patio at five o'clock 
 almost every day . Don Jose choose to come over at tea - time because the 
 english rite at Dona Emilia 's house remind he of the time he live in 
 London as Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James . he do 
 not like tea ; and , usually , rock his american chair , his neat little 
 shiny boot cross on the foot - rest , he would talk on and on with a 
 sort of complacent virtuosity wonderful in a man of his age , while he 
 hold the cup in his hand for a long time . his close - cropped head be 
 perfectly white ; his eye coalblack . 
 on see Charles Gould step into the sala he would nod provisionally 
 and go on to the end of the oratorial period . only then he would say - 
 " Carlos , my friend , you have ride from San Tome in the heat of the 
 day . always the true english activity . no ? what ? " 
 he drink up all the tea at once in one draught . this performance 
 be invariably follow by a slight shudder and a low , involuntary 
 " br - r - r - r , " which be not cover by the hasty exclamation , " Excellent ! " 
 then give up the empty cup into his young friend 's hand , extend with 
 a smile , he continue to expatiate upon the patriotic nature of the San 
 Tome mine for the simple pleasure of talk fluently , it seem , while 
 his recline body jerk backwards and forwards in a rock - chair of 
 the sort export from the United States . the ceiling of the large 
 drawing - room of the Casa Gould extend its white level far above 
 his head . the loftiness dwarf the mixture of heavy , straight - back 
 spanish chair of brown wood with leathern seat , and european 
 furniture , low , and cushion all over , like squat little monster 
 gorge to burst with steel spring and horsehair . there be 
 knick - knack on little table , mirror let into the wall above marble 
 console , square space of carpet under the two group of armchair , 
 each preside over by a deep sofa ; small rug scatter all over the 
 floor of red tile ; three window from the ceiling down to the ground , 
 opening on a balcony , and flank by the perpendicular fold of the 
 dark hanging . the stateliness of ancient day linger between the four 
 high , smooth wall , tint a delicate primrose - colour ; and Mrs. Gould , 
 with her little head and shin coil of hair , sit in a cloud of 
 muslin and lace before a slender mahogany table , resemble a fairy pose 
 lightly before dainty philtre dispense out of vessel of silver and 
 porcelain . 
 Mrs. Gould know the history of the San Tome mine . work in the early 
 day mostly by mean of lash on the back of slave , its yield have 
 be pay for in its own weight of human bone . whole tribe of Indians 
 have perish in the exploitation ; and then the mine be abandon , since 
 with this primitive method it have cease to make a profitable return , 
 no matter how many corps be throw into its maw . then it become 
 forget . it be rediscover after the War of Independence . an english 
 company obtain the right to work it , and find so rich a vein that 
 neither the exaction of successive government , nor the periodical 
 raid of recruit officer upon the population of pay miner they have 
 create , could discourage their perseverance . but in the end , during the 
 long turmoil of pronunciamento that follow the death of the famous 
 Guzman Bento , the native miner , incite to revolt by the emissary 
 send out from the capital , have rise upon their English chief and 
 murder they to a man . the decree of confiscation which appear 
 immediately afterwards in the Diario Official , publish in Sta . Marta , 
 begin with the word : " justly incense at the grind oppression of 
 foreigner , actuate by sordid motif of gain rather than by love for a 
 country where they come impoverished to seek their fortune , the mining 
 population of San Tome , etc . . . . " and end with the declaration : " the 
 chief of the State have resolve to exercise to the full his power 
 of clemency . the mine , which by every law , international , human , and 
 divine , revert now to the Government as national property , shall remain 
 close till the sword draw for the sacred defence of liberal principle 
 have accomplish its mission of secure the happiness of our beloved 
 country . " 
 and for many year this be the last of the San Tome mine . what 
 advantage that Government have expect from the spoliation , it be 
 impossible to tell now . Costaguana be make with difficulty to pay a 
 beggarly money compensation to the family of the victim , and then 
 the matter drop out of diplomatic despatch . but afterwards another 
 Government bethink itself of that valuable asset . it be an ordinary 
 Costaguana Government - the fourth in six year - but it judge of its 
 opportunity sanely . it remember the San Tome mine with a secret 
 conviction of its worthlessness in their own hand , but with an 
 ingenious insight into the various use a silver mine can be put to , 
 apart from the sordid process of extract the metal from under the 
 ground . the father of Charles Gould , for a long time one of the most 
 wealthy merchant of Costaguana , have already lose a considerable part of 
 his fortune in force loan to the successive government . he be a man 
 of calm judgment , who never dream of press his claim ; and when , 
 suddenly , the perpetual concession of the San Tome mine be offer to 
 he in full settlement , his alarm become extreme . he be verse in the 
 way of government . indeed , the intention of this affair , though no 
 doubt deeply meditate in the closet , lie open on the surface of the 
 document present urgently for his signature . the third and most 
 important clause stipulate that the concession - holder should pay at 
 once to the Government five year ' royalty on the estimate output of 
 the mine . 
 Mr. Gould , senior , defend himself from this fatal favour with many 
 argument and entreaty , but without success . he know nothing of 
 mining ; he have no means to put his concession on the european market ; 
 the mine as a work concern do not exist . the building have be 
 burn down , the mining plant have be destroy , the mining population 
 have disappear from the neighbourhood year and year ago ; the very 
 road have vanish under a flood of tropical vegetation as effectually 
 as if swallow by the sea ; and the main gallery have fall in within a 
 hundred yard from the entrance . it be no long an abandon mine ; it 
 be a wild , inaccessible , and rocky gorge of the Sierra , where vestige 
 of charred timber , some heap of smash brick , and a few shapeless 
 piece of rusty iron could have be find under the matted mass of 
 thorny creeper cover the ground . Mr. Gould , senior , do not desire 
 the perpetual possession of that desolate locality ; in fact , the mere 
 vision of it arise before his mind in the still watch of the night 
 have the power to exasperate he into hour of hot and agitated insomnia . 
 it so happen , however , that the Finance Minister of the time be a 
 man to whom , in year go by , Mr. Gould have , unfortunately , decline to 
 grant some small pecuniary assistance , base his refusal on the ground 
 that the applicant be a notorious gambler and cheat , besides be more 
 than half suspect of a robbery with violence on a wealthy ranchero in 
 a remote country district , where he be actually exercise the function 
 of a judge . now , after reach his exalt position , that politician 
 have proclaim his intention to repay evil with good to Senor 
 Gould - the poor man . he affirm and reaffirm this resolution in the 
 drawing - room of Sta . Marta , in a soft and implacable voice , and 
 with such malicious glance that Mr. Gould 's good friend advise he 
 earnestly to attempt no bribery to get the matter drop . it would have 
 be useless . indeed , it would not have be a very safe proceeding . 
 such be also the opinion of a stout , loud - voice lady of french 
 extraction , the daughter , she say , of an officer of high rank    officier 
 superieur de l'armee   , who be accommodate with lodging within the 
 wall of a secularize convent next door to the Ministry of Finance . 
 that florid person , when approach on behalf of Mr. Gould in a proper 
 manner , and with a suitable present , shake her head despondently . she 
 be good - natured , and her despondency be genuine . she imagine she 
 could not take money in consideration of something she could not 
 accomplish . the friend of Mr. Gould , charge with the delicate mission , 
 use to say afterwards that she be the only honest person closely or 
 remotely connect with the Government he have ever meet . " no go , " she 
 have say with a cavalier , husky intonation which be natural to she , and 
 use turn of expression more suitable to a child of parent unknown 
 than to the orphan daughter of a general officer . " no ; it be no go . Pas 
 moyen , mon garcon . C'est dommage , tout de meme . ah ! zut ! Je ne vole 
 pas mon monde . Je ne suis pas ministre - moi ! vous pouvez emporter votre 
 petit sac . " 
 for a moment , bite her carmine lip , she deplore inwardly the tyranny 
 of the rigid principle govern the sale of her influence in high 
 place . then , significantly , and with a touch of impatience , " Allez , " 
 she add , " et dite bien a votre bonhomme - entendez - vous ? - qu'il faut 
 avaler la pilule . " 
 after such a warning there be nothing for it but to sign and pay . 
 Mr. Gould have swallow the pill , and it be as though it have be 
 compound of some subtle poison that act directly on his brain . he 
 become at once mine - ridden , and as he be well read in light literature 
 it take to his mind the form of the Old Man of the Sea fasten upon his 
 shoulder . he also begin to dream of vampire . Mr. Gould exaggerate 
 to himself the disadvantage of his new position , because he view it 
 emotionally . his position in Costaguana be no bad than before . but 
 man be a desperately conservative creature , and the extravagant novelty 
 of this outrage upon his purse distress his sensibility . everybody 
 around he be be rob by the grotesque and murderous band that 
 play their game of government and revolution after the death of 
 Guzman Bento . his experience have teach he that , however short 
 the plunder might fall of their legitimate expectation , no gang in 
 possession of the Presidential Palace would be so incompetent as to 
 suffer itself to be baffle by the want of a pretext . the first casual 
 colonel of the barefooted army of scarecrow that come along be able to 
 expose with force and precision to any mere civilian his title to a sum 
 of 10,000 dollar ; the while his hope would be immutably fix upon a 
 gratuity , at any rate , of no less than a thousand . Mr. Gould know that 
 very well , and , arm with resignation , have wait for well time . but 
 to be rob under the form of legality and business be intolerable to 
 his imagination . Mr. Gould , the father , have one fault in his sagacious 
 and honourable character : he attach too much importance to form . it be 
 a fail common to mankind , whose view be ting by prejudice . there 
 be for he in that affair a malignancy of perverted justice which , by 
 mean of a moral shock , attack his vigorous physique . " it will end 
 by kill I , " he use to affirm many time a day . and , in fact , since 
 that time he begin to suffer from fever , from liver pain , and mostly 
 from a worrying inability to think of anything else . the Finance 
 Minister could have form no conception of the profound subtlety of his 
 revenge . even Mr. Gould 's letter to his fourteen - year - old boy Charles , 
 then away in England for his education , come at last to talk of 
 practically nothing but the mine . he groan over the injustice , the 
 persecution , the outrage of that mine ; he occupy whole page in the 
 exposition of the fatal consequence attach to the possession of that 
 mine from every point of view , with every dismal inference , with word 
 of horror at the apparently eternal character of that curse . for the 
 Concession have be grant to he and his descendant for ever . he 
 implore his son never to return to Costaguana , never to claim any 
 part of his inheritance there , because it be taint by the infamous 
 concession ; never to touch it , never to approach it , to forget that 
 America exist , and pursue a mercantile career in Europe . and each 
 letter end with bitter self - reproach for have stay too long in 
 that cavern of thief , intriguer , and brigand . 
 to be tell repeatedly that one 's future be blight because of the 
 possession of a silver mine be not , at the age of fourteen , a matter 
 of prime importance as to its main statement ; but in its form it be 
 calculate to excite a certain amount of wonder and attention . in course 
 of time the boy , at first only puzzle by the angry jeremiad , but 
 rather sorry for his dad , begin to turn the matter over in his mind in 
 such moment as he could spare from play and study . in about a year he 
 have evolve from the lecture of the letter a definite conviction 
 that there be a silver mine in the Sulaco province of the Republic of 
 Costaguana , where poor Uncle Harry have be shoot by soldier a great 
 many year before . there be also connect closely with that mine a 
 thing call the " iniquitous Gould Concession , " apparently write on 
 a paper which his father desire ardently to " tear and fle into the 
 face " of president , member of judicature , and minister of State . 
 and this desire persist , though the name of these people , he notice , 
 seldom remain the same for a whole year together . this desire   since 
 the thing be iniquitous   seem quite natural to the boy , though why 
 the affair be iniquitous he do not know . afterwards , with advance 
 wisdom , he manage to clear the plain truth of the business from the 
 fantastic intrusion of the Old Man of the Sea , vampire , and ghoul , 
 which have lend to his father 's correspondence the flavour of a gruesome 
 Arabian Nights tale . in the end , the grow youth attain to as 
 close an intimacy with the San Tome mine as the old man who write these 
 plaintive and enraged letter on the other side of the sea . he have be 
 make several time already to pay heavy fine for neglect to work the 
 mine , he report , besides other sum extract from he on account 
 of future royalty , on the ground that a man with such a valuable 
 concession in his pocket could not refuse his financial assistance to 
 the Government of the Republic . the last of his fortune be pass away 
 from he against worthless receipt , he write , in a rage , whilst he be 
 be point out as an individual who have know how to secure enormous 
 advantage from the necessity of his country . and the young man in 
 Europe grow more and more interested in that thing which could provoke 
 such a tumult of word and passion . 
 he think of it every day ; but he think of it without bitterness . it 
 might have be an unfortunate affair for his poor dad , and the 
 whole story throw a queer light upon the social and political life of 
 Costaguana . the view he take of it be sympathetic to his father , yet 
 calm and reflective . his personal feeling have not be outraged , and it 
 be difficult to resent with proper and durable indignation the physical 
 or mental anguish of another organism , even if that other organism be 
 one 's own father . by the time he be twenty Charles Gould have , in his 
 turn , fall under the spell of the San Tome mine . but it be another 
 form of enchantment , more suitable to his youth , into whose magic 
 formula there enter hope , vigour , and self - confidence , instead of 
 weary indignation and despair . leave after he be twenty to his own 
 guidance   except for the severe injunction not to return to Costaguana , 
 he have pursue his study in Belgium and France with the idea of 
 qualify for a mining engineer . but this scientific aspect of his 
 labour remain vague and imperfect in his mind . mine have acquire for 
 he a dramatic interest . he study their peculiarity from a personal 
 point of view , too , as one would study the varied character of man . he 
 visit they as one go with curiosity to call upon remarkable person . 
 he visit mine in Germany , in Spain , in Cornwall . abandon working 
 have for he strong fascination . their desolation appeal to he like 
 the sight of human misery , whose cause be varied and profound . they 
 might have be worthless , but also they might have be misunderstood . 
 his future wife be the first , and perhaps the only person to detect 
 this secret mood which govern the profoundly sensible , almost 
 voiceless attitude of this man towards the world of material thing . and 
 at once her delight in he , linger with half - open wing like those 
 bird that can not rise easily from a flat level , find a pinnacle from 
 which to soar up into the sky . 
 they have become acquainted in Italy , where the future Mrs. Gould be 
 stay with an old and pale aunt who , year before , have marry a 
 middle - aged , impoverished italian marquis . she now mourn that man , who 
 have know how to give up his life to the independence and unity of his 
 country , who have know how to be as enthusiastic in his generosity as 
 the young of those who fall for that very cause of which old Giorgio 
 Viola be a drift relic , as a broken spar be suffer to float away 
 disregard after a naval victory . the Marchesa lead a still , whispering 
 existence , nun - like in her black robe and a white band over the 
 forehead , in a corner of the first floor of an ancient and ruinous 
 palace , whose big , empty hall downstairs shelter under their paint 
 ceiling the harvest , the fowl , and even the cattle , together with the 
 whole family of the tenant farmer . 
 the two young people have meet in Lucca . after that meet Charles Gould 
 visit no mine , though they go together in a carriage , once , to see 
 some marble quarry , where the work resemble mining in so far that 
 it also be the tearing of the raw material of treasure from the earth . 
 Charles Gould do not open his heart to she in any set speech . he 
 simply go on act and think in her sight . this be the true method 
 of sincerity . one of his frequent remark be , " I think sometimes that 
 poor father take a wrong view of that San Tome business . " and they 
 discuss that opinion long and earnestly , as if they could influence a 
 mind across half the globe ; but in reality they discuss it because the 
 sentiment of love can enter into any subject and live ardently in remote 
 phrase . for this natural reason these discussion be precious to Mrs. 
 Gould in her engaged state . Charles fear that Mr. Gould , senior , be 
 waste his strength and make himself ill by his effort to get rid 
 of the Concession . " I fancy that this be not the kind of handle it 
 require , " he muse aloud , as if to himself . and when she wonder 
 frankly that a man of character should devote his energy to plot 
 and intrigue , Charles would remark , with a gentle concern that 
 understand her wonder , " you must not forget that he be bear there . " 
 she would set her quick mind to work upon that , and then make the 
 inconsequent retort , which he accept as perfectly sagacious , because , 
 in fact , it be so - 
 " well , and you ? you be bear there , too . " 
 he know his answer . 
 " that be different . I have   be away ten year . Dad never have such a long 
 spell ; and it be more than thirty year ago . " 
 she be the first person to whom he open his lip after receive the 
 news of his father 's death . 
 " it have kill he ! " he say . 
 he have walk straight out of town with the news , straight out before 
 he in the noonday sun on the white road , and his foot have bring 
 he face to face with she in the hall of the ruin palazzo , a room 
 magnificent and naked , with here and there a long strip of damask , black 
 with damp and age , hang down on a bare panel of the wall . it be 
 furnish with exactly one gilt armchair , with a broken back , and an 
 octagon columnar stand bear a heavy marble vase ornament with 
 sculpture mask and garland of flower , and crack from top to 
 bottom . Charles Gould be dusty with the white dust of the road lie 
 on his boot , on his shoulder , on his cap with two peak . water drip 
 from under it all over his face , and he grasp a thick oaken cudgel in 
 his bare right hand . 
 she go very pale under the rose of her big straw hat , gloved , 
 swing a clear sunshade , catch just as she be go out to meet he 
 at the bottom of the hill , where three poplar stand near the wall of a 
 vineyard . 
 " it have kill he ! " he repeat . " he ought to have have many year yet . 
 we be a long - live family . " 
 she be too startled to say anything ; he be contemplate with a 
 penetrating and motionless stare the crack marble urn as though he 
 have resolve to fix its shape for ever in his memory . it be only when , 
 turn suddenly to she , he blurt out twice , " I have   come to you - I have 
 come straight to you - , " without be able to finish his phrase , that 
 the great pitifulness of that lonely and torment death in Costaguana 
 come to she with the full force of its misery . he catch hold of her 
 hand , raise it to his lip , and at that she drop her parasol to pat 
 he on the cheek , murmur " poor boy , " and begin to dry her eye under 
 the downward curve of her hat - brim , very small in her simple , white 
 frock , almost like a lost child cry in the degraded grandeur of the 
 noble hall , while he stand by she , again perfectly motionless in the 
 contemplation of the marble urn . 
 afterwards they go out for a long walk , which be silent till he 
 exclaim suddenly - 
 " yes . but if he have only grapple with it in a proper way ! " 
 and then they stop . everywhere there be long shadow lie on the 
 hill , on the road , on the enclose field of olive tree ; the shadow 
 of poplar , of wide chestnut , of farm building , of stone wall ; and 
 in mid - air the sound of a bell , thin and alert , be like the throbbing 
 pulse of the sunset glow . her lip be slightly part as though in 
 surprise that he should not be look at she with his usual expression . 
 his usual expression be unconditionally approve and attentive . he be 
 in his talk with she the most anxious and deferential of dictator , 
 an attitude that please she immensely . it affirm her power without 
 detracting from his dignity . that slight girl , with her little foot , 
 little hand , little face attractively overweighte by great coil of 
 hair ; with a rather large mouth , whose mere parting seem to breathe 
 upon you the fragrance of frankness and generosity , have the fastidious 
 soul of an experienced woman . she be , before all thing and all 
 flattery , careful of her pride in the object of her choice . but now he 
 be actually not look at she at all ; and his expression be tense and 
 irrational , as be natural in a man who elect to stare at nothing past a 
 young girl 's head . 
 " well , yes . it be iniquitous . they corrupt he thoroughly , the poor 
 old boy . oh ! why would not   he let I go back to he ? but now I shall know 
 how to grapple with this . " 
 after pronounce these word with immense assurance , he glance down at 
 she , and at once fall a prey to distress , incertitude , and fear . 
 the only thing he want to know now , he say , be whether she do love 
 he enough - whether she would have the courage to go with he so far 
 away ? he put these question to she in a voice that tremble with 
 anxiety - for he be a determined man . 
 she do . she would . and immediately the future hostess of all the 
 Europeans in Sulaco have the physical experience of the earth fall 
 away from under she . it vanish completely , even to the very sound of 
 the bell . when her foot touch the ground again , the bell be still 
 ring in the valley ; she put her hand up to her hair , breathe 
 quickly , and glance up and down the stony lane . it be reassuringly 
 empty . meantime , Charles , step with one foot into a dry and dusty 
 ditch , pick up the open parasol , which have bound away from they 
 with a martial sound of drum tap . he hand it to she soberly , a little 
 crestfallen . 
 they turn back , and after she have slip her hand on his arm , the 
 first word he pronounce be - 
 " it be lucky that we shall be able to settle in a coast town . you have 
 hear its name . it be Sulaco . I be so glad poor father do get that 
 house . he buy a big house there year ago , in order that there should 
 always be a Casa Gould in the principal town of what use to be call 
 the Occidental Province . I live there once , as a small boy , with my 
 dear mother , for a whole year , while poor father be away in the United 
 States on business . you shall be the new mistress of the Casa Gould . " 
 and later , in the inhabited corner of the Palazzo above the vineyard , 
 the marble hill , the pine and olive of Lucca , he also say - 
 " the name of Gould have be always highly respect in Sulaco . my uncle 
 Harry be chief of the State for some time , and have leave a great name 
 amongst the first family . by this I mean the pure Creole family , who 
 take no part in the miserable farce of government . Uncle Harry be no 
 adventurer . in Costaguana we Goulds be no adventurer . he be of the 
 country , and he love it , but he remain essentially an englishman 
 in his idea . he make use of the political cry of his time . it be 
 Federation . but he be no politician . he simply stand up for social 
 order out of pure love for rational liberty and from his hate of 
 oppression . there be no nonsense about he . he go to work in his 
 own way because it seem right , just as I feel I must lay hold of that 
 mine . " 
 in such word he talk to she because his memory be very full of the 
 country of his childhood , his heart of his life with that girl , and his 
 mind of the San Tome Concession . he add that he would have to leave 
 she for a few day to find an American , a man from San Francisco , who 
 be still somewhere in Europe . a few month before he have make his 
 acquaintance in an old historic german town , situate in a mining 
 district . the American have his womankind with he , but seem lonely 
 while they be sketch all day long the old doorway and the 
 turrete corner of the mediaeval house . Charles Gould have with he the 
 inseparable companionship of the mine . the other man be interested in 
 mining enterprise , know something of Costaguana , and be no stranger to 
 the name of Gould . they have talk together with some intimacy which 
 be make possible by the difference of their age . Charles want now 
 to find that capitalist of shrewd mind and accessible character . his 
 father 's fortune in Costaguana , which he have suppose to be still 
 considerable , seem to have melt in the rascally crucible of 
 revolution . apart from some ten thousand pound deposit in England , 
 there appear to be nothing leave except the house in Sulaco , a vague 
 right of forest exploitation in a remote and savage district , and the 
 San Tome Concession , which have attend his poor father to the very 
 brink of the grave . 
 he explain those thing . it be late when they part . she have never 
 before give he such a fascinating vision of herself . all the eagerness 
 of youth for a strange life , for great distance , for a future in which 
 there be an air of adventure , of combat - a subtle thought of redress 
 and conquest , have fill she with an intense excitement , which she 
 return to the giver with a more open and exquisite display of 
 tenderness . 
 he leave she to walk down the hill , and directly he find himself alone 
 he become sober . that irreparable change a death make in the course 
 of our daily thought can be feel in a vague and poignant discomfort 
 of mind . it hurt Charles Gould to feel that never more , by no effort of 
 will , would he be able to think of his father in the same way he use 
 to think of he when the poor man be alive . his breathing image be 
 no long in his power . this consideration , closely affect his own 
 identity , fill his breast with a mournful and angry desire for action . 
 in this his instinct be unerre . action be consolatory . it be the 
 enemy of thought and the friend of flattering illusion . only in the 
 conduct of our action can we find the sense of mastery over the Fates . 
 for his action , the mine be obviously the only field . it be imperative 
 sometimes to know how to disobey the solemn wish of the dead . 
 he resolve firmly to make his disobedience as thorough   by way of 
 atonement   as it well could be . the mine have be the cause of an absurd 
 moral disaster ; its working must be make a serious and moral success . 
 he owe it to the dead man 's memory . such be the - properly 
 speaking - emotion of Charles Gould . his thought run upon the mean 
 of raise a large amount of capital in San Francisco or elsewhere ; and 
 incidentally there occur to he also the general reflection that the 
 counsel of the depart must be an unsound guide . not one of they 
 could be aware beforehand what enormous change the death of any give 
 individual may produce in the very aspect of the world . 
 the late phase in the history of the mine Mrs. Gould know from 
 personal experience . it be in essence the history of her married life . 
 the mantle of the Goulds ' hereditary position in Sulaco have descend 
 amply upon her little person ; but she would not allow the peculiarity 
 of the strange garment to weigh down the vivacity of her character , 
 which be the sign of no mere mechanical sprightliness , but of an 
 eager intelligence . it must not be suppose that Mrs. Gould 's mind be 
 masculine . a woman with a masculine mind be not a being of 
 superior efficiency ; she be simply a phenomenon of imperfect 
 differentiation - interestingly barren and without importance . Dona 
 Emilia 's intelligence being feminine lead she to achieve the conquest of 
 Sulaco , simply by light the way for her unselfishness and sympathy . 
 she could converse charmingly , but she be not talkative . the wisdom of 
 the heart have no concern with the erection or demolition of theory 
 any more than with the defence of prejudice , have no random word at its 
 command . the word it pronounce have the value of act of integrity , 
 tolerance , and compassion . a woman 's true tenderness , like the true 
 virility of man , be express in action of a conquering kind . the lady 
 of Sulaco adore Mrs. Gould . " they still look upon I as something of a 
 monster , " Mrs. Gould have say pleasantly to one of the three gentleman 
 from San Francisco she have to entertain in her new Sulaco house just 
 about a year after her marriage . 
 they be her first visitor from abroad , and they have come to look at 
 the San Tome mine . she jest most agreeably , they think ; and Charles 
 Gould , besides know thoroughly what he be about , have show himself 
 a real hustler . these fact cause they to be well disposed towards his 
 wife . an unmistakable enthusiasm , point by a slight flavour of irony , 
 make her talk of the mine absolutely fascinating to her visitor , and 
 provoke they to grave and indulgent smile in which there be a good 
 deal of deference . perhaps have they know how much she be inspire by 
 an idealistic view of success they would have be amazed at the state 
 of her mind as the spanish - american lady have be amazed at the 
 tireless activity of her body . she would - in her own word - have 
 be for they ' something of a monster . " however , the Goulds be in 
 essential a reticent couple , and their guest depart without the 
 suspicion of any other purpose but simple profit in the working of a 
 silver mine . Mrs. Gould have out her own carriage , with two white mule , 
 to drive they down to the harbour , whence the Ceres be to carry they 
 off into the Olympus of plutocrat . Captain Mitchell have snatch at the 
 occasion of leave - taking to remark to Mrs. Gould , in a low , confidential 
 mutter , " this mark an epoch . " 
 Mrs. Gould love the patio of her spanish house . a broad flight of stone 
 step be overlook silently from a niche in the wall by a Madonna in 
 blue robe with the crown child sit on her arm . subdued voice 
 ascend in the early morning from the paved well of the quadrangle , 
 with the stamping of horse and mule lead out in pair to drink at the 
 cistern . a tangle of slender bamboo stem droop its narrow , blade - like 
 leaf over the square pool of water , and the fat coachman sit muffle 
 up on the edge , hold lazily the end of halter in his hand . 
 barefoote servant pass to and fro , issue from dark , low doorway 
 below ; two laundry girl with basket of wash linen ; the baker with 
 the tray of bread make for the day ; Leonarda - her own camerista - bear 
 high up , swing from her hand raise above her raven black head , a bunch 
 of starched under - skirt dazzlingly white in the slant of sunshine . then 
 the old porter would hobble in , sweep the flagstone , and the 
 house be ready for the day . all the lofty room on three side of 
 the quadrangle open into each other and into the corredor , with its 
 wrought - iron railing and a border of flower , whence , like the lady of 
 the mediaeval castle , she could witness from above all the departure 
 and arrival of the Casa , to which the sonorous arch gateway lend an 
 air of stately importance . 
 she have watch her carriage roll away with the three guest from the 
 north . she smile . their three arm go up simultaneously to their 
 three hat . Captain Mitchell , the fourth , in attendance , have already 
 begin a pompous discourse . then she linger . she linger , approach 
 her face to the cluster of flower here and there as if to give time 
 to her thought to catch up with her slow footstep along the straight 
 vista of the corredor . 
 a fringe indian hammock from Aroa , gay with coloured featherwork , have 
 be swing judiciously in a corner that catch the early sun ; for the 
 morning be cool in Sulaco . the cluster of flor de noche buena blaze 
 in great mass before the open glass door of the reception room . a 
 big green parrot , brilliant like an emerald in a cage that flash like 
 gold , scream out ferociously , " Viva Costaguana ! " then call twice 
 mellifluously , " Leonarda ! Leonarda ! " in imitation of Mrs. Gould 's voice , 
 and suddenly take refuge in immobility and silence . Mrs. Gould reach 
 the end of the gallery and put her head through the door of her 
 husband 's room . 
 Charles Gould , with one foot on a low wooden stool , be already 
 strap his spur . he want to hurry back to the mine . Mrs. Gould , 
 without come in , glance about the room . one tall , broad bookcase , 
 with glass door , be full of book ; but in the other , without shelf , 
 and line with red baize , be arrange firearm : Winchester carbine , 
 revolver , a couple of shot - gun , and even two pair of double - barrel 
 holster pistol . between they , by itself , upon a strip of scarlet 
 velvet , hang an old cavalry sabre , once the property of Don Enrique 
 Gould , the hero of the Occidental Province , present by Don Jose 
 Avellanos , the hereditary friend of the family . 
 otherwise , the plaster white wall be completely bare , except for 
 a water - colour sketch of the San Tome mountain - the work of Dona Emilia 
 herself . in the middle of the red - tile floor stand two long table 
 litter with plan and paper , a few chair , and a glass show - case 
 contain specimen of ore from the mine . Mrs. Gould , look at all 
 these thing in turn , wonder aloud why the talk of these wealthy and 
 enterprise man discuss the prospect , the working , and the safety 
 of the mine render she so impatient and uneasy , whereas she could talk 
 of the mine by the hour with her husband with unwearied interest and 
 satisfaction . and drop her eyelid expressively , she add - 
 " what do you feel about it , Charley ? " 
 then , surprised at her husband 's silence , she raise her eye , open 
 wide , as pretty as pale flower . he have do with the spur , and , 
 twist his moustache with both hand , horizontally , he contemplate 
 she from the height of his long leg with a visible appreciation of her 
 appearance . the consciousness of be thus contemplate pleased Mrs. 
 Gould . 
 " they be considerable man , " he say . 
 " I know . but have you listen to their conversation ? they do not   seem to 
 have understand anything they have see here . " 
 " they have see the mine . they have understand that to some purpose , " 
 Charles Gould interject , in defence of the visitor ; and then his 
 wife mention the name of the most considerable of the three . he be 
 considerable in finance and in industry . his name be familiar to many 
 million of people . he be so considerable that he would never have 
 travel so far away from the centre of his activity if the doctor have 
 not insist , with veiled menace , on his take a long holiday . 
 " Mr. Holroyd 's sense of religion , " Mrs. Gould pursue , " be shock 
 and disgust at the tawdriness of the dress - up saint in the 
 cathedral - the worship , he call it , of wood and tinsel . but it seem 
 to I that he look upon his own God as a sort of influential partner , 
 who get his share of profit in the endowment of church . that be a 
 sort of idolatry . he tell I he endow church every year , Charley . " 
 " no end of they , " say Mr. Gould , marvel inwardly at the mobility 
 of her physiognomy . " all over the country . he be famous for that sort of 
 munificence . " " oh , he do not   boast , " Mrs. Gould declare , scrupulously . 
 " I believe he be really a good man , but so stupid ! a poor Chulo who 
 offer a little silver arm or leg to thank his god for a cure be as 
 rational and more touching . " 
 " he be at the head of immense silver and iron interest , " Charles Gould 
 observe . 
 " ah , yes ! the religion of silver and iron . he be a very civil man , though 
 he look awfully solemn when he first see the Madonna on the staircase , 
 who be only wood and paint ; but he say nothing to I . my dear Charley , 
 I hear those man talk among themselves . can it be that they really wish 
 to become , for an immense consideration , drawer of water and hewer of 
 wood to all the country and nation of the earth ? " 
 " a man must work to some end , " Charles Gould say , vaguely . 
 Mrs. Gould , frown , survey he from head to foot . with his riding 
 breech , leather legging   an article of apparel never before see in 
 Costaguana , a Norfolk coat of grey flannel , and those great flame 
 moustache , he suggest an officer of cavalry turn gentleman farmer . 
 this combination be gratify to Mrs. Gould 's taste . " how thin the 
 poor boy be ! " she think . " he overwork himself . " but there be no 
 deny that his fine - draw , keen red face , and his whole , long - limbe , 
 lank person have an air of breeding and distinction . and Mrs. Gould 
 relent . 
 " I only wonder what you feel , " she murmur , gently . 
 during the last few day , as it happen , Charles Gould have be keep 
 too busy thinking twice before he speak to have pay much attention to 
 the state of his feeling . but theirs be a successful match , and he have 
 no difficulty in find his answer . 
 " the good of my feeling be in your keeping , my dear , " he say , 
 lightly ; and there be so much truth in that obscure phrase that he 
 experience towards she at the moment a great increase of gratitude and 
 tenderness . 
 Mrs. Gould , however , do not seem to find this answer in the least 
 obscure . she brighten up delicately ; already he have change his tone . 
 " but there be fact . the worth of the mine - as a mine - be beyond doubt . 
 it shall make we very wealthy . the mere work of it be a matter of 
 technical knowledge , which I have - which ten thousand other man in the 
 world have . but its safety , its continued existence as an enterprise , 
 give a return to man - to stranger , comparative stranger - who invest 
 money in it , be leave altogether in my hand . I have inspire confidence 
 in a man of wealth and position . you seem to think this perfectly 
 natural - do you ? well , I do not   know . I do not   know why I have ; but it be 
 a fact . this fact make everything possible , because without it I would 
 never have think of disregard my father 's wish . I would never 
 have dispose of the Concession as a speculator dispose of a valuable 
 right to a company - for cash and share , to grow rich eventually if 
 possible , but at any rate to put some money at once in his pocket . no . 
 even if it have be feasible - which I doubt - I would not have do so . 
 poor father do not understand . he be afraid I would hang on to the 
 ruinous thing , wait for just some such chance , and waste my life 
 miserably . that be the true sense of his prohibition , which we have 
 deliberately set aside . " 
 they be walk up and down the corredor . her head just reach to his 
 shoulder . his arm , extend downward , be about her waist . his spur 
 jingle slightly . 
 " he have not see I for ten year . he do not know I . he part from I 
 for my sake , and he would never let I come back . he be always talk 
 in his letter of leave Costaguana , of abandon everything and 
 make his escape . but he be too valuable a prey . they would have 
 throw he into one of their prison at the first suspicion . " 
 his spurred foot clink slowly . he be bend over his wife as they 
 walk . the big parrot , turn its head askew , follow their pacing 
 figure with a round , unblinking eye . 
 " he be a lonely man . ever since I be ten year old he use to talk to 
 I as if I have be grow up . when I be in Europe he write to I every 
 month . ten , twelve page every month of my life for ten year . and , 
 after all , he do not know I ! just think of it - ten whole year away ; 
 the year I be grow up into a man . he could not know I . do you 
 think he could ? " 
 Mrs. Gould shake her head negatively ; which be just what her husband 
 have expect from the strength of the argument . but she shake she 
 head negatively only because she think that no one could know her 
 Charles - really know he for what he be but herself . the thing be 
 obvious . it could be feel . it require no argument . and poor Mr. Gould , 
 senior , who have die too soon to ever hear of their engagement , remain 
 too shadowy a figure for she to be credit with knowledge of any sort 
 whatever . 
 " no , he do not understand . in my view this mine could never have be 
 a thing to sell . never ! after all his misery I simply could not have 
 touch it for money alone , " Charles Gould pursue : and she press she 
 head to his shoulder approvingly . 
 these two young people remember the life which have end wretchedly 
 just when their own life have come together in that splendour of hopeful 
 love , which to the most sensible mind appear like a triumph of good 
 over all the evil of the earth . a vague idea of rehabilitation have 
 enter the plan of their life . that it be so vague as to elude the 
 support of argument make it only the strong . it have present itself 
 to they at the instant when the woman 's instinct of devotion and the 
 man 's instinct of activity receive from the strong of illusion their 
 most powerful impulse . the very prohibition impose the necessity of 
 success . it be as if they have be morally bind to make good their 
 vigorous view of life against the unnatural error of weariness and 
 despair . if the idea of wealth be present to they it be only in so 
 far as it be bind with that other success . Mrs. Gould , an orphan from 
 early childhood and without fortune , bring up in an atmosphere of 
 intellectual interest , have never consider the aspect of great 
 wealth . they be too remote , and she have not learn that they be 
 desirable . on the other hand , she have not know anything of absolute 
 want . even the very poverty of her aunt , the Marchesa , have nothing 
 intolerable to a refined mind ; it seem in accord with a great grief : 
 it have the austerity of a sacrifice offer to a noble ideal . thus even 
 the most legitimate touch of materialism be want in Mrs. Gould 's 
 character . the dead man of whom she think with tenderness   because 
 he be Charley 's father   and with some impatience   because he have be 
 weak , must be put completely in the wrong . nothing else would do 
 to keep their prosperity without a stain on its only real , on its 
 immaterial side ! 
 Charles Gould , on his part , have be oblige to keep the idea of wealth 
 well to the fore ; but he bring it forward as a means , not as an end . 
 unless the mine be good business it could not be touch . he have to 
 insist on that aspect of the enterprise . it be his lever to move 
 man who have capital . and Charles Gould believe in the mine . he 
 know everything that could be know of it . his faith in the mine be 
 contagious , though it be not serve by a great eloquence ; but business 
 man be frequently as sanguine and imaginative as lover . they be 
 affect by a personality much oftener than people would suppose ; and 
 Charles Gould , in his unshaken assurance , be absolutely convincing . 
 besides , it be a matter of common knowledge to the man to whom he 
 address himself that mining in Costaguana be a game that could be 
 make considerably more than worth the candle . the man of affair know that 
 very well . the real difficulty in touch it be elsewhere . against 
 that there be an implication of calm and implacable resolution in 
 Charles Gould 's very voice . man of affair venture sometimes on act 
 that the common judgment of the world would pronounce absurd ; they make 
 their decision on apparently impulsive and human ground . " very well , " 
 have say the considerable personage to whom Charles Gould on his way 
 out through San Francisco have lucidly expose his point of view . " let we 
 suppose that the mining affair of Sulaco be take in hand . there would 
 then be in it : first , the house of Holroyd , which be all right ; then , 
 Mr. Charles Gould , a citizen of Costaguana , who be also all right ; and , 
 lastly , the Government of the Republic . so far this resemble the first 
 start of the Atacama nitrate field , where there be a financing house , 
 a gentleman of the name of Edwards , and - a Government ; or , rather , two 
 Governments - two south american government . and you know what come of 
 it . War come of it ; devastating and prolonged war come of it , Mr. Gould . 
 however , here we possess the advantage of have only one south 
 American Government hang around for plunder out of the deal . it be an 
 advantage ; but then there be degree of badness , and that Government be 
 the Costaguana Government . " 
 thus speak the considerable personage , the millionaire endower of 
 church on a scale befit the greatness of his native land - the same 
 to whom the doctor use the language of horrid and veiled menace . he 
 be a big - limbed , deliberate man , whose quiet burliness lend to an ample 
 silk - face frock - coat a superfine dignity . his hair be iron grey , his 
 eyebrow be still black , and his massive profile be the profile of 
 a Caesar 's head on an old roman coin . but his parentage be german and 
 Scotch and English , with remote strain of Danish and french blood , 
 give he the temperament of a Puritan and an insatiable imagination 
 of conquest . he be completely unbend to his visitor , because of the 
 warm introduction the visitor have bring from Europe , and because of 
 an irrational liking for earnestness and determination wherever meet , to 
 whatever end direct . 
 " the Costaguana Government shall play its hand for all it be worth - and 
 do not   you forget it , Mr. Gould . now , what be Costaguana ? it be the 
 bottomless pit of 10 per cent . loan and other fool investment . 
 european capital have be fling into it with both hand for year . not 
 our , though . we in this country know just about enough to keep indoor 
 when it rain . we can sit and watch . of course , some day we shall step 
 in . we be bind to . but there be no hurry . time itself have get to wait 
 on the great country in the whole of God 's Universe . we shall be 
 give the word for everything : industry , trade , law , journalism , art , 
 politic , and religion , from Cape Horn clear over to Smith 's Sound , 
 and beyond , too , if anything worth take hold of turn up at the North 
 Pole . and then we shall have the leisure to take in hand the outlying 
 island and continent of the earth . we shall run the world 's business 
 whether the world like it or not . the world can not   help it - and neither 
 can we , I guess . " 
 by this he mean to express his faith in destiny in word suitable to 
 his intelligence , which be unskille in the presentation of general 
 idea . his intelligence be nourish on fact ; and Charles Gould , whose 
 imagination have be permanently affect by the one great fact of a 
 silver mine , have no objection to this theory of the world 's future . 
 if it have seem distasteful for a moment it be because the sudden 
 statement of such vast eventuality dwarf almost to nothingness the 
 actual matter in hand . he and his plan and all the mineral wealth of 
 the Occidental Province appear suddenly rob of every vestige of 
 magnitude . the sensation be disagreeable ; but Charles Gould be not 
 dull . already he feel that he be produce a favourable impression ; the 
 consciousness of that flattering fact help he to a vague smile , which 
 his big interlocutor take for a smile of discreet and admire assent . 
 he smile quietly , too ; and immediately Charles Gould , with that mental 
 agility mankind will display in defence of a cherish hope , reflect 
 that the very apparent insignificance of his aim would help he to 
 success . his personality and his mine would be take up because it be 
 a matter of no great consequence , one way or another , to a man who 
 refer his action to such a prodigious destiny . and Charles Gould be 
 not humiliate by this consideration , because the thing remain as 
 big as ever for he . nobody else 's vast conception of destiny could 
 diminish the aspect of his desire for the redemption of the San Tome 
 mine . in comparison to the correctness of his aim , definite in space and 
 absolutely attainable within a limited time , the other man appear for 
 an instant as a dreamy idealist of no importance . 
 the great man , massive and benignant , have be look at he 
 thoughtfully ; when he break the short silence it be to remark that 
 concession fly about thick in the air of Costaguana . any simple soul 
 that just yearn to be take in could bring down a concession at the 
 first shot . 
 " our consul get their mouth stop with they , " he continue , with a 
 twinkle of genial scorn in his eye . but in a moment he become grave . 
 " a conscientious , upright man , that care nothing for boodle , and keep 
 clear of their intrigue , conspiracy , and faction , soon get his 
 passport . see that , Mr. Gould ? Persona non grata . that be the reason our 
 Government be never properly inform . on the other hand , Europe must be 
 keep out of this continent , and for proper interference on our part the 
 time be not yet ripe , I dare say . but we here - we be not this country 's 
 Government , neither be we simple soul . your affair be all right . the 
 main question for we be whether the second partner , and that be you , be 
 the right sort to hold his own against the third and unwelcome partner , 
 which be one or another of the high and mighty robber gang that run the 
 Costaguana Government . what do you think , Mr. Gould , eh ? " 
 he bent forward to look steadily into the unflinche eye of Charles 
 Gould , who , remember the large box full of his father 's letter , put 
 the accumulate scorn and bitterness of many year into the tone of his 
 answer - 
 " as far as the knowledge of these man and their method and their 
 politic be concern , I can answer for myself . I have be feed on 
 that sort of knowledge since I be a boy . I be not likely to fall into 
 mistake from excess of optimism . " 
 " not likely , eh ? that be all right . Tact and a stiff upper lip be what 
 you will want ; and you could bluff a little on the strength of your 
 backing . not too much , though . we will go with you as long as the thing 
 run straight . but we will not   be draw into any large trouble . this be the 
 experiment which I be willing to make . there be some risk , and we will 
 take it ; but if you can not   keep up your end , we will stand our loss , of 
 course , and then - we will let the thing go . this mine can wait ; it have 
 be shut up before , as you know . you must understand that under no 
 circumstance will we consent to throw good money after bad . " 
 thus the great personage have speak then , in his own private office , in 
 a great city where other man   very considerable in the eye of a vain 
 populace   wait with alacrity upon a wave of his hand . and rather more 
 than a year later , during his unexpected appearance in Sulaco , he have 
 emphasize his uncompromise attitude with a freedom of sincerity 
 permit to his wealth and influence . he do this with the less 
 reserve , perhaps , because the inspection of what have be do , and more 
 still the way in which successive step have be take , have impress 
 he with the conviction that Charles Gould be perfectly capable of 
 keep up his end . 
 " this young fellow , " he think to himself , " may yet become a power in 
 the land . " 
 this think flatter he , for hitherto the only account of this young 
 man he could give to his intimate be - 
 " my brother - in - law meet he in one of these one - horse old german town , 
 near some mine , and send he on to I with a letter . he be one of the 
 Costaguana Goulds , pure - breed englishman , but all bear in the country . 
 his uncle go into politic , be the last Provincial President of 
 Sulaco , and get shoot after a battle . his father be a prominent business 
 man in Sta . Marta , try to keep clear of their politic , and die 
 ruin after a lot of revolution . and that be your Costaguana in a 
 nutshell . " 
 of course , he be too great a man to be question as to his motif , 
 even by his intimate . the outside world be at liberty to wonder 
 respectfully at the hidden meaning of his action . he be so great a man 
 that his lavish patronage of the " pure form of Christianity "   which in 
 its naive form of church - building amuse Mrs. Gould   be look upon by 
 his fellow - citizen as the manifestation of a pious and humble spirit . 
 but in his own circle of the financial world the taking up of such a 
 thing as the San Tome mine be regard with respect , indeed , but rather 
 as a subject for discreet jocularity . it be a great man 's caprice . in 
 the great Holroyd build   an enormous pile of iron , glass , and block 
 of stone at the corner of two street , cobwebbe aloft by the radiation 
 of telegraph wire   the head of principal department exchange 
 humorous glance , which mean that they be not let into the secret 
 of the San Tome business . the Costaguana mail   it be never large - one 
 fairly heavy envelope   be take unopened straight into the great man 's 
 room , and no instruction deal with it have ever be issue thence . 
 the office whisper that he answer personally - and not by dictation 
 either , but actually write in his own hand , with pen and ink , and , it 
 be to be suppose , take a copy in his own private press copy - book , 
 inaccessible to profane eye . some scornful young man , insignificant 
 piece of minor machinery in that eleven - storey - high workshop of great 
 affair , express frankly their private opinion that the great chief 
 have do at last something silly , and be ashamed of his folly ; other , 
 elderly and insignificant , but full of romantic reverence for the 
 business that have devour their good year , use to mutter darkly and 
 knowingly that this be a portentous sign ; that the Holroyd connection 
 mean by - and - by to get hold of the whole Republic of Costaguana , lock , 
 stock , and barrel . but , in fact , the hobby theory be the right one . it 
 interest the great man to attend personally to the San Tome mine ; it 
 interest he so much that he allow this hobby to give a direction to 
 the first complete holiday he have take for quite a startling number 
 of year . he be not run a great enterprise there ; no mere railway 
 board or industrial corporation . he be run a man ! a success would 
 have please he very much on refreshingly novel ground ; but , on the 
 other side of the same feeling , it be incumbent upon he to cast it 
 off utterly at the first sign of failure . a man may be throw off . the 
 paper have unfortunately trumpet all over the land his journey to 
 Costaguana . if he be pleased at the way Charles Gould be go on , he 
 infuse an add grimness into his assurance of support . even at the 
 very last interview , half an hour or so before he roll out of the 
 patio , hat in hand , behind Mrs. Gould 's white mule , he have say in 
 Charles 's room - 
 " you go ahead in your own way , and I shall know how to help you as long 
 as you hold your own . but you may rest assure that in a give case we 
 shall know how to drop you in time . " 
 to this Charles Gould 's only answer have be : " you may begin send out 
 the machinery as soon as you like . " 
 and the great man have like this imperturbable assurance . the secret 
 of it be that to Charles Gould 's mind these uncompromise term be 
 agreeable . like this the mine preserve its identity , with which he have 
 endow it as a boy ; and it remain dependent on himself alone . it be 
 a serious affair , and he , too , take it grimly . 
 " of course , " he say to his wife , allude to this last conversation 
 with the depart guest , while they walk slowly up and down the 
 corredor , follow by the irritated eye of the parrot - " of course , a 
 man of that sort can take up a thing or drop it when he like . he will 
 suffer from no sense of defeat . he may have to give in , or he may have 
 to die to - morrow , but the great silver and iron interest will survive , 
 and some day will get hold of Costaguana along with the rest of the 
 world . " 
 they have stop near the cage . the parrot , catch the sound of a word 
 belong to his vocabulary , be move to interfere . parrot be very 
 human . 
 " Viva Costaguana ! " he shriek , with intense self - assertion , and , 
 instantly ruffle up his feather , assume an air of puff - up 
 somnolence behind the glitter wire . 
 " and do you believe that , Charley ? " Mrs. Gould ask . " this seem to I 
 most awful materialism , and - " 
 " my dear , it be nothing to I , " interrupt her husband , in a reasonable 
 tone . " I make use of what I see . what be it to I whether his talk be the 
 voice of destiny or simply a bit of clap - trap eloquence ? there be a good 
 deal of eloquence of one sort or another produce in both Americas . the 
 air of the New World seem favourable to the art of declamation . have 
 you forget how dear Avellanos can hold forth for hour here - ? " 
 " oh , but that be different , " protest Mrs. Gould , almost shocked . the 
 allusion be not to the point . Don Jose be a dear good man , who talk 
 very well , and be enthusiastic about the greatness of the San Tome 
 mine . " how can you compare they , Charles ? " she exclaim , reproachfully . 
 " he have suffer - and yet he hop . " 
 the work competence of man - which she never question - be very 
 surprising to Mrs. Gould , because upon so many obvious issue they 
 show themselves strangely muddle - head . 
 Charles Gould , with a careworn calmness which secure for he at once 
 his wife 's anxious sympathy , assure she that he be not compare . he 
 be an American himself , after all , and perhaps he could understand both 
 kind of eloquence - " if it be worth while to try , " he add , grimly . 
 but he have breathe the air of England long than any of his people have 
 do for three generation , and really he beg to be excuse . his 
 poor father could be eloquent , too . and he ask his wife whether she 
 remember a passage in one of his father 's last letter where Mr. 
 Gould have express the conviction that " God look wrathfully at these 
 country , or else he would let some ray of hope fall through a rift in 
 the appalling darkness of intrigue , bloodshed , and crime that hang over 
 the Queen of Continents . " 
 Mrs. Gould have not forget . " you read it to I , Charley , " she 
 murmur . " it be a striking pronouncement . how deeply your father must 
 have feel its terrible sadness ! " 
 " he do not like to be rob . it exasperate he , " say Charles Gould . 
 " but the image will serve well enough . what be want here be law , good 
 faith , order , security . any one can declaim about these thing , but I 
 pin my faith to material interest . only let the material interest once 
 get a firm footing , and they be bind to impose the condition on 
 which alone they can continue to exist . that be how your money - making be 
 justify here in the face of lawlessness and disorder . it be justify 
 because the security which it demand must be share with an oppressed 
 people . a well justice will come afterwards . that be your ray of hope . " 
 his arm press her slight form close to his side for a moment . " and 
 who know whether in that sense even the San Tome mine may not become 
 that little rift in the darkness which poor father despair of ever 
 see ? " 
 she glance up at he with admiration . he be competent ; he have give a 
 vast shape to the vagueness of her unselfish ambition . 
 " Charley , " she say , " you be splendidly disobedient . " 
 he leave she suddenly in the corredor to go and get his hat , a soft , grey 
 sombrero , an article of national costume which combine unexpectedly 
 well with his english get - up . he come back , a riding - whip under his arm , 
 button up a dogskin glove ; his face reflect the resolute nature of 
 his thought . his wife have wait for he at the head of the stair , and 
 before he give she the parting kiss he finish the conversation - 
 " what should be perfectly clear to we , " he say , " be the fact that there 
 be no go back . where could we begin life afresh ? we be in now for 
 all that there be in we . " 
 he bend over her upturned face very tenderly and a little remorsefully . 
 Charles Gould be competent because he have no illusion . the Gould 
 Concession have to fight for life with such weapon as could be find at 
 once in the mire of a corruption that be so universal as almost to lose 
 its significance . he be prepared to stoop for his weapon . for a moment 
 he feel as if the silver mine , which have kill his father , have decoy 
 he far than he mean to go ; and with the roundabout logic of 
 emotion , he feel that the worthiness of his life be bind up with 
 success . there be no go back . 
 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 Mrs. Gould be too intelligently sympathetic not to share that feeling . 
 it make life exciting , and she be too much of a woman not to like 
 excitement . but it frighten she , too , a little ; and when Don Jose 
 Avellanos , rock in the american chair , would go so far as to say , 
 " even , my dear Carlos , if you have fail ; even if some untoward event 
 be yet to destroy your work - which God forbid ! - you would have 
 deserve well of your country , " Mrs. Gould would look up from the 
 tea - table profoundly at her unmoved husband stir the spoon in the 
 cup as though he have not hear a word . 
 not that Don Jose anticipate anything of the sort . he could not praise 
 enough dear Carlos 's tact and courage . his English , rock - like quality 
 of character be his good safeguard , Don Jose affirm ; and , turn to 
 Mrs. Gould , " as to you , Emilia , my soul " - he would address she with the 
 familiarity of his age and old friendship - " you be as true a patriot as 
 though you have be bear in our midst . " 
 this might have be less or more than the truth . Mrs. Gould , 
 accompany her husband all over the province in the search for labour , 
 have see the land with a deep glance than a trueborn costaguanera 
 could have do . in her travel - wear riding habit , her face powder 
 white like a plaster cast , with a further protection of a small silk 
 mask during the heat of the day , she ride on a well - shape , light - foot 
 pony in the centre of a little cavalcade . two mozos de campo , 
 picturesque in great hat , with spurred bare heel , in white embroider 
 calzonera , leather jacket and striped ponchos , ride ahead with 
 carbine across their shoulder , sway in unison to the pace of the 
 horse . a tropilla of pack mule bring up the rear in charge of a thin 
 brown muleteer , sit his long - eared beast very near the tail , leg 
 thrust far forward , the wide brim of his hat set far back , make a sort 
 of halo for his head . an old Costaguana officer , a retired senior major 
 of humble origin , but patronize by the first family on account of 
 his Blanco opinion , have be recommend by Don Jose for commissary and 
 organizer of that expedition . the point of his grey moustache hang far 
 below his chin , and , rid on Mrs. Gould 's left hand , he look about 
 with kindly eye , point out the feature of the country , tell the 
 name of the little pueblo and of the estate , of the smooth - wall 
 hacienda like long fortress crown the knoll above the level of 
 the Sulaco Valley . it unroll itself , with green young crop , plain , 
 woodland , and gleam of water , park - like , from the blue vapour of the 
 distant sierra to an immense quivering horizon of grass and sky , where 
 big white cloud seem to fall slowly into the darkness of their own 
 shadow . 
 man plough with wooden plough and yoked oxen , small on a boundless 
 expanse , as if attack immensity itself . the mount figure of 
 vaquero gallop in the distance , and the great herd feed with all 
 their horn head one way , in one single waver line as far as eye 
 could reach across the broad potrero . a spread cotton - wool tree 
 shade a thatched ranche by the road ; the trudging file of burden 
 Indians take off their hat , would lift sad , mute eye to the 
 cavalcade raise the dust of the crumble camino real make by the 
 hand of their enslaved forefather . and Mrs. Gould , with each day 's 
 journey , seem to come near to the soul of the land in the tremendous 
 disclosure of this interior unaffected by the slight european veneer 
 of the coast town , a great land of plain and mountain and people , 
 suffering and mute , wait for the future in a pathetic immobility of 
 patience . 
 she know its sight and its hospitality , dispense with a sort of 
 slumbrous dignity in those great house present long , blind wall and 
 heavy portal to the wind - sweep pasture . she be give the head of the 
 table , where master and dependant sit in a simple and patriarchal 
 state . the lady of the house would talk softly in the moonlight under 
 the orange tree of the courtyard , impress upon she the sweetness 
 of their voice and the something mysterious in the quietude of their 
 life . in the morning the gentleman , well mount in braid sombrero 
 and embroider riding suit , with much silver on the trapping of 
 their horse , would ride forth to escort the depart guest before 
 commit they , with grave good - bye , to the care of God at the 
 boundary pillar of their estate . in all these household she 
 could hear story of political outrage ; friend , relative , ruin , 
 imprison , kill in the battle of senseless civil war , barbarously 
 execute in ferocious proscription , as though the government of the 
 country have be a struggle of lust between band of absurd devil let 
 loose upon the land with sabre and uniform and grandiloquent phrase . 
 and on all the lip she find a weary desire for peace , the dread of 
 officialdom with its nightmarish parody of administration without law , 
 without security , and without justice . 
 she bear a whole two month of wander very well ; she have that power 
 of resistance to fatigue which one discover here and there in some 
 quite frail - look woman with surprise - like a state of possession by 
 a remarkably stubborn spirit . Don Pepe - the old Costaguana major - after 
 much display of solicitude for the delicate lady , have end by 
 confer upon she the name of the " never - tired Senora . " Mrs. Gould 
 be indeed become a costaguanera . have acquire in Southern Europe a 
 knowledge of true peasantry , she be able to appreciate the great worth 
 of the people . she see the man under the silent , sad - eyed beast of 
 burden . she see they on the road carry load , lonely figure upon 
 the plain , toil under great straw hat , with their white clothing 
 flap about their limb in the wind ; she remember the village by 
 some group of indian woman at the fountain impress upon her memory , 
 by the face of some young indian girl with a melancholy and sensual 
 profile , raise an earthenware vessel of cool water at the door of a 
 dark hut with a wooden porch cumber with great brown jar . the solid 
 wooden wheel of an ox - cart , halt with its shaft in the dust , show 
 the stroke of the axe ; and a party of charcoal carrier , with each 
 man 's load rest above his head on the top of the low mud wall , sleep 
 stretch in a row within the strip of shade . 
 the heavy stonework of bridge and church leave by the conqueror 
 proclaim the disregard of human labour , the tribute - labour of vanish 
 nation . the power of king and church be go , but at the sight of 
 some heavy ruinous pile overtop from a knoll the low mud wall of a 
 village , Don Pepe would interrupt the tale of his campaign to exclaim - 
 " Poor Costaguana ! before , it be everything for the Padres , nothing for 
 the people ; and now it be everything for those great politico in Sta . 
 Marta , for negro and thief . " 
 Charles talk with the alcalde , with the fiscale , with the 
 principal people in town , and with the caballero on the estate . the 
 commandante of the district offer he escort - for he could show an 
 authorization from the Sulaco political chief of the day . how much the 
 document have cost he in gold twenty - dollar piece be a secret between 
 himself , a great man in the United States   who condescend to answer 
 the Sulaco mail with his own hand , and a great man of another sort , 
 with a dark olive complexion and shifty eye , inhabit then the Palace 
 of the Intendencia in Sulaco , and who pique himself on his culture and 
 europeanism generally in a rather french style because he have live in 
 Europe for some year - in exile , he say . however , it be pretty well 
 know that just before this exile he have incautiously gamble away all 
 the cash in the Custom House of a small port where a friend in power have 
 procure for he the post of subcollector . that youthful indiscretion 
 have , amongst other inconvenience , oblige he to earn his living for a 
 time as a cafe waiter in Madrid ; but his talent must have be great , 
 after all , since they have enable he to retrieve his political 
 fortune so splendidly . Charles Gould , expose his business with an 
 imperturbable steadiness , call he Excellency . 
 the provincial Excellency assume a weary superiority , tilt his chair 
 far back near an open window in the true Costaguana manner . the military 
 band happen to be bray operatic selection on the plaza just then , 
 and twice he raise his hand imperatively for silence in order to listen 
 to a favourite passage . 
 " exquisite , delicious ! " he murmur ; while Charles Gould wait , 
 stand by with inscrutable patience . " Lucia , Lucia di Lammermoor ! I be 
 passionate for music . it transport I . ha ! the divine - ha ! - Mozart . Si ! 
 divine . . . what be it you be say ? " 
 of course , rumour have reach he already of the newcomer 's intention . 
 besides , he have receive an official warning from Sta . Marta . his manner 
 be intend simply to conceal his curiosity and impress his visitor . 
 but after he have lock up something valuable in the drawer of a large 
 writing - desk in a distant part of the room , he become very affable , and 
 walk back to his chair smartly . 
 " if you intend to build village and assemble a population near the 
 mine , you shall require a decree of the Minister of the Interior for 
 that , " he suggest in a business - like manner . 
 " I have already send a memorial , " say Charles Gould , steadily , " and I 
 reckon now confidently upon your Excellency 's favourable conclusion . " 
 the Excellency be a man of many mood . with the receipt of the money 
 a great mellowness have descend upon his simple soul . unexpectedly he 
 fetch a deep sigh . 
 " ah , Don Carlos ! what we want be advanced man like you in the province . 
 the lethargy - the lethargy of these aristocrat ! the want of public 
 spirit ! the absence of all enterprise ! I , with my profound study in 
 Europe , you understand - " 
 with one hand thrust into his swell bosom , he rise and fall on 
 his toe , and for ten minute , almost without draw breath , go on 
 hurl himself intellectually to the assault of Charles Gould 's polite 
 silence ; and when , stop abruptly , he fall back into his chair , 
 it be as though he have be beat off from a fortress . to save his 
 dignity he hasten to dismiss this silent man with a solemn 
 inclination of the head and the word , pronounce with moody , fatigued 
 condescension - 
 " you may depend upon my enlightened goodwill as long as your conduct as 
 a good citizen deserve it . " 
 he take up a paper fan and begin to cool himself with a consequential 
 air , while Charles Gould bow and withdraw . then he drop the fan 
 at once , and star with an appearance of wonder and perplexity at the 
 closed door for quite a long time . at last he shrug his shoulder as 
 if to assure himself of his disdain . cold , dull . no intellectuality . red 
 hair . a true Englishman . he despise he . 
 his face darken . what mean this unimpressed and frigid behaviour ? he 
 be the first of the successive politician send out from the capital 
 to rule the Occidental Province whom the manner of Charles Gould in 
 official intercourse be to strike as offensively independent . 
 Charles Gould assume that if the appearance of listen to deplorable 
 balderdash must form part of the price he have to pay for be leave 
 unmoleste , the obligation of utter balderdash personally be by 
 no mean include in the bargain . he draw the line there . to these 
 provincial autocrat , before whom the peaceable population of 
 all class have be accustom to tremble , the reserve of that 
 English - look engineer cause an uneasiness which swing to and fro 
 between cringing and truculence . gradually all of they discover that , 
 no matter what party be in power , that man remain in most effective 
 touch with the high authority in Sta . Marta . 
 this be a fact , and it account perfectly for the Goulds be by 
 no mean so wealthy as the engineer - in - chief on the new railway could 
 legitimately suppose . follow the advice of Don Jose Avellanos , 
 who be a man of good counsel   though render timid by his horrible 
 experience of Guzman Bento 's time , Charles Gould have keep clear of the 
 capital ; but in the current gossip of the foreign resident there he 
 be know   with a good deal of seriousness underlie the irony   by the 
 nickname of " King of Sulaco . " an advocate of the Costaguana Bar , a 
 man of reputed ability and good character , member of the distinguished 
 Moraga family possess extensive estate in the Sulaco Valley , be 
 point out to stranger , with a shade of mystery and respect , as 
 the agent of the San Tome mine - " political , you know . " he be tall , 
 black - whisker , and discreet . it be know that he have easy access to 
 minister , and that the numerous Costaguana general be always anxious 
 to dine at his house . president grant he audience with facility . he 
 correspond actively with his maternal uncle , Don Jose Avellanos ; 
 but his letter - unless those express formally his dutiful 
 affection - be seldom entrust to the Costaguana Post Office . there 
 the envelope be open , indiscriminately , with the frankness of a 
 brazen and childish impudence characteristic of some spanish - american 
 government . but it must be note that at about the time of the 
 re - opening of the San Tome mine the muleteer who have be employ by 
 Charles Gould in his preliminary travel on the Campo add his small 
 train of animal to the thin stream of traffic carry over the mountain 
 pass between the Sta . Marta upland and the Valley of Sulaco . there 
 be no traveller by that arduous and unsafe route unless under very 
 exceptional circumstance , and the state of inland trade do not visibly 
 require additional transport facility ; but the man seem to find his 
 account in it . a few package be always find for he whenever he 
 take the road . very brown and wooden , in goatskin breech with the 
 hair outside , he sit near the tail of his own smart mule , his great hat 
 turn against the sun , an expression of blissful vacancy on his long 
 face , hum day after day a love - song in a plaintive key , or , without 
 a change of expression , let out a yell at his small tropilla in 
 front . a round little guitar hang high up on his back ; and there be a 
 place scoop out artistically in the wood of one of his pack - saddle 
 where a tightly roll piece of paper could be slip in , the wooden 
 plug replace , and the coarse canvas nail on again . when in Sulaco 
 it be his practice to smoke and doze all day long   as though he have 
 no care in the world   on a stone bench outside the doorway of the Casa 
 Gould and face the window of the Avellanos house . year and year 
 ago his mother have be chief laundry - woman in that family - very 
 accomplish in the matter of clear - starching . he himself have be 
 bear on one of their hacienda . his name be Bonifacio , and Don Jose , 
 cross the street about five o'clock to call on Dona Emilia , always 
 acknowledge his humble salute by some movement of hand or head . the 
 porter of both house converse lazily with he in tone of grave 
 intimacy . his evening he devote to gambling and to call in a spirit 
 of generous festivity upon the peyne d'oro girl in the more remote 
 side - street of the town . but he , too , be a discreet man . 
 CHAPTER eight 
 those of we whom business or curiosity take to Sulaco in these year 
 before the first advent of the railway can remember the steady effect 
 of the San Tome mine upon the life of that remote province . the outward 
 appearance have not change then as they have change since , as I be 
 tell , with cable car run along the street of the Constitution , and 
 carriage road far into the country , to Rincon and other village , where 
 the foreign merchant and the Ricos generally have their modern villa , 
 and a vast railway good yard by the harbour , which have a quay - side , a 
 long range of warehouse , and quite serious , organized labour trouble 
 of its own . 
 nobody have ever hear of labour trouble then . the Cargadores of the 
 port form , indeed , an unruly brotherhood of all sort of scum , with 
 a patron saint of their own . they go on strike regularly   every 
 bull - fight day , a form of trouble that even Nostromo at the height of 
 his prestige could never cope with efficiently ; but the morning after 
 each fiesta , before the indian market - woman have open their mat 
 parasol on the plaza , when the snow of Higuerota gleam pale over 
 the town on a yet black sky , the appearance of a phantom - like horseman 
 mount on a silver - grey mare solve the problem of labour without fail . 
 his steed pace the lane of the slum and the weed - grow enclosure 
 within the old rampart , between the black , lightless cluster of hut , 
 like cow - byre , like dog - kennel . the horseman hammer with the butt of 
 a heavy revolver at the door of low pulperia , of obscene lean - to shed 
 slop against the tumble - down piece of a noble wall , at the wooden 
 side of dwelling so flimsy that the sound of snore and sleepy mutter 
 within could be hear in the pause of the thunder clatter of his 
 blow . he call out man 's name menacingly from the saddle , once , 
 twice . the drowsy answer - grumpy , conciliating , savage , jocular , or 
 deprecating - come out into the silent darkness in which the horseman sit 
 still , and presently a dark figure would flit out cough in the still 
 air . sometimes a low - toned woman cry through the window - hole softly , 
 " he be come directly , senor , " and the horseman wait silent on a 
 motionless horse . but if perchance he have to dismount , then , after a 
 while , from the door of that hovel or of that pulperia , with a ferocious 
 scuffle and stifle imprecation , a cargador would fly out head first 
 and hand abroad , to sprawl under the foreleg of the silver - grey mare , 
 who only prick forward her sharp little ear . she be use to that 
 work ; and the man , pick himself up , would walk away hastily from 
 Nostromo 's revolver , reel a little along the street and snarl low 
 curse . at sunrise Captain Mitchell , come out anxiously in his night 
 attire on to the wooden balcony run the whole length of the O.S.N. 
 Company 's lonely building by the shore , would see the lighter already 
 under way , figure move busily about the cargo crane , perhaps hear 
 the invaluable Nostromo , now dismount and in the checked shirt and red 
 sash of a Mediterranean sailor , bawl order from the end of the jetty 
 in a stentorian voice . a fellow in a thousand ! 
 the material apparatus of perfect civilization which obliterate the 
 individuality of old town under the stereotyped convenience of modern 
 life have not intrude as yet ; but over the wear - out antiquity of Sulaco , 
 so characteristic with its stuccoed house and bar window , with 
 the great yellowy - white wall of abandon convent behind the row of 
 sombre green cypress , that fact - very modern in its spirit - the San 
 Tome mine have already throw its subtle influence . it have alter , too , 
 the outward character of the crowd on feast day on the plaza before 
 the open portal of the cathedral , by the number of white ponchos with a 
 green stripe affect as holiday wear by the San Tome miner . they have 
 also adopt white hat with green cord and braid - article of good 
 quality , which could be obtain in the storehouse of the administration 
 for very little money . a peaceable Cholo wear these colour   unusual 
 in Costaguana   be somehow very seldom beat to within an inch of his 
 life on a charge of disrespect to the town police ; neither run he much 
 risk of be suddenly lasso on the road by a recruiting party of 
 lanceros - a method of voluntary enlistment look upon as almost legal 
 in the Republic . whole village be know to have volunteer for the 
 army in that way ; but , as Don Pepe would say with a hopeless shrug to 
 Mrs. Gould , " what would you ! poor people ! pobrecito ! pobrecito ! but 
 the State must have its soldier . " 
 thus professionally speak Don Pepe , the fighter , with pendent 
 moustache , a nut - brown , lean face , and a clean run of a cast - iron jaw , 
 suggest the type of a cattle - herd horseman from the great Llanos of 
 the South . " if you will listen to an old officer of Paez , senore , " be 
 the exordium of all his speech in the Aristocratic Club of Sulaco , 
 where he be admit on account of his past service to the extinct 
 cause of Federation . the club , date from the day of the proclamation 
 of Costaguana 's independence , boast many name of liberator amongst 
 its first founder . suppress arbitrarily innumerable time by 
 various government , with memory of proscription and of at least one 
 wholesale massacre of its member , sadly assemble for a banquet by the 
 order of a zealous military commandante   their body be afterwards 
 strip naked and fling into the plaza out of the window by the 
 low scum of the populace , it be again flourish , at that period , 
 peacefully . it extend to stranger the large hospitality of the cool , 
 big room of its historic quarter in the front part of a house , once 
 the residence of a high official of the Holy Office . the two wing , shut 
 up , crumble behind the nailed door , and what may be describe as a 
 grove of young orange tree grow in the unpaved patio conceal the 
 utter ruin of the back part face the gate . you turn in from the 
 street , as if enter a secluded orchard , where you come upon the foot 
 of a disjointed staircase , guard by a moss - stain effigy of some 
 saintly bishop , mitre and staff , and bear the indignity of a 
 break nose meekly , with his fine stone hand cross on his breast . the 
 chocolate - colour face of servant with mop of black hair peep 
 at you from above ; the click of billiard ball come to your ear , and 
 ascend the step , you would perhaps see in the first sala , very stiff 
 upon a straight - back chair , in a good light , Don Pepe move his long 
 moustache as he spelt his way , at arm 's length , through an old Sta . 
 Marta newspaper . his horse - a stony - hearted but persevere black brute 
 with a hammer head - you would have see in the street doze motionless 
 under an immense saddle , with its nose almost touch the curbstone of 
 the sidewalk . 
 Don Pepe , when " down from the mountain , " as the phrase , often hear in 
 Sulaco , go , could also be see in the drawing - room of the Casa Gould . 
 he sit with modest assurance at some distance from the tea - table . 
 with his knee close together , and a kindly twinkle of drollery in his 
 deep - set eye , he would throw his small and ironic pleasantry into the 
 current of conversation . there be in that man a sort of sane , humorous 
 shrewdness , and a vein of genuine humanity so often find in simple 
 old soldier of prove courage who have see much desperate service . of 
 course he know nothing whatever of mining , but his employment be of a 
 special kind . he be in charge of the whole population in the territory 
 of the mine , which extend from the head of the gorge to where the cart 
 track from the foot of the mountain enter the plain , cross a stream 
 over a little wooden bridge paint green - green , the colour of hope , 
 be also the colour of the mine . 
 it be report in Sulaco that up there " at the mountain " Don Pepe 
 walk about precipitous path , girt with a great sword and in a shabby 
 uniform with tarnish bullion epaulette of a senior major . Most miner 
 be Indians , with big wild eye , address he as Taita   father , as 
 these barefooted people of Costaguana will address anybody who wear 
 shoe ; but it be Basilio , Mr. Gould 's own mozo and the head servant 
 of the Casa , who , in all good faith and from a sense of propriety , 
 announce he once in the solemn word , " El Senor Gobernador have 
 arrive . " 
 Don Jose Avellanos , then in the drawing - room , be delighted beyond 
 measure at the aptness of the title , with which he greet the old major 
 banteringly as soon as the latter 's soldierly figure appear in the 
 doorway . Don Pepe only smile in his long moustache , as much as to say , 
 " you might have find a bad name for an old soldier . " 
 and El Senor Gobernador he have remain , with his small joke upon 
 his function and upon his domain , where he affirm with humorous 
 exaggeration to Mrs. Gould - 
 " no two stone could come together anywhere without the Gobernador 
 hear the click , senora . " 
 and he would tap his ear with the tip of his forefinger knowingly . even 
 when the number of the miner alone rise to over six hundred he seem 
 to know each of they individually , all the innumerable Joses , Manuels , 
 Ignacios , from the village primero - segundo - or tercero   there be 
 three mining village   under his government . he could distinguish they 
 not only by their flat , joyless face , which to Mrs. Gould look 
 all alike , as if run into the same ancestral mould of suffer and 
 patience , but apparently also by the infinitely graduate shade of 
 reddish - brown , of blackish - brown , of coppery - brown back , as the two 
 shift , strip to linen drawer and leather skull - cap , mingle 
 together with a confusion of naked limb , of shouldered pick , swing 
 lamp , in a great shuffle of sandalle foot on the open plateau before 
 the entrance of the main tunnel . it be a time of pause . the indian 
 boy lean idly against the long line of little cradle wagon stand 
 empty ; the screener and ore - breaker squat on their heel smoke 
 long cigar ; the great wooden shoot slant over the edge of the 
 tunnel plateau be silent ; and only the ceaseless , violent rush of 
 water in the open flume could be hear , murmur fiercely , with the 
 splash and rumble of revolve turbine - wheel , and the thudding march 
 of the stamp pound to powder the treasure rock on the plateau below . 
 the head of gang , distinguish by brass medal hang on their bare 
 breast , marshal their squad ; and at last the mountain would swallow 
 one - half of the silent crowd , while the other half would move off in 
 long file down the zigzag path lead to the bottom of the gorge . 
 it be deep ; and , far below , a thread of vegetation wind between the 
 blaze rock face resemble a slender green cord , in which three lumpy 
 knot of banana patch , palm - leaf root , and shady tree mark the 
 Village one , Village Two , Village Three , house the miner of the Gould 
 Concession . 
 whole family have be move from the first towards the spot in the 
 Higuerota range , whence the rumour of work and safety have spread over 
 the pastoral Campo , force its way also , even as the water of a high 
 flood , into the nook and cranny of the distant blue wall of the 
 Sierras . Father first , in a pointed straw hat , then the mother with the 
 big child , generally also a diminutive donkey , all under burden , 
 except the leader himself , or perhaps some grow girl , the pride of the 
 family , step barefoote and straight as an arrow , with braid of 
 raven hair , a thick , haughty profile , and no load to carry but the small 
 guitar of the country and a pair of soft leather sandal tie together 
 on her back . at the sight of such party string out on the cross 
 trail between the pasture , or camp by the side of the royal road , 
 traveller on horseback would remark to each other - 
 " More people go to the San Tome mine . we shall see other to - morrow . " 
 and spur on in the dusk they would discuss the great news of the 
 province , the news of the San Tome mine . a rich Englishman be go 
 to work it - and perhaps not an Englishman , Quien sabe ! a foreigner with 
 much money . oh , yes , it have begin . a party of man who have be to Sulaco 
 with a herd of black bull for the next corrida have report that from 
 the porch of the posada in Rincon , only a short league from the town , 
 the light on the mountain be visible , twinkle above the tree . and 
 there be a woman see rid a horse sideways , not in the chair seat , 
 but upon a sort of saddle , and a man 's hat on her head . she walk 
 about , too , on foot up the mountain path . a woman engineer , it seem 
 she be . 
 " what an absurdity ! impossible , senor ! " 
 " Si ! Si ! Una Americana del Norte . " 
 " ah , well ! if your worship be inform . Una Americana ; it need be 
 something of that sort . " 
 and they would laugh a little with astonishment and scorn , keep a 
 wary eye on the shadow of the road , for one be liable to meet bad man 
 when travel late on the Campo . 
 and it be not only the man that Don Pepe know so well , but he seem 
 able , with one attentive , thoughtful glance , to classify each woman , 
 girl , or grow youth of his domain . it be only the small fry that 
 puzzle he sometimes . he and the padre could be see frequently side by 
 side , meditative and gaze across the street of a village at a lot 
 of sedate brown child , try to sort they out , as it be , in low , 
 consulting tone , or else they would together put search question 
 as to the parentage of some small , staid urchin meet wandering , naked and 
 grave , along the road with a cigar in his baby mouth , and perhaps his 
 mother 's rosary , purloin for purpose of ornamentation , hang in a 
 loop of bead low down on his rotund little stomach . the spiritual and 
 temporal pastor of the mine flock be very good friend . with Dr. 
 Monygham , the medical pastor , who have accept the charge from Mrs. 
 Gould , and live in the hospital building , they be on not so intimate 
 term . but no one could be on intimate term with El Senor Doctor , who , 
 with his twisted shoulder , droop head , sardonic mouth , and side - long 
 bitter glance , be mysterious and uncanny . the other two authority 
 work in harmony . Father Roman , dry - up , small , alert , wrinkle , 
 with big round eye , a sharp chin , and a great snuff - taker , be an old 
 campaigner , too ; he have shrive many simple soul on the battlefield of 
 the Republic , kneel by the dying on hillside , in the long grass , in 
 the gloom of the forest , to hear the last confession with the smell 
 of gunpowder smoke in his nostril , the rattle of musket , the hum 
 and spatter of bullet in his ear . and where be the harm if , at the 
 presbytery , they have a game with a pack of greasy card in the early 
 evening , before Don Pepe go his last round to see that all the 
 watchman of the mine - a body organize by himself - be at their post ? 
 for that last duty before he sleep Don Pepe do actually gird his old 
 sword on the verandah of an unmistakable american white frame house , 
 which Father Roman call the presbytery . near by , a long , low , dark 
 building , steeple - roof , like a vast barn with a wooden cross over the 
 gable , be the miner ' chapel . there Father Roman say Mass every day 
 before a sombre altar - piece represent the Resurrection , the grey 
 slab of the tombstone balance on one corner , a figure soar upwards , 
 long - limbed and livid , in an oval of pallid light , and a helmeted brown 
 legionary smite down , right across the bituminous foreground . " this 
 picture , my child , muy linda e maravillosa , " Father Roman would say 
 to some of his flock , " which you behold here through the munificence 
 of the wife of our Senor Administrador , have be paint in Europe , a 
 country of saint and miracle , and much great than our Costaguana . " 
 and he would take a pinch of snuff with unction . but when once an 
 inquisitive spirit desire to know in what direction this Europe be 
 situate , whether up or down the coast , Father Roman , to conceal his 
 perplexity , become very reserved and severe . " no doubt it be extremely 
 far away . but ignorant sinner like you of the San Tome mine should 
 think earnestly of everlasting punishment instead of inquire into the 
 magnitude of the earth , with its country and population altogether 
 beyond your understanding . " 
 with a " good - night , Padre , " " good - night , Don Pepe , " the Gobernador would 
 go off , hold up his sabre against his side , his body bend forward , 
 with a long , plod stride in the dark . the jocularity proper to an 
 innocent card game for a few cigar or a bundle of yerba be replace 
 at once by the stern duty mood of an officer set out to visit the 
 outpost of an encamped army . one loud blast of the whistle that 
 hang from his neck provoke instantly a great shrilling of respond 
 whistle , mingle with the barking of dog , that would calm down slowly 
 at last , away up at the head of the gorge ; and in the stillness two 
 sereno , on guard by the bridge , would appear walk noiselessly 
 towards he . on one side of the road a long frame building - the 
 store - would be close and barricade from end to end ; face it 
 another white frame house , still long , and with a verandah - the 
 hospital - would have light in the two window of Dr. Monygham 's 
 quarter . even the delicate foliage of a clump of pepper tree do not 
 stir , so breathless would be the darkness warm by the radiation of the 
 over - heated rock . Don Pepe would stand still for a moment with the two 
 motionless sereno before he , and , abruptly , high up on the sheer face 
 of the mountain , dot with single torch , like drop of fire fall 
 from the two great blaze cluster of light above , the ore shoot 
 would begin to rattle . the great clattering , shuffle noise , gather 
 speed and weight , would be catch up by the wall of the gorge , and send 
 upon the plain in a growl of thunder . the pasadero in Rincon swear that 
 on calm night , by listen intently , he could catch the sound in his 
 doorway as of a storm in the mountain . 
 to Charles Gould 's fancy it seem that the sound must reach the 
 uttermost limit of the province . rid at night towards the mine , it 
 would meet he at the edge of a little wood just beyond Rincon . there 
 be no mistaking the growl mutter of the mountain pour its stream 
 of treasure under the stamp ; and it come to his heart with the 
 peculiar force of a proclamation thunder forth over the land and the 
 marvellousness of an accomplished fact fulfil an audacious desire . 
 he have hear this very sound in his imagination on that far - off evening 
 when his wife and himself , after a tortuous ride through a strip of 
 forest , have rein in their horse near the stream , and have gaze for 
 the first time upon the jungle - grow solitude of the gorge . the head of 
 a palm rise here and there . in a high ravine round the corner of the 
 San Tome mountain   which be square like a blockhouse   the thread of a 
 slender waterfall flash bright and glassy through the dark green of 
 the heavy frond of tree - fern . Don Pepe , in attendance , ride up , and , 
 stretch his arm up the gorge , have declare with mock solemnity , 
 " behold the very paradise of snake , senora . " 
 and then they have wheel their horse and ride back to sleep that 
 night at Rincon . the alcalde - an old , skinny Moreno , a sergeant of 
 Guzman Bento 's time - have clear respectfully out of his house with his 
 three pretty daughter , to make room for the foreign senora and their 
 worship the Caballeros . all he ask Charles Gould   whom he take for a 
 mysterious and official person   to do for he be to remind the supreme 
 Government - El Gobierno supreme - of a pension   amounting to about a 
 dollar a month   to which he believe himself entitle . it have be 
 promise to he , he affirm , straighten his bent back martially , 
 " many year ago , for my valour in the war with the wild Indios when a 
 young man , senor . " 
 the waterfall exist no long . the tree - fern that have luxuriate in 
 its spray have die around the dry - up pool , and the high ravine be 
 only a big trench half fill up with the refuse of excavation and 
 tailing . the torrent , dam up above , send its water rush along 
 the open flume of scoop tree trunk stride on trestle - leg to the 
 turbine work the stamp on the low plateau - the mesa grande of the 
 San Tome mountain . only the memory of the waterfall , with its amazing 
 fernery , like a hang garden above the rock of the gorge , be 
 preserve in Mrs. Gould 's water - colour sketch ; she have make it hastily 
 one day from a clear patch in the bush , sit in the shade of 
 a roof of straw erect for she on three rough pole under Don Pepe 's 
 direction . 
 Mrs. Gould have see it all from the beginning : the clearing of the 
 wilderness , the making of the road , the cutting of new path up the 
 cliff face of San Tome . for week together she have live on the spot 
 with her husband ; and she be so little in Sulaco during that year that 
 the appearance of the Gould carriage on the Alameda would cause a social 
 excitement . from the heavy family coach full of stately senora and 
 black - eyed senorita roll solemnly in the shade alley white hand 
 be wave towards she with animation in a flutter of greeting . Dona 
 Emilia be " down from the mountain . " 
 but not for long . Dona Emilia would be go " up to the mountain " in a 
 day or two , and her sleek carriage mule would have an easy time of 
 it for another long spell . she have watch the erection of the first 
 frame - house put up on the low mesa for an office and Don Pepe 's 
 quarter ; she hear with a thrill of thankful emotion the first wagon 
 load of ore rattle down the then only shoot ; she have stand by her 
 husband 's side perfectly silent , and go cold all over with excitement 
 at the instant when the first battery of only fifteen stamp be put 
 in motion for the first time . on the occasion when the fire under the 
 first set of retort in their shed have glow far into the night she do 
 not retire to rest on the rough cadre set up for she in the as yet bare 
 frame - house till she have see the first spongy lump of silver yield to 
 the hazard of the world by the dark depth of the Gould Concession ; 
 she have lay her unmercenary hand , with an eagerness that make they 
 tremble , upon the first silver ingot turn out still warm from the 
 mould ; and by her imaginative estimate of its power she endow that 
 lump of metal with a justificative conception , as though it be not 
 a mere fact , but something far - reach and impalpable , like the true 
 expression of an emotion or the emergence of a principle . 
 Don Pepe , extremely interested , too , look over her shoulder with a 
 smile that , make longitudinal fold on his face , cause it to resemble 
 a leathern mask with a benignantly diabolic expression . 
 " would not the muchachos of Hernandez like to get hold of this 
 insignificant object , that look , por Dios , very much like a piece of 
 tin ? " he remark , jocularly . 
 Hernandez , the robber , have be an inoffensive , small ranchero , 
 kidnap with circumstance of peculiar atrocity from his home during 
 one of the civil war , and force to serve in the army . there his 
 conduct as soldier be exemplary , till , watch his chance , he kill 
 his colonel , and manage to get clear away . with a band of deserter , 
 who choose he for their chief , he have take refuge beyond the wild and 
 waterless Bolson de Tonoro . the haciendas pay he blackmail in cattle 
 and horse ; extraordinary story be tell of his power and of his 
 wonderful escape from capture . he use to ride , single - handed , into the 
 village and the little town on the Campo , drive a pack mule before 
 he , with two revolver in his belt , go straight to the shop or store , 
 select what he want , and ride away unopposed because of the terror his 
 exploit and his audacity inspire . poor country people he usually leave 
 alone ; the upper class be often stop on the road and rob ; but 
 any unlucky official that fall into his hand be sure to get a severe 
 flogging . the army officer do not like his name to be mention in 
 their presence . his follower , mount on steal horse , laugh at the 
 pursuit of the regular cavalry send to hunt they down , and whom they 
 take pleasure to ambush most scientifically in the broken ground of 
 their own fastness . expedition have be fit out ; a price have be 
 put upon his head ; even attempt have be make , treacherously of course , 
 to open negotiation with he , without in the slight way affect 
 the even tenor of his career . at last , in true Costaguana fashion , the 
 Fiscal of Tonoro , who be ambitious of the glory of have reduce the 
 famous Hernandez , offer he a sum of money and a safe conduct out of 
 the country for the betrayal of his band . but Hernandez evidently be 
 not of the stuff of which the distinguished military politician and 
 conspirator of Costaguana be make . this clever but common device 
  which frequently work like a charm in put down revolution   fail 
 with the chief of vulgar Salteadores . it promise well for the Fiscal at 
 first , but end very badly for the squadron of lancero post   by the 
 Fiscal 's direction   in a fold of the ground into which Hernandez have 
 promise to lead his unsuspecting follower they come , indeed , at the 
 appoint time , but creep on their hand and knee through the bush , 
 and only let their presence be know by a general discharge of firearm , 
 which empty many saddle . the trooper who escape come rid very 
 hard into Tonoro . it be say that their command officer   who , be 
 well mount , ride far ahead of the rest   afterwards get into a state 
 of despairing intoxication and beat the ambitious Fiscal severely with 
 the flat of his sabre in the presence of his wife and daughter , 
 for bring this disgrace upon the National Army . the high civil 
 official of Tonoro , fall to the ground in a swoon , be far kick 
 all over the body and rowel with sharp spur about the neck and 
 face because of the great sensitiveness of his military colleague . 
 this gossip of the inland Campo , so characteristic of the ruler of the 
 country with its story of oppression , inefficiency , fatuous method , 
 treachery , and savage brutality , be perfectly know to Mrs. Gould . 
 that it should be accept with no indignant comment by people of 
 intelligence , refinement , and character as something inherent in the 
 nature of thing be one of the symptom of degradation that have the 
 power to exasperate she almost to the verge of despair . still look at 
 the ingot of silver , she shake her head at Don Pepe 's remark - 
 " if it have not be for the lawless tyranny of your Government , Don 
 Pepe , many an outlaw now with Hernandez would be live peaceably and 
 happy by the honest work of his hand . " 
 " Senora , " cry Don Pepe , with enthusiasm , " it be true ! it be as if God 
 have give you the power to look into the very breast of people . you 
 have see they work round you , Dona Emilia - meek as lamb , patient 
 like their own burro , brave like lion . I have lead they to the very 
 muzzle of gun - I , who stand here before you , senora - in the time of 
 Paez , who be full of generosity , and in courage only approach by the 
 uncle of Don Carlos here , as far as I know . no wonder there be bandit 
 in the Campo when there be none but thief , swindler , and sanguinary 
 macaque to rule we in Sta . Marta . however , all the same , a bandit be a 
 bandit , and we shall have a dozen good straight Winchesters to ride with 
 the silver down to Sulaco . " 
 Mrs. Gould 's ride with the first silver escort to Sulaco be the closing 
 episode of what she call " my camp life " before she have settle in her 
 town - house permanently , as be proper and even necessary for the wife of 
 the administrator of such an important institution as the San Tome mine . 
 for the San Tome mine be to become an institution , a rallying point 
 for everything in the province that need order and stability to live . 
 Security seem to flow upon this land from the mountain - gorge . the 
 authority of Sulaco have learn that the San Tome mine could make it 
 worth their while to leave thing and people alone . this be the near 
 approach to the rule of common - sense and justice Charles Gould feel it 
 possible to secure at first . in fact , the mine , with its organization , 
 its population grow fiercely attach to their position of privileged 
 safety , with its armoury , with its Don Pepe , with its armed body of 
 sereno   where , it be say , many an outlaw and deserter - and even some 
 member of Hernandez 's band - have find a place , the mine be a power in 
 the land . as a certain prominent man in Sta . Marta have exclaim with 
 a hollow laugh , once , when discuss the line of action take by the 
 Sulaco authority at a time of political crisis - 
 " you call these man government official ? they ? never ! they be 
 official of the mine - official of the Concession - I tell you . " 
 the prominent man   who be then a person in power , with a lemon - colour 
 face and a very short and curly , not to say woolly , head of hair   go 
 so far in his temporary discontent as to shake his yellow fist under the 
 nose of his interlocutor , and shriek - 
 " yes ! all ! Silence ! all ! I tell you ! the political Gefe , the chief of 
 the police , the chief of the custom , the general , all , all , be the 
 official of that Gould . " 
 thereupon an intrepid but low and argumentative murmur would flow on 
 for a space in the ministerial cabinet , and the prominent man 's passion 
 would end in a cynical shrug of the shoulder . after all , he seem 
 to say , what do it matter as long as the minister himself be not 
 forget during his brief day of authority ? but all the same , the 
 unofficial agent of the San Tome mine , work for a good cause , have 
 his moment of anxiety , which be reflect in his letter to Don Jose 
 Avellanos , his maternal uncle . 
 " no sanguinary macaque from Sta . Marta shall set foot on that part of 
 Costaguana which lie beyond the San Tome bridge , " Don Pepe use to 
 assure Mrs. Gould . " except , of course , as an honour guest - for our 
 Senor Administrador be a deep politico . " but to Charles Gould , in 
 his own room , the old Major would remark with a grim and soldierly 
 cheeriness , " we be all play our head at this game . " 
 Don Jose Avellanos would mutter " Imperium in imperio , Emilia , my soul , " 
 with an air of profound self - satisfaction which , somehow , in a curious 
 way , seem to contain a queer admixture of bodily discomfort . but that , 
 perhaps , could only be visible to the initiate . and for the initiate 
 it be a wonderful place , this drawing - room of the Casa Gould , with its 
 momentary glimpse of the master - El Senor Administrador - old , hard , 
 mysteriously silent , with the line deepen on his English , ruddy , 
 out - of - door complexion ; flit on his thin cavalryman 's leg across 
 the doorway , either just " back from the mountain " or with jingling 
 spur and rid - whip under his arm , on the point of start " for the 
 mountain . " then Don Pepe , modestly martial in his chair , the llanero who 
 seem somehow to have find his martial jocularity , his knowledge 
 of the world , and his manner perfect for his station , in the midst of 
 savage armed contest with his kind ; Avellanos , polished and familiar , 
 the diplomatist with his loquacity cover much caution and wisdom in 
 delicate advice , with his manuscript of a historical work on Costaguana , 
 entitle " fifty year of Misrule , " which , at present , he think it be 
 not prudent   even if it be possible   " to give to the world " ; 
 these three , and also Dona Emilia amongst they , gracious , small , 
 and fairy - like , before the glitter tea - set , with one common 
 master - thought in their head , with one common feeling of a tense 
 situation , with one ever - present aim to preserve the inviolable 
 character of the mine at every cost . and there be also to be see 
 Captain Mitchell , a little apart , near one of the long window , with an 
 air of old - fashioned neat old bachelorhood about he , slightly pompous , 
 in a white waistcoat , a little disregarded and unconscious of it ; 
 utterly in the dark , and imagine himself to be in the thick of thing . 
 the good man , have spend a clear thirty year of his life on the high 
 sea before get what he call a ' shore billet , " be astonish at 
 the importance of transaction   other than relate to shipping   which 
 take place on dry land . almost every event out of the usual daily 
 course " mark an epoch " for he or else be " history " ; unless with his 
 pomposity struggle with a discomfited droop of his rubicund , rather 
 handsome face , set off by snow - white close hair and short whisker , he 
 would mutter - 
 " ah , that ! that , sir , be a mistake . " 
 the reception of the first consignment of San Tome silver for shipment 
 to San Francisco in one of the O.S.N. Co. 's mail - boat have , of course , 
 " mark an epoch " for Captain Mitchell . the ingot pack in box of 
 stiff ox - hide with plait handle , small enough to be carry easily by 
 two man , be bring down by the sereno of the mine walk in careful 
 couple along the half - mile or so of steep , zigzag path to the foot of 
 the mountain . there they would be load into a string of two - wheel 
 cart , resemble roomy coffer with a door at the back , and harness 
 tandem with two mule each , wait under the guard of armed and mount 
 sereno . Don Pepe padlock each door in succession , and at the signal 
 of his whistle the string of cart would move off , closely surround by 
 the clank of spur and carbine , with jolt and cracking of whip , with a 
 sudden deep rumble over the boundary bridge   " into the land of thief 
 and sanguinary macaque , " Don Pepe define that crossing ; hat bob 
 in the first light of the dawn , on the head of cloak figure ; 
 winchester on hip ; bridle hand protrude lean and brown from under 
 the fall fold of the ponchos . the convoy skirt a little wood , 
 along the mine trail , between the mud hut and low wall of Rincon , 
 increase its pace on the camino real , mule urge to speed , escort 
 galloping , Don Carlos rid alone ahead of a dust storm afford a 
 vague vision of long ear of mule , of flutter little green and white 
 flag stick upon each cart ; of raise arm in a mob of sombrero with 
 the white gleam of range eye ; and Don Pepe , hardly visible in the 
 rear of that rattle dust trail , with a stiff seat and impassive face , 
 rise and fall rhythmically on an ewe - neck silver - bit black 
 brute with a hammer head . 
 the sleepy people in the little cluster of hut , in the small ranch 
 near the road , recognize by the headlong sound the charge of the San 
 Tome silver escort towards the crumble wall of the city on the Campo 
 side . they come to the door to see it dash by over rut and stone , 
 with a clatter and clank and cracking of whip , with the reckless rush 
 and precise driving of a field battery hurrying into action , and the 
 solitary english figure of the Senor Administrador rid far ahead in 
 the lead . 
 in the fence roadside paddock loose horse gallop wildly for a 
 while ; the heavy cattle stand up breast deep in the grass , lowing 
 mutteringly at the fly noise ; a meek indian villager would glance 
 back once and hasten to shove his loaded little donkey bodily against a 
 wall , out of the way of the San Tome silver escort go to the sea ; a 
 small knot of chilly lepero under the Stone Horse of the Alameda would 
 mutter : " Caramba ! " on see it take a wide curve at a gallop and dart 
 into the empty Street of the Constitution ; for it be consider the 
 correct thing , the only proper style by the mule - driver of the San Tome 
 mine to go through the wake town from end to end without a check in 
 the speed as if chase by a devil . 
 the early sunshine glow on the delicate primrose , pale pink , pale 
 blue front of the big house with all their gate shut yet , and no face 
 behind the iron bar of the window . in the whole sunlit range of empty 
 balcony along the street only one white figure would be visible 
 high up above the clear pavement - the wife of the Senor 
 Administrador - lean over to see the escort go by to the harbour , a 
 mass of heavy , fair hair twist up negligently on her little head , and 
 a lot of lace about the neck of her muslin wrapper . with a smile to her 
 husband 's single , quick , upward glance , she would watch the whole thing 
 stream past below her foot with an orderly uproar , till she answer 
 by a friendly sign the salute of the gallop Don Pepe , the stiff , 
 deferential inclination with a sweep of the hat below the knee . 
 the string of padlock cart lengthen , the size of the escort grow 
 big as the year go on . every three month an increase stream of 
 treasure sweep through the street of Sulaco on its way to the strong 
 room in the O.S.N. Co. 's building by the harbour , there to await 
 shipment for the North . increase in volume , and of immense value also ; 
 for , as Charles Gould tell his wife once with some exultation , there have 
 never be see anything in the world to approach the vein of the 
 Gould Concession . for they both , each passing of the escort under the 
 balcony of the Casa Gould be like another victory gain in the 
 conquest of peace for Sulaco . 
 no doubt the initial action of Charles Gould have be help at the 
 beginning by a period of comparative peace which occur just about 
 that time ; and also by the general softening of manner as compare with 
 the epoch of civil war whence have emerge the iron tyranny of Guzman 
 Bento of fearful memory . in the contest that break out at the end of 
 his rule   which have keep peace in the country for a whole fifteen year 
 there be more fatuous imbecility , plenty of cruelty and suffering 
 still , but much less of the old - time fierce and blindly ferocious 
 political fanaticism . it be all more vile , more base , more 
 contemptible , and infinitely more manageable in the very outspoken 
 cynicism of motif . it be more clearly a brazen - face scramble for a 
 constantly diminish quantity of booty ; since all enterprise have be 
 stupidly kill in the land . thus it come to pass that the province of 
 Sulaco , once the field of cruel party vengeance , have become in a way 
 one of the considerable prize of political career . the great of the 
 earth   in Sta . Marta   reserve the post in the old Occidental State 
 to those nearest and dearest to they : nephew , brother , husband 
 of favourite sister , bosom friend , trusty supporter - or prominent 
 supporter of whom perhaps they be afraid . it be the blessed province 
 of great opportunity and of large salary ; for the San Tome mine 
 have its own unofficial pay list , whose item and amount , fix in 
 consultation by Charles Gould and Senor Avellanos , be know to a 
 prominent business man in the United States , who for twenty minute or 
 so in every month give his undivided attention to Sulaco affair . at 
 the same time the material interest of all sort , back up by the 
 influence of the San Tome mine , be quietly gather substance in that 
 part of the Republic . if , for instance , the Sulaco Collectorship be 
 generally understand , in the political world of the capital , to open the 
 way to the Ministry of Finance , and so on for every official post , then , 
 on the other hand , the despondent business circle of the Republic have 
 come to consider the Occidental Province as the promise land of safety , 
 especially if a man manage to get on good term with the administration 
 of the mine . " Charles Gould ; excellent fellow ! absolutely necessary to 
 make sure of he before take a single step . get an introduction to 
 he from Moraga if you can - the agent of the King of Sulaco , do not   you 
 know . " 
 no wonder , then , that Sir John , come from Europe to smooth the path 
 for his railway , have be meet the name   and even the nickname   of 
 Charles Gould at every turn in Costaguana . the agent of the San Tome 
 Administration in Sta . Marta   a polished , well - inform gentleman , Sir 
 John think he   have certainly help so greatly in bring about the 
 presidential tour that he begin to think that there be something in 
 the faint whisper hint at the immense occult influence of the Gould 
 Concession . what be currently whisper be this - that the San Tome 
 Administration have , in part , at least , finance the last revolution , 
 which have bring into a five - year dictatorship Don Vincente Ribiera , a 
 man of culture and of unblemished character , invest with a mandate 
 of reform by the good element of the State . serious , well - inform 
 man seem to believe the fact , to hope for well thing , for the 
 establishment of legality , of good faith and order in public life . so 
 much the well , then , think Sir John . he work always on a great 
 scale ; there be a loan to the State , and a project for systematic 
 colonization of the Occidental Province , involve in one vast scheme 
 with the construction of the National Central Railway . good faith , 
 order , honesty , peace , be badly want for this great development of 
 material interest . anybody on the side of these thing , and especially 
 if able to help , have an importance in Sir John 's eye . he have not be 
 disappoint in the " King of Sulaco . " the local difficulty have fall 
 away , as the engineer - in - chief have foretell they would , before Charles 
 Gould 's mediation . Sir John have be extremely fete in Sulaco , next 
 to the President - Dictator , a fact which might have account for the 
 evident ill - humour General Montero display at lunch give on board 
 the Juno just before she be to sail , take away from Sulaco the 
 President - Dictator and the distinguished foreign guest in his train . 
 the Excellentissimo   " the hope of honest man , " as Don Jose have address 
 he in a public speech deliver in the name of the Provincial Assembly 
 of Sulaco   sit at the head of the long table ; Captain Mitchell , 
 positively stony - eyed and purple in the face with the solemnity of 
 this " historical event , " occupy the foot as the representative of the 
 O.S.N. Company in Sulaco , the host of that informal function , with the 
 captain of the ship and some minor official from the shore around he . 
 those cheery , swarthy little gentleman cast jovial side - glance at the 
 bottle of champagne beginning to pop behind the guest ' back in the 
 hand of the ship 's steward . the amber wine cream up to the rim of 
 the glass . 
 Charles Gould have his place next to a foreign envoy , who , in a listless 
 undertone , have be talk to he fitfully of hunting and shooting . 
 the well - nourish , pale face , with an eyeglass and droop yellow 
 moustache , make the Senor Administrador appear by contrast twice as 
 sunbake , more flaming red , a hundred time more intensely and silently 
 alive . Don Jose Avellanos touch elbow with the other foreign 
 diplomat , a dark man with a quiet , watchful , self - confident demeanour , 
 and a touch of reserve . all etiquette be lay aside on the occasion , 
 General Montero be the only one there in full uniform , so stiff with 
 embroidery in front that his broad chest seem protect by a cuirass 
 of gold . Sir John at the beginning have get away from high place for the 
 sake of sit near Mrs. Gould . 
 the great financier be try to express to her his grateful sense 
 of her hospitality and of his obligation to her husband 's " enormous 
 influence in this part of the country , " when she interrupt he by a 
 low " Hush ! " the President be go to make an informal pronouncement . 
 the Excellentissimo be on his leg . he say only a few word , evidently 
 deeply feel , and mean perhaps mostly for Avellanos - his old friend - as 
 to the necessity of unremitting effort to secure the last welfare of 
 the country emerge after this last struggle , he hop , into a period 
 of peace and material prosperity . 
 Mrs. Gould , listen to the mellow , slightly mournful voice , look 
 at this rotund , dark , spectacled face , at the short body , obese to the 
 point of infirmity , think that this man of delicate and melancholy 
 mind , physically almost a cripple , come out of his retirement into a 
 dangerous strife at the call of his fellow , have the right to speak with 
 the authority of his self - sacrifice . and yet she be make uneasy . he 
 be more pathetic than promise , this first civilian Chief of the 
 State Costaguana have ever know , pronouncing , glass in hand , his simple 
 watchword of honesty , peace , respect for law , political good faith 
 abroad and at home - the safeguard of national honour . 
 he sit down . during the respectful , appreciative buzz of voice that 
 follow the speech , General Montero raise a pair of heavy , droop 
 eyelid and roll his eye with a sort of uneasy dullness from face 
 to face . the military backwood hero of the party , though secretly 
 impress by the sudden novelty and splendour of his position   he 
 have never be on board a ship before , and have hardly ever see the sea 
 except from a distance , understand by a sort of instinct the advantage 
 his surly , unpolished attitude of a savage fighter give he amongst all 
 these refined Blanco aristocrat . but why be it that nobody be look 
 at he ? he wonder to himself angrily . he be able to spell out the 
 print of newspaper , and know that he have perform the " great 
 military exploit of modern time . " 
 " my husband want the railway , " Mrs. Gould say to Sir John in the 
 general murmur of resume conversation . " all this bring nearer the 
 sort of future we desire for the country , which have wait for it in 
 sorrow long enough , God know . but I will confess that the other day , 
 during my afternoon drive when I suddenly see an indian boy ride out 
 of a wood with the red flag of a surveying party in his hand , I feel 
 something of a shock . the future mean change - an utter change . and yet 
 even here there be simple and picturesque thing that one would like to 
 preserve . " 
 Sir John listen , smile . but it be his turn now to hush Mrs. Gould . 
 " General Montero be go to speak , " he whisper , and almost 
 immediately add , in comic alarm , " Heavens ! he be go to propose my 
 own health , I believe . " 
 General Montero have rise with a jingle of steel scabbard and a ripple 
 of glitter on his gold - embroider breast ; a heavy sword - hilt appear 
 at his side above the edge of the table . in this gorgeous uniform , with 
 his bull neck , his hooked nose flatten on the tip upon a blue - black , 
 dye moustache , he look like a disguised and sinister vaquero . 
 the drone of his voice have a strangely rasp , soulless ring . he 
 flounder , lower , through a few vague sentence ; then suddenly 
 raise his big head and his voice together , burst out harshly - 
 " the honour of the country be in the hand of the army . I assure you 
 I shall be faithful to it . " he hesitate till his roam eye meet Sir 
 John 's face upon which he fix a lurid , sleepy glance ; and the figure 
 of the lately negotiate loan come into his mind . he lift his glass . 
 " I drink to the health of the man who bring we a million and a half of 
 pound . " 
 he toss off his champagne , and sit down heavily with a half - surprised , 
 half - bullying look all round the face in the profound , as if appal , 
 silence which succeed the felicitous toast . Sir John do not move . 
 " I do not   think I be call upon to rise , " he murmur to Mrs. Gould . 
 " that sort of thing speak for itself . " but Don Jose Avellanos come 
 to the rescue with a short oration , in which he allude pointedly to 
 England 's goodwill towards Costaguana - " a goodwill , " he continue , 
 significantly , " of which I , have be in my time accredit to the 
 Court of St. James , be able to speak with some knowledge . " 
 only then Sir John think fit to respond , which he do gracefully in 
 bad French , punctuate by burst of applause and the " Hear ! hear ! " 
 of Captain Mitchell , who be able to understand a word now and then . 
 directly he have do , the financier of railway turn to Mrs. Gould - 
 " you be good enough to say that you intend to ask I for something , " 
 he remind she , gallantly . " what be it ? be assure that any request 
 from you would be consider in the light of a favour to myself . " 
 she thank he by a gracious smile . everybody be rise from the 
 table . 
 " let we go on deck , " she propose , " where I will be able to point out to 
 you the very object of my request . " 
 an enormous national flag of Costaguana , diagonal red and yellow , with 
 two green palm tree in the middle , float lazily at the mainmast head 
 of the Juno . a multitude of firework be let off in their thousand 
 at the water 's edge in honour of the President keep up a mysterious 
 crepitating noise half round the harbour . now and then a lot of rocket , 
 swish upwards invisibly , detonate overhead with only a puff of smoke 
 in the bright sky . crowd of people could be see between the town gate 
 and the harbour , under the bunch of multicoloure flag flutter on 
 tall pole . faint burst of military music would be hear suddenly , and 
 the remote sound of shout . a knot of ragged negro at the end of the 
 wharf keep on loading and fire a small iron cannon time after time . a 
 greyish haze of dust hang thin and motionless against the sun . 
 Don Vincente Ribiera make a few step under the deck - awning , lean on 
 the arm of Senor Avellanos ; a wide circle be form round he , where 
 the mirthless smile of his dark lip and the sightless glitter of his 
 spectacle could be see turn amiably from side to side . the 
 informal function arrange on purpose on board the Juno to give the 
 President - Dictator an opportunity to meet intimately some of his most 
 notable adherent in Sulaco be draw to an end . on one side , General 
 Montero , his bald head cover now by a plume cocked hat , remain 
 motionless on a skylight seat , a pair of big gauntlete hand fold 
 on the hilt of the sabre standing upright between his leg . the white 
 plume , the coppery tint of his broad face , the blue - black of the 
 moustache under the curved beak , the mass of gold on sleeve and 
 breast , the high shin boot with enormous spur , the working 
 nostril , the imbecile and domineering stare of the glorious victor of 
 Rio Seco have in they something ominous and incredible ; the exaggeration 
 of a cruel caricature , the fatuity of solemn masquerade , the atrocious 
 grotesqueness of some military idol of aztec conception and european 
 bedecking , await the homage of worshipper . Don Jose approach 
 diplomatically this weird and inscrutable portent , and Mrs. Gould turn 
 her fascinated eye away at last . 
 Charles , come up to take leave of Sir John , hear he say , as he bend 
 over his wife 's hand , " certainly . of course , my dear Mrs. Gould , for a 
 protege of your ! not the slight difficulty . consider it do . " 
 go ashore in the same boat with the Goulds , Don Jose Avellanos be 
 very silent . even in the Gould carriage he do not open his lip for 
 a long time . the mule trot slowly away from the wharf between the 
 extend hand of the beggar , who for that day seem to have abandon 
 in a body the portal of church . Charles Gould sit on the back seat 
 and look away upon the plain . a multitude of booth make of green 
 bough , of rush , of odd piece of plank eke out with bit of canvas 
 have be erect all over it for the sale of cana , of dulce , of fruit , 
 of cigar . over little heap of glow charcoal indian woman , squat 
 on mat , cook food in black earthen pot , and boil the water for the 
 mate gourd , which they offer in soft , caress voice to the country 
 people . a racecourse have be stake out for the vaquero ; and away to 
 the left , from where the crowd be mass thickly about a huge temporary 
 erection , like a circus tent of wood with a conical grass roof , come the 
 resonant twanging of harp string , the sharp ping of guitar , with the 
 grave drum throb of an indian gombo pulsate steadily through the 
 shrill chorus of the dancer . 
 Charles Gould say presently - 
 " all this piece of land belong now to the Railway Company . there will 
 be no more popular feast hold here . " 
 Mrs. Gould be rather sorry to think so . she take this opportunity to 
 mention how she have just obtain from Sir John the promise that the 
 house occupy by Giorgio Viola should not be interfere with . she 
 declare she could never understand why the survey engineer ever talk 
 of demolish that old building . it be not in the way of the project 
 harbour branch of the line in the least . 
 she stop the carriage before the door to reassure at once the old 
 Genoese , who come out bare - headed and stand by the carriage step . 
 she talk to he in Italian , of course , and he thank she with calm 
 dignity . an old Garibaldino be grateful to she from the bottom of his 
 heart for keep the roof over the head of his wife and child . he 
 be too old to wander any more . 
 " and be it for ever , signora ? " he ask . 
 " for as long as you like . " 
 " Bene . then the place must be name , it be not worth while before . " 
 he smile ruggedly , with a run together of wrinkle at the corner 
 of his eye . " I shall set about the painting of the name to - morrow . " 
 " and what be it go to be , Giorgio ? " 
 " Albergo d'Italia Una , " say the old Garibaldino , look away for a 
 moment . " More in memory of those who have die , " he add , " than for the 
 country steal from us soldier of liberty by the craft of that accurse 
 piedmontese race of king and minister . " 
 Mrs. Gould smile slightly , and , bend over a little , begin to inquire 
 about his wife and child . he have send they into town on that day . the 
 padrona be well in health ; many thank to the signora for inquire . 
 People be pass in two and three , in whole party of man and 
 woman attend by trot child . a horseman mount on a silver - grey 
 mare draw rein quietly in the shade of the house after take off his 
 hat to the party in the carriage , who return smile and familiar 
 nod . Old Viola , evidently very pleased with the news he have just hear , 
 interrupt himself for a moment to tell he rapidly that the house be 
 secure , by the kindness of the English signora , for as long as he like 
 to keep it . the other listen attentively , but make no response . 
 when the carriage move on he take off his hat again , a grey sombrero 
 with a silver cord and tassel . the bright colour of a mexican serape 
 twist on the cantle , the enormous silver button on the embroider 
 leather jacket , the row of tiny silver button down the seam of the 
 trouser , the snowy linen , a silk sash with embroider end , the silver 
 plate on headstall and saddle , proclaim the unapproachable style of 
 the famous Capataz de Cargadores - a Mediterranean sailor - get up with 
 more finished splendour than any well - to - do young ranchero of the Campo 
 have ever display on a high holiday . 
 " it be a great thing for I , " murmur old Giorgio , still think of 
 the house , for now he have grow weary of change . " the signora just say 
 a word to the Englishman . " 
 " the old Englishman who have enough money to pay for a railway ? he be 
 go off in an hour , " remark Nostromo , carelessly . " Buon viaggio , 
 then . I have   guard his bone all the way from the Entrada pass down to 
 the plain and into Sulaco , as though he have be my own father . " 
 Old Giorgio only move his head sideways absently . Nostromo point 
 after the Goulds ' carriage , near the grass - grow gate in the old town 
 wall that be like a wall of matted jungle . 
 " and I have sit alone at night with my revolver in the Company 's 
 warehouse time and again by the side of that other Englishman 's heap of 
 silver , guard it as though it have be my own . " 
 Viola seem lose in thought . " it be a great thing for I , " he repeat 
 again , as if to himself . 
 " it be , " agree the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores , calmly . " listen , 
 Vecchio - go in and bring I , out a cigar , but do not   look for it in my 
 room . there be nothing there . " 
 Viola step into the cafe and come out directly , still absorb in his 
 idea , and tender he a cigar , mumble thoughtfully in his moustache , 
 " child grow up - and girl , too ! girl ! " he sigh and fall silent . 
 " what , only one ? " remark Nostromo , look down with a sort of comic 
 inquisitiveness at the unconscious old man . " no matter , " he add , with 
 lofty negligence ; " one be enough till another be want . " 
 he light it and let the match drop from his passive finger . Giorgio Viola 
 look up , and say abruptly - 
 " my son would have be just such a fine young man as you , Gian ' 
 Battista , if he have live . " 
 " what ? your son ? but you be right , padrone . if he have be like I he 
 would have be a man . " 
 he turn his horse slowly , and pace on between the booth , check 
 the mare almost to a standstill now and then for child , for the 
 group of people from the distant Campo , who star after he with 
 admiration . the Company 's lighterman salute he from afar ; and the 
 greatly envy Capataz de Cargadores advance , amongst murmur of 
 recognition and obsequious greeting , towards the huge circus - like 
 erection . the throng thicken ; the guitar tinkle louder ; other 
 horseman sit motionless , smoke calmly above the head of the crowd ; it 
 eddy and push before the door of the high - roof building , whence 
 issue a shuffle and thumping of foot in time to the dance music 
 vibrate and shriek with a rack rhythm , overhang by the 
 tremendous , sustain , hollow roar of the gombo . the barbarous and 
 impose noise of the big drum , that can madden a crowd , and that even 
 Europeans can not hear without a strange emotion , seem to draw Nostromo 
 on to its source , while a man , wrap up in a fade , tear poncho , 
 walk by his stirrup , and , buffet right and leave , beg " his 
 worship " insistently for employment on the wharf . he whine , offer 
 the Senor Capataz half his daily pay for the privilege of be admit 
 to the swagger fraternity of Cargadores ; the other half would 
 be enough for he , he protest . but Captain Mitchell 's right - hand 
 man - " invaluable for our work - a perfectly incorruptible fellow " - after 
 look down critically at the ragged mozo , shake his head without a 
 word in the uproar go on around . 
 the man fall back ; and a little far on Nostromo have to pull up . from 
 the door of the dance hall man and woman emerge tottering , stream 
 with sweat , tremble in every limb , to lean , panting , with star eye 
 and part lip , against the wall of the structure , where the harp 
 and guitar play on with mad speed in an incessant roll of thunder . 
 hundred of hand clap in there ; voice shriek , and then all at 
 once would sink low , chant in unison the refrain of a love song , with 
 a die fall . a red flower , fling with a good aim from somewhere in the 
 crowd , strike the resplendent Capataz on the cheek . 
 he catch it as it fall , neatly , but for some time do not turn his 
 head . when at last he condescend to look round , the throng near he 
 have part to make way for a pretty Morenita , her hair hold up by a 
 small golden comb , who be walk towards he in the open space . 
 her arm and neck emerge plump and bare from a snowy chemisette ; the 
 blue woollen skirt , with all the fullness gather in front , scanty on 
 the hip and tight across the back , disclose the provoke action of 
 her walk . she come straight on and lay her hand on the mare 's neck with 
 a timid , coquettish look upwards out of the corner of her eye . 
 " Querido , " she murmur , caressingly , " why do you pretend not to see I 
 when I pass ? " 
 " because I do not   love thee any more , " say Nostromo , deliberately , after 
 a moment of reflective silence . 
 the hand on the mare 's neck tremble suddenly . she drop her head 
 before all the eye in the wide circle form round the generous , the 
 terrible , the inconstant Capataz de Cargadores , and his Morenita . 
 Nostromo , look down , see tear begin to fall down her face . 
 " have it come , then , ever beloved of my heart ? " she whisper . " be it 
 true ? " 
 " no , " say Nostromo , look away carelessly . " it be a lie . I love thee 
 as much as ever . " 
 " be that true ? " she coo , joyously , her cheek still wet with tear . 
 " it be true . " 
 " true on the life ? " 
 " as true as that ; but thou must not ask I to swear it on the Madonna 
 that stand in thy room . " and the Capataz laugh a little in response 
 to the grin of the crowd . 
 she pout - very pretty - a little uneasy . 
 " no , I will not ask for that . I can see love in your eye . " she lay 
 her hand on his knee . " why be you tremble like this ? from love ? " she 
 continue , while the cavernous thundering of the gombo go on without a 
 pause . " but if you love she as much as that , you must give your Paquita 
 a gold - mount rosary of bead for the neck of her Madonna . " 
 " no , " say Nostromo , look into her uplifted , beg eye , which 
 suddenly turn stony with surprise . 
 " no ? then what else will your worship give I on the day of the fiesta ? " 
 she ask , angrily ; ' so as not to shame I before all these people . " 
 " there be no shame for thee in get nothing from thy lover for once . " 
 " true ! the shame be your worship 's - my poor lover 's , " she flare up , 
 sarcastically . 
 Laughs be hear at her anger , at her retort . what an audacious 
 spitfire she be ! the people aware of this scene be call out 
 urgently to other in the crowd . the circle round the silver - grey mare 
 narrow slowly . 
 the girl go off a pace or two , confront the mocking curiosity of 
 the eye , then fling back to the stirrup , tiptoeing , her enraged face 
 turn up to Nostromo with a pair of blaze eye . he bend low to she in 
 the saddle . 
 " Juan , " she hiss , " I could stab thee to the heart ! " 
 the dreaded Capataz de Cargadores , magnificent and carelessly public 
 in his amour , fling his arm round her neck and kiss her splutter 
 lip . a murmur go round . 
 " a knife ! " he demand at large , hold she firmly by the shoulder . 
 twenty blade flash out together in the circle . a young man in holiday 
 attire , bound in , thrust one in Nostromo 's hand and bound back into 
 the rank , very proud of himself . Nostromo have not even look at he . 
 " stand on my foot , " he command the girl , who , suddenly subdue , rise 
 lightly , and when he have she up , encircle her waist , her face near to 
 his , he press the knife into her little hand . 
 " no , Morenita ! you shall not put I to shame , " he say . " you shall have 
 your present ; and so that everyone should know who be your lover to - day , 
 you may cut all the silver button off my coat . " 
 there be shout of laughter and applause at this witty freak , while 
 the girl pass the keen blade , and the impassive rider jingle in his 
 palm the increase hoard of silver button . he ease she to the ground 
 with both her hand full . after whisper for a while with a very 
 strenuous face , she walk away , star haughtily , and vanish into 
 the crowd . 
 the circle have break up , and the lordly Capataz de Cargadores , the 
 indispensable man , the tried and trusty Nostromo , the Mediterranean 
 sailor come ashore casually to try his luck in Costaguana , ride slowly 
 towards the harbour . the Juno be just then swing round ; and even 
 as Nostromo rein up again to look on , a flag run up on the improvise 
 flagstaff erect in an ancient and dismantle little fort at the 
 harbour entrance . half a battery of field gun have be hurry over 
 there from the Sulaco barracks for the purpose of fire the regulation 
 salute for the President - Dictator and the War Minister . as the 
 mail - boat head through the pass , the badly time report announce the 
 end of Don Vincente Ribiera 's first official visit to Sulaco , and for 
 Captain Mitchell the end of another " historic occasion . " next time when 
 the " Hope of honest man " be to come that way , a year and a half later , 
 it be unofficially , over the mountain track , flee after a defeat on 
 a lame mule , to be only just save by Nostromo from an ignominious death 
 at the hand of a mob . it be a very different event , of which Captain 
 Mitchell use to say - 
 " it be history - history , sir ! and that fellow of mine , Nostromo , you 
 know , be right in it . absolutely make history , sir . " 
 but this event , creditable to Nostromo , be to lead immediately to 
 another , which could not be class either as " history " or as " a 
 mistake " in Captain Mitchell 's phraseology . he have another word for it . 
 " Sir " he use to say afterwards , " that be no mistake . it be a 
 fatality . a misfortune , pure and simple , sir . and that poor fellow of 
 mine be right in it - right in the middle of it ! a fatality , if ever 
 there be one - and to my mind he have never be the same man since . " 
 part second the isabel 
 CHAPTER one 
 through good and evil report in the vary fortune of that struggle 
 which Don Jose have characterize in the phrase , " the fate of national 
 honesty tremble in the balance , " the Gould Concession , " imperium in 
 Imperio , " have go on working ; the square mountain have go on pour 
 its treasure down the wooden shoot to the unreste battery of 
 stamp ; the light of San Tome have twinkle night after night upon the 
 great , limitless shadow of the Campo ; every three month the silver 
 escort have go down to the sea as if neither the war nor its 
 consequence could ever affect the ancient Occidental State seclude 
 beyond its high barrier of the Cordillera . all the fighting take place 
 on the other side of that mighty wall of serrate peak lord over by 
 the white dome of Higuerota and as yet unbreached by the railway , of 
 which only the first part , the easy Campo part from Sulaco to the Ivie 
 Valley at the foot of the pass , have be lay . neither do the telegraph 
 line cross the mountain yet ; its pole , like slender beacon on the 
 plain , penetrate into the forest fringe of the foot - hill cut by 
 the deep avenue of the track ; and its wire end abruptly in the 
 construction camp at a white deal table support a Morse apparatus , 
 in a long hut of plank with a corrugated iron roof overshadow by 
 gigantic cedar tree - the quarter of the engineer in charge of the 
 advance section . 
 the harbour be busy , too , with the traffic in railway material , and 
 with the movement of troop along the coast . the O.S.N. Company find 
 much occupation for its fleet . Costaguana have no navy , and , apart from a 
 few coastguard cutter , there be no national ship except a couple of 
 old merchant steamer use as transport . 
 Captain Mitchell , feel more and more in the thick of history , find 
 time for an hour or so during an afternoon in the drawing - room of the 
 Casa Gould , where , with a strange ignorance of the real force at work 
 around he , he profess himself delighted to get away from the 
 strain of affair . he do not know what he would have do without his 
 invaluable Nostromo , he declare . those confound Costaguana politic 
 give he more work - he confide to Mrs. Gould - than he have bargain 
 for . 
 Don Jose Avellanos have display in the service of the endanger 
 Ribiera Government an organize activity and an eloquence of which 
 the echo reach even Europe . for , after the new loan to the Ribiera 
 Government , Europe have become interested in Costaguana . the Sala of the 
 Provincial Assembly   in the Municipal Buildings of Sulaco , with its 
 portrait of the liberator on the wall and an old flag of Cortez 
 preserve in a glass case above the President 's chair , have hear all 
 these speech - the early one contain the impassioned declaration 
 " Militarism be the enemy , " the famous one of the " trembling balance " 
 deliver on the occasion of the vote for the raising of a second 
 Sulaco regiment in the defence of the reform government ; and when the 
 province again display their old flag   proscribe in Guzman Bento 's 
 time   there be another of those great oration , when Don Jose greet 
 these old emblem of the war of Independence , bring out again in the 
 name of new ideal . the old idea of Federalism have disappear . for 
 his part he do not wish to revive old political doctrine . they be 
 perishable . they die . but the doctrine of political rectitude be 
 immortal . the second Sulaco regiment , to whom he be present this 
 flag , be go to show its valour in a contest for order , peace , 
 progress ; for the establishment of national self - respect without 
 which - he declare with energy - " we be a reproach and a byword amongst 
 the power of the world . " 
 Don Jose Avellanos love his country . he have serve it lavishly with 
 his fortune during his diplomatic career , and the later story of his 
 captivity and barbarous ill - usage under Guzman Bento be well know 
 to his listener . it be a wonder that he have not be a victim of 
 the ferocious and summary execution which mark the course of that 
 tyranny ; for Guzman have rule the country with the sombre imbecility of 
 political fanaticism . the power of Supreme Government have become in his 
 dull mind an object of strange worship , as if it be some sort of 
 cruel deity . it be incarnate in himself , and his adversary , the 
 Federalists , be the supreme sinner , object of hate , abhorrence , and 
 fear , as heretic would be to a convinced inquisitor . for year he have 
 carry about at the tail of the Army of Pacification , all over the 
 country , a captive band of such atrocious criminal , who consider 
 themselves most unfortunate at not have be summarily execute . it 
 be a diminish company of nearly naked skeleton , load with iron , 
 cover with dirt , with vermin , with raw wound , all man of position , 
 of education , of wealth , who have learn to fight amongst themselves for 
 scrap of rotten beef throw to they by soldier , or to beg a negro 
 cook for a drink of muddy water in pitiful accent . Don Jose Avellanos , 
 clank his chain amongst the other , seem only to exist in order to 
 prove how much hunger , pain , degradation , and cruel torture a human 
 body can stand without part with the last spark of life . sometimes 
 interrogatory , back by some primitive method of torture , be 
 administer to they by a commission of officer hastily assemble in a 
 hut of stick and branch , and make pitiless by the fear for their own 
 life . a lucky one or two of that spectral company of prisoner would 
 perhaps be lead totter behind a bush to be shoot by a file of soldier . 
 always an army chaplain - some unshaven , dirty man , girt with a sword and 
 with a tiny cross embroider in white cotton on the left breast of 
 a lieutenant 's uniform - would follow , cigarette in the corner of the 
 mouth , wooden stool in hand , to hear the confession and give absolution ; 
 for the Citizen Saviour of the Country   Guzman Bento be call thus 
 officially in petition   be not averse from the exercise of rational 
 clemency . the irregular report of the firing squad would be hear , 
 follow sometimes by a single finishing shot ; a little bluish cloud 
 of smoke would float up above the green bush , and the Army of 
 Pacification would move on over the savanna , through the forest , 
 cross river , invade rural pueblo , devastate the hacienda of 
 the horrid aristocrat , occupy the inland town in the fulfilment of 
 its patriotic mission , and leave behind a united land wherein the evil 
 taint of Federalism could no long be detect in the smoke of burn 
 house and the smell of spilt blood . Don Jose Avellanos have survive 
 that time . perhaps , when contemptuously signify to he his release , 
 the Citizen Saviour of the Country might have think this benighted 
 aristocrat too broken in health and spirit and fortune to be any long 
 dangerous . or , perhaps , it may have be a simple caprice . Guzman Bento , 
 usually full of fanciful fear and brood suspicion , have sudden 
 access of unreasonable self - confidence when he perceive himself 
 elevate on a pinnacle of power and safety beyond the reach of mere 
 mortal plotter . at such time he would impulsively command the 
 celebration of a solemn Mass of thanksgiving , which would be sing in 
 great pomp in the cathedral of Sta . Marta by the trembling , subservient 
 archbishop of his creation . he hear it sit in a gilt armchair 
 place before the high altar , surround by the civil and military head 
 of his government . the unofficial world of Sta . Marta would crowd into 
 the cathedral , for it be not quite safe for anybody of mark to stay 
 away from these manifestation of presidential piety . have thus 
 acknowledge the only power he be at all disposed to recognize as 
 above himself , he would scatter act of political grace in a sardonic 
 wantonness of clemency . there be no other way leave now to enjoy his 
 power but by see his crush adversary crawl impotently into the 
 light of day out of the dark , noisome cell of the Collegio . their 
 harmlessness feed his insatiable vanity , and they could always be get 
 hold of again . it be the rule for all the woman of their family to 
 present thank afterwards in a special audience . the incarnation of that 
 strange god , El Gobierno Supremo , receive they stand , cock hat on 
 head , and exhort they in a menacing mutter to show their gratitude 
 by bring up their child in fidelity to the democratic form of 
 government , " which I have establish for the happiness of our country . " 
 his front tooth have be knock out in some accident of his former 
 herdsman 's life , his utterance be splutter and indistinct . he 
 have be work for Costaguana alone in the midst of treachery and 
 opposition . let it cease now lest he should become weary of forgive ! 
 Don Jose Avellanos have know this forgiveness . 
 he be break in health and fortune deplorably enough to present a truly 
 gratifying spectacle to the supreme chief of democratic institution . 
 he retire to Sulaco . his wife have an estate in that province , and she 
 nurse he back to life out of the house of death and captivity . when 
 she die , their daughter , an only child , be old enough to devote 
 herself to " poor papa . " 
 Miss Avellanos , bear in Europe and educate partly in England , be a 
 tall , grave girl , with a self - possess manner , a wide , white forehead , 
 a wealth of rich brown hair , and blue eye . 
 the other young lady of Sulaco stand in awe of her character and 
 accomplishment . she be repute to be terribly learn and serious . as 
 to pride , it be well know that all the Corbelans be proud , and her 
 mother be a Corbelan . Don Jose Avellanos depend very much upon the 
 devotion of his beloved Antonia . he accept it in the benighted way of 
 man , who , though make in God 's image , be like stone idol without sense 
 before the smoke of certain burn offering . he be ruin in every 
 way , but a man possess of passion be not a bankrupt in life . Don Jose 
 Avellanos desire passionately for his country : peace , prosperity , 
 and   as the end of the preface to " fifty Years of Misrule " have it 
 " an honourable place in the comity of civilized nation . " in this last 
 phrase the Minister Plenipotentiary , cruelly humiliate by the bad faith 
 of his Government towards the foreign bondholder , stand disclose in 
 the patriot . 
 the fatuous turmoil of greedy faction succeed the tyranny of Guzman 
 Bento seem to bring his desire to the very door of opportunity . he 
 be too old to descend personally into the centre of the arena at Sta . 
 Marta . but the man who act there seek his advice at every step . he 
 himself think that he could be most useful at a distance , in Sulaco . 
 his name , his connection , his former position , his experience command 
 the respect of his class . the discovery that this man , live in 
 dignified poverty in the Corbelan town residence   opposite the Casa 
 Gould , could dispose of material mean towards the support of the cause 
 increase his influence . it be his open letter of appeal that decide 
 the candidature of Don Vincente Ribiera for the Presidency . another of 
 these informal State paper draw up by Don Jose   this time in the 
 shape of an address from the Province   induce that scrupulous 
 constitutionalist to accept the extraordinary power confer upon he 
 for five year by an overwhelming vote of congress in Sta . Marta . it 
 be a specific mandate to establish the prosperity of the people on the 
 basis of firm peace at home , and to redeem the national credit by the 
 satisfaction of all just claim abroad . 
 on the afternoon the news of that vote have reach Sulaco by the usual 
 roundabout postal way through Cayta , and up the coast by steamer . Don 
 Jose , who have be wait for the mail in the Goulds ' drawing - room , get 
 out of the rock - chair , let his hat fall off his knee . he rub 
 his silvery , short hair with both hand , speechless with the excess of 
 joy . 
 " Emilia , my soul , " he have burst out , " let I embrace you ! let I - " 
 Captain Mitchell , have he be there , would no doubt have make an apt 
 remark about the dawn of a new era ; but if Don Jose think something 
 of the kind , his eloquence fail he on this occasion . the inspirer 
 of that revival of the Blanco party totter where he stand . Mrs. Gould 
 move forward quickly and , as she offer her cheek with a smile to her 
 old friend , manage very cleverly to give he the support of her arm he 
 really need . 
 Don Jose have recover himself at once , but for a time he could do no 
 more than murmur , " oh , you two patriot ! oh , you two patriot ! " - look 
 from one to the other . vague plan of another historical work , wherein 
 all the devotion to the regeneration of the country he love would be 
 enshrine for the reverent worship of posterity , flit through his 
 mind . the historian who have enough elevation of soul to write of Guzman 
 Bento : " yet this monster , imbrue in the blood of his countryman , must 
 not be hold unreservedly to the execration of future year . it appear 
 to be true that he , too , love his country . he have give it twelve year 
 of peace ; and , absolute master of life and fortune as he be , he 
 die poor . his bad fault , perhaps , be not his ferocity , but his 
 ignorance ; " the man who could write thus of a cruel persecutor   the 
 passage occur in his " history of Misrule "   feel at the foreshadowing of 
 success an almost boundless affection for his two helper , for these two 
 young people from over the sea . 
 just as year ago , calmly , from the conviction of practical necessity , 
 strong than any abstract political doctrine , Henry Gould have draw 
 the sword , so now , the time be change , Charles Gould have fling 
 the silver of the San Tome into the fray . the Inglez of Sulaco , the 
 " Costaguana Englishman " of the third generation , be as far from be 
 a political intriguer as his uncle from a revolutionary swashbuckler . 
 spring from the instinctive uprightness of their nature their action 
 be reason . they see an opportunity and use the weapon to hand . 
 Charles Gould 's position - a commanding position in the background of 
 that attempt to retrieve the peace and the credit of the Republic - be 
 very clear . at the beginning he have have to accommodate himself to 
 exist circumstance of corruption so naively brazen as to disarm the 
 hate of a man courageous enough not to be afraid of its irresponsible 
 potency to ruin everything it touch . it seem to he too contemptible 
 for hot anger even . he make use of it with a cold , fearless scorn , 
 manifest rather than conceal by the form of stony courtesy which 
 do away with much of the ignominy of the situation . at bottom , perhaps , 
 he suffer from it , for he be not a man of cowardly illusion , but 
 he refuse to discuss the ethical view with his wife . he trust 
 that , though a little disenchanted , she would be intelligent enough to 
 understand that his character safeguard the enterprise of their life 
 as much or more than his policy . the extraordinary development of the 
 mine have put a great power into his hand . to feel that prosperity 
 always at the mercy of unintelligent greed have grow irksome to he . 
 to Mrs. Gould it be humiliating . at any rate , it be dangerous . in the 
 confidential communication pass between Charles Gould , the king 
 of Sulaco , and the head of the silver and steel interest far away in 
 California , the conviction be grow that any attempt make by man of 
 education and integrity ought to be discreetly support . " you may tell 
 your friend Avellanos that I think so , " Mr. Holroyd have write at the 
 proper moment from his inviolable sanctuary within the eleven - storey 
 high factory of great affair . and shortly afterwards , with a credit 
 open by the Third Southern Bank   locate next door but one to the 
 Holroyd Building , the Ribierist party in Costaguana take a practical 
 shape under the eye of the administrator of the San Tome mine . and Don 
 Jose , the hereditary friend of the Gould family , could say : " perhaps , my 
 dear Carlos , I shall not have believe in vain . " 
 CHAPTER two 
 after another armed struggle , decide by Montero 's victory of Rio Seco , 
 have be add to the tale of civil war , the " honest man , " as Don Jose 
 call they , could breathe freely for the first time in half a century . 
 the five - Year - Mandate law become the basis of that regeneration , 
 the passionate desire and hope for which have be like the elixir of 
 everlaste youth for Don Jose Avellanos . 
 and when it be suddenly - and not quite unexpectedly - endanger by that 
 " brute Montero , " it be a passionate indignation that give he a 
 new lease of life , as it be . already , at the time of the 
 President - Dictator 's visit to Sulaco , Moraga have sound a note of 
 warn from Sta . Marta about the War Minister . Montero and his brother 
 make the subject of an earnest talk between the Dictator - President 
 and the Nestor - inspirer of the party . but Don Vincente , a doctor of 
 philosophy from the Cordova University , seem to have an exaggerated 
 respect for military ability , whose mysteriousness - since it appear 
 to be altogether independent of intellect - impose upon his imagination . 
 the victor of Rio Seco be a popular hero . his service be so recent 
 that the President - Dictator quail before the obvious charge of 
 political ingratitude . great regenerating transaction be be 
 initiate - the fresh loan , a new railway line , a vast colonization 
 scheme . anything that could unsettle the public opinion in the capital 
 be to be avoid . Don Jose bow to these argument and try to 
 dismiss from his mind the gold - lace portent in boot , and with a sabre , 
 make meaningless now at last , he hop , in the new order of thing . 
 Less than six month after the President - Dictator 's visit , Sulaco 
 learn with stupefaction of the military revolt in the name of national 
 honour . the Minister of War , in a barrack - square allocution to the 
 officer of the artillery regiment he have be inspect , have declare 
 the national honour sell to foreigner . the dictator , by his weak 
 compliance with the demand of the european power - for the settlement 
 of long outstanding money claim - have show himself unfit to rule . a 
 letter from Moraga explain afterwards that the initiative , and even 
 the very text , of the incendiary allocution come , in reality , from 
 the other Montero , the ex - guerillero , the Commandante de Plaza . 
 the energetic treatment of Dr. Monygham , send for in haste " to the 
 mountain , " who come gallop three league in the dark , save Don Jose 
 from a dangerous attack of jaundice . 
 after get over the shock , Don Jose refuse to let himself be 
 prostrate . indeed , well news succeed at first . the revolt in the 
 capital have be suppress after a night of fighting in the street . 
 unfortunately , both the Monteros have be able to make their escape 
 south , to their native province of Entre - Montes . the hero of the 
 forest march , the victor of Rio Seco , have be receive with frenzied 
 acclamation in Nicoya , the provincial capital . the troop in garrison 
 there have go to he in a body . the brother be organize an army , 
 gathering malcontent , send emissary prim with patriotic lie to 
 the people , and with promise of plunder to the wild llaneros . even 
 a Monterist press have come into existence , speak oracularly of the 
 secret promise of support give by " our great sister Republic of the 
 North " against the sinister land - grab design of european power , 
 cursing in every issue the " miserable Ribiera , " who have plot 
 to deliver his country , bind hand and foot , for a prey to foreign 
 speculator . 
 Sulaco , pastoral and sleepy , with its opulent Campo and the rich silver 
 mine , hear the din of arm fitfully in its fortunate isolation . it be 
 nevertheless in the very forefront of the defence with man and money ; 
 but the very rumour reach it circuitously - from abroad even , so 
 much be it cut off from the rest of the Republic , not only by natural 
 obstacle , but also by the vicissitude of the war . the Monteristos be 
 besiege Cayta , an important postal link . the overland courier cease 
 to come across the mountain , and no muleteer would consent to risk the 
 journey at last ; even Bonifacio on one occasion fail to return from 
 Sta . Marta , either not dare to start , or perhaps capture by the 
 party of the enemy raid the country between the Cordillera and 
 the capital . monterist publication , however , find their way into the 
 province , mysteriously enough ; and also Monterist emissary preach 
 death to aristocrat in the village and town of the Campo . very early , 
 at the beginning of the trouble , Hernandez , the bandit , have propose 
  through the agency of an old priest of a village in the wild   to 
 deliver two of they to the ribierist authority in Tonoro . they have 
 come to offer he a free pardon and the rank of colonel from General 
 Montero in consideration of join the rebel army with his mount 
 band . no notice be take at the time of the proposal . it be join , as 
 an evidence of good faith , to a petition pray the Sulaco Assembly for 
 permission to enlist , with all his follower , in the force be 
 then raise in Sulaco for the defence of the five - Year Mandate of 
 regeneration . the petition , like everything else , have find its way 
 into Don Jose 's hand . he have show to Mrs. Gould these page of 
 dirty - greyish rough paper   perhaps loot in some village store , 
 cover with the crab , illiterate handwriting of the old padre , 
 carry off from his hut by the side of a mud - wall church to be the 
 secretary of the dread Salteador . they have both bend in the lamplight 
 of the Gould drawing - room over the document contain the fierce and 
 yet humble appeal of the man against the blind and stupid barbarity 
 turn an honest ranchero into a bandit . a postscript of the priest 
 state that , but for be deprive of his liberty for ten day , he have 
 be treat with humanity and the respect due to his sacred calling . he 
 have be , it appear , confess and absolve the chief and most of the 
 band , and he guarantee the sincerity of their good disposition . he have 
 distribute heavy penance , no doubt in the way of litany and fast ; 
 but he argue shrewdly that it would be difficult for they to make their 
 peace with God durably till they have make peace with man . 
 never before , perhaps , have Hernandez 's head be in less jeopardy than 
 when he petition humbly for permission to buy a pardon for himself 
 and his gang of deserter by armed service . he could range afar from the 
 waste land protect his fastness , unchecked , because there be no 
 troop leave in the whole province . the usual garrison of Sulaco have go 
 south to the war , with its brass band play the Bolivar march on the 
 bridge of one of the O.S.N. Company 's steamer . the great family coach 
 draw up along the shore of the harbour be make to rock on the high 
 leathern spring by the enthusiasm of the senoras and the senorita 
 stand up to wave their lace handkerchief , as light after lighter 
 pack full of troop leave the end of the jetty . 
 Nostromo direct the embarkation , under the superintendendence 
 of Captain Mitchell , red - faced in the sun , conspicuous in a white 
 waistcoat , represent the allied and anxious goodwill of all the 
 material interest of civilization . General Barrios , who command the 
 troop , assure Don Jose on part that in three week he would have 
 Montero in a wooden cage draw by three pair of oxen ready for a tour 
 through all the town of the Republic . 
 " and then , senora , " he continue , bar his curly iron - grey head to 
 Mrs. Gould in her landau - " and then , senora , we shall convert our sword 
 into plough - share and grow rich . even I , myself , as soon as this little 
 business be settle , shall open a fundacion on some land I have on the 
 llano and try to make a little money in peace and quietness . Senora , 
 you know , all Costaguana know - what do I say ? - this whole south 
 american continent know , that Pablo Barrios have have his fill of 
 military glory . " 
 Charles Gould be not present at the anxious and patriotic send - off . it 
 be not his part to see the soldier embark . it be neither his part , 
 nor his inclination , nor his policy . his part , his inclination , and 
 his policy be unite in one endeavour to keep unchecked the flow of 
 treasure he have start single - handed from the re - opened scar in the 
 flank of the mountain . as the mine develop he have train for himself 
 some native help . there be foreman , artificer and clerk , with Don 
 Pepe for the gobernador of the mining population . for the rest his 
 shoulder alone sustain the whole weight of the " Imperium in Imperio , " 
 the great Gould Concession whose mere shadow have be enough to crush 
 the life out of his father . 
 Mrs. Gould have no silver mine to look after . in the general life of the 
 Gould Concession she be represent by her two lieutenant , the doctor 
 and the priest , but she feed her woman 's love of excitement on event 
 whose significance be purify to she by the fire of her imaginative 
 purpose . on that day she have bring the Avellanos , father and daughter , 
 down to the harbour with she . 
 amongst his other activity of that stirring time , Don Jose have become 
 the chairman of a Patriotic Committee which have arm a great proportion 
 of troop in the Sulaco command with an improved model of a military 
 rifle . it have be just discard for something still more deadly by 
 one of the great european power . how much of the market - price for 
 second - hand weapon be cover by the voluntary contribution of the 
 principal family , and how much come from those fund Don Jose be 
 understand to command abroad , remain a secret which he alone could 
 have disclose ; but the Ricos , as the populace call they , have 
 contribute under the pressure of their Nestor 's eloquence . some of the 
 more enthusiastic lady have be move to bring offering of jewel 
 into the hand of the man who be the life and soul of the party . 
 there be moment when both his life and his soul seem overtax 
 by so many year of undiscouraged belief in regeneration . he appear 
 almost inanimate , sit rigidly by the side of Mrs. Gould in the 
 landau , with his fine , old , clean - shaven face of a uniform tint as if 
 model in yellow wax , shade by a soft feel hat , the dark eye look 
 out fixedly . Antonia , the beautiful Antonia , as Miss Avellanos be 
 call in Sulaco , lean back , face they ; and her full figure , the 
 grave oval of her face with full red lip , make she look more mature 
 than Mrs. Gould , with her mobile expression and small , erect person 
 under a slightly sway sunshade . 
 whenever possible Antonia attend her father ; her recognize devotion 
 weaken the shocking effect of she scorn for the rigid convention 
 regulate the life of spanish - american girlhood . and , in truth , she be 
 no long girlish . it be say that she often write State paper from 
 her father 's dictation , and be allow to read all the book in 
 his library . at the reception - where the situation be save by the 
 presence of a very decrepit old lady   a relation of the Corbelans , 
 quite deaf and motionless in an armchair - Antonia could hold she own in 
 a discussion with two or three man at a time . obviously she be not the 
 girl to be content with peep through a bar window at a cloak 
 figure of a lover ensconce in a doorway opposite - which be the correct 
 form of Costaguana courtship . it be generally believe that with her 
 foreign upbringing and foreign idea the learn and proud Antonia would 
 never marry - unless , indeed , she marry a foreigner from Europe or 
 North America , now that Sulaco seem on the point of be invade by 
 all the world . 
 CHAPTER three 
 when General Barrios stop to address Mrs. Gould , Antonia raise 
 negligently her hand hold an open fan , as if to shade from the sun 
 her head , wrap in a light lace shawl . the clear gleam of her blue 
 eye glide behind the black fringe of eyelash pause for a moment 
 upon her father , then travel far to the figure of a young man 
 of thirty at most , of medium height , rather thick - set , wear a light 
 overcoat . bear down with the open palm of his hand upon the knob of 
 a flexible cane , he have be look on from a distance ; but directly 
 he see himself notice , he approach quietly and put his elbow over the 
 door of the landau . 
 the shirt collar , cut low in the neck , the big bow of his cravat , 
 the style of his clothing , from the round hat to the varnished shoe , 
 suggest an idea of french elegance ; but otherwise he be the very type 
 of a fair spanish creole . the fluffy moustache and the short , curly , 
 golden beard do not conceal his lip , rosy , fresh , almost pout in 
 expression . his full , round face be of that warm , healthy creole white 
 which be never tan by its native sunshine . Martin Decoud be seldom 
 expose to the Costaguana sun under which he be bear . his people have 
 be long settle in Paris , where he have study law , have dabble in 
 literature , have hop now and then in moment of exaltation to become a 
 poet like that other foreigner of spanish blood , Jose Maria Heredia . in 
 other moment he have , to pass the time , condescend to write article 
 on european affair for the Semenario , the principal newspaper in 
 Sta . Marta , which print they under the heading " from our special 
 correspondent , " though the authorship be an open secret . everybody in 
 Costaguana , where the tale of compatriot in Europe be jealously keep , 
 know that it be " the son Decoud , " a talented young man , suppose to be 
 move in the high sphere of Society . as a matter of fact , he be an 
 idle boulevardier , in touch with some smart journalist , make free of a 
 few newspaper office , and welcome in the pleasure haunt of pressman . 
 this life , whose dreary superficiality be cover by the glitter 
 of universal blague , like the stupid clowning of a harlequin by the 
 spangle of a motley costume , induce in he a Frenchified - but most 
 un - french - cosmopolitanism , in reality a mere barren indifferentism 
 posing as intellectual superiority . of his own country he use to say to 
 his french associate : " imagine an atmosphere of opera - bouffe in which 
 all the comic business of stage statesman , brigand , etc . , etc . , all 
 their farcical stealing , intriguing , and stabbing be do in dead 
 earnest . it be screamingly funny , the blood flow all the time , and the 
 actor believe themselves to be influence the fate of the universe . 
 of course , government in general , any government anywhere , be a thing 
 of exquisite comicality to a discerning mind ; but really we 
 Spanish - Americans do overstep the bound . no man of ordinary 
 intelligence can take part in the intrigue of une farce macabre . 
 however , these ribierist , of whom we hear so much just now , be really 
 try in their own comical way to make the country habitable , and even 
 to pay some of its debt . my friend , you have well write up Senor 
 Ribiera all you can in kindness to your own bondholder . really , if what 
 I be tell in my letter be true , there be some chance for they at last . " 
 and he would explain with rail verve what Don Vincente Ribiera stand 
 for - a mournful little man oppress by his own good intention , the 
 significance of battle win , who Montero be    un grotesque vaniteux 
 et feroce   , and the manner of the new loan connect with railway 
 development , and the colonization of vast tract of land in one great 
 financial scheme . 
 and his french friend would remark that evidently this little fellow 
  Decoud connaissait la question a fond . an important parisian review 
 ask he for an article on the situation . it be compose in a 
 serious tone and in a spirit of levity . afterwards he ask one of his 
 intimate - 
 " have you read my thing about the regeneration of Costaguana - une bonne 
 blague , hein ? " 
 he imagine himself parisian to the tip of his finger . but far 
 from be that he be in danger of remain a sort of nondescript 
 dilettante all his life . he have push the habit of universal raillery 
 to a point where it blind he to the genuine impulse of his own 
 nature . to be suddenly select for the executive member of the 
 patriotic small - arm committee of Sulaco seem to he the height of 
 the unexpected , one of those fantastic move of which only his " dear 
 countryman " be capable . 
 " it be like a tile fall on my head . I - i - executive member ! it be 
 the first I hear of it ! what do I know of military rifle ? C'est 
 funambulesque ! " he have exclaim to his favourite sister ; for the Decoud 
 family - except the old father and mother - use the french language 
 amongst themselves . " and you should see the explanatory and confidential 
 letter ! eight page of it - no less ! " 
 this letter , in Antonia 's handwriting , be sign by Don Jose , who 
 appeal to the " young and gifted Costaguanero " on public ground , and 
 privately open his heart to his talented god - son , a man of wealth 
 and leisure , with wide relation , and by his parentage and bringing - up 
 worthy of all confidence . 
 " which mean , " Martin comment , cynically , to his sister , " that I be 
 not likely to misappropriate the fund , or go blab to our Charge 
 d'Affaires here . " 
 the whole thing be be carry out behind the back of the War 
 Minister , Montero , a mistrusted member of the Ribiera Government , but 
 difficult to get rid of at once . he be not to know anything of it till 
 the troop under Barrios 's command have the new rifle in their hand . the 
 President - Dictator , whose position be very difficult , be alone in the 
 secret . 
 " how funny ! " comment Martin 's sister and confidante ; to which the 
 brother , with an air of good parisian blague , have retort : 
 " it be immense ! the idea of that Chief of the State engage , with the 
 help of private citizen , in dig a mine under his own indispensable 
 War Minister . no ! we be unapproachable ! " and he laugh immoderately . 
 afterwards his sister be surprised at the earnestness and ability 
 he display in carry out his mission , which circumstance make 
 delicate , and his want of special knowledge render difficult . she have 
 never see Martin take so much trouble about anything in his whole life . 
 " it amuse I , " he have explain , briefly . " I be beset by a lot 
 of swindler try to sell all sort of gaspipe weapon . they be 
 charming ; they invite I to expensive luncheon ; I keep up their hope ; 
 it be extremely entertaining . meanwhile , the real affair be be carry 
 through in quite another quarter . " 
 when the business be conclude he declare suddenly his intention of 
 see the precious consignment deliver safely in Sulaco . the whole 
 burlesque business , he think , be worth follow up to the end . he 
 mumble his excuse , tug at his golden beard , before the acute young 
 lady who   after the first wide stare of astonishment   look at he with 
 narrow eye , and pronounce slowly - 
 " I believe you want to see Antonia . " 
 " what Antonia ? " ask the Costaguana boulevardier , in a vexed and 
 disdainful tone . he shrug his shoulder , and spin round on his heel . 
 his sister call out after he joyously - 
 " the Antonia you use to know when she wear her hair in two plait down 
 she back . " 
 he have know she some eight year since , shortly before the Avellanos 
 have leave Europe for good , as a tall girl of sixteen , youthfully 
 austere , and of a character already so form that she venture to treat 
 slightingly his pose of disabused wisdom . on one occasion , as though she 
 have lose all patience , she fly out at he about the aimlessness of his 
 life and the levity of his opinion . he be twenty then , an only son , 
 spoil by his adore family . this attack disconcert he so greatly 
 that he have falter in his affectation of amuse superiority before 
 that insignificant chit of a school - girl . but the impression leave be so 
 strong that ever since all the girl friend of his sister recall to 
 he Antonia Avellanos by some faint resemblance , or by the great force 
 of contrast . it be , he tell himself , like a ridiculous fatality . and , 
 of course , in the news the Decouds receive regularly from Costaguana , 
 the name of their friend , the Avellanos , crop up frequently - the 
 arrest and the abominable treatment of the ex - Minister , the danger and 
 hardship endure by the family , its withdrawal in poverty to Sulaco , 
 the death of the mother . 
 the Monterist pronunciamento have take place before Martin Decoud 
 reach Costaguana . he come out in a roundabout way , through Magellan 's 
 Straits by the main line and the West Coast Service of the O.S.N. 
 Company . his precious consignment arrive just in time to convert the 
 first feeling of consternation into a mood of hope and resolution . 
 publicly he be make much of by the familia principale . privately Don 
 Jose , still shake and weak , embrace he with tear in his eye . 
 " you have come out yourself ! no less could be expect from a Decoud . 
 Alas ! our bad fear have be realize , " he moan , affectionately . 
 and again he hug his god - son . this be indeed the time for man of 
 intellect and conscience to rally round the endangered cause . 
 it be then that Martin Decoud , the adopt child of Western Europe , 
 feel the absolute change of atmosphere . he submit to be embrace 
 and talk to without a word . he be move in spite of himself by that 
 note of passion and sorrow unknown on the more refined stage of european 
 politic . but when the tall Antonia , advance with her light step in 
 the dimness of the big bare Sala of the Avellanos house , offer he her 
 hand   in her emancipate way , and murmur , " I be glad to see you here , 
 Don Martin , " he feel how impossible it would be to tell these two people 
 that he have intend to go away by the next month 's packet . Don Jose , 
 meantime , continue his praise . every accession add to public 
 confidence , and , besides , what an example to the young man at home 
 from the brilliant defender of the country 's regeneration , the worthy 
 expounder of the party 's political faith before the world ! everybody have 
 read the magnificent article in the famous Parisian Review . the world 
 be now inform : and the author 's appearance at this moment be like 
 a public act of faith . Young Decoud feel overcome by a feeling of 
 impatient confusion . his plan have be to return by way of the United 
 States through California , visit Yellowstone Park , see Chicago , Niagara , 
 have a look at Canada , perhaps make a short stay in New York , a long 
 one in Newport , use his letter of introduction . the pressure of 
 Antonia 's hand be so frank , the tone of her voice be so unexpectedly 
 unchanged in its approve warmth , that all he find to say after his 
 low bow be - 
 " I be inexpressibly grateful for your welcome ; but why need a man be 
 thank for return to his native country ? I be sure Dona Antonia do 
 not think so . " 
 " certainly not , senor , " she say , with that perfectly calm openness of 
 manner which characterize all her utterance . " but when he return , as 
 you return , one may be glad - for the sake of both . " 
 Martin Decoud say nothing of his plan . he not only never breathe a 
 word of they to any one , but only a fortnight later ask the mistress 
 of the Casa Gould   where he have of course obtain admission at once , 
 lean forward in his chair with an air of well - breed familiarity , 
 whether she could not detect in he that day a mark change - an air , he 
 explain , of more excellent gravity . at this Mrs. Gould turn her face 
 full towards he with the silent inquiry of slightly widen eye and 
 the mere ghost of a smile , an habitual movement with she , which 
 be very fascinating to man by something subtly devote , finely 
 self - forgetful in its lively readiness of attention . because , Decoud 
 continue imperturbably , he feel no long an idle cumberer of the 
 earth . she be , he assure she , actually behold at that moment the 
 Journalist of Sulaco . at once Mrs. Gould glance towards Antonia , pose 
 upright in the corner of a high , straight - back spanish sofa , a large 
 black fan wave slowly against the curve of her fine figure , the tip 
 of crossed foot peep from under the hem of the black skirt . Decoud 's 
 eye also remain fix there , while in an undertone he add that Miss 
 Avellanos be quite aware of his new and unexpected vocation , which in 
 Costaguana be generally the speciality of half - educate negro and 
 wholly penniless lawyer . then , confront with a sort of urbane 
 effrontery Mrs. Gould 's gaze , now turn sympathetically upon himself , 
 he breathe out the word , " Pro Patria ! " 
 what have happen be that he have all at once yield to Don Jose 's 
 press entreaty to take the direction of a newspaper that would 
 " voice the aspiration of the province . " it have be Don Jose 's old 
 and cherished idea . the necessary plant   on a modest scale   and a large 
 consignment of paper have be receive from America some time before ; 
 the right man alone be want . even Senor Moraga in Sta . Marta have not 
 be able to find one , and the matter be now become press ; 
 some organ be absolutely need to counteract the effect of the lie 
 disseminate by the Monterist press : the atrocious calumny , the 
 appeal to the people call upon they to rise with their knife in 
 their hand and put an end once for all to the Blancos , to these Gothic 
 remnant , to these sinister mummy , these impotent paralitico , who 
 plot with foreigner for the surrender of the land and the slavery 
 of the people . 
 the clamour of this Negro Liberalism frighten Senor Avellanos . a 
 newspaper be the only remedy . and now that the right man have be find 
 in Decoud , great black letter appear paint between the window 
 above the arcade ground floor of a house on the Plaza . it be next to 
 Anzani 's great emporium of boot , silk , ironware , muslin , wooden toy , 
 tiny silver arm , leg , head , heart   for ex - voto offering , rosary , 
 champagne , woman 's hat , patent medicine , even a few dusty book in 
 paper cover and mostly in the french language . the big black letter 
 form the word , " office of the Porvenir . " from these office a single 
 fold sheet of Martin 's journalism issue three time a week ; and 
 the sleek yellow Anzani prowl in a suit of ample black and carpet 
 slipper , before the many door of his establishment , greet by a deep , 
 side - long inclination of his body the Journalist of Sulaco go to and 
 fro on the business of his august call . 
 CHAPTER FOUR 
 perhaps it be in the exercise of his calling that he have come to see 
 the troop depart . the Porvenir of the day after next would no doubt 
 relate the event , but its editor , lean his side against the landau , 
 seem to look at nothing . the front rank of the company of infantry 
 draw up three deep across the shore end of the jetty when press too 
 close would bring their bayonet to the charge ferociously , with an 
 awful rattle ; and then the crowd of spectator sway back bodily , 
 even under the nose of the big white mule . notwithstanding the great 
 multitude there be only a low , mutter noise ; the dust hang in a 
 brown haze , in which the horseman , wedge in the throng here and there , 
 tower from the hip upwards , gaze all one way over the head . almost 
 every one of they have mount a friend , who steady himself with both 
 hand grasp his shoulder from behind ; and the rim of their hat 
 touching , make like one disc sustain the cone of two pointed crown 
 with a double face underneath . a hoarse mozo would bawl out something to 
 an acquaintance in the rank , or a woman would shriek suddenly the word 
 Adios ! follow by the christian name of a man . 
 General Barrios , in a shabby blue tunic and white peg - top trouser 
 fall upon strange red boot , keep his head uncover and stoop 
 slightly , prop himself up with a thick stick . no ! he have earn 
 enough military glory to satiate any man , he insist to Mrs. Gould , 
 try at the same time to put an air of gallantry into his attitude . a 
 few jetty hair hang sparsely from his upper lip , he have a salient nose , 
 a thin , long jaw , and a black silk patch over one eye . his other eye , 
 small and deep - set , twinkle erratically in all direction , aimlessly 
 affable . the few european spectator , all man , who have naturally drift 
 into the neighbourhood of the Gould carriage , betray by the solemnity 
 of their face their impression that the general must have have too much 
 punch   swedish punch , import in bottle by Anzani   at the Amarilla 
 Club before he have start with his Staff on a furious ride to the 
 harbour . but Mrs. Gould bend forward , self - possess , and declare she 
 conviction that still more glory await the general in the near future . 
 " Senora ! " he remonstrate , with great feeling , " in the name of God , 
 reflect ! how can there be any glory for a man like I in overcome that 
 bald - headed embustero with the dye moustache ? " 
 Pablo Ignacio Barrios , son of a village alcalde , general of division , 
 command in chief the Occidental Military district , do not frequent 
 the high society of the town . he prefer the unceremonious 
 gathering of man where he could tell jaguar - hunt story , boast of his 
 power with the lasso , with which he could perform extremely difficult 
 feat of the sort " no married man should attempt , " as the saying 
 go amongst the llaneros ; relate tale of extraordinary night rid , 
 encounter with wild bull , struggle with crocodile , adventure in 
 the great forest , crossing of swollen river . and it be not mere 
 boastfulness that prompt the general 's reminiscence , but a genuine 
 love of that wild life which he have lead in his young day before he 
 turn his back for ever on the thatched roof of the parental tolderia 
 in the wood . wander away as far as Mexico he have fight against the 
 French by the side   as he say   of Juarez , and be the only military 
 man of Costaguana who have ever encounter european troop in the field . 
 that fact shed a great lustre upon his name till it become eclipse 
 by the rise star of Montero . all his life he have be an inveterate 
 gambler . he allude himself quite openly to the current story how once , 
 during some campaign   when in command of a brigade , he have gamble away 
 his horse , pistol , and accoutrement , to the very epaulette , play 
 monte with his colonel the night before the battle . finally , he have 
 send under escort his sword   a presentation sword , with a gold hilt   to 
 the town in the rear of his position to be immediately pledge for five 
 hundred peseta with a sleepy and frightened shop - keeper . by daybreak he 
 have lose the last of that money , too , when his only remark , as he rise 
 calmly , be , " now let we go and fight to the death . " from that time he 
 have become aware that a general could lead his troop into battle 
 very well with a simple stick in his hand . " it have be my custom ever 
 since , " he would say . 
 he be always overwhelm with debt ; even during the period of 
 splendour in his varied fortune of a Costaguana general , when he hold 
 high military command , his gold - lace uniform be almost always 
 in pawn with some tradesman . and at last , to avoid the incessant 
 difficulty of costume cause by the anxious lender , he have assume 
 a disdain of military trapping , an eccentric fashion of shabby old 
 tunic , which have become like a second nature . but the faction Barrios 
 join need to fear no political betrayal . he be too much of a real 
 soldier for the ignoble traffic of buy and sell victory . a 
 member of the foreign diplomatic body in Sta . Marta have once pass a 
 judgment upon he : " barrio be a man of perfect honesty and even of 
 some talent for war , mais il manque de tenue . " after the triumph of the 
 Ribierists he have obtain the reputedly lucrative Occidental 
 command , mainly through the exertion of his creditor   the Sta . Marta 
 shopkeeper , all great politician , who move heaven and earth in his 
 interest publicly , and privately besiege Senor Moraga , the influential 
 agent of the San Tome mine , with the exaggerated lamentation that if 
 the general be pass over , " we shall all be ruin . " an incidental 
 but favourable mention of his name in Mr. Gould senior 's long 
 correspondence with his son have something to do with his appointment , 
 too ; but most of all undoubtedly his establish political honesty . no 
 one question the personal bravery of the Tiger - killer , as the populace 
 call he . he be , however , say to be unlucky in the field - but this 
 be to be the beginning of an era of peace . the soldier like he 
 for his humane temper , which be like a strange and precious flower 
 unexpectedly bloom on the hotbed of corrupt revolution ; and when 
 he ride slowly through the street during some military display , the 
 contemptuous good humour of his solitary eye roam over the crowd 
 extort the acclamation of the populace . the woman of that class 
 especially seem positively fascinate by the long droop nose , 
 the peaked chin , the heavy low lip , the black silk eyepatch and band 
 slant rakishly over the forehead . his high rank always procure an 
 audience of Caballeros for his sporting story , which he detail very 
 well with a simple , grave enjoyment . as to the society of lady , it be 
 irksome by the restraint it impose without any equivalent , as far as 
 he could see . he have not , perhaps , speak three time on the whole to 
 Mrs. Gould since he have take up his high command ; but he have observe 
 she frequently rid with the Senor Administrador , and have pronounce 
 that there be more sense in her little bridle - hand than in all the 
 female head in Sulaco . his impulse have be to be very civil on part 
 to a woman who do not wobble in the saddle , and happen to be the wife 
 of a personality very important to a man always short of money . he even 
 push his attention so far as to desire the aide - de - camp at his side 
  a thick - set , short captain with a Tartar physiognomy   to bring along a 
 corporal with a file of man in front of the carriage , lest the crowd in 
 its backward surge should " incommode the mule of the senora . " then , 
 turn to the small knot of silent Europeans look on within earshot , 
 he raise his voice protectingly - 
 " senor , have no apprehension . go on quietly make your Ferro 
 Carril - your railway , your telegraphs . your - there be enough wealth in 
 Costaguana to pay for everything - or else you would not be here . ha ! ha ! 
 do not   mind this little picardia of my friend Montero . in a little while 
 you shall behold his dye moustache through the bar of a strong wooden 
 cage . Si , senor ! fear nothing , develop the country , work , work ! " 
 the little group of engineer receive this exhortation without a word , 
 and after wave his hand at they loftily , he address himself again to 
 Mrs. Gould - 
 " that be what Don Jose say we must do . be enterprise ! work ! grow 
 rich ! to put Montero in a cage be my work ; and when that insignificant 
 piece of business be do , then , as Don Jose wish we , we shall grow 
 rich , one and all , like so many englishman , because it be money that 
 save a country , and - " 
 but a young officer in a very new uniform , hurry up from the 
 direction of the jetty , interrupt his interpretation of Senor 
 Avellanos 's ideal . the general make a movement of impatience ; the other 
 go on talk to he insistently , with an air of respect . the horse 
 of the Staff have be embark , the steamer 's gig be await the 
 general at the boat step ; and Barrios , after a fierce stare of his one 
 eye , begin to take leave . Don Jose rouse himself for an appropriate 
 phrase pronounce mechanically . the terrible strain of hope and fear be 
 tell on he , and he seem to husband the last spark of his fire for 
 those oratorical effort of which even the distant Europe be to hear . 
 Antonia , her red lip firmly close , avert her head behind the raise 
 fan ; and young Decoud , though he feel the girl 's eye upon he , gaze 
 away persistently , hook on his elbow , with a scornful and complete 
 detachment . Mrs. Gould heroically conceal her dismay at the appearance 
 of man and event so remote from her racial convention , dismay too deep 
 to be utter in word even to her husband . she understand his voiceless 
 reserve well now . their confidential intercourse fall , not in moment 
 of privacy , but precisely in public , when the quick meeting of their 
 glance would comment upon some fresh turn of event . she have go to 
 his school of uncompromise silence , the only one possible , since so 
 much that seem shocking , weird , and grotesque in the working out of 
 their purpose have to be accept as normal in this country . decidedly , 
 the stately Antonia look more mature and infinitely calm ; but she 
 would never have know how to reconcile the sudden sinking of her heart 
 with an amiable mobility of expression . 
 Mrs. Gould smile a good - bye at Barrios , nod round to the Europeans 
  who raise their hat simultaneously   with an engaging invitation , " I 
 hope to see you all presently , at home " ; then say nervously to Decoud , 
 " get in , Don Martin , " and hear he mutter to himself in French , as he 
 open the carriage door , " Le sort en est jete . " she hear he with a 
 sort of exasperation . nobody ought to have know well than himself 
 that the first cast of dice have be already throw long ago in a most 
 desperate game . distant acclamation , word of command yell out , and a 
 roll of drum on the jetty greet the depart general . something like 
 a slight faintness come over she , and she look blankly at Antonia 's 
 still face , wonder what would happen to Charley if that absurd man 
 fail . " a la casa , Ignacio , " she cry at the motionless broad back of 
 the coachman , who gather the rein without haste , mumble to himself 
 under his breath , " Si , la casa . Si , si nina . " 
 the carriage roll noiselessly on the soft track , the shadow fall 
 long on the dusty little plain intersperse with dark bush , mound 
 of turn - up earth , low wooden building with iron roof of the Railway 
 Company ; the sparse row of telegraph pole stride obliquely clear of 
 the town , bear a single , almost invisible wire far into the great 
 campo - like a slender , vibrate feeler of that progress wait outside 
 for a moment of peace to enter and twine itself about the weary heart of 
 the land . 
 the cafe window of the Albergo d'ltalia Una be full of sunburnt , 
 whisker face of railway man . but at the other end of the house , the 
 end of the Signori Inglesi , old Giorgio , at the door with one of his 
 girl on each side , bar his bushy head , as white as the snow of 
 Higuerota . Mrs. Gould stop the carriage . she seldom fail to speak 
 to her protege ; moreover , the excitement , the heat , and the dust have 
 make her thirsty . she ask for a glass of water . Giorgio send the 
 child indoor for it , and approach with pleasure express in his 
 whole rugged countenance . it be not often that he have occasion to see 
 his benefactress , who be also an Englishwoman - another title to his 
 regard . he offer some excuse for his wife . it be a bad day with she ; 
 her oppression - he tap his own broad chest . she could not move from 
 her chair that day . 
 Decoud , ensconce in the corner of his seat , observe gloomily Mrs. 
 Gould 's old revolutionist , then , offhand - 
 " well , and what do you think of it all , Garibaldino ? " 
 Old Giorgio , look at he with some curiosity , say civilly that the 
 troop have march very well . one - eyed Barrios and his officer have do 
 wonder with the recruit in a short time . those Indios , only catch 
 the other day , have go swing past in double quick time , like 
 bersaglieri ; they look well fed , too , and have whole uniform . 
 " uniform ! " he repeat with a half - smile of pity . a look of grim 
 retrospect steal over his pierce , steady eye . it have be otherwise 
 in his time when man fight against tyranny , in the forest of Brazil , 
 or on the plain of Uruguay , starve on half - raw beef without salt , 
 half naked , with often only a knife tie to a stick for a weapon . " and 
 yet we use to prevail against the oppressor , " he conclude , proudly . 
 his animation fall ; the slight gesture of his hand express 
 discouragement ; but he add that he have ask one of the sergeant to 
 show he the new rifle . there be no such weapon in his fighting day ; 
 and if Barrios could not - 
 " yes , yes , " break in Don Jose , almost tremble with eagerness . " we be 
 safe . the good Senor Viola be a man of experience . extremely deadly - be 
 it not so ? you have accomplish your mission admirably , my dear 
 Martin . " 
 Decoud , loll back moodily , contemplate old Viola . 
 " ah ! yes . a man of experience . but who be you for , really , in your 
 heart ? " 
 Mrs. Gould lean over to the child . Linda have bring out a glass of 
 water on a tray , with extreme care ; Giselle present she with a bunch 
 of flower gather hastily . 
 " for the people , " declare old Viola , sternly . 
 " we be all for the people - in the end . " 
 " yes , " mutter old Viola , savagely . " and meantime they fight for you . 
 blind . esclavos ! " 
 at that moment young Scarfe of the railway staff emerge from the 
 door of the part reserve for the Signori Inglesi . he have come down to 
 headquarters from somewhere up the line on a light engine , and have have 
 just time to get a bath and change his clothe . he be a nice boy , and 
 Mrs. Gould welcome he . 
 " it be a delightful surprise to see you , Mrs. Gould . I have   just come down . 
 Usual luck . miss everything , of course . this show be just over , and I 
 hear there have be a great dance at Don Juste Lopez 's last night . be it 
 true ? " 
 " the young patrician , " Decoud begin suddenly in his precise English , 
 " have indeed be dance before they start off to the war with the 
 Great Pompey . " 
 Young Scarfe star , astound . " you have not   meet before , " Mrs. Gould 
 intervene . " Mr. Decoud - Mr. Scarfe . " 
 " ah ! but we be not go to Pharsalia , " protest Don Jose , with 
 nervous haste , also in English . " you should not jest like this , Martin . " 
 Antonia 's breast rise and fall with a deep breath . the young engineer 
 be utterly in the dark . " great what ? " he mutter , vaguely . 
 " luckily , Montero be not a Caesar , " Decoud continue . " not the two 
 Monteros put together would make a decent parody of a Caesar . " he 
 cross his arm on his breast , look at Senor Avellanos , who have 
 return to his immobility . " it be only you , Don Jose , who be a genuine 
 old Roman - vir Romanus - eloquent and inflexible . " 
 since he have hear the name of Montero pronounce , young Scarfe have be 
 eager to express his simple feeling . in a loud and youthful tone he 
 hop that this Montero be go to be lick once for all and do 
 with . there be no saying what would happen to the railway if the 
 revolution get the upper hand . perhaps it would have to be abandon . 
 it would not be the first railway go to pot in Costaguana . " you know , 
 it be one of their so - call national thing , " he run on , wrinkling 
 up his nose as if the word have a suspicious flavour to his profound 
 experience of south american affair . and , of course , he chat with 
 animation , it have be such an immense piece of luck for he at his 
 age to get appoint on the staff " of a big thing like that - do not   you 
 know . " it would give he the pull over a lot of chap all through life , 
 he assert . " therefore - down with Montero ! Mrs. Gould . " his artless 
 grin disappear slowly before the unanimous gravity of the face turn 
 upon he from the carriage ; only that " old chap , " Don Jose , present a 
 motionless , waxy profile , star straight on as if deaf . Scarfe do not 
 know the Avellanos very well . they do not give ball , and Antonia never 
 appear at a ground - floor window , as some other young lady use to do 
 attend by eld woman , to chat with the caballero on horseback in 
 the Calle . the stare of these creole do not matter much ; but what on 
 earth have come to Mrs. Gould ? she say , " go on , Ignacio , " and give he 
 a slow inclination of the head . he hear a short laugh from that 
 round - face , frenchified fellow . he colour up to the eye , and star 
 at Giorgio Viola , who have fall back with the child , hat in hand . 
 " I shall want a horse presently , " he say with some asperity to the old 
 man . 
 " Si , senor . there be plenty of horse , " murmur the Garibaldino , 
 smooth absently , with his brown hand , the two head , one dark with 
 bronze glint , the other fair with a coppery ripple , of the two girl by 
 his side . the return stream of sightseer raise a great dust on the 
 road . horseman notice the group . " go to your mother , " he say . " they 
 be grow up as I be grow old , and there be nobody - " 
 he look at the young engineer and stop , as if awaken from a 
 dream ; then , fold his arm on his breast , take up his usual position , 
 lean back in the doorway with an upward glance fasten on the white 
 shoulder of Higuerota far away . 
 in the carriage Martin Decoud , shift his position as though he could 
 not make himself comfortable , mutter as he sway towards Antonia , " I 
 suppose you hate I . " then in a loud voice he begin to congratulate Don 
 Jose upon all the engineer be convince ribierist . the interest of 
 all those foreigner be gratify . " you have hear this one . he be an 
 enlighten well - wisher . it be pleasant to think that the prosperity of 
 Costaguana be of some use to the world . " 
 " he be very young , " Mrs. Gould remark , quietly . 
 " and so very wise for his age , " retort Decoud . " but here we have the 
 naked truth from the mouth of that child . you be right , Don Jose . the 
 natural treasure of Costaguana be of importance to the progressive 
 Europe represent by this youth , just as three hundred year ago 
 the wealth of our spanish father be a serious object to the rest 
 of Europe - as represent by the bold buccaneer . there be a curse of 
 futility upon our character : Don Quixote and Sancho Panza , chivalry and 
 materialism , high - sound sentiment and a supine morality , violent 
 effort for an idea and a sullen acquiescence in every form of 
 corruption . we convulse a continent for our independence only to 
 become the passive prey of a democratic parody , the helpless victim 
 of scoundrel and cut - throat , our institution a mockery , our law a 
 farce - a Guzman Bento our master ! and we have sink so low that when 
 a man like you have awaken our conscience , a stupid barbarian of a 
 Montero - Great Heavens ! a Montero ! - become a deadly danger , and an 
 ignorant , boastful Indio , like Barrios , be our defender . " 
 but Don Jose , disregard the general indictment as though he have 
 not hear a word of it , take up the defence of Barrios . the man be 
 competent enough for his special task in the plan of campaign . it 
 consist in an offensive movement , with Cayta as base , upon the flank 
 of the Revolutionist force advance from the south against Sta . Marta , 
 which be cover by another army with the President - Dictator in its 
 midst . Don Jose become quite animate with a great flow of speech , 
 bend forward anxiously under the steady eye of his daughter . Decoud , 
 as if silence by so much ardour , do not make a sound . the bell of the 
 city be strike the hour of oracion when the carriage roll under 
 the old gateway face the harbour like a shapeless monument of leaf 
 and stone . the rumble of wheel under the sonorous arch be traverse 
 by a strange , pierce shriek , and Decoud , from his back seat , have a 
 view of the people behind the carriage trudge along the road outside , 
 all turn their head , in sombreros and rebozos , to look at a 
 locomotive which roll quickly out of sight behind Giorgio Viola 's 
 house , under a white trail of steam that seem to vanish in the 
 breathless , hysterically prolong scream of warlike triumph . and it 
 be all like a fleeting vision , the shriek ghost of a railway engine 
 flee across the frame of the archway , behind the startled movement 
 of the people stream back from a military spectacle with silent 
 footstep on the dust of the road . it be a material train return 
 from the Campo to the palisade yard . the empty car roll lightly 
 on the single track ; there be no rumble of wheel , no tremor of the 
 ground . the engine - driver , run past the Casa Viola with the salute 
 of an uplifted arm , check his speed smartly before enter the yard ; 
 and when the ear - splitting screech of the steam - whistle for the brake 
 have stop , a series of hard , batter shock , mingle with the 
 clanking of chain - coupling , make a tumult of blow and shake fetter 
 under the vault of the gate . 
 CHAPTER five 
 the Gould carriage be the first to return from the harbour to the empty 
 town . on the ancient pavement , lay out in pattern , sink into rut and 
 hole , the portly Ignacio , mindful of the spring of the Parisian - build 
 landau , have pull up to a walk , and Decoud in his corner contemplate 
 moodily the inner aspect of the gate . the squat turrete side hold up 
 between they a mass of masonry with bunch of grass grow at the top , 
 and a grey , heavily scroll , armorial shield of stone above the apex of 
 the arch with the arm of Spain nearly smooth out as if in readiness 
 for some new device typical of the impending progress . 
 the explosive noise of the railway truck seem to augment Decoud 's 
 irritation . he mutter something to himself , then begin to talk aloud 
 in curt , angry phrase throw at the silence of the two woman . they do 
 not look at he at all ; while Don Jose , with his semi - translucent , waxy 
 complexion , overshadow by the soft grey hat , sway a little to the 
 jolt of the carriage by the side of Mrs. Gould . 
 " this sound put a new edge on a very old truth . " 
 Decoud speak in French , perhaps because of Ignacio on the box above he ; 
 the old coachman , with his broad back fill a short , silver - braid 
 jacket , have a big pair of ear , whose thick rim stand well away from 
 his cropped head . 
 " yes , the noise outside the city wall be new , but the principle be old . " 
 he ruminate his discontent for a while , then begin afresh with a 
 sidelong glance at Antonia - 
 " no , but just imagine our forefather in morion and corselet draw 
 up outside this gate , and a band of adventurer just land from their 
 ship in the harbour there . thief , of course . speculator , too . their 
 expedition , each one , be the speculation of grave and reverend 
 person in England . that be history , as that absurd sailor Mitchell be 
 always say . " 
 " Mitchell 's arrangement for the embarkation of the troop be 
 excellent ! " exclaim Don Jose . 
 " that ! - that ! oh , that be really the work of that Genoese seaman ! but 
 to return to my noise ; there use to be in the old day the sound of 
 trumpet outside that gate . war trumpet ! I be sure they be trumpet . I 
 have read somewhere that Drake , who be the great of these man , use 
 to dine alone in his cabin on board ship to the sound of trumpet . in 
 those day this town be full of wealth . those man come to take it . 
 now the whole land be like a treasure - house , and all these people be 
 break into it , whilst we be cut each other 's throat . the only 
 thing that keep they out be mutual jealousy . but they will come to an 
 agreement some day - and by the time we have   settle our quarrel and 
 become decent and honourable , there will be nothing leave for we . it have 
 always be the same . we be a wonderful people , but it have always 
 be our fate to be " - he do not say " rob , " but add , after a 
 pause - " exploit ! " 
 Mrs. Gould say , " oh , this be unjust ! " and Antonia interject , " do not 
 answer he , Emilia . he be attack I . " 
 " you surely do not think I be attack Don Carlos ! " Decoud answer . 
 and then the carriage stop before the door of the Casa Gould . the 
 young man offer his hand to the lady . they go in first together ; 
 Don Jose walk by the side of Decoud , and the gouty old porter totter 
 after they with some light wrap on his arm . 
 Don Jose slip his hand under the arm of the journalist of Sulaco . 
 " the Porvenir must have a long and confident article upon Barrios and 
 the irresistibleness of his army of Cayta ! the moral effect should be 
 keep up in the country . we must cable encourage extract to Europe and 
 the United States to maintain a favourable impression abroad . " 
 Decoud mutter , " oh , yes , we must comfort our friend , the 
 speculator . " 
 the long open gallery be in shadow , with its screen of plant in vas 
 along the balustrade , hold out motionless blossom , and all the glass 
 door of the reception - room throw open . a jingle of spur die out at 
 the further end . 
 Basilio , stand aside against the wall , say in a soft tone to 
 the pass lady , " the Senor Administrador be just back from the 
 mountain . " 
 in the great sala , with its group of ancient spanish and modern 
 european furniture making as if different centre under the high white 
 spread of the ceiling , the silver and porcelain of the tea - service 
 gleam among a cluster of dwarf chair , like a bit of a lady 's boudoir , 
 put in a note of feminine and intimate delicacy . 
 Don Jose in his rock - chair place his hat on his lap , and Decoud 
 walk up and down the whole length of the room , pass between table 
 load with knick - knack and almost disappear behind the high back 
 of leathern sofa . he be think of the angry face of Antonia ; he be 
 confident that he would make his peace with she . he have not stay in 
 Sulaco to quarrel with Antonia . 
 Martin Decoud be angry with himself . all he see and hear go 
 on around he exasperate the preconceived view of his european 
 civilization . to contemplate revolution from the distance of the 
 parisian Boulevards be quite another matter . here on the spot it be 
 not possible to dismiss their tragic comedy with the expression , " Quelle 
 farce ! " 
 the reality of the political action , such as it be , seem close , and 
 acquire poignancy by Antonia 's belief in the cause . its crudeness hurt 
 his feeling . he be surprised at his own sensitiveness . 
 " I suppose I be more of a Costaguanero than I would have believe 
 possible , " he think to himself . 
 his disdain grow like a reaction of his scepticism against the action 
 into which he be force by his infatuation for Antonia . he soothe 
 himself by say he be not a patriot , but a lover . 
 the lady come in bareheaded , and Mrs. Gould sink low before the little 
 tea - table . Antonia take up her usual place at the reception hour - the 
 corner of a leathern couch , with a rigid grace in her pose and a fan in 
 her hand . Decoud , swerve from the straight line of his march , come to 
 lean over the high back of her seat . 
 for a long time he talk into her ear from behind , softly , with a half 
 smile and an air of apologetic familiarity . her fan lie half grasp on 
 her knee . she never look at he . his rapid utterance grow more and 
 more insistent and caressing . at last he venture a slight laugh . 
 " no , really . you must forgive I . one must be serious sometimes . " 
 he pause . she turn her head a little ; her blue eye glide slowly 
 towards he , slightly upwards , mollified and question . 
 " you can not   think I be serious when I call Montero a gran ' bestia 
 every second day in the Porvenir ? that be not a serious occupation . no 
 occupation be serious , not even when a bullet through the heart be the 
 penalty of failure ! " 
 her hand close firmly on her fan . 
 " some reason , you understand , I mean some sense , may creep into 
 thinking ; some glimpse of truth . I mean some effective truth , for which 
 there be no room in politic or journalism . I happen to have say what I 
 think . and you be angry ! if you do I the kindness to think a little 
 you will see that I speak like a patriot . " 
 she open her red lip for the first time , not unkindly . 
 " yes , but you never see the aim . man must be use as they be . I suppose 
 nobody be really disintereste , unless , perhaps , you , Don Martin . " 
 " God forbid ! it be the last thing I should like you to believe of I . " he 
 speak lightly , and pause . 
 she begin to fan herself with a slow movement without raise her hand . 
 after a time he whisper passionately - 
 " Antonia ! " 
 she smile , and extend her hand after the english manner towards 
 Charles Gould , who be bow before she ; while Decoud , with his 
 elbow spread on the back of the sofa , drop his eye and murmur , 
 " Bonjour . " 
 the Senor Administrador of the San Tome mine bent over his wife for 
 a moment . they exchange a few word , of which only the phrase , " the 
 great enthusiasm , " pronounce by Mrs. Gould , could be hear . 
 " yes , " Decoud begin in a murmur . " even he ! " 
 " this be sheer calumny , " say Antonia , not very severely . 
 " you just ask he to throw his mine into the melting - pot for the great 
 cause , " Decoud whisper . 
 Don Jose have raise his voice . he rub his hand cheerily . the 
 excellent aspect of the troop and the great quantity of new deadly 
 rifle on the shoulder of those brave man seem to fill he with an 
 ecstatic confidence . 
 Charles Gould , very tall and thin before his chair , listen , but 
 nothing could be discover in his face except a kind and deferential 
 attention . 
 meantime , Antonia have rise , and , cross the room , stand look out 
 of one of the three long window give on the street . Decoud follow 
 she . the window be throw open , and he lean against the thickness of 
 the wall . the long fold of the damask curtain , fall straight from 
 the broad brass cornice , hide he partly from the room . he fold his 
 arm on his breast , and look steadily at Antonia 's profile . 
 the people return from the harbour fill the pavement ; the shuffle 
 of sandal and a low murmur of voice ascend to the window . now and 
 then a coach roll slowly along the disjointed roadway of the Calle de 
 la Constitucion . there be not many private carriage in Sulaco ; at the 
 most crowded hour on the Alameda they could be count with one glance 
 of the eye . the great family ark sway on high leathern spring , full 
 of pretty powdered face in which the eye look intensely alive 
 and black . and first Don Juste Lopez , the President of the Provincial 
 Assembly , pass with his three lovely daughter , solemn in a black 
 frock - coat and stiff white tie , as when direct a debate from a high 
 tribune . though they all raise their eye , Antonia do not make the 
 usual greeting gesture of a fluttered hand , and they affect not to 
 see the two young people , costaguanero with european manner , whose 
 eccentricity be discuss behind the bar window of the first 
 family in Sulaco . and then the widow Senora Gavilaso de Valdes 
 roll by , handsome and dignified , in a great machine in which she use 
 to travel to and from her country house , surround by an armed retinue 
 in leather suit and big sombrero , with carbine at the bow of their 
 saddle . she be a woman of most distinguished family , proud , rich , and 
 kind - hearted . her second son , Jaime , have just go off on the Staff of 
 Barrios . the eld , a worthless fellow of a moody disposition , fill 
 Sulaco with the noise of his dissipation , and gamble heavily at the 
 club . the two young boy , with yellow ribierist cockade in their 
 cap , sit on the front seat . she , too , affect not to see the Senor 
 Decoud talk publicly with Antonia in defiance of every convention . 
 and he not even her novio as far as the world know ! though , even in that 
 case , it would have be scandal enough . but the dignified old lady , 
 respect and admire by the first family , would have be still more 
 shock if she could have hear the word they be exchange . 
 " do you say I lose sight of the aim ? I have only one aim in the world . " 
 she make an almost imperceptible negative movement of her head , still 
 star across the street at the Avellanos 's house , grey , mark with 
 decay , and with iron bar like a prison . 
 " and it would be so easy of attainment , " he continue , " this aim which , 
 whether knowingly or not , I have always have in my heart - ever since the 
 day when you snub I so horribly once in Paris , you remember . " 
 a slight smile seem to move the corner of the lip that be on his 
 side . 
 " you know you be a very terrible person , a sort of Charlotte Corday 
 in a schoolgirl 's dress ; a ferocious patriot . I suppose you would have 
 stick a knife into Guzman Bento ? " 
 she interrupt he . " you do I too much honour . " 
 " at any rate , " he say , change suddenly to a tone of bitter levity , 
 " you would have send I to stab he without compunction . " 
 " ah , par exemple ! " she murmur in a shocked tone . 
 " well , " he argue , mockingly , " you do keep I here write deadly 
 nonsense . deadly to I ! it have already kill my self - respect . and you 
 may imagine , " he continue , his tone pass into light banter , " that 
 Montero , should he be successful , would get even with I in the only way 
 such a brute can get even with a man of intelligence who condescend to 
 call he a gran ' bestia three time a week . it be a sort of intellectual 
 death ; but there be the other one in the background for a journalist of 
 my ability . " 
 " if he be successful ! " say Antonia , thoughtfully . 
 " you seem satisfied to see my life hang on a thread , " Decoud reply , 
 with a broad smile . " and the other Montero , the ' my trusted brother ' of 
 the proclamation , the guerrillero - have not   I write that he be take 
 the guest ' overcoat and change plate in Paris at our Legation in 
 the interval of spy on our refugee there , in the time of Rojas ? he 
 will wash out that sacred truth in blood . in my blood ! why do you look 
 annoyed ? this be simply a bit of the biography of one of our great man . 
 what do you think he will do to I ? there be a certain convent wall 
 round the corner of the Plaza , opposite the door of the Bull Ring . you 
 know ? opposite the door with the inscription , Intrada de la Sombra . ' 
 Appropriate , perhaps ! that be where the uncle of our host give up his 
 anglo - south - american soul . and , note , he might have run away . a man 
 who have fight with weapon may run away . you might have let I go 
 with Barrios if you have care for I . I would have carry one of those 
 rifle , in which Don Jose believe , with the great satisfaction , in 
 the rank of poor peon and Indios , that know nothing either of reason 
 or politic . the most forlorn hope in the most forlorn army on earth 
 would have be safe than that for which you make I stay here . when 
 you make war you may retreat , but not when you spend your time in 
 incite poor ignorant fool to kill and to die . " 
 his tone remain light , and as if unaware of his presence she stand 
 motionless , her hand clasp lightly , the fan hang down from she 
 interlaced finger . he wait for a while , and then - 
 " I shall go to the wall , " he say , with a sort of jocular desperation . 
 even that declaration do not make she look at he . her head remain 
 still , her eye fix upon the house of the Avellanos , whose chip 
 pilaster , broken cornice , the whole degradation of dignity be hide 
 now by the gathering dusk of the street . in her whole figure her lip 
 alone move , form the word - 
 " Martin , you will make I cry . " 
 he remain silent for a minute , startle , as if overwhelm by a sort 
 of awed happiness , with the line of the mocking smile still stiffen 
 about his mouth , and incredulous surprise in his eye . the value of a 
 sentence be in the personality which utter it , for nothing new can be 
 say by man or woman ; and those be the last word , it seem to he , 
 that could ever have be speak by Antonia . he have never make it up 
 with she so completely in all their intercourse of small encounter ; but 
 even before she have time to turn towards he , which she do slowly with 
 a rigid grace , he have begin to plead - 
 " my sister be only wait to embrace you . my father be transport with 
 joy . I will not   say anything of my mother ! our mother be like sister . 
 there be the mail - boat for the south next week - let we go . that Moraga 
 be a fool ! a man like Montero be bribe . it be the practice of the 
 country . it be tradition - it 's politic . read ' fifty Years of Misrule . ' " 
 " leave poor papa alone , Don Martin . he believe - " 
 " I have the great tenderness for your father , " he begin , hurriedly . 
 " but I love you , Antonia ! and Moraga have miserably mismanage this 
 business . perhaps your father do , too ; I do not   know . Montero be 
 bribeable . why , I suppose he only want his share of this famous loan 
 for national development . why do not   the stupid Sta . Marta people give 
 he a mission to Europe , or something ? he would have take five year ' 
 salary in advance , and go on loafing in Paris , this stupid , ferocious 
 Indio ! " 
 " the man , " she say , thoughtfully , and very calm before this outburst , 
 " be intoxicate with vanity . we have all the information , not from 
 Moraga only ; from other , too . there be his brother intriguing , too . " 
 " oh , yes ! " he say . " of course you know . you know everything . you read 
 all the correspondence , you write all the paper - all those State paper 
 that be inspire here , in this room , in blind deference to a theory 
 of political purity . had not   you Charles Gould before your eye ? Rey de 
 Sulaco ! he and his mine be the practical demonstration of what could 
 have be do . do you think he succeed by his fidelity to a theory of 
 virtue ? and all those railway people , with their honest work ! of course , 
 their work be honest ! but what if you can not work honestly till the 
 thief be satisfied ? could he not , a gentleman , have tell this Sir 
 John what's - his - name that Montero have to be buy off - he and all his 
 Negro Liberals hang on to his gold - lace sleeve ? he ought to have 
 be buy off with his own stupid weight of gold - his weight of gold , 
 I tell you , boot , sabre , spur , cocked hat , and all . " 
 she shake her head slightly . " it be impossible , " she murmur . 
 " he want the whole lot ? what ? " 
 she be face he now in the deep recess of the window , very close and 
 motionless . her lip move rapidly . Decoud , lean his back against the 
 wall , listen with crossed arm and lower eyelid . he drink the tone 
 of her even voice , and watch the agitated life of her throat , as if 
 wave of emotion have run from her heart to pass out into the air in her 
 reasonable word . he also have his aspiration , he aspire to carry she 
 away out of these deadly futility of pronunciamientos and reform . all 
 this be wrong - utterly wrong ; but she fascinate he , and sometimes 
 the sheer sagacity of a phrase would break the charm , replace the 
 fascination by a sudden unwilling thrill of interest . some woman 
 hover , as it be , on the threshold of genius , he reflect . they do 
 not want to know , or think , or understand . passion stand for all that , 
 and he be ready to believe that some startlingly profound remark , some 
 appreciation of character , or a judgment upon an event , border on the 
 miraculous . in the mature Antonia he could see with an extraordinary 
 vividness the austere schoolgirl of the early day . she seduce his 
 attention ; sometimes he could not restrain a murmur of assent ; now and 
 then he advance an objection quite seriously . gradually they begin to 
 argue ; the curtain half hide they from the people in the sala . 
 outside it have grow dark . from the deep trench of shadow between the 
 house , light up vaguely by the glimmer of street lamp , ascend the 
 evening silence of Sulaco ; the silence of a town with few carriage , 
 of unshod horse , and a softly sandalle population . the window of 
 the Casa Gould fling their shin parallelogram upon the house of 
 the Avellanos . now and then a shuffle of foot pass below with the 
 pulsate red glow of a cigarette at the foot of the wall ; and the 
 night air , as if cool by the snow of Higuerota , refresh their 
 face . 
 " we occidental , " say Martin Decoud , use the usual term the 
 provincial of Sulaco apply to themselves , " have be always distinct 
 and separate . as long as we hold Cayta nothing can reach we . in all our 
 trouble no army have march over those mountain . a revolution in the 
 central province isolate we at once . look how complete it be now ! the 
 news of Barrios ' movement will be cable to the United States , and 
 only in that way will it reach Sta . Marta by the cable from the other 
 seaboard . we have the great rich , the great fertility , the 
 pure blood in our great family , the most laborious population . the 
 Occidental Province should stand alone . the early Federalism be not 
 bad for we . then come this union which Don Henrique Gould resist . 
 it open the road to tyranny ; and , ever since , the rest of Costaguana 
 hang like a millstone round our neck . the Occidental territory be 
 large enough to make any man 's country . look at the mountain ! nature 
 itself seem to cry to we , ' separate ! ' " 
 she make an energetic gesture of negation . a silence fall . 
 " oh , yes , I know it be contrary to the doctrine lay down in the ' history 
 of Fifty Years ' Misrule . ' I be only try to be sensible . but my sense 
 seem always to give you cause for offence . have I startle you very 
 much with this perfectly reasonable aspiration ? " 
 she shake her head . no , she be not startle , but the idea shock she 
 early conviction . her patriotism be large . she have never consider 
 that possibility . 
 " it may yet be the mean of save some of your conviction , " he say , 
 prophetically . 
 she do not answer . she seem tired . they lean side by side on the 
 rail of the little balcony , very friendly , have exhausted politic , 
 give themselves up to the silent feeling of their nearness , in one of 
 those profound pause that fall upon the rhythm of passion . towards the 
 plaza end of the street the glow coal in the brazero of the market 
 woman cook their evening meal gleam red along the edge of the 
 pavement . a man appear without a sound in the light of a street lamp , 
 show the coloured invert triangle of his border poncho , square on 
 his shoulder , hang to a point below his knee . from the harbour 
 end of the Calle a horseman walk his soft - stepping mount , gleam 
 silver - grey abreast each lamp under the dark shape of the rider . 
 " behold the illustrious Capataz de Cargadores , " say Decoud , gently , 
 " come in all his splendour after his work be do . the next great man 
 of Sulaco after Don Carlos Gould . but he be good - natured , and let I 
 make friend with he . " 
 " ah , indeed ! " say Antonia . " how do you make friend ? " 
 " a journalist ought to have his finger on the popular pulse , and this 
 man be one of the leader of the populace . a journalist ought to know 
 remarkable man - and this man be remarkable in his way . " 
 " ah , yes ! " say Antonia , thoughtfully . " it be know that this italian 
 have a great influence . " 
 the horseman have pass below they , with a gleam of dim light on the 
 shin broad quarter of the grey mare , on a bright heavy stirrup , on a 
 long silver spur ; but the short flick of yellowish flame in the dusk be 
 powerless against the muffle - up mysteriousness of the dark figure with 
 an invisible face conceal by a great sombrero . 
 Decoud and Antonia remain lean over the balcony , side by side , 
 touch elbow , with their head overhang the darkness of the 
 street , and the brilliantly light sala at their back . this be a 
 tete - a - tete of extreme impropriety ; something of which in the whole 
 extent of the Republic only the extraordinary Antonia could be 
 capable - the poor , motherless girl , never accompany , with a careless 
 father , who have think only of make she learn . even Decoud himself 
 seem to feel that this be as much as he could expect of have she to 
 himself till - till the revolution be over and he could carry she off 
 to Europe , away from the endlessness of civil strife , whose folly seem 
 even hard to bear than its ignominy . after one Montero there would 
 be another , the lawlessness of a populace of all colour and race , 
 barbarism , irremediable tyranny . as the great Liberator Bolivar have say 
 in the bitterness of his spirit , " America be ungovernable . those who 
 work for her independence have plough the sea . " he do not care , he 
 declare boldly ; he seize every opportunity to tell she that though she 
 have manage to make a Blanco journalist of he , he be no patriot . first 
 of all , the word have no sense for cultured mind , to whom the narrowness 
 of every belief be odious ; and secondly , in connection with the 
 everlasting trouble of this unhappy country it be hopelessly 
 besmirch ; it have be the cry of dark barbarism , the cloak of 
 lawlessness , of crime , of rapacity , of simple thieving . 
 he be surprised at the warmth of his own utterance . he have no need 
 to drop his voice ; it have be low all the time , a mere murmur in the 
 silence of dark house with their shutter close early against the 
 night air , as be the custom of Sulaco . only the sala of the Casa Gould 
 fling out defiantly the blaze of its four window , the bright appeal of 
 light in the whole dumb obscurity of the street . and the murmur on the 
 little balcony go on after a short pause . 
 " but we be labour to change all that , " Antonia protest . " it be 
 exactly what we desire . it be our object . it be the great cause . and 
 the word you despise have stand also for sacrifice , for courage , for 
 constancy , for suffer . Papa , who - " 
 " plough the sea , " interrupt Decoud , look down . 
 there be below the sound of hasty and ponderous footstep . 
 " your uncle , the grand - vicar of the cathedral , have just turn under the 
 gate , " observe Decoud . " he say Mass for the troop in the Plaza this 
 morning . they have build for he an altar of drum , you know . and they 
 bring outside all the paint block to take the air . all the wooden 
 saint stand militarily in a row at the top of the great flight of 
 step . they look like a gorgeous escort attend the Vicar - General . I 
 see the great function from the window of the Porvenir . he be amazing , 
 your uncle , the last of the Corbelans . he glitter exceedingly in his 
 vestment with a great crimson velvet cross down his back . and all the 
 time our saviour Barrios sit in the Amarilla Club drinking punch at 
 an open window . Esprit fort - our Barrios . I expect every moment your 
 uncle to launch an excommunication there and then at the black eye - patch 
 in the window across the Plaza . but not at all . ultimately the troop 
 march off . later Barrios come down with some of the officer , and 
 stand with his uniform all unbuttoned , discourse at the edge of the 
 pavement . suddenly your uncle appear , no long glitter , but all 
 black , at the cathedral door with that threatening aspect he have - you 
 know , like a sort of avenge spirit . he give one look , stride over 
 straight at the group of uniform , and lead away the general by the 
 elbow . he walk he for a quarter of an hour in the shade of a 
 wall . never let go his elbow for a moment , talk all the time with 
 exaltation , and gesticulate with a long black arm . it be a curious 
 scene . the officer seem strike with astonishment . remarkable man , 
 your missionary uncle . he hat an infidel much less than a heretic , and 
 prefer a heathen many time to an infidel . he condescend graciously to 
 call I a heathen , sometimes , you know . " 
 Antonia listen with her hand over the balustrade , opening and 
 shut the fan gently ; and Decoud talk a little nervously , as if 
 afraid that she would leave he at the first pause . their comparative 
 isolation , the precious sense of intimacy , the slight contact of their 
 arm , affect he softly ; for now and then a tender inflection creep 
 into the flow of his ironic murmur . 
 " any slight sign of favour from a relative of yours be welcome , Antonia . 
 and perhaps he understand I , after all ! but I know he , too , our Padre 
 Corbelan . the idea of political honour , justice , and honesty for he 
 consist in the restitution of the confiscate Church property . nothing 
 else could have draw that fierce converter of savage Indians out of the 
 wild to work for the Ribierist cause ! nothing else but that wild hope ! 
 he would make a pronunciamiento himself for such an object against any 
 government if he could only get follower ! what do Don Carlos Gould 
 think of that ? but , of course , with his english impenetrability , nobody 
 can tell what he think . probably he think of nothing apart from his 
 mine ; of his ' Imperium in Imperio . ' as to Mrs. Gould , she think of 
 her school , of her hospital , of the mother with the young baby , of 
 every sick old man in the three village . if you be to turn your head 
 now you would see she extract a report from that sinister doctor in a 
 check shirt - what be his name ? Monygham - or else catechise Don Pepe or 
 perhaps listen to Padre Roman . they be all down here to - day - all 
 her minister of state . well , she be a sensible woman , and perhaps Don 
 Carlos be a sensible man . it be a part of solid english sense not to 
 think too much ; to see only what may be of practical use at the moment . 
 these people be not like ourselves . we have no political reason ; we 
 have political passion - sometimes . what be a conviction ? a particular 
 view of our personal advantage either practical or emotional . no one be 
 a patriot for nothing . the word serve we well . but I be clear - sight , 
 and I shall not use that word to you , Antonia ! I have no patriotic 
 illusion . I have only the supreme illusion of a lover . " 
 he pause , then mutter almost inaudibly , " that can lead one very far , 
 though . " 
 behind their back the political tide that once in every twenty - four 
 hour set with a strong flood through the Gould drawing - room could 
 be hear , rise higher in a hum of voice . man have be drop in 
 singly , or in two and three : the high official of the province , 
 engineer of the railway , sunburnt and in tweed , with the frosted head 
 of their chief smile with slow , humorous indulgence amongst the young 
 eager face . Scarfe , the lover of fandango , have already slip out in 
 search of some dance , no matter where , on the outskirt of the town . Don 
 Juste Lopez , after take his daughter home , have enter solemnly , in a 
 black creased coat button up under his spread brown beard . the 
 few member of the Provincial Assembly present cluster at once around 
 their President to discuss the news of the war and the last proclamation 
 of the rebel Montero , the miserable Montero , call in the name of " a 
 justly incense democracy " upon all the Provincial Assemblies of the 
 Republic to suspend their sitting till his sword have make peace and the 
 will of the people could be consult . it be practically an invitation 
 to dissolve : an unheard - of audacity of that evil madman . 
 the indignation run high in the knot of deputy behind Jose Avellanos . 
 Don Jose , lift up his voice , cry out to they over the high back 
 of his chair , " Sulaco have answer by send to - day an army upon his 
 flank . if all the other province show only half as much patriotism as 
 we occidental - " 
 a great outburst of acclamation cover the vibrate treble of the 
 life and soul of the party . yes ! yes ! this be true ! a great truth ! 
 Sulaco be in the forefront , as ever ! it be a boastful tumult , the 
 hopefulness inspire by the event of the day break out amongst those 
 caballero of the Campo thinking of their herd , of their land , of 
 the safety of their family . everything be at stake . . . . no ! it be 
 impossible that Montero should succeed ! this criminal , this shameless 
 Indio ! the clamour continue for some time , everybody else in the 
 room look towards the group where Don Juste have put on his air of 
 impartial solemnity as if preside at a sitting of the Provincial 
 Assembly . Decoud have turn round at the noise , and , lean his back 
 on the balustrade , shout into the room with all the strength of his 
 lung , " Gran ' bestia ! " 
 this unexpected cry have the effect of still the noise . all the eye 
 be direct to the window with an approving expectation ; but Decoud 
 have already turn his back upon the room , and be again lean out 
 over the quiet street . 
 " this be the quintessence of my journalism ; that be the supreme 
 argument , " he say to Antonia . " I have invent this definition , this 
 last word on a great question . but I be no patriot . I be no more of a 
 patriot than the Capataz of the Sulaco Cargadores , this Genoese who have 
 do such great thing for this harbour - this active usher - in of the 
 material implement for our progress . you have hear Captain Mitchell 
 confess over and over again that till he get this man he could never 
 tell how long it would take to unload a ship . that be bad for progress . 
 you have see he pass by after his labour on his famous horse to 
 dazzle the girl in some ballroom with an earthen floor . he be a 
 fortunate fellow ! his work be an exercise of personal power ; his 
 leisure be spend in receive the mark of extraordinary adulation . 
 and he like it , too . can anybody be more fortunate ? to be fear and 
 admire be - " 
 " and be these your high aspiration , Don Martin ? " interrupt 
 Antonia . 
 " I be speak of a man of that sort , " say Decoud , curtly . " the hero 
 of the world have be fear and admire . what more could he want ? " 
 Decoud have often feel his familiar habit of ironic thought fall 
 shatter against Antonia 's gravity . she irritate he as if she , too , 
 have suffer from that inexplicable feminine obtuseness which stand 
 so often between a man and a woman of the more ordinary sort . but he 
 overcome his vexation at once . he be very far from think Antonia 
 ordinary , whatever verdict his scepticism might have pronounce upon 
 himself . with a touch of penetrate tenderness in his voice he assure 
 she that his only aspiration be to a felicity so high that it seem 
 almost unrealizable on this earth . 
 she colour invisibly , with a warmth against which the breeze from the 
 sierra seem to have lose its cool power in the sudden melting of 
 the snow . his whisper could not have carry so far , though there be 
 enough ardour in his tone to melt a heart of ice . Antonia turn away 
 abruptly , as if to carry his whisper assurance into the room behind , 
 full of light , noisy with voice . 
 the tide of political speculation be beat high within the four wall 
 of the great sala , as if drive beyond the mark by a great gust of 
 hope . Don Juste 's fan - shape beard be still the centre of loud and 
 animate discussion . there be a self - confident ring in all the 
 voice . even the few Europeans around Charles Gould - a Dane , a couple 
 of Frenchmen , a discreet fat german , smile , with down - cast eye , the 
 representative of those material interest that have get a footing in 
 Sulaco under the protect might of the San Tome mine - have infuse a 
 lot of good humour into their deference . Charles Gould , to whom they 
 be pay their court , be the visible sign of the stability that 
 could be achieve on the shift ground of revolution . they feel 
 hopeful about their various undertaking . one of the two Frenchmen , 
 small , black , with glitter eye lose in an immense growth of bushy 
 beard , wave his tiny brown hand and delicate wrist . he have be 
 travel in the interior of the province for a syndicate of european 
 capitalist . his forcible " Monsieur l'Administrateur " return every 
 minute shrill above the steady hum of conversation . he be relate 
 his discovery . he be ecstatic . Charles Gould glance down at he 
 courteously . 
 at a give moment of these necessary reception it be Mrs. Gould 's 
 habit to withdraw quietly into a little drawing - room , especially her 
 own , next to the great sala . she have rise , and , wait for Antonia , 
 listen with a slightly worried graciousness to the engineer - in - chief 
 of the railway , who stoop over she , relate slowly , without the 
 slight gesture , something apparently amusing , for his eye have a 
 humorous twinkle . Antonia , before she advance into the room to join 
 Mrs. Gould , turn her head over her shoulder towards Decoud , only for a 
 moment . 
 " why should any one of we think his aspiration unrealizable ? " she say , 
 rapidly . 
 " I be go to cling to mine to the end , Antonia , " he answer , through 
 clench tooth , then bow very low , a little distantly . 
 the engineer - in - chief have not finish tell his amusing story . 
 the humour of railway building in South America appeal to his keen 
 appreciation of the absurd , and he tell his instance of ignorant 
 prejudice and as ignorant cunning very well . now , Mrs. Gould give he 
 all her attention as he walk by her side escort the lady out of 
 the room . finally all three pass unnoticed through the glass door in 
 the gallery . only a tall priest stalk silently in the noise of the 
 sala check himself to look after they . Father Corbelan , whom Decoud 
 have see from the balcony turn into the gateway of the Casa 
 Gould , have address no one since come in . the long , skimpy soutane 
 accentuate the tallness of his stature ; he carry his powerful torso 
 throw forward ; and the straight , black bar of his joined eyebrow , the 
 pugnacious outline of the bony face , the white spot of a scar on the 
 bluish shaven cheek   a testimonial to his apostolic zeal from a 
 party of unconverted Indians , suggest something unlawful behind his 
 priesthood , the idea of a chaplain of bandit . 
 he separate his bony , knot hand clasp behind his back , to shake 
 his finger at Martin . 
 Decoud have step into the room after Antonia . but he do not go far . 
 he have remain just within , against the curtain , with an expression of 
 not quite genuine gravity , like a grow - up person take part in a game 
 of child . he gaze quietly at the threatening finger . 
 " I have watch your reverence convert General Barrios by a special 
 sermon on the Plaza , " he say , without make the slight movement . 
 " what miserable nonsense ! " Father Corbelan 's deep voice resound all 
 over the room , make all the head turn on the shoulder . " the man be a 
 drunkard . senor , the God of your General be a bottle ! " 
 his contemptuous , arbitrary voice cause an uneasy suspension of every 
 sound , as if the self - confidence of the gathering have be stagger by 
 a blow . but nobody take up Father Corbelan 's declaration . 
 it be know that Father Corbelan have come out of the wild to advocate 
 the sacred right of the Church with the same fanatical fearlessness 
 with which he have go preach to bloodthirsty savage , devoid 
 of human compassion or worship of any kind . rumour of legendary 
 proportion tell of his success as a missionary beyond the eye of 
 christian man . he have baptize whole nation of Indians , live with 
 they like a savage himself . it be relate that the padre use to ride 
 with his Indians for day , half naked , carry a bullock - hide shield , 
 and , no doubt , a long lance , too - who know ? that he have wander 
 clothe in skin , seek for proselyte somewhere near the snow line of 
 the Cordillera . of these exploit Padre Corbelan himself be never know 
 to talk . but he make no secret of his opinion that the politician of 
 Sta . Marta have hard heart and more corrupt mind than the heathen 
 to whom he have carry the word of God . his injudicious zeal for the 
 temporal welfare of the Church be damage the Ribierist cause . it be 
 common knowledge that he have refuse to be make titular bishop of the 
 Occidental diocese till justice be do to a despoiled Church . the 
 political Gefe of Sulaco   the same dignitary whom Captain Mitchell save 
 from the mob afterwards   hint with naive cynicism that doubtless their 
 excellency the Ministers send the padre over the mountain to Sulaco 
 in the bad season of the year in the hope that he would be freeze 
 to death by the icy blast of the high paramo . every year a few hardy 
 muleteer - man inure to exposure - be know to perish in that way . but 
 what would you have ? their excellency possibly have not realize what 
 a tough priest he be . meantime , the ignorant be begin to murmur 
 that the ribierist reform mean simply the taking away of the land 
 from the people . some of it be to be give to foreigner who make the 
 railway ; the great part be to go to the padre . 
 these be the result of the Grand Vicar 's zeal . even from the short 
 allocution to the troop on the Plaza   which only the first rank 
 could have hear   he have not be able to keep out his fix idea of 
 an outraged Church wait for reparation from a penitent country . the 
 political Gefe have be exasperate . but he could not very well throw 
 the brother - in - law of Don Jose into the prison of the Cabildo . the chief 
 magistrate , an easy - go and popular official , visit the Casa 
 Gould , walk over after sunset from the Intendencia , unattended , 
 acknowledge with dignified courtesy the salutation of high and low 
 alike . that evening he have walk up straight to Charles Gould and have 
 hiss out to he that he would have like to deport the Grand Vicar 
 out of Sulaco , anywhere , to some desert island , to the Isabels , for 
 instance . " the one without water preferably - eh , Don Carlos ? " he have 
 add in a tone between jest and earnest . this uncontrollable priest , 
 who have reject his offer of the episcopal palace for a residence and 
 prefer to hang his shabby hammock amongst the rubble and spider of 
 the sequestrate Dominican Convent , have take into his head to advocate 
 an unconditional pardon for Hernandez the Robber ! and this be not 
 enough ; he seem to have enter into communication with the most 
 audacious criminal the country have know for year . the Sulaco police 
 know , of course , what be go on . Padre Corbelan have get hold of that 
 reckless Italian , the Capataz de Cargadores , the only man fit for such 
 an errand , and have send a message through he . Father Corbelan have 
 study in Rome , and could speak italian . the Capataz be know to visit 
 the old Dominican Convent at night . an old woman who serve the Grand 
 Vicar have hear the name of Hernandez pronounce ; and only last Saturday 
 afternoon the Capataz have be observe gallop out of town . he do 
 not return for two day . the police would have lay the italian by the 
 heel if it have not be for fear of the Cargadores , a turbulent body of 
 man , quite apt to raise a tumult . nowadays it be not so easy to govern 
 Sulaco . bad character flock into it , attract by the money in the 
 pocket of the railway workman . the populace be make restless by Father 
 Corbelan 's discourse . and the first magistrate explain to Charles 
 Gould that now the province be strip of troop any outbreak of 
 lawlessness would find the authority with their boot off , as it be . 
 then he go away moodily to sit in an armchair , smoke a long , thin 
 cigar , not very far from Don Jose , with whom , bend over sideways , he 
 exchange a few word from time to time . he ignore the entrance of the 
 priest , and whenever Father Corbelan 's voice be raise behind he , he 
 shrug his shoulder impatiently . 
 Father Corbelan have remain quite motionless for a time with that 
 something vengeful in his immobility which seem to characterize all 
 his attitude . a lurid glow of strong conviction give its peculiar 
 aspect to the black figure . but its fierceness become soften as the 
 padre , fix his eye upon Decoud , raise his long , black arm slowly , 
 impressively - 
 " and you - you be a perfect heathen , " he say , in a subdue , deep voice . 
 he make a step nearer , point a forefinger at the young man 's breast . 
 Decoud , very calm , feel the wall behind the curtain with the back of his 
 head . then , with his chin tilt well up , he smile . 
 " very well , " he agree with the slightly weary nonchalance of a man well 
 use to these passage . " but be it perhaps that you have not discover 
 yet what be the God of my worship ? it be an easy task with our 
 Barrios . " 
 the priest suppress a gesture of discouragement . " you believe neither 
 in stick nor stone , " he say . 
 " nor bottle , " add Decoud without stir . " neither do the other of 
 your reverence 's confidant . I mean the Capataz of the Cargadores . 
 he do not drink . your reading of my character do honour to your 
 perspicacity . but why call I a heathen ? " 
 " true , " retort the priest . " you be ten time bad . a miracle could 
 not convert you . " 
 " I certainly do not believe in miracle , " say Decoud , quietly . Father 
 Corbelan shrug his high , broad shoulder doubtfully . 
 " a sort of Frenchman - godless - a materialist , " he pronounce slowly , as 
 if weigh the term of a careful analysis . " neither the son of his own 
 country nor of any other , " he continue , thoughtfully . 
 " Scarcely human , in fact , " Decoud comment under his breath , his head 
 at rest against the wall , his eye gaze up at the ceiling . 
 " the victim of this faithless age , " Father Corbelan resume in a deep 
 but subdued voice . 
 " but of some use as a journalist . " Decoud change his pose and speak 
 in a more animate tone . " have your worship neglect to read the last 
 number of the Porvenir ? I assure you it be just like the other . on 
 the general policy it continue to call Montero a gran ' bestia , and 
 stigmatize his brother , the guerrillero , for a combination of lackey 
 and spy . what could be more effective ? in local affair it urge the 
 Provincial Government to enlist bodily into the national army the band 
 of Hernandez the Robber - who be apparently the protege of the Church - or 
 at least of the Grand Vicar . nothing could be more sound . " 
 the priest nod and turn on the heel of his square - toed shoe with 
 big steel buckle . again , with his hand clasp behind his back , he 
 pace to and fro , plant his foot firmly . when he swing about , the 
 skirt of his soutane be inflate slightly by the brusqueness of his 
 movement . 
 the great sala have be empty itself slowly . when the Gefe Politico 
 rise to go , most of those still remain stand up suddenly in sign of 
 respect , and Don Jose Avellanos stop the rocking of his chair . but 
 the good - natured First Official make a deprecatory gesture , wave his 
 hand to Charles Gould , and go out discreetly . 
 in the comparative peace of the room the scream " Monsieur 
 l'Administrateur " of the frail , hairy Frenchman seem to acquire a 
 preternatural shrillness . the explorer of the capitalist syndicate be 
 still enthusiastic . " ten million dollar ' worth of copper practically in 
 sight , Monsieur l'Administrateur . ten million in sight ! and a railway 
 come - a railway ! they will never believe my report . C'est trop beau . " 
 he fall a prey to a scream ecstasy , in the midst of sagely nodding 
 head , before Charles Gould 's imperturbable calm . 
 and only the priest continue his pacing , fling round the skirt of 
 his soutane at each end of his beat . Decoud murmur to he ironically : 
 " those gentleman talk about their god . " 
 Father Corbelan stop short , look at the journalist of Sulaco 
 fixedly for a moment , shrug his shoulder slightly , and resume his 
 plodding walk of an obstinate traveller . 
 and now the Europeans be drop off from the group around Charles 
 Gould till the Administrador of the Great Silver Mine could be see in 
 his whole lank length , from head to foot , leave strand by the 
 ebb tide of his guest on the great square of carpet , as it be a 
 multi - coloured shoal of flower and arabesque under his brown boot . 
 Father Corbelan approach the rock - chair of Don Jose Avellanos . 
 " come , brother , " he say , with kindly brusqueness and a touch of 
 relieve impatience a man may feel at the end of a perfectly useless 
 ceremony . " A la Casa ! a la Casa ! this have be all talk . let we now go 
 and think and pray for guidance from Heaven . " 
 he roll his black eye upwards . by the side of the frail 
 diplomatist - the life and soul of the party - he seem gigantic , with 
 a gleam of fanaticism in the glance . but the voice of the party , or , 
 rather , its mouthpiece , the ' son Decoud " from Paris , turn journalist 
 for the sake of Antonia 's eye , know very well that it be not so , that 
 he be only a strenuous priest with one idea , fear by the woman and 
 execrate by the man of the people . Martin Decoud , the dilettante in 
 life , imagine himself to derive an artistic pleasure from watch 
 the picturesque extreme of wrongheadedness into which an honest , 
 almost sacred , conviction may drive a man . " it be like madness . it must 
 be - because it be self - destructive , " Decoud have say to himself often . 
 it seem to he that every conviction , as soon as it become effective , 
 turn into that form of dementia the god send upon those they wish to 
 destroy . but he enjoy the bitter flavour of that example with the zest 
 of a connoisseur in the art of his choice . those two man get on well 
 together , as if each have feel respectively that a masterful conviction , 
 as well as utter scepticism , may lead a man very far on the by - path of 
 political action . 
 Don Jose obey the touch of the big hairy hand . Decoud follow out the 
 brother - in - law . and there remain only one visitor in the vast empty 
 sala , bluishly hazy with tobacco smoke , a heavy - eye , round - cheek man , 
 with a droop moustache , a hide merchant from Esmeralda , who have come 
 overland to Sulaco , rid with a few peon across the coast range . 
 he be very full of his journey , undertake mostly for the purpose 
 of see the Senor Administrador of San Tome in relation to some 
 assistance he require in his hide - export business . he hop to 
 enlarge it greatly now that the country be go to be settle . it be 
 go to be settle , he repeat several time , degrade by a strange , 
 anxious whine the sonority of the spanish language , which he patter 
 rapidly , like some sort of cringe jargon . a plain man could carry 
 on his little business now in the country , and even think of enlarge 
 it - with safety . be it not so ? he seem to beg Charles Gould for a 
 confirmatory word , a grunt of assent , a simple nod even . 
 he could get nothing . his alarm increase , and in the pause he would 
 dart his eye here and there ; then , loth to give up , he would branch 
 off into feel allusion to the danger of his journey . the audacious 
 Hernandez , leave his usual haunt , have cross the Campo of Sulaco , 
 and be know to be lurk in the ravine of the coast range . 
 yesterday , when distant only a few hour from Sulaco , the hide merchant 
 and his servant have see three man on the road arrest suspiciously , 
 with their horse ' head together . two of these ride off at once and 
 disappear in a shallow quebrada to the left . " we stop , " continue 
 the man from Esmeralda , " and I try to hide behind a small bush . but 
 none of my mozos would go forward to find out what it mean , and the 
 third horseman seem to be wait for we to come up . it be no use . we 
 have be see . so we ride slowly on , tremble . he let we pass - a man on 
 a grey horse with his hat down on his eye - without a word of greeting ; 
 but by - and - by we hear he gallop after we . we face about , but that 
 do not seem to intimidate he . he ride up at speed , and touch 
 my foot with the toe of his boot , ask I for a cigar , with a 
 blood - curdle laugh . he do not seem armed , but when he put his hand 
 back to reach for the match I see an enormous revolver strapped to his 
 waist . I shudder . he have very fierce whisker , Don Carlos , and as he 
 do not offer to go on we dare not move . at last , blow the smoke of 
 my cigar into the air through his nostril , he say , ' Senor , it would be 
 perhaps well for you if I ride behind your party . you be not very far 
 from Sulaco now . go you with God . ' what would you ? we go on . there 
 be no resist he . he might have be Hernandez himself ; though my 
 servant , who have be many time to Sulaco by sea , assure I that he 
 have recognize he very well for the Capataz of the Steamship Company 's 
 cargadore . later , that same evening , I see that very man at the corner 
 of the Plaza talk to a girl , a Morenita , who stand by the stirrup 
 with her hand on the grey horse 's mane . " 
 " I assure you , Senor Hirsch , " murmur Charles Gould , " that you run no 
 risk on this occasion . " 
 " that may be , senor , though I tremble yet . a most fierce man - to look 
 at . and what do it mean ? a person employ by the Steamship Company 
 talk with salteadore - no less , senor ; the other horseman be 
 salteadore - in a lonely place , and behave like a robber himself ! a 
 cigar be nothing , but what be there to prevent he ask I for my 
 purse ? " 
 " no , no , Senor Hirsch , " Charles Gould murmur , let his glance 
 stray away a little vacantly from the round face , with its hooked beak 
 upturned towards he in an almost childlike appeal . " if it be the 
 Capataz de Cargadores you meet - and there be no doubt , be there ? - you 
 be perfectly safe . " 
 " thank you . you be very good . a very fierce - look man , Don Carlos . he 
 ask I for a cigar in a most familiar manner . what would have happen 
 if I have not have a cigar ? I shudder yet . what business have he to be 
 talk with robber in a lonely place ? " 
 but Charles Gould , openly preoccupy now , give not a sign , make no 
 sound . the impenetrability of the embody Gould Concession have its 
 surface shade . to be dumb be merely a fatal affliction ; but the king 
 of Sulaco have word enough to give he all the mysterious weight of a 
 taciturn force . his silence , back by the power of speech , have as many 
 shade of significance as utter word in the way of assent , of doubt , 
 of negation - even of simple comment . some seem to say plainly , " think 
 it over " ; other mean clearly , " go ahead " ; a simple , low " I see , " with 
 an affirmative nod , at the end of a patient listen half - hour be 
 the equivalent of a verbal contract , which man have learn to trust 
 implicitly , since behind it all there be the great San Tome mine , the 
 head and front of the material interest , so strong that it depend 
 on no man 's goodwill in the whole length and breadth of the Occidental 
 Province - that be , on no goodwill which it could not buy ten time 
 over . but to the little hook - nosed man from Esmeralda , anxious about 
 the export of hide , the silence of Charles Gould portend a failure . 
 evidently this be no time for extend a modest man 's business . he 
 envelop in a swift mental malediction the whole country , with all 
 its inhabitant , partisan of Ribiera and Montero alike ; and there be 
 incipient tear in his mute anger at the thought of the innumerable 
 ox - hide go to waste upon the dreamy expanse of the Campo , with its 
 single palm rise like ship at sea within the perfect circle of the 
 horizon , its clump of heavy timber motionless like solid island 
 of leaf above the run wave of grass . there be hide there , 
 rotting , with no profit to anybody - rotting where they have be drop 
 by man call away to attend the urgent necessity of political 
 revolution . the practical , mercantile soul of Senor Hirsch rebel 
 against all that foolishness , while he be take a respectful but 
 disconcert leave of the might and majesty of the San Tome mine in the 
 person of Charles Gould . he could not restrain a heart - break murmur , 
 wring out of his very aching heart , as it be . 
 " it be a great , great foolishness , Don Carlos , all this . the price of 
 hide in Hamburg be go up - up . of course the Ribierist Government will 
 do away with all that - when it get establish firmly . meantime - " 
 he sigh . 
 " yes , meantime , " repeat Charles Gould , inscrutably . 
 the other shrug his shoulder . but he be not ready to go yet . there 
 be a little matter he would like to mention very much if permit . it 
 appear he have some good friend in Hamburg   he murmur the name 
 of the firm   who be very anxious to do business , in dynamite , he 
 explain . a contract for dynamite with the San Tome mine , and then , 
 perhaps , later on , other mine , which be sure to - the little man from 
 Esmeralda be ready to enlarge , but Charles interrupt he . it seem 
 as though the patience of the Senor Administrador be give way at 
 last . 
 " Senor Hirsch , " he say , " I have enough dynamite store up at the 
 mountain to send it down crash into the valley " - his voice rise a 
 little - " to send half Sulaco into the air if I like . " 
 Charles Gould smile at the round , startled eye of the dealer in hide , 
 who be murmur hastily , " just so . just so . " and now he be go . 
 it be impossible to do business in explosive with an Administrador so 
 well provide and so discouraging . he have suffer agony in the saddle 
 and have expose himself to the atrocity of the bandit Hernandez for 
 nothing at all . neither hide nor dynamite - and the very shoulder of 
 the enterprise Israelite express dejection . at the door he bow low 
 to the engineer - in - chief . but at the bottom of the stair in the patio 
 he stop short , with his podgy hand over his lip in an attitude of 
 meditative astonishment . 
 " what do he want to keep so much dynamite for ? " he mutter . " and why 
 do he talk like this to I ? " 
 the engineer - in - chief , look in at the door of the empty sala , whence 
 the political tide have ebb out to the last insignificant drop , nod 
 familiarly to the master of the house , stand motionless like a tall 
 beacon amongst the deserted shoal of furniture . 
 " good - night , I be go . got my bike downstairs . the railway will know 
 where to go for dynamite should we get short at any time . we have do 
 cutting and chop for a while now . we shall begin soon to blast our 
 way through . " 
 " do not   come to I , " say Charles Gould , with perfect serenity . " I 
 shall not   have an ounce to spare for anybody . not an ounce . not for my own 
 brother , if I have a brother , and he be the engineer - in - chief of the 
 most promising railway in the world . " 
 " what be that ? " ask the engineer - in - chief , with equanimity . 
 " Unkindness ? " 
 " no , " say Charles Gould , stolidly . " policy . " 
 " Radical , I should think , " the engineer - in - chief observe from the 
 doorway . 
 " be that the right name ? " Charles Gould say , from the middle of the 
 room . 
 " I mean , go to the root , you know , " the engineer explain , with an 
 air of enjoyment . 
 " why , yes , " Charles pronounce , slowly . " the Gould Concession have strike 
 such deep root in this country , in this province , in that gorge of the 
 mountain , that nothing but dynamite shall be allow to dislodge it 
 from there . it be my choice . it be my last card to play . " 
 the engineer - in - chief whistle low . " a pretty game , " he say , with a 
 shade of discretion . " and have you tell Holroyd of that extraordinary 
 trump card you hold in your hand ? " 
 " card only when it be play ; when it fall at the end of the game . till 
 then you may call it a - a - " 
 " Weapon , " suggest the railway man . 
 " no . you may call it rather an argument , " correct Charles Gould , 
 gently . " and that be how I have   present it to Mr. Holroyd . " 
 " and what do he say to it ? " ask the engineer , with undisguised 
 interest . 
 " he " - Charles Gould speak after a slight pause - " he say something 
 about hold on like grim death and put our trust in God . I should 
 imagine he must have be rather startled . but then " - pursue the 
 Administrador of the San Tome mine - " but then , he be very far away , you 
 know , and , as they say in this country , God be very high above . " 
 the engineer 's appreciative laugh die away down the stair , where the 
 Madonna with the child on her arm seem to look after his shake broad 
 back from her shallow niche . 
 CHAPTER SIX 
 a profound stillness reign in the Casa Gould . the master of the house , 
 walk along the corredor , open the door of his room , and see his 
 wife sit in a big armchair - his own smoking armchair - thoughtful , 
 contemplate her little shoe . and she do not raise her eye when he 
 walk in . 
 " Tired ? " ask Charles Gould . 
 " a little , " say Mrs. Gould . still without look up , she add with 
 feeling , " there be an awful sense of unreality about all this . " 
 Charles Gould , before the long table strew with paper , on which lie a 
 hunting crop and a pair of spur , stand look at his wife : " the heat 
 and dust must have be awful this afternoon by the waterside , " he 
 murmur , sympathetically . " the glare on the water must have be simply 
 terrible . " 
 " one could close one 's eye to the glare , " say Mrs. Gould . " but , my 
 dear Charley , it be impossible for I to close my eye to our position ; 
 to this awful . . . " 
 she raise her eye and look at her husband 's face , from which all 
 sign of sympathy or any other feeling have disappear . " why do not   you 
 tell I something ? " she almost wail . 
 " I think you have understand I perfectly from the first , " Charles 
 Gould say , slowly . " I think we have say all there be to say a long 
 time ago . there be nothing to say now . there be thing to be do . we 
 have do they ; we have go on do they . there be no go back now . 
 I do not   suppose that , even from the first , there be really any possible 
 way back . and , what be more , we can not   even afford to stand still . " 
 " ah , if one only know how far you mean to go , " say his wife inwardly 
 tremble , but in an almost playful tone . 
 " any distance , any length , of course , " be the answer , in a 
 matter - of - fact tone , which cause Mrs. Gould to make another effort to 
 repress a shudder . 
 she stand up , smile graciously , and her little figure seem to be 
 diminish still more by the heavy mass of her hair and the long train 
 of her gown . 
 " but always to success , " she say , persuasively . 
 Charles Gould , envelop she in the steely blue glance of his attentive 
 eye , answer without hesitation - 
 " oh , there be no alternative . " 
 he put an immense assurance into his tone . as to the word , this be all 
 that his conscience would allow he to say . 
 Mrs. Gould 's smile remain a shade too long upon her lip . she 
 murmur - 
 " I will leave you ; I have   a slight headache . the heat , the dust , be 
 indeed - I suppose you be go back to the mine before the morning ? " 
 " at midnight , " say Charles Gould . " we be bring down the silver 
 to - morrow . then I shall take three whole day off in town with you . " 
 " ah , you be go to meet the escort . I shall be on the balcony at five 
 o'clock to see you pass . till then , good - bye . " 
 Charles Gould walk rapidly round the table , and , seize her hand , 
 bent down , press they both to his lip . before he straighten 
 himself up again to his full height she have disengage one to smooth his 
 cheek with a light touch , as if he be a little boy . 
 " try to get some rest for a couple of hour , " she murmur , with a 
 glance at a hammock stretch in a distant part of the room . her long 
 train swish softly after she on the red tile . at the door she look 
 back . 
 two big lamp with unpolished glass globe bath in a soft and abundant 
 light the four white wall of the room , with a glass case of arm , the 
 brass hilt of Henry Gould 's cavalry sabre on its square of velvet , and 
 the water - colour sketch of the San Tome gorge . and Mrs. Gould , gaze at 
 the last in its black wooden frame , sigh out - 
 " ah , if we have leave it alone , Charley ! " 
 " no , " Charles Gould say , moodily ; " it be impossible to leave it 
 alone . " 
 " perhaps it be impossible , " Mrs. Gould admit , slowly . her lip 
 quiver a little , but she smile with an air of dainty bravado . " we 
 have disturb a good many snake in that Paradise , Charley , have not 
 we ? " 
 " yes , I remember , " say Charles Gould , " it be Don Pepe who call the 
 gorge the Paradise of snake . no doubt we have disturb a great many . 
 but remember , my dear , that it be not now as it be when you make that 
 sketch . " he wave his hand towards the small water - colour hanging alone 
 upon the great bare wall . " it be no long a Paradise of snake . we have 
 bring mankind into it , and we can not turn our back upon they to go 
 and begin a new life elsewhere . " 
 he confront his wife with a firm , concentrated gaze , which Mrs. Gould 
 return with a brave assumption of fearlessness before she go out , 
 close the door gently after she . 
 in contrast with the white glare room the dimly light corredor have a 
 restful mysteriousness of a forest glade , suggest by the stem and the 
 leaf of the plant range along the balustrade of the open side . 
 in the streak of light fall through the open door of the 
 reception - room , the blossom , white and red and pale lilac , come out 
 vivid with the brilliance of flower in a stream of sunshine ; and Mrs. 
 Gould , pass on , have the vividness of a figure see in the clear 
 patch of sun that chequer the gloom of open glade in the wood . the 
 stone in the ring upon her hand press to her forehead glitter in 
 the lamplight abreast of the door of the sala . 
 " who be there ? " she ask , in a startled voice . " be that you , Basilio ? " 
 she look in , and see Martin Decoud walk about , with an air of 
 have lose something , amongst the chair and table . 
 " Antonia have forget her fan in here , " say Decoud , with a strange air 
 of distraction ; ' so I enter to see . " 
 but , even as he say this , he have obviously give up his search , and 
 walk straight towards Mrs. Gould , who look at he with doubtful 
 surprise . 
 " Senora , " he begin , in a low voice . 
 " what be it , Don Martin ? " ask Mrs. Gould . and then she add , with a 
 slight laugh , " I be so nervous to - day , " as if to explain the eagerness 
 of the question . 
 " nothing immediately dangerous , " say Decoud , who now could not conceal 
 his agitation . " pray do not   distress yourself . no , really , you must not 
 distress yourself . " 
 Mrs. Gould , with her candid eye very wide open , her lip compose into 
 a smile , be steady herself with a little bejewelled hand against the 
 side of the door . 
 " perhaps you do not   know how alarming you be , appear like this 
 unexpectedly - " 
 " I ! alarming ! " he protest , sincerely vex and surprised . " I assure 
 you that I be not in the least alarm myself . a fan be lose ; well , 
 it will be find again . but I do not   think it be here . it be a fan I be 
 look for . I can not understand how Antonia could - well ! have you find 
 it , amigo ? " 
 " no , senor , " say behind Mrs. Gould the soft voice of Basilio , the head 
 servant of the Casa . " I do not   think the senorita could have leave it in 
 this house at all . " 
 " go and look for it in the patio again . go now , my friend ; look for it 
 on the step , under the gate ; examine every flagstone ; search for it 
 till I come down again . . . . that fellow " - he address himself in 
 English to Mrs. Gould - " be always steal up behind one 's back on his 
 bare foot . I set he to look for that fan directly I come in to justify 
 my reappearance , my sudden return . " 
 he pause and Mrs. Gould say , amiably , " you be always welcome . " she 
 pause for a second , too . " but I be wait to learn the cause of your 
 return . " 
 Decoud affect suddenly the utmost nonchalance . 
 " I can not   bear to be spy upon . oh , the cause ? yes , there be a cause ; 
 there be something else that be lose besides Antonia 's favourite fan . as 
 I be walk home after see Don Jose and Antonia to their house , the 
 Capataz de Cargadores , rid down the street , speak to I . " 
 " have anything happen to the Violas ? " inquire Mrs. Gould . 
 " the Violas ? you mean the old Garibaldino who keep the hotel where 
 the engineer live ? nothing happen there . the Capataz say nothing 
 of they ; he only tell I that the telegraphist of the Cable Company be 
 walk on the Plaza , bareheade , look out for I . there be news from 
 the interior , Mrs. Gould . I should rather say rumour of news . " 
 " good news ? " say Mrs. Gould in a low voice . 
 " worthless , I should think . but if I must define they , I would say bad . 
 they be to the effect that a two day ' battle have be fight near Sta . 
 Marta , and that the ribierist be defeat . it must have happen a few 
 day ago - perhaps a week . the rumour have just reach Cayta , and the 
 man in charge of the cable station there have telegraph the news to his 
 colleague here . we might just as well have keep Barrios in Sulaco . " 
 " what be to be do now ? " murmur Mrs. Gould . 
 " nothing . he be at sea with the troop . he will get to cayta in a couple 
 of day ' time and learn the news there . what he will do then , who can 
 say ? hold cayta ? offer his submission to Montero ? disband his army - this 
 last most likely , and go himself in one of the O.S.N. Company 's 
 steamer , north or south - to Valparaiso or to San Francisco , no matter 
 where . our Barrios have a great practice in exile and repatriation , 
 which mark the point in the political game . " 
 Decoud , exchange a steady stare with Mrs. Gould , add , tentatively , 
 as it be , " and yet , if we have could have be do . " 
 " montero victorious , completely victorious ! " Mrs. Gould breathe out in 
 a tone of unbelief . 
 " a canard , probably . that sort of bird be hatch in great number in 
 such time as these . and even if it be true ? well , let we put thing 
 at their bad , let we say it be true . " 
 " then everything be lose , " say Mrs. Gould , with the calmness of 
 despair . 
 suddenly she seem to divine , she seem to see Decoud 's tremendous 
 excitement under its cloak of studied carelessness . it be , indeed , 
 become visible in his audacious and watchful stare , in the curve , 
 half - reckless , half - contemptuous , of his lip . and a french phrase come 
 upon they as if , for this Costaguanero of the Boulevard , that have be 
 the only forcible language - 
 " Non , Madame . Rien n'est perdu . " 
 it electrify Mrs. Gould out of her benumb attitude , and she say , 
 vivaciously - 
 " what would you think of do ? " 
 but already there be something of mockery in Decoud 's suppress 
 excitement . 
 " what would you expect a true Costaguanero to do ? another revolution , of 
 course . on my word of honour , Mrs. Gould , I believe I be a true hijo del 
 pay , a true son of the country , whatever Father Corbelan may say . and 
 I be not so much of an unbeliever as not to have faith in my own idea , 
 in my own remedy , in my own desire . " 
 " yes , " say Mrs. Gould , doubtfully . 
 " you do not   seem convince , " Decoud go on again in French . " say , then , 
 in my passion . " 
 Mrs. Gould receive this addition unflinchingly . to understand it 
 thoroughly she do not require to hear his muttered assurance - 
 " there be nothing I would not do for the sake of Antonia . there be 
 nothing I be not prepared to undertake . there be no risk I be not ready 
 to run . " 
 Decoud seem to find a fresh audacity in this voicing of his thought . 
 " you would not believe I if I be to say that it be the love of the 
 country which - " 
 she make a sort of discouraged protest with her arm , as if to express 
 that she have give up expect that motive from any one . 
 " a Sulaco revolution , " Decoud pursue in a forcible undertone . " the 
 Great Cause may be serve here , on the very spot of its inception , in 
 the place of its birth , Mrs. Gould . " 
 Frowning , and bite her low lip thoughtfully , she make a step away 
 from the door . 
 " you be not go to speak to your husband ? " Decoud arrest she 
 anxiously . 
 " but you will need his help ? " 
 " no doubt , " Decoud admit without hesitation . " everything turn upon 
 the San Tome mine , but I would rather he do not   know anything as yet of 
 my - my hope . " 
 a puzzled look come upon Mrs. Gould 's face , and Decoud , approach , 
 explain confidentially - 
 " do not   you see , he be such an idealist . " 
 Mrs. Gould flush pink , and her eye grow dark at the same time . 
 " Charley an idealist ! " she say , as if to herself , wonderingly . " what on 
 earth do you mean ? " 
 " yes , " concede Decoud , " it be a wonderful thing to say with the sight 
 of the San Tome mine , the great fact in the whole of South America , 
 perhaps , before our very eye . but look even at that , he have idealize 
 this fact to a point - " he pause . " Mrs. Gould , be you aware to what 
 point he have idealize the existence , the worth , the meaning of the San 
 Tome mine ? be you aware of it ? " 
 he must have know what he be talk about . 
 the effect he expect be produce . Mrs. Gould , ready to take fire , 
 give it up suddenly with a low little sound that resemble a moan . 
 " what do you know ? " she ask in a feeble voice . 
 " nothing , " answer Decoud , firmly . " but , then , do not   you see , he be an 
 Englishman ? " 
 " well , what of that ? " ask Mrs. Gould . 
 " simply that he can not act or exist without idealize every simple 
 feeling , desire , or achievement . he could not believe his own motif if 
 he do not make they first a part of some fairy tale . the earth be not 
 quite good enough for he , I fear . do you excuse my frankness ? besides , 
 whether you excuse it or not , it be part of the truth of thing which 
 hurt the - what do you call they ? - the Anglo - Saxon 's susceptibility , 
 and at the present moment I do not   feel as if I could treat seriously 
 either his conception of thing or - if you allow I to say so - or yet 
 your . " 
 Mrs. Gould give no sign of be offend . " I suppose Antonia 
 understand you thoroughly ? " 
 " Understands ? well , yes . but I be not sure that she approve . that , 
 however , make no difference . I be honest enough to tell you that , Mrs. 
 Gould . " 
 " your idea , of course , be separation , " she say . 
 " separation , of course , " declare Martin . " yes ; separation of the whole 
 Occidental Province from the rest of the unquiet body . but my true idea , 
 the only one I care for , be not to be separate from Antonia . " 
 " and that be all ? " ask Mrs. Gould , without severity . 
 " absolutely . I be not deceive myself about my motif . she will not   leave 
 Sulaco for my sake , therefore Sulaco must leave the rest of the Republic 
 to its fate . nothing could be clear than that . I like a clearly 
 define situation . I can not part with Antonia , therefore the one and 
 indivisible Republic of Costaguana must be make to part with its western 
 province . fortunately it happen to be also a sound policy . the 
 rich , the most fertile part of this land may be save from anarchy . 
 personally , I care little , very little ; but it be a fact that the 
 establishment of Montero in power would mean death to I . in all the 
 proclamation of general pardon which I have see , my name , with a few 
 other , be specially excepted . the brother hate I , as you know very 
 well , Mrs. Gould ; and behold , here be the rumour of they have win a 
 battle . you say that suppose it be true , I have plenty of time to run 
 away . " 
 the slight , protest murmur on the part of Mrs. Gould make he pause 
 for a moment , while he look at she with a sombre and resolute glance . 
 " ah , but I would , Mrs. Gould . I would run away if it serve that which 
 at present be my only desire . I be courageous enough to say that , and to 
 do it , too . but woman , even our woman , be idealist . it be Antonia that 
 will not   run away . a novel sort of vanity . " 
 " you call it vanity , " say Mrs. Gould , in a shocked voice . 
 " say pride , then , which . Father Corbelan would tell you , be a mortal 
 sin . but I be not proud . I be simply too much in love to run away . at 
 the same time I want to live . there be no love for a dead man . therefore 
 it be necessary that Sulaco should not recognize the victorious 
 Montero . " 
 " and you think my husband will give you his support ? " 
 " I think he can be draw into it , like all idealist , when he once see 
 a sentimental basis for his action . but I would not   talk to he . mere 
 clear fact will not   appeal to his sentiment . it be much well for he 
 to convince himself in his own way . and , frankly , I could not , perhaps , 
 just now pay sufficient respect to either his motif or even , perhaps , 
 to your , Mrs. Gould . " 
 it be evident that Mrs. Gould be very determined not to be offend . 
 she smile vaguely , while she seem to think the matter over . as far 
 as she could judge from the girl 's half - confidence , Antonia understand 
 that young man . obviously there be promise of safety in his plan , or 
 rather in his idea . moreover , right or wrong , the idea could do no harm . 
 and it be quite possible , also , that the rumour be false . 
 " you have some sort of a plan , " she say . 
 " simplicity itself . barrio have start , let he go on then ; he will 
 hold Cayta , which be the door of the sea route to Sulaco . they can not 
 send a sufficient force over the mountain . no ; not even to cope with 
 the band of Hernandez . meantime we shall organize our resistance here . 
 and for that , this very Hernandez will be useful . he have defeat troop 
 as a bandit ; he will no doubt accomplish the same thing if he be make 
 a colonel or even a general . you know the country well enough not to 
 be shock by what I say , Mrs. Gould . I have hear you assert that this 
 poor bandit be the living , breathe example of cruelty , injustice , 
 stupidity , and oppression , that ruin man 's soul as well as their 
 fortune in this country . well , there would be some poetical retribution 
 in that man arise to crush the evil which have drive an honest 
 ranchero into a life of crime . a fine idea of retribution in that , be not 
 there ? " 
 Decoud have drop easily into English , which he speak with precision , 
 very correctly , but with too many z sound . 
 " think also of your hospital , of your school , of your ail mother 
 and feeble old man , of all that population which you and your husband 
 have bring into the rocky gorge of San Tome . be you not responsible 
 to your conscience for all these people ? be it not worth while to make 
 another effort , which be not at all so desperate as it look , rather 
 than - " 
 Decoud finish his thought with an upward toss of the arm , suggest 
 annihilation ; and Mrs. Gould turn away her head with a look of horror . 
 " why do not   you say all this to my husband ? " she ask , without look 
 at Decoud , who stand watch the effect of his word . 
 " ah ! but Don Carlos be so english , " he begin . Mrs. Gould interrupt - 
 " leave that alone , Don Martin . he be as much a Costaguanero - no ! he be 
 more of a Costaguanero than yourself . " 
 " sentimentalist , sentimentalist , " Decoud almost coo , in a tone of 
 gentle and soothe deference . " Sentimentalist , after the amazing manner 
 of your people . I have be watch El Rey de Sulaco since I come here 
 on a fool 's errand , and perhaps impel by some treason of fate lurk 
 behind the unaccountable turn of a man 's life . but I do not   matter , I be 
 not a sentimentalist , I can not endow my personal desire with a shin 
 robe of silk and jewel . life be not for I a moral romance derive from 
 the tradition of a pretty fairy tale . no , Mrs. Gould ; I be practical . I 
 be not afraid of my motif . but , pardon I , I have be rather carry 
 away . what I wish to say be that I have be observe . I will not   tell you 
 what I have discover - " 
 " no . that be unnecessary , " whisper Mrs. Gould , once more avert she 
 head . 
 " it be . except one little fact , that your husband do not like I . 
 it be a small matter , which , in the circumstance , seem to acquire a 
 perfectly ridiculous importance . ridiculous and immense ; for , clearly , 
 money be require for my plan , " he reflect ; then add , meaningly , 
 " and we have two sentimentalist to deal with . " 
 " I do not   know that I understand you , Don Martin , " say Mrs. Gould , 
 coldly , preserve the low key of their conversation . " but , speak as 
 if I do , who be the other ? " 
 " the great Holroyd in San Francisco , of course , " Decoud whisper , 
 lightly . " I think you understand I very well . woman be idealist ; but 
 then they be so perspicacious . " 
 but whatever be the reason of that remark , disparaging and 
 complimentary at the same time , Mrs. Gould seem not to pay attention 
 to it . the name of Holroyd have give a new tone to her anxiety . 
 " the silver escort be come down to the harbour tomorrow ; a whole six 
 month ' working , Don Martin ! " she cry in dismay . 
 " let it come down , then , " breathe out Decoud , earnestly , almost into 
 her ear . 
 " but if the rumour should get about , and especially if it turn out 
 true , trouble might break out in the town , " object Mrs. Gould . 
 Decoud admit that it be possible . he know well the town child 
 of the Sulaco Campo : sullen , thievish , vindictive , and bloodthirsty , 
 whatever great quality their brother of the plain might have have . 
 but then there be that other sentimentalist , who attach a strangely 
 idealistic meaning to concrete fact . this stream of silver must be keep 
 flow north to return in the form of financial backing from the great 
 house of Holroyd . up at the mountain in the strong room of the mine 
 the silver bar be worth less for his purpose than so much lead , from 
 which at least bullet may be run . let it come down to the harbour , 
 ready for shipment . 
 the next north - go steamer would carry it off for the very salvation 
 of the San Tome mine , which have produce so much treasure . and , 
 moreover , the rumour be probably false , he remark , with much 
 conviction in his hurried tone . 
 " besides , senora , " conclude Decoud , " we may suppress it for many day . 
 I have be talk with the telegraphist in the middle of the Plaza 
 Mayor ; thus I be certain that we could not have be overhear . there 
 be not even a bird in the air near we . and also let I tell you 
 something more . I have be make friend with this man call 
 Nostromo , the Capataz . we have a conversation this very evening , I 
 walk by the side of his horse as he ride slowly out of the town just 
 now . he promise I that if a riot take place for any reason - even 
 for the most political of reason , you understand - his Cargadores , an 
 important part of the populace , you will admit , should be find on the 
 side of the Europeans . " 
 " he have promise you that ? " Mrs. Gould inquire , with interest . " what 
 make he make that promise to you ? " 
 " upon my word , I do not   know , " declare Decoud , in a slightly surprised 
 tone . " he certainly promise I that , but now you ask I why , I could 
 not tell you his reason . he talk with his usual carelessness , which , 
 if he have be anything else but a common sailor , I would call a pose or 
 an affectation . " 
 Decoud , interrupt himself , look at Mrs. Gould curiously . 
 " upon the whole , " he continue , " I suppose he expect something to his 
 advantage from it . you must not   forget that he do not exercise his 
 extraordinary power over the low class without a certain amount of 
 personal risk and without a great profusion in spend his money . 
 one must pay in some way or other for such a solid thing as individual 
 prestige . he tell I after we make friend at a dance , in a Posada keep 
 by a Mexican just outside the wall , that he have come here to make his 
 fortune . I suppose he look upon his prestige as a sort of investment . " 
 " perhaps he prize it for its own sake , " Mrs. Gould say in a tone as 
 if she be repel an undeserved aspersion . " Viola , the Garibaldino , 
 with whom he have live for some year , call he the Incorruptible . " 
 " ah ! he belong to the group of your protege out there towards the 
 harbour , Mrs. Gould . Muy bien . and Captain Mitchell call he wonderful . 
 I have hear no end of tale of his strength , his audacity , his 
 fidelity . no end of fine thing . H'm ! incorruptible ! it be indeed a name 
 of honour for the Capataz of the Cargadores of Sulaco . Incorruptible ! 
 Fine , but vague . however , I suppose he be sensible , too . and I talk to 
 he upon that sane and practical assumption . " 
 " I prefer to think he disintereste , and therefore trustworthy , " Mrs. 
 Gould say , with the near approach to curtness it be in her nature 
 to assume . 
 " well , if so , then the silver will be still more safe . let it come down , 
 senora . let it come down , so that it may go north and return to we in 
 the shape of credit . " 
 Mrs. Gould glance along the corredor towards the door of her husband 's 
 room . Decoud , watch she as if she have his fate in her hand , detect 
 an almost imperceptible nod of assent . he bow with a smile , and , 
 put his hand into the breast pocket of his coat , pull out a fan of 
 light feather set upon paint leaf of sandal - wood . " I have it in my 
 pocket , " he murmur , triumphantly , " for a plausible pretext . " he bow 
 again . " good - night , senora . " 
 Mrs. Gould continue along the corredor away from her husband 's room . 
 the fate of the San Tome mine be lie heavy upon her heart . it be a 
 long time now since she have begin to fear it . it have be an idea . she 
 have watch it with misgiving turn into a fetish , and now the 
 fetish have grow into a monstrous and crush weight . it be as if the 
 inspiration of their early year have leave her heart to turn into a wall 
 of silver - brick , erect by the silent work of evil spirit , between 
 she and her husband . he seem to dwell alone within a circumvallation 
 of precious metal , leave she outside with her school , her hospital , 
 the sick mother and the feeble old man , mere insignificant vestige of 
 the initial inspiration . " those poor people ! " she murmur to herself . 
 below she hear the voice of Martin Decoud in the patio speak loudly : 
 " I have find Dona Antonia 's fan , Basilio . look , here it be ! " 
 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 it be part of what Decoud would have call his sane materialism that 
 he do not believe in the possibility of friendship between man and 
 woman . 
 the one exception he allow confirm , he maintain , that absolute 
 rule . friendship be possible between brother and sister , mean 
 by friendship the frank unreserve , as before another human being , of 
 thought and sensation ; all the objectless and necessary sincerity of 
 one 's innermost life try to re - act upon the profound sympathy of 
 another existence . 
 his favourite sister , the handsome , slightly arbitrary and resolute 
 angel , rule the father and mother Decoud in the first - floor apartment 
 of a very fine parisian house , be the recipient of Martin Decoud 's 
 confidence as to his thought , action , purpose , doubt , and even 
 failure . . . . 
 " prepare our little circle in Paris for the birth of another South 
 American Republic . one more or less , what do it matter ? they may come 
 into the world like evil flower on a hotbed of rotten institution ; but 
 the seed of this one have germinate in your brother 's brain , and that 
 will be enough for your devoted assent . I be write this to you by the 
 light of a single candle , in a sort of inn , near the harbour , keep by 
 an Italian call Viola , a protege of Mrs. Gould . the whole building , 
 which , for all I know , may have be contrive by a Conquistador farmer 
 of the pearl fishery three hundred year ago , be perfectly silent . so be 
 the plain between the town and the harbour ; silent , but not so dark as 
 the house , because the picket of italian workman guard the railway 
 have light little fire all along the line . it be not so quiet around 
 here yesterday . we have an awful riot - a sudden outbreak of the populace , 
 which be not suppress till late today . its object , no doubt , be 
 loot , and that be defeat , as you may have learn already from the 
 cablegram send via San Francisco and New York last night , when the 
 cable be still open . you have read already there that the energetic 
 action of the Europeans of the railway have save the town from 
 destruction , and you may believe that . I write out the cable myself . we 
 have no Reuter 's agency man here . I have also fire at the mob from the 
 window of the club , in company with some other young man of position . 
 our object be to keep the Calle de la Constitucion clear for the exodus 
 of the lady and child , who have take refuge on board a couple of 
 cargo ship now in the harbour here . that be yesterday . you should also 
 have learn from the cable that the miss President , Ribiera , who have 
 disappear after the battle of Sta . Marta , have turn up here in Sulaco 
 by one of those strange coincidence that be almost incredible , rid 
 on a lame mule into the very midst of the street fighting . it appear 
 that he have flee , in company of a muleteer call Bonifacio , across the 
 mountain from the threat of Montero into the arm of an enraged mob . 
 " the Capataz of Cargadores , that italian sailor of whom I have write 
 to you before , have save he from an ignoble death . that man seem 
 to have a particular talent for be on the spot whenever there be 
 something picturesque to be do . 
 " he be with I at four o'clock in the morning at the office of the 
 Porvenir , where he have turn up so early in order to warn I of the 
 come trouble , and also to assure I that he would keep his cargadore 
 on the side of order . when the full daylight come we be look 
 together at the crowd on foot and on horseback , demonstrate on the 
 Plaza and shying stone at the window of the Intendencia . Nostromo 
  that be the name they call he by here   be point out to I his 
 Cargadores intersperse in the mob . 
 " the sun shin late upon Sulaco , for it have first to climb above the 
 mountain . in that clear morning light , bright than twilight , Nostromo 
 see right across the vast Plaza , at the end of the street beyond the 
 cathedral , a mount man apparently in difficulty with a yelling knot 
 of lepero . at once he say to I , ' that be a stranger . what be it they 
 be do to he ? ' then he take out the silver whistle he be in the 
 habit of use on the wharf   this man seem to disdain the use of any 
 metal less precious than silver   and blow into it twice , evidently a 
 preconcerte signal for his Cargadores . he run out immediately , and they 
 rally round he . I run out , too , but be too late to follow they and 
 help in the rescue of the stranger , whose animal have fall . I be set 
 upon at once as a hat aristocrat , and be only too glad to get into 
 the club , where Don Jaime Berges   you may remember he visit at 
 our house in Paris some three year ago   thrust a sporting gun into 
 my hand . they be already fire from the window . there be little 
 heap of cartridge lie about on the open card - table . I remember a 
 couple of overturned chair , some bottle roll on the floor amongst 
 the pack of card scatter suddenly as the caballero rise from their 
 game to open fire upon the mob . Most of the young man have spend the 
 night at the club in the expectation of some such disturbance . in two of 
 the candelabra , on the console , the candle be burn down in their 
 socket . a large iron nut , probably steal from the railway workshop , 
 fly in from the street as I enter , and break one of the large mirror 
 set in the wall . I notice also one of the club servant tie up hand 
 and foot with the cord of the curtain and fling in a corner . I have a 
 vague recollection of Don Jaime assure I hastily that the fellow have 
 be detect put poison into the dish at supper . but I remember 
 distinctly he be shriek for mercy , without stop at all , 
 continuously , and so absolutely disregard that nobody even take the 
 trouble to gag he . the noise he make be so disagreeable that I have 
 half a mind to do it myself . but there be no time to waste on such 
 trifle . I take my place at one of the window and begin fire . 
 " I do not   learn till later in the afternoon whom it be that Nostromo , 
 with his Cargadores and some italian workman as well , have manage to 
 save from those drunken rascal . that man have a peculiar talent when 
 anything strike to the imagination have to be do . I make that remark 
 to he afterwards when we meet after some sort of order have be restore 
 in the town , and the answer he make rather surprised I . he say quite 
 moodily , ' and how much do I get for that , senor ? ' then it dawn upon I 
 that perhaps this man 's vanity have be satiate by the adulation of the 
 common people and the confidence of his superior ! " 
 Decoud pause to light a cigarette , then , with his head still over his 
 writing , he blow a cloud of smoke , which seem to rebound from the 
 paper . he take up the pencil again . 
 " that be yesterday evening on the Plaza , while he sit on the step of 
 the cathedral , his hand between his knee , hold the bridle of his 
 famous silver - grey mare . he have lead his body of Cargadores splendidly 
 all day long . he look fatigued . I do not   know how I look . very 
 dirty , I suppose . but I suppose I also look pleased . from the time the 
 fugitive President have be get off to the S. S. Minerva , the tide 
 of success have turn against the mob . they have be drive off the 
 harbour , and out of the well street of the town , into their own 
 maze of ruin and tolderia . you must understand that this riot , whose 
 primary object be undoubtedly the get hold of the San Tome silver 
 store in the low room of the Custom House   besides the general 
 looting of the Ricos , have acquire a political colouring from the fact 
 of two deputy to the Provincial Assembly , Senores Gamacho and Fuentes , 
 both from Bolson , put themselves at the head of it - late in the 
 afternoon , it be true , when the mob , disappoint in their hope of 
 loot , make a stand in the narrow street to the cry of ' Viva la 
 Libertad ! down with Feudalism ! '   I wonder what they imagine feudalism to 
 be ?   ' down with the Goths and Paralytics . ' I suppose the Senores Gamacho 
 and Fuentes know what they be do . they be prudent gentleman . 
 in the Assembly they call themselves Moderates , and oppose every 
 energetic measure with philanthropic pensiveness . at the first rumour 
 of Montero 's victory , they show a subtle change of the pensive temper , 
 and begin to defy poor Don Juste Lopez in his Presidential tribune 
 with an effrontery to which the poor man could only respond by a daze 
 smoothing of his beard and the ringing of the presidential bell . then , 
 when the downfall of the Ribierist cause become confirm beyond the 
 shadow of a doubt , they have blossom into convince Liberals , act 
 together as if they be siamese twin , and ultimately take charge , as 
 it be , of the riot in the name of monterist principle . 
 " their last move of eight o'clock last night be to organize themselves 
 into a Monterist Committee which sit , as far as I know , in a posada 
 keep by a retire mexican bull - fighter , a great politician , too , whose 
 name I have forget . thence they have issue a communication to 
 we , the Goths and Paralytics of the Amarilla Club   who have our own 
 committee , invite we to come to some provisional understanding for a 
 truce , in order , they have the impudence to say , that the noble cause of 
 Liberty ' should not be stain by the criminal excess of conservative 
 selfishness ! ' as I come out to sit with Nostromo on the cathedral step 
 the club be busy consider a proper reply in the principal room , 
 litter with exploded cartridge , with a lot of broken glass , blood 
 smear , candlestick , and all sort of wreckage on the floor . but all 
 this be nonsense . nobody in the town have any real power except the 
 railway engineer , whose man occupy the dismantled house acquire 
 by the Company for their town station on one side of the Plaza , and 
 Nostromo , whose Cargadores be sleep under the arcade along 
 the front of Anzani 's shop . a fire of broken furniture out of the 
 Intendencia saloon , mostly gild , be burn on the Plaza , in a high 
 flame sway right upon the statue of Charles IV . the dead body of a 
 man be lie on the step of the pedestal , his arm throw wide open , 
 and his sombrero cover his face - the attention of some friend , 
 perhaps . the light of the flame touch the foliage of the first tree 
 on the Alameda , and play on the end of a side street near by , block 
 up by a jumble of ox - cart and dead bullock . sit on one of the 
 carcass , a lepero , muffle up , smoke a cigarette . it be a truce , you 
 understand . the only other living be on the Plaza besides ourselves 
 be a Cargador walk to and fro , with a long , bare knife in his hand , 
 like a sentry before the Arcades , where his friend be sleep . and 
 the only other spot of light in the dark town be the light window 
 of the club , at the corner of the Calle . " 
 after have write so far , Don Martin Decoud , the exotic dandy of the 
 parisian boulevard , get up and walk across the sanded floor of the 
 cafe at one end of the Albergo of United Italy , keep by Giorgio Viola , 
 the old companion of Garibaldi . the highly coloured lithograph of the 
 Faithful Hero seem to look dimly , in the light of one candle , at the 
 man with no faith in anything except the truth of his own sensation . 
 look out of the window , Decoud be meet by a darkness so impenetrable 
 that he could see neither the mountain nor the town , nor yet the 
 building near the harbour ; and there be not a sound , as if the 
 tremendous obscurity of the Placid Gulf , spread from the water over 
 the land , have make it dumb as well as blind . presently Decoud feel a 
 light tremor of the floor and a distant clank of iron . a bright white 
 light appear , deep in the darkness , grow big with a thunder 
 noise . the rolling stock usually keep on the siding in Rincon be be 
 run back to the yard for safe keeping . like a mysterious stirring of 
 the darkness behind the headlight of the engine , the train pass in a 
 gust of hollow uproar , by the end of the house , which seem to vibrate 
 all over in response . and nothing be clearly visible but , on the end 
 of the last flat car , a negro , in white trouser and naked to the waist , 
 swing a blaze torch basket incessantly with a circular movement of 
 his bare arm . Decoud do not stir . 
 behind he , on the back of the chair from which he have rise , hang his 
 elegant parisian overcoat , with a pearl - grey silk lining . but when he 
 turn back to come to the table the candlelight fall upon a face that 
 be grimy and scratch . his rosy lip be blacken with heat , the 
 smoke of gun - powder . Dirt and rust tarnish the lustre of his short 
 beard . his shirt collar and cuff be crumple ; the blue silken tie 
 hang down his breast like a rag ; a greasy smudge cross his white brow . 
 he have not take off his clothing nor used water , except to snatch a 
 hasty drink greedily , for some forty hour . an awful restlessness have 
 make he its own , have mark he with all the sign of desperate strife , 
 and put a dry , sleepless stare into his eye . he murmur to himself 
 in a hoarse voice , " I wonder if there be any bread here , " look vaguely 
 about he , then drop into the chair and take the pencil up again . he 
 become aware he have not eat anything for many hour . 
 it occur to he that no one could understand he so well as his 
 sister . in the most sceptical heart there lurk at such moment , when 
 the chance of existence be involve , a desire to leave a correct 
 impression of the feeling , like a light by which the action may be see 
 when personality be go , go where no light of investigation can ever 
 reach the truth which every death take out of the world . therefore , 
 instead of look for something to eat , or try to snatch an hour or 
 so of sleep , Decoud be fill the page of a large pocket - book with a 
 letter to his sister . 
 in the intimacy of that intercourse he could not keep out his weariness , 
 his great fatigue , the close touch of his bodily sensation . he begin 
 again as if he be talk to she . with almost an illusion of her 
 presence , he write the phrase , " I be very hungry . " 
 " I have the feeling of a great solitude around I , " he continue . " be 
 it , perhaps , because I be the only man with a definite idea in his head , 
 in the complete collapse of every resolve , intention , and hope about I ? 
 but the solitude be also very real . all the engineer be out , and have 
 be for two day , look after the property of the National Central 
 Railway , of that great Costaguana undertaking which be to put money into 
 the pocket of Englishmen , Frenchmen , Americans , Germans , and God know 
 who else . the silence about I be ominous . there be above the middle 
 part of this house a sort of first floor , with narrow opening like 
 loophole for window , probably use in old time for the well 
 defence against the savage , when the persistent barbarism of our native 
 continent do not wear the black coat of politician , but go about 
 yelling , half - naked , with bow and arrow in its hand . the woman of 
 the house be die up there , I believe , all alone with her old husband . 
 there be a narrow staircase , the sort of staircase one man could easily 
 defend against a mob , lead up there , and I have just hear , through 
 the thickness of the wall , the old fellow go down into their kitchen 
 for something or other . it be a sort of noise a mouse might make behind 
 the plaster of a wall . all the servant they have run away yesterday and 
 have not return yet , if ever they do . for the rest , there be only two 
 child here , two girl . the father have send they downstairs , and 
 they have creep into this cafe , perhaps because I be here . they huddle 
 together in a corner , in each other 's arm ; I just notice they a few 
 minute ago , and I feel more lonely than ever . " 
 Decoud turn half round in his chair , and ask , " be there any bread 
 here ? " 
 Linda 's dark head be shake negatively in response , above the fair head 
 of her sister nestle on her breast . 
 " you could not   get I some bread ? " insist Decoud . the child do not 
 move ; he see her large eye stare at he very dark from the corner . 
 " you be not afraid of I ? " he say . 
 " no , " say Linda , " we be not afraid of you . you come here with Gian ' 
 Battista . " 
 " you mean Nostromo ? " say Decoud . 
 " the English call he so , but that be no name either for man or beast , " 
 say the girl , pass her hand gently over her sister 's hair . 
 " but he let people call he so , " remark Decoud . 
 " not in this house , " retort the child . 
 " ah ! well , I shall call he the Capataz then . " 
 Decoud give up the point , and after write steadily for a while turn 
 round again . 
 " when do you expect he back ? " he ask . 
 " after he bring you here he ride off to fetch the Senor Doctor from 
 the town for mother . he will be back soon . " 
 " he stand a good chance of get shoot somewhere on the road , " Decoud 
 murmur to himself audibly ; and Linda declare in her high - pitch 
 voice - 
 " nobody would dare to fire a shot at Gian ' Battista . " 
 " you believe that , " ask Decoud , " do you ? " 
 " I know it , " say the child , with conviction . " there be no one in this 
 place brave enough to attack Gian ' Battista . " 
 " it do not   require much bravery to pull a trigger behind a bush , " 
 mutter Decoud to himself . " fortunately , the night be dark , or there 
 would be but little chance of save the silver of the mine . " 
 he turn again to his pocket - book , glance back through the page , and 
 again start his pencil . 
 " that be the position yesterday , after the Minerva with the fugitive 
 President have go out of harbour , and the rioter have be drive back 
 into the side lane of the town . I sit on the step of the cathedral 
 with Nostromo , after send out the cable message for the information 
 of a more or less attentive world . strangely enough , though the office 
 of the Cable Company be in the same building as the Porvenir , the mob , 
 which have throw my press out of the window and scatter the type all 
 over the Plaza , have be keep from interfere with the instrument 
 on the other side of the courtyard . as I sit talk with Nostromo , 
 Bernhardt , the telegraphist , come out from under the Arcades with a 
 piece of paper in his hand . the little man have tie himself up to an 
 enormous sword and be hang all over with revolver . he be ridiculous , 
 but the brave german of his size that ever tap the key of a morse 
 transmitter . he have receive the message from Cayta report the 
 transport with Barrios 's army just enter the port , and end with 
 the word , ' the great enthusiasm prevail . ' I walk off to drink 
 some water at the fountain , and I be shoot at from the Alameda by 
 somebody hide behind a tree . but I drank , and do not   care ; with 
 Barrios in Cayta and the great Cordillera between we and Montero 's 
 victorious army I seem , notwithstanding Messrs. Gamacho and Fuentes , 
 to hold my new State in the hollow of my hand . I be ready to sleep , but 
 when I get as far as the Casa Gould I find the patio full of wounded 
 lay out on straw . light be burn , and in that enclose courtyard 
 on that hot night a faint odour of chloroform and blood hang about . 
 at one end Doctor Monygham , the doctor of the mine , be dress the 
 wound ; at the other , near the stair , Father Corbelan , kneeling , 
 listen to the confession of a die Cargador . Mrs. Gould be walk 
 about through these shamble with a large bottle in one hand and a 
 lot of cotton wool in the other . she just look at I and never even 
 wink . her camerista be follow she , also hold a bottle , and 
 sob gently to herself . 
 " I busy myself for some time in fetch water from the cistern for 
 the wounded . afterwards I wander upstairs , meet some of the first 
 lady of Sulaco , pale than I have ever see they before , with bandage 
 over their arm . not all of they have flee to the ship . a good many have 
 take refuge for the day in the Casa Gould . on the landing a girl , with 
 her hair half down , be kneel against the wall under the niche where 
 stand a Madonna in blue robe and a gilt crown on her head . I think 
 it be the eld Miss Lopez ; I could not   see her face , but I remember 
 look at the high french heel of her little shoe . she do not make 
 a sound , she do not stir , she be not sob ; she remain there , 
 perfectly still , all black against the white wall , a silent figure of 
 passionate piety . I be sure she be no more frightened than the other 
 white - faced lady I meet carry bandage . one be sit on the top 
 step tear a piece of linen hastily into strip - the young wife of an 
 elderly man of fortune here . she interrupt herself to wave her hand to 
 my bow , as though she be in her carriage on the Alameda . the woman 
 of our country be worth look at during a revolution . the rouge and 
 pearl powder fall off , together with that passive attitude towards the 
 outer world which education , tradition , custom impose upon they from the 
 early infancy . I think of your face , which from your infancy have 
 the stamp of intelligence instead of that patient and resign cast 
 which appear when some political commotion tear down the veil of 
 cosmetic and usage . 
 " in the great sala upstairs a sort of Junta of Notables be sit , 
 the remnant of the vanish Provincial Assembly . Don Juste Lopez have have 
 half his beard sing off at the muzzle of a trabuco load with slug , 
 of which every one miss he , providentially . and as he turn his head 
 from side to side it be exactly as if there have be two man inside his 
 frock - coat , one nobly whisker and solemn , the other untidy and scared . 
 " they raise a cry of ' Decoud ! Don Martin ! ' at my entrance . I ask 
 they , ' what be you deliberate upon , gentleman ? ' there do not seem 
 to be any president , though Don Jose Avellanos sit at the head of the 
 table . they all answer together , ' on the preservation of life and 
 property . ' ' till the new official arrive , ' Don Juste explain to I , 
 with the solemn side of his face offer to my view . it be as if a 
 stream of water have be pour upon my glow idea of a new state . 
 there be a hiss sound in my ear , and the room grow dim , as if 
 suddenly fill with vapour . 
 " I walk up to the table blindly , as though I have be drunk . ' you be 
 deliberate upon surrender , ' I say . they all sit still , with their 
 nose over the sheet of paper each have before he , God only know why . 
 only Don Jose hide his face in his hand , mutter , ' never , never ! ' but 
 as I look at he , it seem to I that I could have blow he away 
 with my breath , he look so frail , so weak , so wear out . whatever 
 happen , he will not survive . the deception be too great for a man of 
 his age ; and have not   he see the sheet of ' fifty year of Misrule , ' 
 which we have begin print on the press of the Porvenir , litter 
 the Plaza , float in the gutter , fire out as wad for trabuco 
 load with handful of type , blow in the wind , trample in the mud ? I 
 have see page float upon the very water of the harbour . it would 
 be unreasonable to expect he to survive . it would be cruel . 
 " ' do you know , ' I cry , ' what surrender mean to you , to your woman , to 
 your child , to your property ? ' 
 " I declaim for five minute without draw breath , it seem to I , 
 harp on our good chance , on the ferocity of Montero , whom I make out 
 to be as great a beast as I have no doubt he would like to be if he have 
 intelligence enough to conceive a systematic reign of terror . and then 
 for another five minute or more I pour out an impassioned appeal 
 to their courage and manliness , with all the passion of my love for 
 Antonia . for if ever man speak well , it would be from a personal 
 feeling , denounce an enemy , defend himself , or plead for what 
 really may be dearer than life . my dear girl , I absolutely thunder at 
 they . it seem as if my voice would burst the wall asunder , and when 
 I stop I see all their scared eye look at I dubiously . and that 
 be all the effect I have produce ! only Don Jose 's head have sink low 
 and low on his breast . I bent my ear to his withered lip , and make 
 out his whisper , something like , ' in God 's name , then , Martin , my son ! ' 
 I do not   know exactly . there be the name of God in it , I be certain . it 
 seem to I I have catch his last breath - the breath of his depart 
 soul on his lip . 
 " he live yet , it be true . I have see he since ; but it be only a 
 senile body , lie on its back , cover to the chin , with open eye , and 
 so still that you might have say it be breathe no long . I leave he 
 thus , with Antonia kneeling by the side of the bed , just before I come 
 to this Italian 's posada , where the ubiquitous death be also wait . 
 but I know that Don Jose have really die there , in the Casa Gould , with 
 that whisper urge I to attempt what no doubt his soul , wrap up in 
 the sanctity of diplomatic treaty and solemn declaration , must 
 have abhor . I have exclaim very loud , ' there be never any God in a 
 country where man will not help themselves . ' 
 " meanwhile , Don Juste have begin a pondered oration whose solemn effect 
 be spoil by the ridiculous disaster to his beard . I do not wait 
 to make it out . he seem to argue that Montero 's   he call he the 
 General   intention be probably not evil , though , he go on , ' that 
 distinguished man '   only a week ago we use to call he a gran ' bestia 
 ' be perhaps mistake as to the true mean . ' as you may imagine , 
 I do not   stay to hear the rest . I know the intention of Montero 's 
 brother , Pedrito , the guerrillero , whom I expose in Paris , some year 
 ago , in a cafe frequent by south american student , where he try 
 to pass himself off for a Secretary of Legation . he use to come in 
 and talk for hour , twist his feel hat in his hairy paw , and his 
 ambition seem to become a sort of Duc de Morny to a sort of Napoleon . 
 already , then , he use to talk of his brother in inflated term . he 
 seem fairly safe from be find out , because the student , all of 
 the Blanco family , do not , as you may imagine , frequent the Legation . 
 it be only Decoud , a man without faith and principle , as they use to 
 say , that go in there sometimes for the sake of the fun , as it be to 
 an assembly of train monkey . I know his intention . I have see he 
 change the plate at table . whoever be allow to live on in terror , I 
 must die the death . 
 " no , I do not   stay to the end to hear Don Juste Lopez try to persuade 
 himself in a grave oration of the clemency and justice , and honesty , and 
 purity of the brother Montero . I go out abruptly to seek Antonia . 
 I see she in the gallery . as I open the door , she extend to I her 
 clasp hand . 
 " ' what be they do in there ? ' she ask . 
 " ' talk , ' I say , with my eye look into her . 
 " ' yes , yes , but - ' 
 " ' empty speech , ' I interrupt she . ' hide their fear behind 
 imbecile hope . they be all great Parliamentarians there - on the 
 English model , as you know . ' I be so furious that I could hardly speak . 
 she make a gesture of despair . 
 " through the door I hold a little ajar behind I , we hear Dun Juste 's 
 measure mouthing monotone go on from phrase to phrase , like a sort of 
 awful and solemn madness . 
 " ' after all , the democratic aspiration have , perhaps , their legitimacy . 
 the way of human progress be inscrutable , and if the fate of the 
 country be in the hand of Montero , we ought - ' 
 " I crash the door to on that ; it be enough ; it be too much . there 
 be never a beautiful face express more horror and despair than the 
 face of Antonia . I could not   bear it ; I seize her wrist . 
 " ' have they kill my father in there ? ' she ask . 
 " her eye blaze with indignation , but as I look on , fascinated , the 
 light in they go out . 
 " ' it be a surrender , ' I say . and I remember I be shake her wrist I 
 hold apart in my hand . ' but it be more than talk . your father tell I to 
 go on in God 's name . ' 
 " my dear girl , there be that in Antonia which would make I believe in 
 the feasibility of anything . one look at her face be enough to set 
 my brain on fire . and yet I love she as any other man would - with the 
 heart , and with that alone . she be more to I than his Church to Father 
 Corbelan   the Grand Vicar disappear last night from the town ; perhaps 
 go to join the band of Hernandez . she be more to I than his precious 
 mine to that sentimental Englishman . I will not   speak of his wife . she may 
 have be sentimental once . the San Tome mine stand now between those 
 two people . ' your father himself , Antonia , ' I repeat ; ' your father , do 
 you understand ? have tell I to go on . ' 
 " she avert her face , and in a pained voice - 
 " ' he have ? ' she cry . ' then , indeed , I fear he will never speak again . ' 
 " she free her wrist from my clutch and begin to cry in her 
 handkerchief . I disregard her sorrow ; I would rather see her miserable 
 than not see she at all , never any more ; for whether I escape or stay 
 to die , there be for we no come together , no future . and that be 
 so , I have no pity to waste upon the pass moment of her sorrow . I 
 send she off in tear to fetch Dona Emilia and Don Carlos , too . their 
 sentiment be necessary to the very life of my plan ; the sentimentalism 
 of the people that will never do anything for the sake of their 
 passionate desire , unless it come to they clothe in the fair robe of 
 an idea . 
 " late at night we form a small junta of four - the two woman , Don 
 Carlos , and myself - in Mrs. Gould 's blue - and - white boudoir . 
 " El Rey de Sulaco think himself , no doubt , a very honest man . and so 
 he be , if one could look behind his taciturnity . perhaps he think 
 that this alone make his honesty unstaine . those englishman live on 
 illusion which somehow or other help they to get a firm hold of the 
 substance . when he speak it be by a rare ' yes ' or ' no ' that seem as 
 impersonal as the word of an oracle . but he could not impose on I by 
 his dumb reserve . I know what he have in his head ; he have his mine in 
 his head ; and his wife have nothing in her head but his precious person , 
 which he have bind up with the Gould Concession and tie up to that 
 little woman 's neck . no matter . the thing be to make he present the 
 affair to Holroyd   the Steel and Silver King   in such a manner as to 
 secure his financial support . at that time last night , just twenty - four 
 hour ago , we think the silver of the mine safe in the Custom House 
 vault till the north - bind steamer come to take it away . and as long as 
 the treasure flow north , without a break , that utter sentimentalist , 
 Holroyd , would not drop his idea of introduce , not only justice , 
 industry , peace , to the benighted continent , but also that pet dream 
 of his of a purer form of Christianity . later on , the principal european 
 really in Sulaco , the engineer - in - chief of the railway , come rid up 
 the Calle , from the harbour , and be admit to our conclave . meantime , 
 the Junta of the Notables in the great sala be still deliberate ; 
 only , one of they have run out in the corredor to ask the servant 
 whether something to eat could not   be send in . the first word the 
 engineer - in - chief say as he come into the boudoir be , ' what be 
 your house , dear Mrs. Gould ? a war hospital below , and apparently a 
 restaurant above . I see they carry tray full of good thing into the 
 sala . ' 
 " ' and here , in this boudoir , ' I say , ' you behold the inner cabinet of 
 the Occidental Republic that be to be . ' 
 " he be so preoccupied that he do not   smile at that , he do not   even look 
 surprised . 
 " he tell we that he be attend to the general disposition for the 
 defence of the railway property at the railway yard when he be 
 send for to go into the railway telegraph office . the engineer of the 
 railhead , at the foot of the mountain , want to talk to he from his 
 end of the wire . there be nobody in the office but himself and the 
 operator of the railway telegraph , who read off the click aloud as the 
 tape coil its length upon the floor . and the purport of that talk , 
 click nervously from a wooden shed in the depth of the forest , 
 have inform the chief that President Ribiera have be , or be be , 
 pursue . this be news , indeed , to all of we in Sulaco . Ribiera himself , 
 when rescue , revive , and soothe by we , have be incline to think 
 that he have not be pursue . 
 " Ribiera have yield to the urgent solicitation of his friend , and have 
 leave the headquarters of his discomfited army alone , under the 
 guidance of Bonifacio , the muleteer , who have be willing to take the 
 responsibility with the risk . he have depart at daybreak of the third 
 day . his remain force have melt away during the night . Bonifacio 
 and he ride hard on horse towards the Cordillera ; then they obtain 
 mule , enter the pass , and cross the Paramo of Ivie just before a 
 freeze blast sweep over that stony plateau , bury in a drift of 
 snow the little shelter - hut of stone in which they have spend the night . 
 afterwards poor Ribiera have many adventure , get separate from his 
 guide , lose his mount , struggle down to the Campo on foot , and if he 
 have not throw himself on the mercy of a ranchero would have perish a 
 long way from Sulaco . that man , who , as a matter of fact , recognize 
 he at once , let he have a fresh mule , which the fugitive , heavy and 
 unskilful , have ride to death . and it be true he have be pursue by 
 a party command by no less a person than Pedro Montero , the brother of 
 the general . the cold wind of the Paramo luckily catch the pursuer on 
 the top of the pass . some few man , and all the animal , perish in the 
 icy blast . the straggler die , but the main body keep on . they 
 find poor Bonifacio lie half - dead at the foot of a snow slope , and 
 bayonet he promptly in the true Civil War style . they would have have 
 Ribiera , too , if they have not , for some reason or other , turn off the 
 track of the old Camino Real , only to lose their way in the forest 
 at the foot of the low slope . and there they be at last , have 
 stumble in unexpectedly upon the construction camp . the engineer at 
 the railhead tell his chief by wire that he have Pedro Montero absolutely 
 there , in the very office , listen to the click . he be go to 
 take possession of Sulaco in the name of the Democracy . he be very 
 overbearing . his man slaughter some of the Railway Company 's cattle 
 without ask leave , and go to work broil the meat on the ember . 
 Pedrito make many pointed inquiry as to the silver mine , and what 
 have become of the product of the last six month ' working . he have say 
 peremptorily , ' ask your chief up there by wire , he ought to know ; tell 
 he that Don Pedro Montero , Chief of the Campo and Minister of the 
 Interior of the new Government , desire to be correctly inform . ' 
 " he have his foot wrap up in blood - stain rag , a lean , haggard face , 
 ragged beard and hair , and have walk in limping , with a crooked branch 
 of a tree for a staff . his follower be perhaps in a bad plight , but 
 apparently they have not throw away their arm , and , at any rate , not 
 all their ammunition . their lean face fill the door and the window 
 of the telegraph hut . as it be at the same time the bedroom of the 
 engineer - in - charge there , Montero have throw himself on his clean 
 blanket and lie there shiver and dictate requisition to be 
 transmit by wire to Sulaco . he demand a train of car to be send 
 down at once to transport his man up . 
 " ' to this I answer from my end , ' the engineer - in - chief relate to we , 
 ' that I dare not risk the rolling - stock in the interior , as there have 
 be attempt to wreck train all along the line several time . I do 
 that for your sake , Gould , ' say the chief engineer . ' the answer to this 
 be , in the word of my subordinate , " the filthy brute on my bed say , 
 ' suppose I be to have you shoot ? ' " to which my subordinate , who , it 
 appear , be himself operate , remark that it would not bring the 
 car up . upon that , the other , yawning , say , " never mind , there be 
 no lack of horse on the Campo . " and , turn over , go to sleep on 
 Harris 's bed . ' 
 " this be why , my dear girl , I be a fugitive to - night . the last wire from 
 railhead say that Pedro Montero and his man leave at daybreak , after 
 feed on asado beef all night . they take all the horse ; they will 
 find more on the road ; they will be here in less than thirty hour , and 
 thus Sulaco be no place either for I or the great store of silver 
 belong to the Gould Concession . 
 " but that be not the bad . the garrison of Esmeralda have go over to 
 the victorious party . we have hear this by mean of the telegraphist of 
 the Cable Company , who come to the Casa Gould in the early morning with 
 the news . in fact , it be so early that the day have not yet quite break 
 over Sulaco . his colleague in Esmeralda have call he up to say 
 that the garrison , after shoot some of their officer , have take 
 possession of a Government steamer lay up in the harbour . it be really 
 a heavy blow for I . I think I could depend on every man in this 
 province . it be a mistake . it be a Monterist Revolution in Esmeralda , 
 just such as be attempt in Sulaco , only that that one come off . the 
 telegraphist be signal to Bernhardt all the time , and his last 
 transmit word be , ' they be burst in the door , and take 
 possession of the cable office . you be cut off . can do no more . ' 
 " but , as a matter of fact , he manage somehow to escape the vigilance 
 of his captor , who have try to stop the communication with the outer 
 world . he do manage it . how it be do I do not   know , but a few 
 hour afterwards he call up Sulaco again , and what he say be , ' the 
 insurgent army have take possession of the Government transport in the 
 bay and be fill she with troop , with the intention of go round 
 the coast to Sulaco . therefore look out for yourself . they will be 
 ready to start in a few hour , and may be upon you before daybreak . ' 
 " this be all he could say . they drive he away from his instrument this 
 time for good , because Bernhardt have be call up Esmeralda ever 
 since without get an answer . " 
 after set these word down in the pocket - book which he be fill 
 up for the benefit of his sister , Decoud lift his head to listen . but 
 there be no sound , neither in the room nor in the house , except the 
 drip of the water from the filter into the vast earthenware jar under 
 the wooden stand . and outside the house there be a great silence . 
 Decoud lower his head again over the pocket - book . 
 " I be not run away , you understand , " he write on . " I be simply 
 go away with that great treasure of silver which must be save at 
 all cost . Pedro Montero from the Campo and the revolted garrison of 
 Esmeralda from the sea be converge upon it . that it be there lie 
 ready for they be only an accident . the real objective be the San Tome 
 mine itself , as you may well imagine ; otherwise the Occidental Province 
 would have be , no doubt , leave alone for many week , to be gather 
 at leisure into the arm of the victorious party . Don Carlos Gould 
 will have enough to do to save his mine , with its organization and its 
 people ; this ' Imperium in Imperio , ' this wealth - produce thing , to 
 which his sentimentalism attach a strange idea of justice . he hold 
 to it as some man hold to the idea of love or revenge . unless I be much 
 mistaken in the man , it must remain inviolate or perish by an act of 
 his will alone . a passion have creep into his cold and idealistic life . 
 a passion which I can only comprehend intellectually . a passion that 
 be not like the passion we know , we man of another blood . but it be as 
 dangerous as any of our . 
 " his wife have understand it , too . that be why she be such a good ally 
 of mine . she seize upon all my suggestion with a sure instinct that in 
 the end they make for the safety of the Gould Concession . and he defer 
 to she because he trust she perhaps , but I fancy rather as if he wish 
 to make up for some subtle wrong , for that sentimental unfaithfulness 
 which surrender her happiness , her life , to the seduction of an idea . 
 the little woman have discover that he live for the mine rather 
 than for she . but let they be . to each his fate , shape by passion or 
 sentiment . the principal thing be that she have back up my advice to 
 get the silver out of the town , out of the country , at once , at any 
 cost , at any risk . Don Carlos ' mission be to preserve unstaine the fair 
 fame of his mine ; Mrs. Gould 's mission be to save he from the effect 
 of that cold and overmaster passion , which she dread more than if it 
 be an infatuation for another woman . Nostromo 's mission be to save 
 the silver . the plan be to load it into the large of the Company 's 
 lighter , and send it across the gulf to a small port out of Costaguana 
 territory just on the other side the Azuera , where the first northbound 
 steamer will get order to pick it up . the water here be calm . we 
 shall slip away into the darkness of the gulf before the Esmeralda 
 rebel arrive ; and by the time the day break over the ocean we shall be 
 out of sight , invisible , hide by Azuera , which itself look from the 
 Sulaco shore like a faint blue cloud on the horizon . 
 " the incorruptible Capataz de Cargadores be the man for that work ; 
 and I , the man with a passion , but without a mission , I go with he to 
 return - to play my part in the farce to the end , and , if successful , to 
 receive my reward , which no one but Antonia can give I . 
 " I shall not see she again now before I depart . I leave she , as I have 
 say , by Don Jose 's bedside . the street be dark , the house shut up , 
 and I walk out of the town in the night . not a single street - lamp have 
 be light for two day , and the archway of the gate be only a mass of 
 darkness in the vague form of a tower , in which I hear low , dismal 
 groan , that seem to answer the murmur of a man 's voice . 
 " I recognize something impassive and careless in its tone , 
 characteristic of that genoese sailor who , like I , have come casually 
 here to be draw into the event for which his scepticism as well as 
 mine seem to entertain a sort of passive contempt . the only thing he 
 seem to care for , as far as I have be able to discover , be to be well 
 speak of . an ambition fit for noble soul , but also a profitable one 
 for an exceptionally intelligent scoundrel . yes . his very word , ' to 
 be well speak of . Si , senor . ' he do not seem to make any difference 
 between speaking and thinking . be it sheer naiveness or the practical 
 point of view , I wonder ? exceptional individuality always interest I , 
 because they be true to the general formula express the moral state 
 of humanity . 
 " he join I on the harbour road after I have pass they under the dark 
 archway without stop . it be a woman in trouble he have be talk 
 to . through discretion I keep silent while he walk by my side . after 
 a time he begin to talk himself . it be not what I expect . it be 
 only an old woman , an old lace - maker , in search of her son , one of the 
 street - sweeper employ by the municipality . friend have come the day 
 before at daybreak to the door of their hovel call he out . he have 
 go with they , and she have not see he since ; so she have leave the food 
 she have be prepare half - cook on the extinct ember and have crawl 
 out as far as the harbour , where she have hear that some town mozos have 
 be kill on the morning of the riot . one of the Cargadores guard 
 the Custom House have bring out a lantern , and have help she to look 
 at the few dead leave lie about there . now she be creep back , 
 have fail in her search . so she sit down on the stone seat under the 
 arch , moaning , because she be very tired . the Capataz have question 
 she , and after hear she broken and groan tale have advise she to 
 go and look amongst the wounded in the patio of the Casa Gould . he have 
 also give she a quarter dollar , he mention carelessly . " 
 " ' why do you do that ? ' I ask . ' do you know she ? ' 
 " ' no , senor . I do not   suppose I have ever see she before . how should I ? 
 she have not probably be out in the street for year . she be one 
 of those old woman that you find in this country at the back of hut , 
 crouch over fireplace , with a stick on the ground by their side , and 
 almost too feeble to drive away the stray dog from their cooking - pot . 
 Caramba ! I could tell by her voice that death have forget she . but , 
 old or young , they like money , and will speak well of the man who give 
 it to they . ' he laugh a little . ' senor , you should have feel the 
 clutch of her paw as I put the piece in her palm . ' he pause . ' my last , 
 too , ' he add . 
 " I make no comment . he be know for his liberality and his bad luck at 
 the game of monte , which keep he as poor as when he first come here . 
 " ' I suppose , Don Martin , ' he begin , in a thoughtful , speculative tone , 
 ' that the Senor Administrador of San Tome will reward I some day if I 
 save his silver ? ' 
 " I say that it could not be otherwise , surely . he walk on , mutter 
 to himself . ' si , si , without doubt , without doubt ; and , look you , Senor 
 Martin , what it be to be well speak of ! there be not another man that 
 could have be even think of for such a thing . I shall get something 
 great for it some day . and let it come soon , ' he mumble . ' time pass 
 in this country as quick as anywhere else . ' 
 " this , soeur cherie , be my companion in the great escape for the sake 
 of the great cause . he be more naive than shrewd , more masterful than 
 crafty , more generous with his personality than the people who make use 
 of he be with their money . at least , that be what he think himself 
 with more pride than sentiment . I be glad I have make friend with he . 
 as a companion he acquire more importance than he ever have as a sort of 
 minor genius in his way - as an original italian sailor whom I allow 
 to come in in the small hour and talk familiarly to the editor of the 
 Porvenir while the paper be go through the press . and it be curious 
 to have meet a man for whom the value of life seem to consist in 
 personal prestige . 
 " I be wait for he here now . on arrive at the posada keep by Viola 
 we find the child alone down below , and the old Genoese shout to 
 his countryman to go and fetch the doctor . otherwise we would have go 
 on to the wharf , where it appear Captain Mitchell with some volunteer 
 Europeans and a few pick Cargadores be load the light with the 
 silver that must be save from Montero 's clutch in order to be use 
 for Montero 's defeat . Nostromo gallop furiously back towards the town . 
 he have be long go already . this delay give I time to talk to you . 
 by the time this pocket - book reach your hand much will have happen . 
 but now it be a pause under the hover wing of death in this silent 
 house bury in the black night , with this die woman , the two child 
 crouch without a sound , and that old man whom I can hear through the 
 thickness of the wall pass up and down with a light rub noise no 
 loud than a mouse . and I , the only other with they , do not   really know 
 whether to count myself with the living or with the dead . ' Quien sabe ? ' 
 as the people here be prone to say in answer to every question . but no ! 
 feeling for you be certainly not dead , and the whole thing , the house , 
 the dark night , the silent child in this dim room , my very presence 
 here - all this be life , must be life , since it be so much like a dream . " 
 with the writing of the last line there come upon Decoud a moment of 
 sudden and complete oblivion . he sway over the table as if strike by 
 a bullet . the next moment he sit up , confused , with the idea that he have 
 hear his pencil roll on the floor . the low door of the cafe , wide open , 
 be fill with the glare of a torch in which be visible half of a 
 horse , switch its tail against the leg of a rider with a long iron 
 spur strapped to the naked heel . the two girl be go , and Nostromo , 
 stand in the middle of the room , look at he from under the round 
 brim of the sombrero low down over his brow . 
 " I have bring that sour - faced english doctor in Senora Gould 's 
 carriage , " say Nostromo . " I doubt if , with all his wisdom , he can 
 save the Padrona this time . they have send for the child . a bad sign 
 that . " 
 he sit down on the end of a bench . " she want to give they her blessing , 
 I suppose . " 
 Dazedly Decoud observe that he must have fall sound asleep , and 
 Nostromo say , with a vague smile , that he have look in at the window 
 and have see he lie still across the table with his head on his arm . 
 the English senora have also come in the carriage , and go upstairs at 
 once with the doctor . she have tell he not to wake up Don Martin yet ; 
 but when they send for the child he have come into the cafe . 
 the half of the horse with its half of the rider swing round outside the 
 door ; the torch of tow and resin in the iron basket which be carry on 
 a stick at the saddle - bow flare right into the room for a moment , and 
 Mrs. Gould enter hastily with a very white , tired face . the hood of 
 her dark , blue cloak have fall back . both man rise . 
 " Teresa want to see you , Nostromo , " she say . the Capataz do not move . 
 Decoud , with his back to the table , begin to button up his coat . 
 " the silver , Mrs. Gould , the silver , " he murmur in English . " do not 
 forget that the Esmeralda garrison have get a steamer . they may appear 
 at any moment at the harbour entrance . " 
 " the doctor say there be no hope , " Mrs. Gould speak rapidly , also in 
 English . " I shall take you down to the wharf in my carriage and then 
 come back to fetch away the girl . " she change swiftly into Spanish to 
 address Nostromo . " why be you waste time ? Old Giorgio 's wife wish 
 to see you . " 
 " I be go to she , senora , " mutter the Capataz . Dr. Monygham now 
 show himself , bring back the child . to Mrs. Gould 's inquire 
 glance he only shake his head and go outside at once , follow by 
 Nostromo . 
 the horse of the torch - bearer , motionless , hang his head low , and the 
 rider have drop the rein to light a cigarette . the glare of the torch 
 play on the front of the house cross by the big black letter of its 
 inscription in which only the word Italia be light fully . the patch 
 of waver glare reach as far as Mrs. Gould 's carriage wait on 
 the road , with the yellow - face , portly Ignacio apparently doze on the 
 box . by his side Basilio , dark and skinny , hold a Winchester carbine in 
 front of he , with both hand , and peer fearfully into the darkness . 
 Nostromo touch lightly the doctor 's shoulder . 
 " be she really die , senor doctor ? " 
 " yes , " say the doctor , with a strange twitch of his scarred cheek . " and 
 why she want to see you I can not imagine . " 
 " she have be like that before , " suggest Nostromo , look away . 
 " well , Capataz , I can assure you she will never be like that again , " 
 snarl Dr. Monygham . " you may go to she or stay away . there be very 
 little to be get from talk to the dying . but she tell Dona Emilia in 
 my hearing that she have be like a mother to you ever since you first 
 set foot ashore here . " 
 " Si ! and she never have a good word to say for I to anybody . it be more 
 as if she could not forgive I for be alive , and such a man , too , as 
 she would have like her son to be . " 
 " maybe ! " exclaim a mournful deep voice near they . " woman have their 
 own way of torment themselves . " Giorgio Viola have come out of the 
 house . he throw a heavy black shadow in the torchlight , and the glare 
 fall on his big face , on the great bushy head of white hair . he motion 
 the Capataz indoor with his extended arm . 
 Dr. Monygham , after busy himself with a little medicament box of 
 polished wood on the seat of the landau , turn to old Giorgio and 
 thrust into his big , tremble hand one of the glass - stopper bottle 
 out of the case . 
 " give she a spoonful of this now and then , in water , " he say . " it will 
 make she easy . " 
 " and there be nothing more for she ? " ask the old man , patiently . 
 " no . not on earth , " say the doctor , with his back to he , click the 
 lock of the medicine case . 
 Nostromo slowly cross the large kitchen , all dark but for the glow of 
 a heap of charcoal under the heavy mantel of the cooking - range , where 
 water be boil in an iron pot with a loud bubble sound . between 
 the two wall of a narrow staircase a bright light stream from the 
 sick - room above ; and the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores step 
 noiselessly in soft leather sandal , bushy whiskered , his muscular 
 neck and bronze chest bare in the open check shirt , resemble a 
 Mediterranean sailor just come ashore from some wine or fruit - laden 
 felucca . at the top he pause , broad shoulder , narrow hipped and 
 supple , look at the large bed , like a white couch of state , with a 
 profusion of snowy linen , amongst which the Padrona sit unpropped and 
 bow , her handsome , black - browed face bent over her chest . a mass of 
 raven hair with only a few white thread in it cover her shoulder ; 
 one thick strand fall forward half veil her cheek . perfectly 
 motionless in that pose , express physical anxiety and unrest , she 
 turn her eye alone towards Nostromo . 
 the Capataz have a red sash wind many time round his waist , and a heavy 
 silver ring on the forefinger of the hand he raise to give a twist to 
 his moustache . 
 " their revolution , their revolution , " gasp Senora Teresa . " look , 
 Gian ' Battista , it have kill I at last ! " 
 Nostromo say nothing , and the sick woman with an upward glance 
 insist . " look , this one have kill I , while you be away fight 
 for what do not concern you , foolish man . " 
 " why talk like this ? " mumble the Capataz between his tooth . " will you 
 never believe in my good sense ? it concern I to keep on be what I 
 be : every day alike . " 
 " you never change , indeed , " she say , bitterly . " always think of 
 yourself and take your pay out in fine word from those who care 
 nothing for you . " 
 there be between they an intimacy of antagonism as close in its way as 
 the intimacy of accord and affection . he have not walk along the way 
 of Teresa 's expectation . it be she who have encourage he to leave his 
 ship , in the hope of secure a friend and defender for the girl . the 
 wife of old Giorgio be aware of her precarious health , and be haunt 
 by the fear of her aged husband 's loneliness and the unprotected state 
 of the child . she have want to annex that apparently quiet and 
 steady young man , affectionate and pliable , an orphan from his tender 
 age , as he have tell she , with no tie in Italy except an uncle , owner 
 and master of a felucca , from whose ill - usage he have run away before he 
 be fourteen . he have seem to her courageous , a hard worker , determine 
 to make his way in the world . from gratitude and the tie of habit he 
 would become like a son to herself and Giorgio ; and then , who know , 
 when Linda have grow up . . . . ten year ' difference between husband and 
 wife be not so much . her own great man be nearly twenty year old 
 than herself . Gian ' Battista be an attractive young fellow , besides ; 
 attractive to man , woman , and child , just by that profound quietness 
 of personality which , like a serene twilight , render more seductive 
 the promise of his vigorous form and the resolution of his conduct . 
 Old Giorgio , in profound ignorance of his wife 's view and hope , have a 
 great regard for his young countryman . " a man ought not to be tame , " he 
 use to tell she , quote the spanish proverb in defence of the splendid 
 Capataz . she be grow jealous of his success . he be escape from 
 she , she fear . she be practical , and he seem to she to be an absurd 
 spendthrift of these quality which make he so valuable . he get too 
 little for they . he scatter they with both hand amongst too many 
 people , she think . he lay no money by . she rail at his poverty , his 
 exploit , his adventure , his love and his reputation ; but in her heart 
 she have never give he up , as though , indeed , he have be her son . 
 even now , ill as she be , ill enough to feel the chill , black breath of 
 the approach end , she have wish to see he . it be like put out 
 her benumbed hand to regain her hold . but she have presume too much on 
 her strength . she could not command her thought ; they have become dim , 
 like her vision . the word falter on her lip , and only the paramount 
 anxiety and desire of her life seem to be too strong for death . 
 the Capataz say , " I have hear these thing many time . you be unjust , 
 but it do not hurt I . only now you do not seem to have much strength 
 to talk , and I have but little time to listen . I be engage in a work of 
 very great moment . " 
 she make an effort to ask he whether it be true that he have find time 
 to go and fetch a doctor for she . Nostromo nod affirmatively . 
 she be pleased : it relieve her suffering to know that the man have 
 condescend to do so much for those who really want his help . it be 
 a proof of his friendship . her voice become strong . 
 " I want a priest more than a doctor , " she say , pathetically . she do 
 not move her head ; only her eye run into the corner to watch the 
 Capataz standing by the side of her bed . " would you go to fetch a priest 
 for I now ? think ! a die woman ask you ! " 
 Nostromo shake his head resolutely . he do not believe in priest in 
 their sacerdotal character . a doctor be an efficacious person ; but a 
 priest , as priest , be nothing , incapable of do either good or harm . 
 Nostromo do not even dislike the sight of they as old Giorgio do . the 
 utter uselessness of the errand be what strike he most . 
 " Padrona , " he say , " you have be like this before , and get well 
 after a few day . I have give you already the very last moment I can 
 spare . ask Senora Gould to send you one . " 
 he be feel uneasy at the impiety of this refusal . the Padrona 
 believe in priest , and confess herself to they . but all woman 
 do that . it could not be of much consequence . and yet his heart feel 
 oppress for a moment - at the thought what absolution would mean to she 
 if she believe in it only ever so little . no matter . it be quite true 
 that he have give she already the very last moment he could spare . 
 " you refuse to go ? " she gasp . " ah ! you be always yourself , indeed . " 
 " listen to reason , Padrona , " he say . " I be need to save the silver of 
 the mine . do you hear ? a great treasure than the one which they say 
 be guard by ghost and devil on Azuera . it be true . I be resolve to 
 make this the most desperate affair I be ever engage on in my whole 
 life . " 
 she feel a despairing indignation . the supreme test have fail . stand 
 above she , Nostromo do not see the distorted feature of her face , 
 distort by a paroxysm of pain and anger . only she begin to tremble all 
 over . her bow head shake . the broad shoulder quiver . 
 " then God , perhaps , will have mercy upon I ! but do you look to it , man , 
 that you get something for yourself out of it , besides the remorse that 
 shall overtake you some day . " 
 she laugh feebly . " get rich at least for once , you indispensable , 
 admire Gian ' Battista , to whom the peace of a die woman be less 
 than the praise of people who have give you a silly name - and nothing 
 besides - in exchange for your soul and body . " 
 the Capataz de Cargadores swear to himself under his breath . 
 " leave my soul alone , Padrona , and I shall know how to take care of 
 my body . where be the harm of people have need of I ? what be you 
 envy I that I have rob you and the child of ? those very people 
 you be throw in my tooth have do more for old Giorgio than they 
 ever think of do for I . " 
 he strike his breast with his open palm ; his voice have remain low 
 though he have speak in a forcible tone . he twist his moustache one 
 after another , and his eye wander a little about the room . 
 " be it my fault that I be the only man for their purpose ? what angry 
 nonsense be you talk , mother ? would you rather have I timid and 
 foolish , sell water - melon on the market - place or row a boat for 
 passenger along the harbour , like a soft Neapolitan without courage 
 or reputation ? would you have a young man live like a monk ? I do not 
 believe it . would you want a monk for your eld girl ? let she grow . 
 what be you afraid of ? you have be angry with I for everything I do 
 for year ; ever since you first speak to I , in secret from old Giorgio , 
 about your Linda . husband to one and brother to the other , do you say ? 
 well , why not ! I like the little one , and a man must marry some time . 
 but ever since that time you have be make little of I to everyone . 
 why ? do you think you could put a collar and chain on I as if I be 
 one of the watch - dog they keep over there in the railway yard ? look 
 here , Padrona , I be the same man who come ashore one evening and sit 
 down in the thatched ranche you live in at that time on the other side 
 of the town and tell you all about himself . you be not unjust to I 
 then . what have happen since ? I be no long an insignificant youth . a 
 good name , Giorgio say , be a treasure , Padrona . " 
 " they have turn your head with their praise , " gasp the sick woman . 
 " they have be pay you with word . your folly shall betray you into 
 poverty , misery , starvation . the very lepero shall laugh at you - the 
 great Capataz . " 
 Nostromo stand for a time as if strike dumb . she never look at he . a 
 self - confident , mirthless smile pass quickly from his lip , and then 
 he back away . his disregarded figure sink down beyond the doorway . 
 he descend the stair backwards , with the usual sense of have be 
 somehow baffle by this woman 's disparagement of this reputation he have 
 obtain and desire to keep . 
 downstair in the big kitchen a candle be burn , surround by the 
 shadow of the wall , of the ceiling , but no ruddy glare fill the open 
 square of the outer door . the carriage with Mrs. Gould and Don Martin , 
 precede by the horseman bear the torch , have go on to the jetty . 
 Dr. Monygham , who have remain , sit on the corner of a hard wood table 
 near the candlestick , his seam , shaven face incline sideways , his 
 arm cross on his breast , his lip purse up , and his prominent eye 
 glare stonily upon the floor of black earth . near the overhang 
 mantel of the fireplace , where the pot of water be still boil 
 violently , old Giorgio hold his chin in his hand , one foot advance , as 
 if arrest by a sudden thought . 
 " Adios , viejo , " say Nostromo , feel the handle of his revolver in the 
 belt and loosen his knife in its sheath . he pick up a blue poncho 
 line with red from the table , and put it over his head . " Adios , look 
 after the thing in my sleeping - room , and if you hear from I no more , 
 give up the box to Paquita . there be not much of value there , except my 
 new serape from Mexico , and a few silver button on my good jacket . no 
 matter ! the thing will look well enough on the next lover she get , and 
 the man need not be afraid I shall linger on earth after I be dead , like 
 those Gringos that haunt the Azuera . " 
 Dr. Monygham twist his lip into a bitter smile . after old Giorgio , 
 with an almost imperceptible nod and without a word , have go up the 
 narrow stair , he say - 
 " why , Capataz ! I think you could never fail in anything . " 
 Nostromo , glance contemptuously at the doctor , linger in the doorway 
 roll a cigarette , then strike a match , and , after light it , hold 
 the burn piece of wood above his head till the flame nearly touch 
 his finger . 
 " no wind ! " he mutter to himself . " look here , senor - do you know the 
 nature of my undertaking ? " 
 Dr. Monygham nod sourly . 
 " it be as if I be take up a curse upon I , senor doctor . a man with 
 a treasure on this coast will have every knife raise against he in 
 every place upon the shore . you see that , senor doctor ? I shall float 
 along with a spell upon my life till I meet somewhere the north - bind 
 steamer of the Company , and then indeed they will talk about the Capataz 
 of the Sulaco Cargadores from one end of America to another . " 
 Dr. Monygham laugh his short , throaty laugh . Nostromo turn round in 
 the doorway . 
 " but if your worship can find any other man ready and fit for such 
 business I will stand back . I be not exactly tired of my life , though I 
 be so poor that I can carry all I have with myself on my horse 's back . " 
 " you gamble too much , and never say ' no ' to a pretty face , Capataz , " 
 say Dr. Monygham , with sly simplicity . " that be not the way to make a 
 fortune . but nobody that I know ever suspect you of be poor . I 
 hope you have make a good bargain in case you come back safe from this 
 adventure . " 
 " what bargain would your worship have make ? " ask Nostromo , blow the 
 smoke out of his lip through the doorway . 
 Dr. Monygham listen up the staircase for a moment before he answer , 
 with another of his short , abrupt laugh - 
 " Illustrious Capataz , for take the curse of death upon my back , as you 
 call it , nothing else but the whole treasure would do . " 
 Nostromo vanish out of the doorway with a grunt of discontent at 
 this jeer answer . Dr. Monygham hear he gallop away . Nostromo ride 
 furiously in the dark . there be light in the building of the 
 O.S.N. Company near the wharf , but before he get there he meet the Gould 
 carriage . the horseman precede it with the torch , whose light show 
 the white mule trot , the portly Ignacio driving , and Basilio with 
 the carbine on the box . from the dark body of the landau Mrs. Gould 's 
 voice cry , " they be wait for you , Capataz ! " she be return , 
 chilly and excited , with Decoud 's pocket - book still hold in her hand . he 
 have confide it to she to send to his sister . " perhaps my last word to 
 she , " he have say , press Mrs. Gould 's hand . 
 the Capataz never check his speed . at the head of the wharf vague 
 figure with rifle leapt to the head of his horse ; other close upon 
 he - cargadore of the company post by Captain Mitchell on the watch . 
 at a word from he they fall back with subservient murmur , recognize 
 his voice . at the other end of the jetty , near a cargo crane , in a dark 
 group with glowing cigar , his name be pronounce in a tone of relief . 
 Most of the Europeans in Sulaco be there , rally round Charles Gould , 
 as if the silver of the mine have be the emblem of a common cause , the 
 symbol of the supreme importance of material interest . they have load 
 it into the light with their own hand . Nostromo recognize Don Carlos 
 Gould , a thin , tall shape stand a little apart and silent , to whom 
 another tall shape , the engineer - in - chief , say aloud , " if it must be 
 lose , it be a million time well that it should go to the bottom of 
 the sea . " 
 Martin Decoud call out from the light , " Au revoir , messieur , till 
 we clasp hand again over the new - bear Occidental Republic . " only a 
 subdue murmur respond to his clear , ring tone ; and then it seem 
 to he that the wharf be float away into the night ; but it be 
 Nostromo , who be already push against a pile with one of the heavy 
 sweep . Decoud do not move ; the effect be that of be launch 
 into space . after a splash or two there be not a sound but the thud 
 of Nostromo 's foot leap about the boat . he hoist the big sail ; a 
 breath of wind fan Decoud 's cheek . everything have vanish but the 
 light of the lantern Captain Mitchell have hoist upon the post at the 
 end of the jetty to guide Nostromo out of the harbour . 
 the two man , unable to see each other , keep silent till the light , 
 slip before the fitful breeze , pass out between almost invisible 
 headland into the still deep darkness of the gulf . for a time the 
 lantern on the jetty shone after they . the wind fail , then fan up 
 again , but so faintly that the big , half - deck boat slip along with 
 no more noise than if she have be suspend in the air . 
 " we be out in the gulf now , " say the calm voice of Nostromo . a moment 
 after he add , " Senor Mitchell have lower the light . " 
 " yes , " say Decoud ; " nobody can find we now . " 
 a great recrudescence of obscurity embrace the boat . the sea in the 
 gulf be as black as the cloud above . Nostromo , after strike a couple 
 of match to get a glimpse of the boat - compass he have with he in the 
 light , steer by the feel of the wind on his cheek . 
 it be a new experience for Decoud , this mysteriousness of the great 
 water spread out strangely smooth , as if their restlessness have be 
 crush by the weight of that dense night . the Placido be sleep 
 profoundly under its black poncho . 
 the main thing now for success be to get away from the coast and gain 
 the middle of the gulf before day break . the Isabels be somewhere 
 at hand . " on your left as you look forward , senor , " say Nostromo , 
 suddenly . when his voice cease , the enormous stillness , without light 
 or sound , seem to affect Decoud 's sens like a powerful drug . he 
 do not   even know at time whether he be asleep or awake . like a man 
 lose in slumber , he hear nothing , he see nothing . even his hand 
 hold before his face do not exist for his eye . the change from the 
 agitation , the passion and the danger , from the sight and sound of 
 the shore , be so complete that it would have resemble death have it 
 not be for the survival of his thought . in this foretaste of eternal 
 peace they float vivid and light , like unearthly clear dream of 
 earthly thing that may haunt the soul free by death from the misty 
 atmosphere of regret and hope . Decoud shake himself , shudder a bit , 
 though the air that drift past he be warm . he have the strange 
 sensation of his soul have just return into his body from the 
 circumambient darkness in which land , sea , sky , the mountain , and the 
 rock be as if they have not be . 
 Nostromo 's voice be speak , though he , at the tiller , be also as 
 if he be not . " have you be asleep , Don Martin ? Caramba ! if it be 
 possible I would think that I , too , have doze off . I have a strange 
 notion somehow of have dream that there be a sound of blubbering , 
 a sound a sorrow man could make , somewhere near this boat . something 
 between a sigh and a sob . " 
 " strange ! " mutter Decoud , stretch upon the pile of treasure box 
 cover by many tarpaulin . " could it be that there be another boat near 
 we in the gulf ? we could not see it , you know . " 
 Nostromo laugh a little at the absurdity of the idea . they dismiss 
 it from their mind . the solitude could almost be feel . and when the 
 breeze cease , the blackness seem to weigh upon Decoud like a stone . 
 " this be overpower , " he mutter . " do we move at all , Capataz ? " 
 " not so fast as a crawl beetle tangle in the grass , " answer 
 Nostromo , and his voice seem deaden by the thick veil of obscurity 
 that feel warm and hopeless all about they . there be long period 
 when he make no sound , invisible and inaudible as if he have mysteriously 
 step out of the light . 
 in the featureless night Nostromo be not even certain which way the 
 lighter head after the wind have completely die out . he peer for the 
 island . there be not a hint of they to be see , as if they have sink to 
 the bottom of the gulf . he throw himself down by the side of Decoud at 
 last , and whisper into his ear that if daylight catch they near the 
 Sulaco shore through want of wind , it would be possible to sweep the 
 light behind the cliff at the high end of the Great Isabel , where 
 she would lie conceal . Decoud be surprised at the grimness of his 
 anxiety . to he the removal of the treasure be a political move . it be 
 necessary for several reason that it should not fall into the hand of 
 Montero , but here be a man who take another view of this enterprise . 
 the Caballeros over there do not seem to have the slight idea of 
 what they have give he to do . Nostromo , as if affect by the gloom 
 around , seem nervously resentful . Decoud be surprised . the Capataz , 
 indifferent to those danger that seem obvious to his companion , 
 allow himself to become scornfully exasperate by the deadly nature 
 of the trust put , as a matter of course , into his hand . it be more 
 dangerous , Nostromo say , with a laugh and a curse , than send a man 
 to get the treasure that people say be guard by devil and ghost in 
 the deep ravine of Azuera . " Senor , " he say , " we must catch the steamer 
 at sea . we must keep out in the open looking for she till we have eat 
 and drink all that have be put on board here . and if we miss she by 
 some mischance , we must keep away from the land till we grow weak , 
 and perhaps mad , and die , and drift dead , until one or another of the 
 steamer of the Compania come upon the boat with the two dead man who 
 have save the treasure . that , senor , be the only way to save it ; for , 
 do not   you see ? for we to come to the land anywhere in a hundred mile 
 along this coast with this silver in our possession be to run the naked 
 breast against the point of a knife . this thing have be give to I 
 like a deadly disease . if man discover it I be dead , and you , too , 
 senor , since you would come with I . there be enough silver to make a 
 whole province rich , let alone a seaboard pueblo inhabit by thief 
 and vagabond . Senor , they would think that heaven itself send these 
 rich into their hand , and would cut our throat without hesitation . 
 I would trust no fair word from the good man around the shore of this 
 wild gulf . reflect that , even by give up the treasure at the first 
 demand , we would not be able to save our life . do you understand this , 
 or must I explain ? " 
 " no , you need not   explain , " say Decoud , a little listlessly . " I can see 
 it well enough myself , that the possession of this treasure be very 
 much like a deadly disease for man situate as we be . but it have to be 
 remove from Sulaco , and you be the man for the task . " 
 " I be ; but I can not believe , " say Nostromo , " that its loss would have 
 impoverish Don Carlos Gould very much . there be more wealth in the 
 mountain . I have hear it roll down the shoot on quiet night when 
 I use to ride to Rincon to see a certain girl , after my work at the 
 harbour be do . for year the rich rock have be pour down with a 
 noise like thunder , and the miner say that there be enough at the heart 
 of the mountain to thunder on for year and year to come . and yet , the 
 day before yesterday , we have be fight to save it from the mob , 
 and to - night I be send out with it into this darkness , where there be no 
 wind to get away with ; as if it be the last lot of silver on earth to 
 get bread for the hungry with . ha ! ha ! well , I be go to make it the 
 most famous and desperate affair of my life - wind or no wind . it shall 
 be talk about when the little child be grow up and the grown 
 man be old . aha ! the Monterists must not get hold of it , I be tell , 
 whatever happen to Nostromo the Capataz ; and they shall not have it , I 
 tell you , since it have be tie for safety round Nostromo 's neck . " 
 " I see it , " murmur Decoud . he see , indeed , that his companion have his 
 own peculiar view of this enterprise . 
 Nostromo interrupt his reflection upon the way man 's quality be 
 make use of , without any fundamental knowledge of their nature , by the 
 proposal they should slip the long oar out and sweep the light in 
 the direction of the Isabels . it would not   do for daylight to reveal 
 the treasure float within a mile or so of the harbour entrance . the 
 denser the darkness generally , the smart be the puff of wind on 
 which he have reckon to make his way ; but tonight the gulf , under its 
 poncho of cloud , remain breathless , as if dead rather than asleep . 
 Don Martin 's soft hand suffer cruelly , tug at the thick handle of 
 the enormous oar . he stick to it manfully , set his tooth . he , too , 
 be in the toil of an imaginative existence , and that strange work of 
 pull a light seem to belong naturally to the inception of a new 
 state , acquire an ideal meaning from his love for Antonia . for all 
 their effort , the heavily laden lighter hardly move . Nostromo could 
 be hear swear to himself between the regular splash of the sweep . 
 " we be make a crooked path , " he mutter to himself . " I wish I could 
 see the island . " 
 in his unskilfulness Don Martin over - exert himself . now and then a 
 sort of muscular faintness would run from the tip of his ache finger 
 through every fibre of his body , and pass off in a flush of heat . he have 
 fight , talk , suffer mentally and physically , exert his mind and 
 body for the last forty - eight hour without intermission . he have have no 
 rest , very little food , no pause in the stress of his thought and his 
 feeling . even his love for Antonia , whence he draw his strength and 
 his inspiration , have reach the point of tragic tension during their 
 hurried interview by Don Jose 's bedside . and now , suddenly , he be 
 throw out of all this into a dark gulf , whose very gloom , silence , and 
 breathless peace add a torment to the necessity for physical exertion . 
 he imagine the light sinking to the bottom with an extraordinary 
 shudder of delight . " I be on the verge of delirium , " he think . he 
 master the trembling of all his limb , of his breast , the inward 
 trembling of all his body exhaust of its nervous force . 
 " shall we rest , Capataz ? " he propose in a careless tone . " there be 
 many hour of night yet before we . " 
 " true . it be but a mile or so , I suppose . rest your arm , senor , if that 
 be what you mean . you will find no other sort of rest , I can promise 
 you , since you let yourself be bind to this treasure whose loss would 
 make no poor man poor . no , senor ; there be no rest till we find a 
 north - bind steamer , or else some ship find we drift about stretch 
 out dead upon the Englishman 's silver . or rather - no ; por Dios ! I shall 
 cut down the gunwale with the axe right to the water 's edge before 
 thirst and hunger rob I of my strength . by all the saint and devil 
 I shall let the sea have the treasure rather than give it up to any 
 stranger . since it be the good pleasure of the Caballeros to send I 
 off on such an errand , they shall learn I be just the man they take I 
 for . " 
 Decoud lie on the silver box pant . all his active sensation and 
 feeling from as far back as he could remember seem to he the maddest 
 of dream . even his passionate devotion to Antonia into which he have 
 work himself up out of the depth of his scepticism have lose all 
 appearance of reality . for a moment he be the prey of an extremely 
 languid but not unpleasant indifference . 
 " I be sure they do not   mean you to take such a desperate view of this 
 affair , " he say . 
 " what be it , then ? a joke ? " snarl the man , who on the pay - sheet of 
 the O.S.N. Company 's establishment in Sulaco be describe as " Foreman 
 of the wharf " against the figure of his wage . " be it for a joke they 
 wake I up from my sleep after two day of street fighting to make I 
 stake my life upon a bad card ? everybody know , too , that I be not a 
 lucky gambler . " 
 " yes , everybody know of your good luck with woman , Capataz , " Decoud 
 propitiate his companion in a weary drawl . 
 " look here , senor , " Nostromo go on . " I never even remonstrate about 
 this affair . directly I hear what be want I see what a desperate 
 affair it must be , and I make up my mind to see it out . every minute be 
 of importance . I have to wait for you first . then , when we arrive at 
 the Italia Una , old Giorgio shout to I to go for the english doctor . 
 later on , that poor die woman want to see I , as you know . Senor , 
 I be reluctant to go . I feel already this cursed silver grow heavy 
 upon my back , and I be afraid that , know herself to be die , she 
 would ask I to ride off again for a priest . Father Corbelan , who be 
 fearless , would have come at a word ; but Father Corbelan be far away , 
 safe with the band of Hernandez , and the populace , that would have like 
 to tear he to piece , be much incense against the priest . not 
 a single fat padre would have consent to put his head out of his 
 hiding - place to - night to save a christian soul , except , perhaps , under 
 my protection . that be in her mind . I pretend I do not believe she 
 be go to die . Senor , I refuse to fetch a priest for a die 
 woman . . . . " 
 Decoud be hear to stir . 
 " you do , Capataz ! " he exclaim . his tone change . " well , you know - it 
 be rather fine . " 
 " you do not believe in priest , Don Martin ? neither do I. what be the 
 use of waste time ? but she - she believe in they . the thing stick in 
 my throat . she may be dead already , and here we be float helpless 
 with no wind at all . curse on all superstition . she die think I 
 deprive she of Paradise , I suppose . it shall be the most desperate 
 affair of my life . " 
 Decoud remain lose in reflection . he try to analyze the sensation 
 awake by what he have be tell . the voice of the Capataz be hear 
 again : 
 " now , Don Martin , let we take up the sweep and try to find the Isabels . 
 it be either that or sink the light if the day overtake we . we 
 must not forget that the steamer from Esmeralda with the soldier may be 
 come along . we will pull straight on now . I have discover a bit of a 
 candle here , and we must take the risk of a small light to make a course 
 by the boat compass . there be not enough wind to blow it out - may the 
 curse of Heaven fall upon this blind gulf ! " 
 a small flame appear burn quite straight . it show fragmentarily 
 the stout rib and planking in the hollow , empty part of the light . 
 Decoud could see Nostromo stand up to pull . he see he as high as the 
 red sash on his waist , with a gleam of a white - handle revolver and the 
 wooden haft of a long knife protrude on his left side . Decoud nerve 
 himself for the effort of rowing . certainly there be not enough wind to 
 blow the candle out , but its flame sway a little to the slow movement 
 of the heavy boat . it be so big that with their utmost effort 
 they could not move it quick than about a mile an hour . this be 
 sufficient , however , to sweep they amongst the Isabels long before 
 daylight come . there be a good six hour of darkness before they , and 
 the distance from the harbour to the Great Isabel do not exceed two 
 mile . Decoud put this heavy toil to the account of the Capataz 's 
 impatience . sometimes they pause , and then strain their ear to hear 
 the boat from Esmeralda . in this perfect quietness a steamer moving 
 would have be hear from far off . as to see anything it be out of 
 the question . they could not see each other . even the light 's sail , 
 which remain set , be invisible . very often they rest . 
 " Caramba ! " say Nostromo , suddenly , during one of those interval when 
 they loll idly against the heavy handle of the sweep . " what be it ? 
 be you distressed , Don Martin ? " 
 Decoud assure he that he be not distressed in the least . Nostromo 
 for a time keep perfectly still , and then in a whisper invite Martin to 
 come aft . 
 with his lip touch Decoud 's ear he declare his belief that there 
 be somebody else besides themselves upon the light . twice now he have 
 hear the sound of stifle sobbing . 
 " Senor , " he whisper with awed wonder , " I be certain that there be 
 somebody weep in this light . " 
 Decoud have hear nothing . he express his incredulity . however , it be 
 easy to ascertain the truth of the matter . 
 " it be most amazing , " mutter Nostromo . " could anybody have conceal 
 himself on board while the light be lie alongside the wharf ? " 
 " and you say it be like sob ? " ask Decoud , lower his voice , 
 too . " if he be weep , whoever he be he can not be very dangerous . " 
 clamber over the precious pile in the middle , they crouch low on 
 the foreside of the mast and grope under the half - deck . right forward , 
 in the narrow part , their hand come upon the limb of a man , who 
 remain as silent as death . too startle themselves to make a sound , 
 they drag he aft by one arm and the collar of his coat . he be 
 limp - lifeless . 
 the light of the bit of candle fall upon a round , hook - nosed face with 
 black moustache and little side - whisker . he be extremely dirty . a 
 greasy growth of beard be sprout on the shaven part of the cheek . 
 the thick lip be slightly part , but the eye remain closed . 
 Decoud , to his immense astonishment , recognize Senor Hirsch , the hide 
 merchant from Esmeralda . Nostromo , too , have recognize he . and they 
 gaze at each other across the body , lie with its naked foot high 
 than its head , in an absurd pretence of sleep , faintness , or death . 
 CHAPTER eight 
 for a moment , before this extraordinary find , they forget their own 
 concern and sensation . Senor Hirsch 's sensation as he lie there must 
 have be those of extreme terror . for a long time he refuse to give 
 a sign of life , till at last Decoud 's objurgation , and , perhaps more , 
 Nostromo 's impatient suggestion that he should be throw overboard , as 
 he seem to be dead , induce he to raise one eyelid first , and then 
 the other . 
 it appear that he have never find a safe opportunity to leave Sulaco . 
 he lodge with Anzani , the universal storekeeper , on the Plaza Mayor . 
 but when the riot break out he have make his escape from his host 's house 
 before daylight , and in such a hurry that he have forget to put on his 
 shoe . he have run out impulsively in his sock , and with his hat in his 
 hand , into the garden of Anzani 's house . Fear give he the necessary 
 agility to climb over several low wall , and afterwards he blunder 
 into the overgrown cloister of the ruin franciscan convent in one of 
 the by - street . he force himself into the midst of matted bush with 
 the recklessness of desperation , and this account for his scratched 
 body and his torn clothing . he lie hide there all day , his tongue 
 cleave to the roof of his mouth with all the intensity of thirst 
 engender by heat and fear . three time different band of man invade 
 the place with shout and imprecation , look for Father Corbelan ; but 
 towards the evening , still lie on his face in the bush , he think 
 he would die from the fear of silence . he be not very clear as to what 
 have induce he to leave the place , but evidently he have get out 
 and slunk successfully out of town along the deserted back lane . he 
 wander in the darkness near the railway , so madden by apprehension 
 that he dare not even approach the fire of the picket of italian 
 workman guard the line . he have a vague idea evidently of find 
 refuge in the railway yard , but the dog rush upon he , barking ; man 
 begin to shout ; a shot be fire at random . he flee away from the gate . 
 by the mere accident , as it happen , he take the direction of the 
 O.S.N. Company 's office . twice he stumble upon the body of man 
 kill during the day . but everything live frighten he much more . 
 he crouch , crept , crawl , make dash , guide by a sort of animal 
 instinct , keep away from every light and from every sound of voice . 
 his idea be to throw himself at the foot of Captain Mitchell and 
 beg for shelter in the Company 's office . it be all dark there as 
 he approach on his hand and knee , but suddenly someone on guard 
 challenge loudly , " Quien vive ? " there be more dead man lie about , 
 and he flatten himself down at once by the side of a cold corpse . he 
 hear a voice say , " here be one of those wound rascal crawl 
 about . shall I go and finish he ? " and another voice object that it 
 be not safe to go out without a lantern upon such an errand ; perhaps it 
 be only some negro Liberal look for a chance to stick a knife into 
 the stomach of an honest man . Hirsch do not   stay to hear any more , but 
 crawl away to the end of the wharf , hide himself amongst a lot of 
 empty cask . after a while some people come along , talk , and with 
 glow cigarette . he do not stop to ask himself whether they would be 
 likely to do he any harm , but bolt incontinently along the jetty , 
 see a light lying moor at the end , and throw himself into it . in his 
 desire to find cover he creep right forward under the half - deck , and he 
 have remain there more dead than alive , suffer agony of hunger 
 and thirst , and almost faint with terror , when he hear numerous 
 footstep and the voice of the Europeans who come in a body escort 
 the wagonload of treasure , push along the rail by a squad of 
 Cargadores . he understand perfectly what be be do from the talk , 
 but do not disclose his presence from the fear that he would not 
 be allow to remain . his only idea at the time , overpower and 
 masterful , be to get away from this terrible Sulaco . and now he 
 regret it very much . he have hear Nostromo talk to Decoud , and wish 
 himself back on shore . he do not desire to be involve in any desperate 
 affair - in a situation where one could not run away . the involuntary 
 groan of his anguished spirit have betray he to the sharp ear of the 
 Capataz . 
 they have prop he up in a sit posture against the side of the 
 light , and he go on with the moan account of his adventure till 
 his voice break , his head fall forward . " Water , " he whisper , with 
 difficulty . Decoud hold one of the can to his lip . he revive after 
 an extraordinarily short time , and scramble up to his foot wildly . 
 Nostromo , in an angry and threatening voice , order he forward . Hirsch 
 be one of those man whom fear lash like a whip , and he must have 
 have an appalling idea of the Capataz 's ferocity . he display an 
 extraordinary agility in disappear forward into the darkness . they 
 hear he get over the tarpaulin ; then there be the sound of a 
 heavy fall , follow by a weary sigh . afterwards all be still in 
 the fore - part of the light , as though he have kill himself in his 
 headlong tumble . Nostromo shout in a menacing voice - 
 " lie still there ! do not move a limb . if I hear as much as a loud breath 
 from you I shall come over there and put a bullet through your head . " 
 the mere presence of a coward , however passive , bring an element of 
 treachery into a dangerous situation . Nostromo 's nervous impatience 
 pass into gloomy thoughtfulness . Decoud , in an undertone , as if 
 speak to himself , remark that , after all , this bizarre event make 
 no great difference . he could not conceive what harm the man could 
 do . at most he would be in the way , like an inanimate and useless 
 object - like a block of wood , for instance . 
 " I would think twice before get rid of a piece of wood , " say 
 Nostromo , calmly . " something may happen unexpectedly where you could 
 make use of it . but in an affair like ours a man like this ought to be 
 throw overboard . even if he be as brave as a lion we would not want 
 he here . we be not run away for our life . Senor , there be no harm 
 in a brave man try to save himself with ingenuity and courage ; but 
 you have hear his tale , Don Martin . his be here be a miracle of 
 fear - " Nostromo pause . " there be no room for fear in this light , " he 
 add through his tooth . 
 Decoud have no answer to make . it be not a position for argument , for a 
 display of scruple or feeling . there be a thousand way in which 
 a panic - stricken man could make himself dangerous . it be evident 
 that Hirsch could not be speak to , reason with , or persuade into a 
 rational line of conduct . the story of his own escape demonstrate that 
 clearly enough . Decoud think that it be a thousand pity the wretch 
 have not die of fright . nature , who have make he what he be , seem to 
 have calculate cruelly how much he could bear in the way of atrocious 
 anguish without actually expire . some compassion be due to so much 
 terror . Decoud , though imaginative enough for sympathy , resolve not 
 to interfere with any action that Nostromo would take . but Nostromo do 
 nothing . and the fate of Senor Hirsch remain suspend in the darkness 
 of the gulf at the mercy of event which could not be foresee . 
 the Capataz , extend his hand , put out the candle suddenly . it be to 
 Decoud as if his companion have destroy , by a single touch , the world 
 of affair , of love , of revolution , where his complacent superiority 
 analyze fearlessly all motif and all passion , include his own . 
 he gasp a little . Decoud be affect by the novelty of his position . 
 intellectually self - confident , he suffer from be deprive of the 
 only weapon he could use with effect . no intelligence could penetrate 
 the darkness of the Placid Gulf . there remain only one thing he be 
 certain of , and that be the overweening vanity of his companion . it be 
 direct , uncomplicated , naive , and effectual . Decoud , who have be 
 make use of he , have try to understand his man thoroughly . he 
 have discover a complete singleness of motive behind the varied 
 manifestation of a consistent character . this be why the man remain 
 so astonishingly simple in the jealous greatness of his conceit . and now 
 there be a complication . it be evident that he resent have be 
 give a task in which there be so many chance of failure . " I wonder , " 
 think Decoud , " how he would behave if I be not here . " 
 he hear Nostromo mutter again , " no ! there be no room for fear on this 
 light . courage itself do not seem good enough . I have a good eye and 
 a steady hand ; no man can say he ever see I tired or uncertain what to 
 do ; but por Dios , Don Martin , I have be send out into this black calm 
 on a business where neither a good eye , nor a steady hand , nor judgment 
 be any use . . . . " he swear a string of oath in spanish and italian 
 under his breath . " nothing but sheer desperation will do for this 
 affair . " 
 these word be in strange contrast to the prevail peace - to 
 this almost solid stillness of the gulf . a shower fall with an abrupt 
 whispering sound all round the boat , and Decoud take off his hat , and , 
 let his head get wet , feel greatly refresh . presently a steady 
 little draught of air caress his cheek . the light begin to move , 
 but the shower distance it . the drop cease to fall upon his head and 
 hand , the whispering die out in the distance . Nostromo emit a grunt 
 of satisfaction , and grasp the tiller , chirrup softly , as sailor 
 do , to encourage the wind . never for the last three day have Decoud feel 
 less the need for what the Capataz would call desperation . 
 " I fancy I hear another shower on the water , " he observe in a tone of 
 quiet content . " I hope it will catch we up . " 
 Nostromo cease chirrup at once . " you hear another shower ? " he say , 
 doubtfully . a sort of thinning of the darkness seem to have take 
 place , and Decoud could see now the outline of his companion 's figure , 
 and even the sail come out of the night like a square block of dense 
 snow . 
 the sound which Decoud have detect come along the water harshly . 
 Nostromo recognize that noise partaking of a hiss and a rustle which 
 spread out on all side of a steamer make her way through a smooth 
 water on a quiet night . it could be nothing else but the capture 
 transport with troop from Esmeralda . she carry no light . the noise 
 of her steaming , grow louder every minute , would stop at time 
 altogether , and then begin again abruptly , and sound startlingly nearer ; 
 as if that invisible vessel , whose position could not be precisely 
 guess , be make straight for the light . meantime , that last keep 
 on sail slowly and noiselessly before a breeze so faint that it be 
 only by lean over the side and feel the water slip through his 
 finger that Decoud convince himself they be move at all . his 
 drowsy feeling have depart . he be glad to know that the light 
 be move . after so much stillness the noise of the steamer seem 
 uproarious and distract . there be a weirdness in not be able to 
 see she . suddenly all be still . she have stop , but so close to they 
 that the steam , blow off , send its rumble vibration right over 
 their head . 
 " they be try to make out where they be , " say Decoud in a whisper . 
 again he lean over and put his finger into the water . " we be move 
 quite smartly , " he inform Nostromo . 
 " we seem to be cross her bow , " say the Capataz in a cautious tone . 
 " but this be a blind game with death . move on be of no use . we must not 
 be see or hear . " 
 his whisper be hoarse with excitement . of all his face there be 
 nothing visible but a gleam of white eyeball . his finger grip 
 Decoud 's shoulder . " that be the only way to save this treasure from this 
 steamer full of soldier . any other would have carry light . but you 
 observe there be not a gleam to show we where she be . " 
 Decoud stand as if paralyze ; only his thought be wildly active . in 
 the space of a second he remember the desolate glance of Antonia as he 
 leave she at the bedside of her father in the gloomy house of Avellanos , 
 with shutter window , but all the door stand open , and desert by 
 all the servant except an old negro at the gate . he remember the 
 Casa Gould on his last visit , the argument , the tone of his voice , 
 the impenetrable attitude of Charles , Mrs. Gould 's face so blanched 
 with anxiety and fatigue that her eye seem to have change colour , 
 appear nearly black by contrast . even whole sentence of the 
 proclamation which he mean to make Barrios issue from his headquarters 
 at Cayta as soon as he get there pass through his mind ; the very germ 
 of the new State , the separationist proclamation which he have try 
 before he leave to read hurriedly to Don Jose , stretch out on his 
 bed under the fix gaze of his daughter . God know whether the 
 old statesman have understand it ; he be unable to speak , but he have 
 certainly lift his arm off the coverlet ; his hand have move as if 
 to make the sign of the cross in the air , a gesture of blessing , of 
 consent . Decoud have that very draft in his pocket , write in pencil 
 on several loose sheet of paper , with the heavily - print heading , 
 " Administration of the San Tome Silver Mine . Sulaco . Republic of 
 Costaguana . " he have write it furiously , snatch page after page 
 on Charles Gould 's table . Mrs. Gould have look several time over 
 his shoulder as he write ; but the Senor Administrador , stand 
 straddle - legged , would not even glance at it when it be finish . he 
 have wave it away firmly . it must have be scorn , and not caution , 
 since he never make a remark about the use of the Administration 's paper 
 for such a compromise document . and that show his disdain , the true 
 english disdain of common prudence , as if everything outside the range 
 of their own thought and feeling be unworthy of serious recognition . 
 Decoud have the time in a second or two to become furiously angry with 
 Charles Gould , and even resentful against Mrs. Gould , in whose care , 
 tacitly it be true , he have leave the safety of Antonia . well perish a 
 thousand time than owe your preservation to such people , he exclaim 
 mentally . the grip of Nostromo 's finger never remove from his 
 shoulder , tighten fiercely , recall he to himself . 
 " the darkness be our friend , " the Capataz murmur into his ear . " I be 
 go to lower the sail , and trust our escape to this black gulf . no 
 eye could make we out lie silent with a naked mast . I will do it 
 now , before this steamer close still more upon we . the faint creak of a 
 block would betray we and the San Tome treasure into the hand of those 
 thief . " 
 he move about as warily as a cat . Decoud hear no sound ; and it be 
 only by the disappearance of the square blotch of darkness that he know 
 the yard have come down , lower as carefully as if it have be make of 
 glass . next moment he hear Nostromo 's quiet breathing by his side . 
 " you have well not move at all from where you be , Don Martin , " advise 
 the Capataz , earnestly . " you might stumble or displace something which 
 would make a noise . the sweep and the punting pole be lie about . 
 move not for your life . Por Dios , Don Martin , " he go on in a keen but 
 friendly whisper , " I be so desperate that if I do not   know your worship 
 to be a man of courage , capable of stand stock still whatever 
 happen , I would drive my knife into your heart . " 
 a deathlike stillness surround the light . it be difficult to 
 believe that there be near a steamer full of man with many pair of 
 eye peer from her bridge for some hint of land in the night . she 
 steam have cease blow off , and she remain stop too far off 
 apparently for any other sound to reach the light . 
 " perhaps you would , Capataz , " Decoud begin in a whisper . " however , you 
 need not trouble . there be other thing than the fear of your knife 
 to keep my heart steady . it shall not betray you . only , have you 
 forget - " 
 " I speak to you openly as to a man as desperate as myself , " explain 
 the Capataz . " the silver must be save from the Monterists . I tell 
 Captain Mitchell three time that I prefer to go alone . I tell Don 
 Carlos Gould , too . it be in the Casa Gould . they have send for I . the 
 lady be there ; and when I try to explain why I do not wish to 
 have you with I , they promise I , both of they , great reward for your 
 safety . a strange way to talk to a man you be send out to an almost 
 certain death . those gentlefolk do not seem to have sense enough to 
 understand what they be give one to do . I tell they I could do 
 nothing for you . you would have be safe with the bandit Hernandez . 
 it would have be possible to ride out of the town with no great risk 
 than a chance shot send after you in the dark . but it be as if they have 
 be deaf . I have to promise I would wait for you under the harbour gate . 
 I do wait . and now because you be a brave man you be as safe as the 
 silver . neither more nor less . " 
 at that moment , as if by way of comment upon Nostromo 's word , the 
 invisible steamer go ahead at half speed only , as could be judge 
 by the leisurely beat of her propeller . the sound shift its place 
 markedly , but without come nearer . it even grow a little more distant 
 right abeam of the light , and then cease again . 
 " they be try for a sight of the Isabels , " mutter Nostromo , " in 
 order to make for the harbour in a straight line and seize the Custom 
 House with the treasure in it . have you ever see the Commandant of 
 Esmeralda , Sotillo ? a handsome fellow , with a soft voice . when I first 
 come here I use to see he in the Calle talk to the senorita at the 
 window of the house , and show his white tooth all the time . but 
 one of my Cargadores , who have be a soldier , tell I that he have once 
 order a man to be flay alive in the remote Campo , where he be send 
 recruit amongst the people of the Estancias . it have never enter his 
 head that the Compania have a man capable of baffle his game . " 
 the murmur loquacity of the Capataz disturb Decoud like a hint 
 of weakness . and yet , talkative resolution may be as genuine as grim 
 silence . 
 " Sotillo be not baffle so far , " he say . " have you forget that crazy 
 man forward ? " 
 Nostromo have not forget Senor Hirsch . he reproach himself bitterly 
 for not have visit the light carefully before leave the wharf . 
 he reproach himself for not have stab and fling Hirsch overboard 
 at the very moment of discovery without even look at his face . that 
 would have be consistent with the desperate character of the affair . 
 whatever happen , Sotillo be already baffle . even if that wretch , now 
 as silent as death , do anything to betray the nearness of the light , 
 Sotillo - if Sotillo it be in command of the troop on board - would be 
 still baffle of his plunder . 
 " I have an axe in my hand , " Nostromo whisper , wrathfully , " that in 
 three stroke would cut through the side down to the water 's edge . 
 moreover , each light have a plug in the stern , and I know exactly where 
 it be . I feel it under the sole of my foot . " 
 Decoud recognize the ring of genuine determination in the nervous 
 murmur , the vindictive excitement of the famous Capataz . before the 
 steamer , guide by a shriek or two   for there could be no more than 
 that , Nostromo say , gnash his tooth audibly , could find the light 
 there would be plenty of time to sink this treasure tie up round his 
 neck . 
 the last word he hiss into Decoud 's ear . Decoud say nothing . he be 
 perfectly convinced . the usual characteristic quietness of the man be 
 go . it be not equal to the situation as he conceive it . something 
 deep , something unsuspected by everyone , have come to the surface . 
 Decoud , with careful movement , slip off his overcoat and divest 
 himself of his boot ; he do not consider himself bind in honour to 
 sink with the treasure . his object be to get down to Barrios , in cayta , 
 as the Capataz know very well ; and he , too , mean , in his own way , 
 to put into that attempt all the desperation of which he be capable . 
 Nostromo mutter , " true , true ! you be a politician , senor . rejoin the 
 army , and start another revolution . " he point out , however , that there 
 be a little boat belong to every light fit to carry two man , if 
 not more . Theirs be tow behind . 
 of that Decoud have not be aware . of course , it be too dark to see , 
 and it be only when Nostromo put his hand upon its painter fasten to 
 a cleat in the stern that he experience a full measure of relief . the 
 prospect of find himself in the water and swimming , overwhelm 
 by ignorance and darkness , probably in a circle , till he sink from 
 exhaustion , be revolt . the barren and cruel futility of such an end 
 intimidate his affectation of careless pessimism . in comparison to it , 
 the chance of be leave float in a boat , expose to thirst , hunger , 
 discovery , imprisonment , execution , present itself with an aspect of 
 amenity worth secure even at the cost of some self - contempt . he do 
 not accept Nostromo 's proposal that he should get into the boat at 
 once . " something sudden may overwhelm we , senor , " the Capataz remark 
 promise faithfully , at the same time , to let go the painter at the 
 moment when the necessity become manifest . 
 but Decoud assure he lightly that he do not mean to take to the boat 
 till the very last moment , and that then he mean the Capataz to come 
 along , too . the darkness of the gulf be no long for he the end of 
 all thing . it be part of a live world since , pervade it , failure 
 and death could be feel at your elbow . and at the same time it be a 
 shelter . he exult in its impenetrable obscurity . " like a wall , like a 
 wall , " he mutter to himself . 
 the only thing which check his confidence be the thought of Senor 
 Hirsch . not to have bind and gag he seem to Decoud now the height 
 of improvident folly . as long as the miserable creature have the power to 
 raise a yell he be a constant danger . his abject terror be mute now , 
 but there be no saying from what cause it might suddenly find vent in 
 shriek . 
 this very madness of fear which both Decoud and Nostromo have see in 
 the wild and irrational glance , and in the continuous twitching of 
 his mouth , protect Senor Hirsch from the cruel necessity of this 
 desperate affair . the moment of silence he for ever have pass . as 
 Nostromo remark , in answer to Decoud 's regret , it be too late ! it 
 could not be do without noise , especially in the ignorance of the 
 man 's exact position . wherever he have elect to crouch and tremble , it 
 be too hazardous to go near he . he would begin probably to yell for 
 mercy . it be much well to leave he quite alone since he be keep 
 so still . but to trust to his silence become every moment a great 
 strain upon Decoud 's composure . 
 " I wish , Capataz , you have not let the right moment pass , " he murmur . 
 " what ! to silence he for ever ? I think it good to hear first how he 
 come to be here . it be too strange . who could imagine that it be 
 all an accident ? afterwards , senor , when I see you give he water to 
 drink , I could not do it . not after I have see you hold up the can to 
 his lip as though he be your brother . Senor , that sort of necessity 
 must not be think of too long . and yet it would have be no cruelty 
 to take away from he his wretched life . it be nothing but fear . your 
 compassion save he then , Don Martin , and now it be too late . it 
 could not   be do without noise . " 
 in the steamer they be keep a perfect silence , and the stillness 
 be so profound that Decoud feel as if the slight sound conceivable 
 must travel unchecked and audible to the end of the world . what if 
 Hirsch cough or sneeze ? to feel himself at the mercy of such an 
 idiotic contingency be too exasperating to be look upon with irony . 
 Nostromo , too , seem to be get restless . be it possible , he 
 ask himself , that the steamer , find the night too dark altogether , 
 intend to remain stop where she be till daylight ? he begin to 
 think that this , after all , be the real danger . he be afraid that 
 the darkness , which be his protection , would , in the end , cause his 
 undoing . 
 Sotillo , as Nostromo have surmise , be in command on board the 
 transport . the event of the last forty - eight hour in Sulaco be not 
 know to he ; neither be he aware that the telegraphist in Esmeralda 
 have manage to warn his colleague in Sulaco . like a good many officer 
 of the troop garrison the province , Sotillo have be influence 
 in his adoption of the Ribierist cause by the belief that it have the 
 enormous wealth of the Gould Concession on its side . he have be one 
 of the frequenter of the Casa Gould , where he have air his Blanco 
 conviction and his ardour for reform before Don Jose Avellanos , cast 
 frank , honest glance towards Mrs. Gould and Antonia the while . he be 
 know to belong to a good family persecute and impoverish during the 
 tyranny of Guzman Bento . the opinion he express appear eminently 
 natural and proper in a man of his parentage and antecedent . and he 
 be not a deceiver ; it be perfectly natural for he to express elevated 
 sentiment while his whole faculty be take up with what seem then 
 a solid and practical notion - the notion that the husband of Antonia 
 Avellanos would be , naturally , the intimate friend of the Gould 
 Concession . he even point this out to Anzani once , when negotiate 
 the sixth or seventh small loan in the gloomy , damp apartment with 
 enormous iron bar , behind the principal shop in the whole row under the 
 Arcades . he hint to the universal shopkeeper at the excellent term 
 he be on with the emancipate senorita , who be like a sister to the 
 Englishwoman . he would advance one leg and put his arm akimbo , pose 
 for Anzani 's inspection , and fix he with a haughty stare . 
 " look , miserable shopkeeper ! how can a man like I fail with any woman , 
 let alone an emancipate girl live in scandalous freedom ? " he seem 
 to say . 
 his manner in the Casa Gould be , of course , very different - devoid of 
 all truculence , and even slightly mournful . like most of his countryman , 
 he be carry away by the sound of fine word , especially if utter 
 by himself . he have no conviction of any sort upon anything except as to 
 the irresistible power of his personal advantage . but that be so 
 firm that even Decoud 's appearance in Sulaco , and his intimacy with 
 the Goulds and the Avellanos , do not disquiet he . on the contrary , 
 he try to make friend with that rich Costaguanero from Europe in the 
 hope of borrow a large sum by - and - by . the only guide motive of 
 his life be to get money for the satisfaction of his expensive taste , 
 which he indulge recklessly , have no self - control . he imagine 
 himself a master of intrigue , but his corruption be as simple as an 
 animal instinct . at time , in solitude , he have his moment of ferocity , 
 and also on such occasion as , for instance , when alone in a room with 
 Anzani try to get a loan . 
 he have talk himself into the command of the Esmeralda garrison . that 
 small seaport have its importance as the station of the main submarine 
 cable connect the Occidental Provinces with the outer world , and the 
 junction with it of the Sulaco branch . Don Jose Avellanos propose he , 
 and Barrios , with a rude and jeer guffaw , have say , " oh , let Sotillo 
 go . he be a very good man to keep guard over the cable , and the lady 
 of Esmeralda ought to have their turn . " barrio , an indubitably brave 
 man , have no great opinion of Sotillo . 
 it be through the Esmeralda cable alone that the San Tome mine could 
 be keep in constant touch with the great financier , whose tacit approval 
 make the strength of the Ribierist movement . this movement have its 
 adversary even there . Sotillo govern Esmeralda with repressive 
 severity till the adverse course of event upon the distant theatre 
 of civil war force upon he the reflection that , after all , the great 
 silver mine be fat to become the spoil of the victor . but caution 
 be necessary . he begin by assume a dark and mysterious attitude 
 towards the faithful ribierist municipality of Esmeralda . later on , the 
 information that the commandant be hold assembly of officer in 
 the dead of night   which have leak out somehow   cause those gentleman 
 to neglect their civil duty altogether , and remain shut up in their 
 house . suddenly one day all the letter from Sulaco by the overland 
 courier be carry off by a file of soldier from the post office to 
 the Commandancia , without disguise , concealment , or apology . Sotillo have 
 hear through Cayta of the final defeat of Ribiera . 
 this be the first open sign of the change in his conviction . presently 
 notorious democrat , who have be live till then in constant fear of 
 arrest , leg iron , and even flogging , could be observe go in and 
 out at the great door of the Commandancia , where the horse of the 
 orderly doze under their heavy saddle , while the man , in ragged 
 uniform and point straw hat , lounge on a bench , with their naked 
 foot stick out beyond the strip of shade ; and a sentry , in a red baize 
 coat with hole at the elbow , stand at the top of the step glare 
 haughtily at the common people , who uncover their head to he as they 
 pass . 
 Sotillo 's idea do not soar above the care for his personal safety and 
 the chance of plunder the town in his charge , but he fear that such 
 a late adhesion would earn but scant gratitude from the victor . he have 
 believe just a little too long in the power of the San Tome mine . the 
 seize correspondence have confirm his previous information of a 
 large amount of silver ingot lie in the Sulaco Custom House . to gain 
 possession of it would be a clear monterist move ; a sort of service that 
 would have to be reward . with the silver in his hand he could make 
 term for himself and his soldier . he be aware neither of the riot , 
 nor of the President 's escape to Sulaco and the close pursuit lead by 
 Montero 's brother , the guerrillero . the game seem in his own hand . 
 the initial move be the seizure of the cable telegraph office and the 
 securing of the Government steamer lie in the narrow creek which be 
 the harbour of Esmeralda . the last be effect without difficulty by 
 a company of soldier swarm with a rush over the gangway as she 
 lie alongside the quay ; but the lieutenant charge with the duty of 
 arrest the telegraphist halt on the way before the only cafe in 
 Esmeralda , where he distribute some brandy to his man , and refresh 
 himself at the expense of the owner , a known ribierist . the whole party 
 become intoxicate , and proceed on their mission up the street yelling 
 and fire random shot at the window . this little festivity , which 
 might have turn out dangerous to the telegraphist 's life , enable he 
 in the end to send his warning to Sulaco . the lieutenant , staggering 
 upstairs with a draw sabre , be before long kiss he on both 
 cheek in one of those swift change of mood peculiar to a state of 
 drunkenness . he clasp the telegraphist close round the neck , assure 
 he that all the officer of the Esmeralda garrison be go to be 
 make colonel , while tear of happiness stream down his sodden face . 
 thus it come about that the town major , come along later , find the 
 whole party sleep on the stair and in passage , and the telegraphist 
  who scorn this chance of escape   very busy click the key of the 
 transmitter . the major lead he away bareheade , with his hand tie 
 behind his back , but conceal the truth from Sotillo , who remain in 
 ignorance of the warning despatch to Sulaco . 
 the colonel be not the man to let any sort of darkness stand in the way 
 of the plan surprise . it appear to he a dead certainty ; his heart 
 be set upon his object with an ungovernable , childlike impatience . ever 
 since the steamer have round Punta Mala , to enter the deep shadow 
 of the gulf , he have remain on the bridge in a group of officer as 
 excited as himself . distract between the coaxing and menace of 
 Sotillo and his Staff , the miserable commander of the steamer keep she 
 move with as much prudence as they would let he exercise . some of 
 they have be drink heavily , no doubt ; but the prospect of lay 
 hand on so much wealth make they absurdly foolhardy , and , at the same 
 time , extremely anxious . the old major of the battalion , a stupid , 
 suspicious man , who have never be afloat in his life , distinguish 
 himself by put out suddenly the binnacle light , the only one allow 
 on board for the necessity of navigation . he could not understand of 
 what use it could be for find the way . to the vehement protestation 
 of the ship 's captain , he stamp his foot and tap the handle of 
 his sword . " aha ! I have unmask you , " he cry , triumphantly . " you be 
 tear your hair from despair at my acuteness . be I a child to believe 
 that a light in that brass box can show you where the harbour be ? I be 
 an old soldier , I be . I can smell a traitor a league off . you want 
 that gleam to betray our approach to your friend the Englishman . a thing 
 like that show you the way ! what a miserable lie ! Que picardia ! you 
 Sulaco people be all in the pay of those foreigner . you deserve to 
 be run through the body with my sword . " other officer , crowd round , 
 try to calm his indignation , repeat persuasively , " no , no ! this be 
 an appliance of the mariner , major . this be no treachery . " the captain 
 of the transport fling himself face downwards on the bridge , and refuse 
 to rise . " put an end to I at once , " he repeat in a stifle voice . 
 Sotillo have to interfere . 
 the uproar and confusion on the bridge become so great that the helmsman 
 flee from the wheel . he take refuge in the engine - room , and alarm the 
 engineer , who , disregard the threat of the soldier set on guard 
 over they , stop the engine , protest that they would rather be 
 shoot than run the risk of be drown down below . 
 this be the first time Nostromo and Decoud hear the steam stop . 
 after order have be restore , and the binnacle lamp relighte , she go 
 ahead again , pass wide of the light in her search for the Isabels . 
 the group could not be make out , and , at the pitiful entreaty of the 
 captain , Sotillo allow the engine to be stop again to wait for one 
 of those periodical lightening of darkness cause by the shifting of 
 the cloud canopy spread above the water of the gulf . 
 Sotillo , on the bridge , mutter from time to time angrily to the 
 captain . the other , in an apologetic and cringe tone , beg su merce 
 the colonel to take into consideration the limitation put upon human 
 faculty by the darkness of the night . Sotillo swell with rage and 
 impatience . it be the chance of a lifetime . 
 " if your eye be of no more use to you than this , I shall have they put 
 out , " he yell . 
 the captain of the steamer make no answer , for just then the mass of the 
 Great Isabel loom up darkly after a pass shower , then vanish , as 
 if sweep away by a wave of great obscurity precede another downpour . 
 this be enough for he . in the voice of a man come back to life again , 
 he inform Sotillo that in an hour he would be alongside the Sulaco 
 wharf . the ship be put then full speed on the course , and a great 
 bustle of preparation for landing arise among the soldier on her deck . 
 it be hear distinctly by Decoud and Nostromo . the Capataz understand 
 its meaning . they have make out the Isabels , and be go on now in 
 a straight line for Sulaco . he judge that they would pass close ; but 
 believe that lie still like this , with the sail lower , the light 
 could not be see . " no , not even if they rub side with we , " he 
 mutter . 
 the rain begin to fall again ; first like a wet mist , then with a heavy 
 touch , thicken into a smart , perpendicular downpour ; and the hiss and 
 thump of the approach steamer be come extremely near . Decoud , 
 with his eye full of water , and lower head , ask himself how long 
 it would be before she draw past , when unexpectedly he feel a lurch . 
 an inrush of foam break swishing over the stern , simultaneously with 
 a crack of timber and a staggering shock . he have the impression of 
 an angry hand lay hold of the light and drag it along to 
 destruction . the shock , of course , have knock he down , and he find 
 himself roll in a lot of water at the bottom of the light . a 
 violent churning go on alongside ; a strange and amazed voice cry out 
 something above he in the night . he hear a pierce shriek for help 
 from Senor Hirsch . he keep his tooth hard set all the time . it be a 
 collision ! 
 the steamer have strike the light obliquely , heel she over till she 
 be half swamp , start some of her timber , and swing her head 
 parallel to her own course with the force of the blow . the shock of 
 it on board of she be hardly perceptible . all the violence of that 
 collision be , as usual , feel only on board the small craft . even 
 Nostromo himself think that this be perhaps the end of his desperate 
 adventure . he , too , have be fling away from the long tiller , which 
 take charge in the lurch . next moment the steamer would have pass on , 
 leave the light to sink or swim after have shoulder she thus out 
 of her way , and without even get a glimpse of her form , have it not 
 be that , be deeply laden with store and the great number of people 
 on board , her anchor be low enough to hook itself into one of the wire 
 shroud of the light 's mast . for the space of two or three gasp 
 breath that new rope hold against the sudden strain . it be this that 
 give Decoud the sensation of the snatching pull , drag the light 
 away to destruction . the cause of it , of course , be inexplicable to 
 he . the whole thing be so sudden that he have no time to think . but all 
 his sensation be perfectly clear ; he have keep complete possession of 
 himself ; in fact , he be even pleasantly aware of that calmness at the 
 very moment of be pitch head first over the transom , to struggle 
 on his back in a lot of water . Senor Hirsch 's shriek he have hear and 
 recognize while he be regain his foot , always with that mysterious 
 sensation of be drag headlong through the darkness . not a word , 
 not a cry escape he ; he have no time to see anything ; and follow 
 upon the despairing scream for help , the drag motion cease so 
 suddenly that he stagger forward with open arm and fall against the 
 pile of the treasure box . he cling to they instinctively , in the 
 vague apprehension of be fling about again ; and immediately he hear 
 another lot of shriek for help , prolonged and despairing , not near 
 he at all , but unaccountably in the distance , away from the light 
 altogether , as if some spirit in the night be mock at Senor 
 Hirsch 's terror and despair . 
 then all be still - as still as when you wake up in your bed in a dark 
 room from a bizarre and agitated dream . the lighter rock slightly ; the 
 rain be still fall . two groping hand take hold of his bruise side 
 from behind , and the Capataz 's voice whisper , in his ear , " Silence , 
 for your life ! silence ! the steamer have stop . " 
 Decoud listen . the gulf be dumb . he feel the water nearly up to his 
 knee . " be we sink ? " he ask in a faint breath . 
 " I do not   know , " Nostromo breathe back to he . " Senor , make not the 
 slight sound . " 
 Hirsch , when order forward by Nostromo , have not return into his 
 first hiding - place . he have fall near the mast , and have no strength to 
 rise ; moreover , he fear to move . he have give himself up for dead , 
 but not on any rational ground . it be simply a cruel and terrifying 
 feeling . whenever he try to think what would become of he his tooth 
 would start chatter violently . he be too absorb in the utter 
 misery of his fear to take notice of anything . 
 though he be stifle under the lighter 's sail which Nostromo have 
 unwittingly lower on top of he , he do not even dare to put out his 
 head till the very moment of the steam striking . then , indeed , he 
 leap right out , spur on to new miracle of bodily vigour by this 
 new shape of danger . the inrush of water when the lighter heel over 
 unseal his lip . his shriek , " save I ! " be the first distinct warning 
 of the collision for the people on board the steamer . next moment the 
 wire shroud part , and the release anchor sweep over the light 's 
 forecastle . it come against the breast of Senor Hirsch , who simply 
 seize hold of it , without in the least know what it be , but curl 
 his arm and leg upon the part above the fluke with an invincible , 
 unreasonable tenacity . the lighter yaw off wide , and the steamer , 
 move on , carry he away , cling hard , and shout for help . it 
 be some time , however , after the steamer have stop that his position 
 be discover . his sustained yelping for help seem to come from 
 somebody swim in the water . at last a couple of man go over the 
 bow and haul he on board . he be carry straight off to Sotillo on 
 the bridge . his examination confirm the impression that some craft have 
 be run over and sink , but it be impracticable on such a dark night 
 to look for the positive proof of float wreckage . Sotillo be more 
 anxious than ever now to enter the harbour without loss of time ; the 
 idea that he have destroy the principal object of his expedition be 
 too intolerable to be accept . this feeling make the story he have hear 
 appear the more incredible . Senor Hirsch , after be beat a little 
 for tell lie , be thrust into the chartroom . but he be beat only 
 a little . his tale have take the heart out of Sotillo 's Staff , though 
 they all repeat round their chief , " impossible ! impossible ! " with the 
 exception of the old major , who triumph gloomily . 
 " I tell you ; I tell you , " he mumble . " I could smell some treachery , 
 some diableria a league off . " 
 meantime , the steamer have keep on her way towards Sulaco , where only the 
 truth of that matter could be ascertain . Decoud and Nostromo hear the 
 loud churning of her propeller diminish and die out ; and then , with no 
 useless word , busy themselves in make for the Isabels . the last 
 shower have bring with it a gentle but steady breeze . the danger be 
 not over yet , and there be no time for talk . the light be leak 
 like a sieve . they splash in the water at every step . the Capataz put 
 into Decoud 's hand the handle of the pump which be fit at the side 
 aft , and at once , without question or remark , Decoud begin to pump in 
 utter forgetfulness of every desire but that of keep the treasure 
 afloat . Nostromo hoist the sail , fly back to the tiller , pull at 
 the sheet like mad . the short flare of a match   they have be keep 
 dry in a tight tin box , though the man himself be completely wet , 
 disclose to the toil Decoud the eagerness of his face , bent low over 
 the box of the compass , and the attentive stare of his eye . he know 
 now where he be , and he hop to run the sinking lighter ashore in 
 the shallow cove where the high , cliff - like end of the Great Isabel be 
 divide in two equal part by a deep and overgrown ravine . 
 Decoud pump without intermission . Nostromo steer without relax 
 for a second the intense , peering effort of his stare . each of they be 
 as if utterly alone with his task . it do not occur to they to speak . 
 there be nothing in common between they but the knowledge that the 
 damage light must be slowly but surely sink . in that knowledge , 
 which be like the crucial test of their desire , they seem to have 
 become completely estranged , as if they have discover in the very shock 
 of the collision that the loss of the light would not mean the same 
 thing to they both . this common danger bring their difference in aim , 
 in view , in character , and in position , into absolute prominence in the 
 private vision of each . there be no bond of conviction , of common 
 idea ; they be merely two adventurer pursue each his own adventure , 
 involve in the same imminence of deadly peril . therefore they have 
 nothing to say to each other . but this peril , this only incontrovertible 
 truth in which they share , seem to act as an inspiration to their 
 mental and bodily power . 
 there be certainly something almost miraculous in the way the Capataz 
 make the cove with nothing but the shadowy hint of the island 's shape 
 and the vague gleam of a small sandy strip for a guide . where the ravine 
 open between the cliff , and a slender , shallow rivulet meander out 
 of the bush to lose itself in the sea , the light be run ashore ; and 
 the two man , with a taciturn , undaunted energy , begin to discharge her 
 precious freight , carry each ox - hide box up the bed of the rivulet 
 beyond the bush to a hollow place which the caving in of the soil have 
 make below the root of a large tree . its big smooth trunk lean like 
 a fall column far over the trickle of water run amongst the loose 
 stone . 
 a couple of year before Nostromo have spend a whole Sunday , all alone , 
 explore the island . he explain this to Decoud after their task be 
 do , and they sit , weary in every limb , with their leg hang down 
 the low bank , and their back against the tree , like a pair of blind 
 man aware of each other and their surrounding by some indefinable sixth 
 sense . 
 " yes , " Nostromo repeat , " I never forget a place I have carefully 
 look at once . " he speak slowly , almost lazily , as if there have be a 
 whole leisurely life before he , instead of the scanty two hour before 
 daylight . the existence of the treasure , barely conceal in this 
 improbable spot , lay a burden of secrecy upon every contemplated step , 
 upon every intention and plan of future conduct . he feel the partial 
 failure of this desperate affair entrust to the great reputation 
 he have know how to make for himself . however , it be also a partial 
 success . his vanity be half appease . his nervous irritation have 
 subside . 
 " you never know what may be of use , " he pursue with his usual quietness 
 of tone and manner . " I spend a whole miserable Sunday in explore this 
 crumb of land . " 
 " a misanthropic sort of occupation , " mutter Decoud , viciously . " you 
 have no money , I suppose , to gamble with , and to fle about amongst the 
 girl in your usual haunt , Capataz . " 
 " e vero ! " exclaim the Capataz , surprise into the use of his native 
 tongue by so much perspicacity . " I have not ! therefore I do not want 
 to go amongst those beggarly people accustomed to my generosity . it be 
 look for from the Capataz of the Cargadores , who be the rich man , 
 and , as it be , the Caballeros amongst the common people . I do not   care 
 for card but as a pastime ; and as to those girl that boast of have 
 open their door to my knock , you know I would not   look at any one of 
 they twice except for what the people would say . they be queer , the 
 good people of Sulaco , and I have get much useful information simply by 
 listen patiently to the talk of the woman that everybody believe 
 I be in love with . poor Teresa could never understand that . on that 
 particular Sunday , senor , she scold so that I go out of the house 
 swearing that I would never darken their door again unless to fetch 
 away my hammock and my chest of clothe . Senor , there be nothing more 
 exasperating than to hear a woman you respect rail against your good 
 reputation when you have not a single brass coin in your pocket . I 
 untie one of the small boat and pull myself out of the harbour with 
 nothing but three cigar in my pocket to help I spend the day on this 
 island . but the water of this rivulet you hear under your foot be cool 
 and sweet and good , senor , both before and after a smoke . " he be silent 
 for a while , then add reflectively , " that be the first Sunday after 
 I bring down the white - whisker English rico all the way down the 
 mountain from the Paramo on the top of the Entrada Pass - and in the 
 coach , too ! no coach have go up or down that mountain road within the 
 memory of man , senor , till I bring this one down in charge of fifty 
 peon work like one man with rope , pickax , and pole under my 
 direction . that be the rich Englishman who , as people say , pay for the 
 making of this railway . he be very pleased with I . but my wage be 
 not due till the end of the month . " 
 he slide down the bank suddenly . Decoud hear the splash of his foot in 
 the brook and follow his footstep down the ravine . his form be lose 
 among the bush till he have reach the strip of sand under the cliff . 
 as often happen in the gulf when the shower during the first part 
 of the night have be frequent and heavy , the darkness have thin 
 considerably towards the morning though there be no sign of daylight 
 as yet . 
 the cargo - light , relieve of its precious burden , rock feebly , 
 half - afloat , with her fore - foot on the sand . a long rope stretch 
 away like a black cotton thread across the strip of white beach to 
 the grapnel Nostromo have carry ashore and hook to the stem of a 
 tree - like shrub in the very opening of the ravine . 
 there be nothing for Decoud but to remain on the island . he receive 
 from Nostromo 's hand whatever food the foresight of Captain Mitchell 
 have put on board the light and deposit it temporarily in the little 
 dinghy which on their arrival they have haul up out of sight amongst 
 the bush . it be to be leave with he . the island be to be a 
 hiding - place , not a prison ; he could pull out to a pass ship . the 
 O.S.N. Company 's mail boat pass close to the island when go into 
 Sulaco from the north . but the Minerva , carry off the ex - president , 
 have take the news up north of the disturbance in Sulaco . it be 
 possible that the next steamer down would get instruction to miss the 
 port altogether since the town , as far as the Minerva 's officer know , 
 be for the time be in the hand of the rabble . this would mean that 
 there would be no steamer for a month , as far as the mail service go ; 
 but Decoud have to take his chance of that . the island be his only 
 shelter from the proscription hang over his head . the Capataz be , 
 of course , go back . the unloaded lighter leak much less , and he 
 think that she would keep afloat as far as the harbour . 
 he pass to Decoud , stand knee - deep alongside , one of the two spade 
 which belong to the equipment of each light for use when ballast 
 ship . by work with it carefully as soon as there be daylight enough 
 to see , Decoud could loosen a mass of earth and stone overhang the 
 cavity in which they have deposit the treasure , so that it would look 
 as if it have fall naturally . it would cover up not only the cavity , 
 but even all trace of their work , the footstep , the displace stone , 
 and even the broken bush . 
 " besides , who would think of look either for you or the treasure 
 here ? " Nostromo continue , as if he could not tear himself away from the 
 spot . " nobody be ever likely to come here . what could any man want 
 with this piece of earth as long as there be room for his foot on the 
 mainland ! the people in this country be not curious . there be even 
 no fisherman here to intrude upon your worship . all the fishing that 
 be do in the gulf go on near Zapiga , over there . Senor , if you be 
 force to leave this island before anything can be arrange for you , do 
 not try to make for Zapiga . it be a settlement of thief and matrero , 
 where they would cut your throat promptly for the sake of your gold 
 watch and chain . and , senor , think twice before confide in any one 
 whatever ; even in the officer of the Company 's steamer , if you ever 
 get on board one . Honesty alone be not enough for security . you must 
 look to discretion and prudence in a man . and always remember , senor , 
 before you open your lip for a confidence , that this treasure may be 
 leave safely here for hundred of year . time be on its side , senor . and 
 silver be an incorruptible metal that can be trust to keep its value 
 for ever . . . . an incorruptible metal , " he repeat , as if the idea have 
 give he a profound pleasure . 
 " as some man be say to be , " Decoud pronounce , inscrutably , while 
 the Capataz , who busy himself in bale out the light with a wooden 
 bucket , go on throw the water over the side with a regular splash . 
 Decoud , incorrigible in his scepticism , reflect , not cynically , but 
 with general satisfaction , that this man be make incorruptible by his 
 enormous vanity , that fine form of egoism which can take on the aspect 
 of every virtue . 
 Nostromo cease baling , and , as if strike with a sudden thought , drop 
 the bucket with a clatter into the light . 
 " have you any message ? " he ask in a lowered voice . " remember , I shall 
 be ask question . " 
 " you must find the hopeful word that ought to be speak to the people 
 in town . I trust for that your intelligence and your experience , 
 Capataz . you understand ? " 
 " Si , senor . . . . for the lady . " 
 " yes , yes , " say Decoud , hastily . " your wonderful reputation will make 
 they attach great value to your word ; therefore be careful what you 
 say . I be look forward , " he continue , feel the fatal touch of 
 contempt for himself to which his complex nature be subject , " I be 
 look forward to a glorious and successful ending to my mission . do 
 you hear , Capataz ? use the word glorious and successful when you 
 speak to the senorita . your own mission be accomplish gloriously and 
 successfully . you have indubitably save the silver of the mine . not 
 only this silver , but probably all the silver that shall ever come out 
 of it . " 
 Nostromo detect the ironic tone . " I dare say , Senor Don Martin , " he 
 say , moodily . " there be very few thing that I be not equal to . 
 ask the foreign signori . I , a man of the people , who can not always 
 understand what you mean . but as to this lot which I must leave here , 
 let I tell you that I would believe it in great safety if you have not 
 be with I at all . " 
 an exclamation escape Decoud , and a short pause follow . " shall I go 
 back with you to Sulaco ? " he ask in an angry tone . 
 " shall I strike you dead with my knife where you stand ? " retort 
 Nostromo , contemptuously . " it would be the same thing as take you to 
 Sulaco . Come , senor . your reputation be in your politic , and mine be 
 bind up with the fate of this silver . do you wonder I wish there 
 have be no other man to share my knowledge ? I want no one with I , 
 senor . " 
 " you could not have keep the light afloat without I , " Decoud almost 
 shout . " you would have go to the bottom with she . " 
 " yes , " utter Nostromo , slowly ; " alone . " 
 here be a man , Decoud reflect , that seem as though he would have 
 prefer to die rather than deface the perfect form of his egoism . such 
 a man be safe . in silence he help the Capataz to get the grapnel on 
 board . Nostromo clear the shelve shore with one push of the heavy 
 oar , and Decoud find himself solitary on the beach like a man in a 
 dream . a sudden desire to hear a human voice once more seize upon his 
 heart . the light be hardly distinguishable from the black water upon 
 which she float . 
 " what do you think have become of Hirsch ? " he shout . 
 " knock overboard and drown , " cry Nostromo 's voice confidently out 
 of the black waste of sky and sea around the islet . " keep close in the 
 ravine , senor . I shall try to come out to you in a night or two . " 
 a slight swish rustle show that Nostromo be set the sail . it 
 fill all at once with a sound as of a single loud drum - tap . Decoud 
 go back to the ravine . Nostromo , at the tiller , look back from time 
 to time at the vanish mass of the Great Isabel , which , little by 
 little , merge into the uniform texture of the night . at last , when 
 he turn his head again , he see nothing but a smooth darkness , like a 
 solid wall . 
 then he , too , experience that feeling of solitude which have weigh 
 heavily on Decoud after the light have slip off the shore . but while 
 the man on the island be oppress by a bizarre sense of unreality 
 affect the very ground upon which he walk , the mind of the Capataz 
 of the Cargadores turn alertly to the problem of future conduct . 
 Nostromo 's faculty , work on parallel line , enable he to steer 
 straight , to keep a look - out for Hermosa , near which he have to pass , and 
 to try to imagine what would happen tomorrow in Sulaco . to - morrow , or , 
 as a matter of fact , to - day , since the dawn be not very far , Sotillo 
 would find out in what way the treasure have go . a gang of Cargadores 
 have be employ in load it into a railway truck from the Custom 
 House store - room , and run the truck on to the wharf . there would 
 be arrest make , and certainly before noon Sotillo would know in what 
 manner the silver have leave Sulaco , and who it be that take it out . 
 Nostromo 's intention have be to sail right into the harbour ; but at 
 this thought by a sudden touch of the tiller he throw the light into 
 the wind and check her rapid way . his re - appearance with the very 
 boat would raise suspicion , would cause surmise , would absolutely 
 put Sotillo on the track . he himself would be arrest ; and once in 
 the Calabozo there be no say what they would do to he to make 
 he speak . he trust himself , but he stand up to look round . near by , 
 Hermosa show low its white surface as flat as a table , with the slight 
 run of the sea raise by the breeze washing over its edge noisily . the 
 light must be sink at once . 
 he allow she to drift with her sail aback . there be already a good 
 deal of water in she . he allow she to drift towards the harbour 
 entrance , and , let the tiller swing about , squat down and 
 busy himself in loosen the plug . with that out she would fill very 
 quickly , and every lighter carry a little iron ballast - enough to make 
 she go down when full of water . when he stand up again the noisy wash 
 about the Hermosa sound far away , almost inaudible ; and already he 
 could make out the shape of land about the harbour entrance . this be a 
 desperate affair , and he be a good swimmer . a mile be nothing to he , 
 and he know of an easy place for land just below the earthwork of 
 the old abandon fort . it occur to he with a peculiar fascination 
 that this fort be a good place in which to sleep the day through after 
 so many sleepless night . 
 with one blow of the tiller he unship for the purpose , he knock the 
 plug out , but do not take the trouble to lower the sail . he feel the 
 water well up heavily about his leg before he leap on to the 
 taffrail . there , upright and motionless , in his shirt and trouser only , 
 he stand wait . when he have feel she settle he spring far away with a 
 mighty splash . 
 at once he turn his head . the gloomy , clouded dawn from behind the 
 mountain show he on the smooth water the upper corner of the sail , 
 a dark wet triangle of canvas wave slightly to and fro . he see it 
 vanish , as if jerk under , and then strike out for the shore . 
 PART THIRD the lighthouse 
 CHAPTER one 
 Directly the cargo boat have slip away from the wharf and get lose 
 in the darkness of the harbour the Europeans of Sulaco separate , to 
 prepare for the coming of the Monterist regime , which be approach 
 Sulaco from the mountain , as well as from the sea . 
 this bit of manual work in load the silver be their last concert 
 action . it end the three day of danger , during which , accord to 
 the newspaper press of Europe , their energy have preserve the town 
 from the calamity of popular disorder . at the shore end of the jetty , 
 Captain Mitchell say good - night and turn back . his intention be to 
 walk the plank of the wharf till the steamer from Esmeralda turn up . 
 the engineer of the railway staff , collect their basque and italian 
 workman , march they away to the railway yard , leave the Custom 
 House , so well defend on the first day of the riot , stand open to 
 the four wind of heaven . their man have conduct themselves bravely 
 and faithfully during the famous " three day " of Sulaco . in a great part 
 this faithfulness and that courage have be exercise in self - defence 
 rather than in the cause of those material interest to which Charles 
 Gould have pin his faith . amongst the cry of the mob not the least 
 loud have be the cry of death to foreigner . it be , indeed , a lucky 
 circumstance for Sulaco that the relation of those import workman 
 with the people of the country have be uniformly bad from the first . 
 Doctor Monygham , go to the door of Viola 's kitchen , observe this 
 retreat mark the end of the foreign interference , this withdrawal of 
 the army of material progress from the field of Costaguana revolution . 
 Algarrobe torch carry on the outskirt of the move body send their 
 penetrate aroma into his nostril . their light , sweep along the 
 front of the house , make the letter of the inscription , " Albergo 
 d'ltalia Una , " leap out black from end to end of the long wall . his eye 
 blink in the clear blaze . several young man , mostly fair and tall , 
 shepherd this mob of dark bronze head , surmount by the glint of 
 slant rifle barrel , nod to he familiarly as they go by . the 
 doctor be a well - know character . some of they wonder what he be 
 do there . then , on the flank of their workman they tramp on , 
 follow the line of rail . 
 " withdraw your people from the harbour ? " say the doctor , address 
 himself to the chief engineer of the railway , who have accompany 
 Charles Gould so far on his way to the town , walk by the side of the 
 horse , with his hand on the saddle - bow . they have stop just outside 
 the open door to let the workman cross the road . 
 " as quick as I can . we be not a political faction , " answer the 
 engineer , meaningly . " and we be not go to give our new ruler a 
 handle against the railway . you approve I , Gould ? " 
 " absolutely , " say Charles Gould 's impassive voice , high up and outside 
 the dim parallelogram of light fall on the road through the open 
 door . 
 with Sotillo expect from one side , and Pedro Montero from the other , 
 the engineer - in - chief 's only anxiety now be to avoid a collision with 
 either . Sulaco , for he , be a railway station , a terminus , workshop , 
 a great accumulation of store . as against the mob the railway defend 
 its property , but politically the railway be neutral . he be a brave 
 man ; and in that spirit of neutrality he have carry proposal of truce 
 to the self - appoint chief of the popular party , the deputy fuente 
 and Gamacho . bullet be still fly about when he have cross the 
 Plaza on that mission , wave above his head a white napkin belong to 
 the table linen of the Amarilla Club . 
 he be rather proud of this exploit ; and reflect that the doctor , 
 busy all day with the wound in the patio of the Casa Gould , have 
 not have time to hear the news , he begin a succinct narrative . he have 
 communicate to they the intelligence from the Construction Camp as to 
 Pedro Montero . the brother of the victorious general , he have assure 
 they , could be expect at Sulaco at any time now . this news   as he 
 anticipate , when shout out of the window by Senor Gamacho , induce 
 a rush of the mob along the Campo Road towards Rincon . the two deputy 
 also , after shake hand with he effusively , mount and gallop off 
 to meet the great man . " I have mislead they a little as to the time , " the 
 chief engineer confess . " however hard he rid , he can scarcely get 
 here before the morning . but my object be attain . I have   secure several 
 hour ' peace for the lose party . but I do not tell they anything 
 about Sotillo , for fear they would take it into their head to try 
 to get hold of the harbour again , either to oppose he or welcome 
 he - there be no saying which . there be Gould 's silver , on which rest 
 the remnant of our hope . Decoud 's retreat have to be think of , too . 
 I think the railway have do pretty well by its friend without 
 compromise itself hopelessly . now the party must be leave to 
 themselves . " 
 " Costaguana for the Costaguaneros , " interject the doctor , 
 sardonically . " it be a fine country , and they have raise a fine crop of 
 hate , vengeance , murder , and rapine - those son of the country . " 
 " well , I be one of they , " Charles Gould 's voice sound , calmly , " and 
 I must be go on to see to my own crop of trouble . my wife have drive 
 straight on , doctor ? " 
 " yes . all be quiet on this side . Mrs. Gould have take the two girl 
 with she . " 
 Charles Gould ride on , and the engineer - in - chief follow the doctor 
 indoor . 
 " that man be calmness personify , " he say , appreciatively , drop on 
 a bench , and stretch his well - shape leg in cycling stocking nearly 
 across the doorway . " he must be extremely sure of himself . " 
 " if that be all he be sure of , then he be sure of nothing , " say the 
 doctor . he have perch himself again on the end of the table . he nurse 
 his cheek in the palm of one hand , while the other sustain the 
 elbow . " it be the last thing a man ought to be sure of . " the candle , 
 half - consume and burn dimly with a long wick , light up from below 
 his inclined face , whose expression affect by the draw - in cicatrix 
 in the cheek , have something vaguely unnatural , an exaggerated 
 remorseful bitterness . as he sit there he have the air of meditate upon 
 sinister thing . the engineer - in - chief gaze at he for a time before he 
 protest . 
 " I really do not   see that . for I there seem to be nothing else . 
 however - - " 
 he be a wise man , but he could not quite conceal his contempt for that 
 sort of paradox ; in fact . Dr. Monygham be not like by the Europeans 
 of Sulaco . his outward aspect of an outcast , which he preserve even in 
 Mrs. Gould 's drawing - room , provoke unfavourable criticism . there could 
 be no doubt of his intelligence ; and as he have live for over twenty 
 year in the country , the pessimism of his outlook could not be 
 altogether ignore . but instinctively , in self - defence of their 
 activity and hope , his hearer put it to the account of some hide 
 imperfection in the man 's character . it be know that many year 
 before , when quite young , he have be make by Guzman Bento chief medical 
 officer of the army . not one of the Europeans then in the service 
 of Costaguana have be so much like and trust by the fierce old 
 dictator . 
 afterwards his story be not so clear . it lose itself amongst the 
 innumerable tale of conspiracy and plot against the tyrant as a 
 stream be lose in an arid belt of sandy country before it emerge , 
 diminish and trouble , perhaps , on the other side . the doctor make 
 no secret of it that he have live for year in the wild part of 
 the Republic , wander with almost unknown indian tribe in the great 
 forest of the far interior where the great river have their source . 
 but it be mere aimless wandering ; he have write nothing , collect 
 nothing , bring nothing for science out of the twilight of the forest , 
 which seem to cling to his battered personality limp about Sulaco , 
 where it have drift in casually , only to get strand on the shore of 
 the sea . 
 it be also know that he have live in a state of destitution till the 
 arrival of the Goulds from Europe . Don Carlos and Dona Emilia have take 
 up the mad English doctor , when it become apparent that for all his 
 savage independence he could be tame by kindness . perhaps it be 
 only hunger that have tame he . in year go by he have certainly be 
 acquaint with Charles Gould 's father in Sta . Marta ; and now , no matter 
 what be the dark passage of his history , as the medical officer of 
 the San Tome mine he become a recognize personality . he be recognize , 
 but not unreservedly accept . so much defiant eccentricity and such 
 an outspoken scorn for mankind seem to point to mere recklessness of 
 judgment , the bravado of guilt . besides , since he have become again of 
 some account , vague whisper have be hear that year ago , when fall 
 into disgrace and throw into prison by Guzman Bento at the time of the 
 so - call Great Conspiracy , he have betray some of his good friend 
 amongst the conspirator . nobody pretend to believe that whisper ; the 
 whole story of the Great Conspiracy be hopelessly involved and obscure ; 
 it be admit in Costaguana that there never have be a conspiracy 
 except in the diseased imagination of the Tyrant ; and , therefore , 
 nothing and no one to betray ; though the most distinguish 
 costaguanero have be imprison and execute upon that accusation . the 
 procedure have drag on for year , decimate the well class like 
 a pestilence . the mere expression of sorrow for the fate of execute 
 kinsman have be punish with death . Don Jose Avellanos be perhaps the 
 only one living who know the whole story of those unspeakable cruelty . 
 he have suffer from they himself , and he , with a shrug of the shoulder 
 and a nervous , jerky gesture of the arm , be will not to put away from he , 
 as it be , every allusion to it . but whatever the reason , Dr. Monygham , 
 a personage in the administration of the Gould Concession , treat with 
 reverent awe by the miner , and indulge in his peculiarity by Mrs. 
 Gould , remain somehow outside the pale . 
 it be not from any liking for the doctor that the engineer - in - chief have 
 linger in the inn upon the plain . he like old Viola much well . he 
 have come to look upon the Albergo d'ltalia Una as a dependence of the 
 railway . many of his subordinate have their quarter there . Mrs. Gould 's 
 interest in the family confer upon it a sort of distinction . the 
 engineer - in - chief , with an army of worker under his order , appreciate 
 the moral influence of the old Garibaldino upon his countryman . his 
 austere , old - world Republicanism have a severe , soldier - like standard of 
 faithfulness and duty , as if the world be a battlefield where man have 
 to fight for the sake of universal love and brotherhood , instead of a 
 more or less large share of booty . 
 " poor old chap ! " he say , after he have hear the doctor 's account of 
 Teresa . " he will never be able to keep the place go by himself . I shall 
 be sorry . " 
 " he be quite alone up there , " grunt Doctor Monygham , with a toss of his 
 heavy head towards the narrow staircase . " every live soul have clear 
 out , and Mrs. Gould take the girl away just now . it might not be 
 over - safe for they out here before very long . of course , as a doctor I 
 can do nothing more here ; but she have ask I to stay with old Viola , 
 and as I have no horse to get back to the mine , where I ought to be , I 
 make no difficulty to stay . they can do without I in the town . " 
 " I have a good mind to remain with you , doctor , till we see 
 whether anything happen to - night at the harbour , " declare the 
 engineer - in - chief . " he must not be molest by Sotillo 's soldiery , who 
 may push on as far as this at once . Sotillo use to be very cordial to 
 I at the Goulds ' and at the club . how that man'll ever dare to look any 
 of his friend here in the face I can not   imagine . " 
 " he will no doubt begin by shoot some of they to get over the first 
 awkwardness , " say the doctor . " nothing in this country serve well 
 your military man who have change side than a few summary execution . " 
 he speak with a gloomy positiveness that leave no room for protest . the 
 engineer - in - chief do not attempt any . he simply nod several time 
 regretfully , then say - 
 " I think we shall be able to mount you in the morning , doctor . our peon 
 have recover some of our stampede horse . by rid hard and take 
 a wide circuit by Los Hatos and along the edge of the forest , clear of 
 Rincon altogether , you may hope to reach the San Tome bridge without 
 be interfere with . the mine be just now , to my mind , the safe 
 place for anybody at all compromise . I only wish the railway be as 
 difficult to touch . " 
 " be I compromise ? " Doctor Monygham bring out slowly after a short 
 silence . 
 " the whole Gould Concession be compromise . it could not have remain 
 for ever outside the political life of the country - if those convulsion 
 may be call life . the thing be - can it be touch ? the moment be 
 bind to come when neutrality would become impossible , and Charles Gould 
 understand this well . I believe he be prepare for every extremity . a 
 man of his sort have never contemplate remain indefinitely at the 
 mercy of ignorance and corruption . it be like be a prisoner in a 
 cavern of banditti with the price of your ransom in your pocket , and 
 buy your life from day to day . your mere safety , not your liberty , 
 mind , doctor . I know what I be talk about . the image at which you 
 shrug your shoulder be perfectly correct , especially if you conceive 
 such a prisoner endow with the power of replenish his pocket by 
 mean as remote from the faculty of his captor as if they be magic . 
 you must have understand that as well as I do , doctor . he be in the 
 position of the goose with the golden egg . I broach this matter to 
 he as far back as Sir John 's visit here . the prisoner of stupid and 
 greedy banditti be always at the mercy of the first imbecile ruffian , 
 who may blow out his brain in a fit of temper or for some prospect of 
 an immediate big haul . the tale of kill the goose with the golden 
 egg have not be evolve for nothing out of the wisdom of mankind . it 
 be a story that will never grow old . that be why Charles Gould in his 
 deep , dumb way have countenance the Ribierist Mandate , the first public 
 act that promise he safety on other than venal ground . ribierism have 
 fail , as everything merely rational fail in this country . but Gould 
 remain logical in wish to save this big lot of silver . Decoud 's plan 
 of a counter - revolution may be practicable or not , it may have a 
 chance , or it may not have a chance . with all my experience of this 
 revolutionary continent , I can hardly yet look at their method 
 seriously . Decoud have be read to we his draft of a proclamation , 
 and talk very well for two hour about his plan of action . he have 
 argument which should have appear solid enough if we , member of old , 
 stable political and national organization , be not startle by the 
 mere idea of a new state evolve like this out of the head of a scoff 
 young man flee for his life , with a proclamation in his pocket , to a 
 rough , jeering , half - breed swashbuckler , who in this part of the world be 
 call a general . it sound like a comic fairy tale - and behold , it may 
 come off ; because it be true to the very spirit of the country . " 
 " be the silver go off , then ? " ask the doctor , moodily . 
 the chief engineer pull out his watch . " by Captain Mitchell 's 
 reckoning - and he ought to know - it have be go long enough now to 
 be some three or four mile outside the harbour ; and , as Mitchell say , 
 Nostromo be the sort of seaman to make the good of his opportunity . " 
 here the doctor grunt so heavily that the other change his tone . 
 " you have a poor opinion of that move , doctor ? but why ? Charles Gould 
 have get to play his game out , though he be not the man to formulate his 
 conduct even to himself , perhaps , let alone to other . it may be that 
 the game have be partly suggest to he by Holroyd ; but it accord 
 with his character , too ; and that be why it have be so successful . 
 have not   they come to call he ' El Rey de Sulaco ' in Sta . Marta ? a 
 nickname may be the good record of a success . that be what I call put 
 the face of a joke upon the body of a truth . my dear sir , when I first 
 arrive in Sta . Marta I be strike by the way all those journalist , 
 demagogue , member of Congress , and all those general and judge 
 cringe before a sleepy - eyed advocate without practice simply because he 
 be the plenipotentiary of the Gould Concession . Sir John when he come 
 out be impressed , too . " 
 " a new state , with that plump dandy , Decoud , for the first President , " 
 muse Dr. Monygham , nurse his cheek and swing his leg all the 
 time . 
 " upon my word , and why not ? " the chief engineer retort in an 
 unexpectedly earnest and confidential voice . it be as if something 
 subtle in the air of Costaguana have inoculate he with the local faith 
 in " pronunciamientos . " all at once he begin to talk , like an expert 
 revolutionist , of the instrument ready to hand in the intact army at 
 Cayta , which could be bring back in a few day to Sulaco if only 
 Decoud manage to make his way at once down the coast . for the military 
 chief there be Barrios , who have nothing but a bullet to expect from 
 Montero , his former professional rival and bitter enemy . Barrios 's 
 concurrence be assure . as to his army , it have nothing to expect from 
 Montero either ; not even a month 's pay . from that point of view the 
 existence of the treasure be of enormous importance . the mere knowledge 
 that it have be save from the Monterists would be a strong inducement 
 for the Cayta troop to embrace the cause of the new State . 
 the doctor turn round and contemplate his companion for some time . 
 " this Decoud , I see , be a persuasive young beggar , " he remark at last . 
 " and pray be it for this , then , that Charles Gould have let the whole lot 
 of ingot go out to sea in charge of that Nostromo ? " 
 " Charles Gould , " say the engineer - in - chief , " have say no more about his 
 motive than usual . you know , he do not   talk . but we all here know his 
 motive , and he have only one - the safety of the San Tome mine with the 
 preservation of the Gould Concession in the spirit of his compact with 
 Holroyd . Holroyd be another uncommon man . they understand each other 's 
 imaginative side . one be thirty , the other nearly sixty , and they have 
 be make for each other . to be a millionaire , and such a millionaire 
 as Holroyd , be like be eternally young . the audacity of youth 
 reckon upon what it fancy an unlimited time at its disposal ; but a 
 millionaire have unlimited mean in his hand - which be well . one 's time 
 on earth be an uncertain quantity , but about the long reach of million 
 there be no doubt . the introduction of a pure form of Christianity into 
 this continent be a dream for a youthful enthusiast , and I have be 
 try to explain to you why Holroyd at fifty - eight be like a man on the 
 threshold of life , and well , too . he be not a missionary , but the San 
 Tome mine hold just that for he . I assure you , in sober truth , that he 
 could not manage to keep this out of a strictly business conference upon 
 the finance of Costaguana he have with Sir John a couple of year ago . 
 Sir John mention it with amazement in a letter he write to I here , 
 from San Francisco , when on his way home . upon my word , doctor , thing 
 seem to be worth nothing by what they be in themselves . I begin to 
 believe that the only solid thing about they be the spiritual value 
 which everyone discover in his own form of activity - - " 
 " bah ! " interrupt the doctor , without stop for an instant the idle 
 swing movement of his leg . " self - flattery . food for that vanity 
 which make the world go round . meantime , what do you think be go to 
 happen to the treasure float about the gulf with the great Capataz 
 and the great politician ? " 
 " why be you uneasy about it , doctor ? " 
 " I uneasy ! and what the devil be it to I ? I put no spiritual value into 
 my desire , or my opinion , or my action . they have not enough 
 vastness to give I room for self - flattery . look , for instance , I should 
 certainly have like to ease the last moment of that poor woman . and 
 I can not . it be impossible . have you meet the impossible face to face - or 
 have you , the Napoleon of railway , no such word in your dictionary ? " 
 " be she bind to have a very bad time of it ? " ask the chief engineer , 
 with humane concern . 
 slow , heavy footstep move across the plank above the heavy hard wood 
 beam of the kitchen . then down the narrow opening of the staircase make 
 in the thickness of the wall , and narrow enough to be defend by one 
 man against twenty enemy , come the murmur of two voice , one faint and 
 break , the other deep and gentle answer it , and in its graver tone 
 cover the weak sound . 
 the two man remain still and silent till the murmur cease , then the 
 doctor shrug his shoulder and muttered - 
 " yes , she be bind to . and I could do nothing if I go up now . " 
 a long period of silence above and below ensue . 
 " I fancy , " begin the engineer , in a subdue voice , " that you mistrust 
 Captain Mitchell 's Capataz . " 
 " Mistrust he ! " mutter the doctor through his tooth . " I believe he 
 capable of anything - even of the most absurd fidelity . I be the last 
 person he speak to before he leave the wharf , you know . the poor woman up 
 there want to see he , and I let he go up to she . the dying must not 
 be contradict , you know . she seem then fairly calm and resign , 
 but the scoundrel in those ten minute or so have do or say something 
 which seem to have drive she into despair . you know , " go on 
 the doctor , hesitatingly , " woman be so very unaccountable in every 
 position , and at all time of life , that I think sometimes she be in 
 a way , do not   you see ? in love with he - the Capataz . the rascal have his 
 own charm indubitably , or he would not have make the conquest of all the 
 populace of the town . no , no , I be not absurd . I may have give a wrong 
 name to some strong sentiment for he on her part , to an unreasonable 
 and simple attitude a woman be apt to take up emotionally towards a 
 man . she use to abuse he to I frequently , which , of course , be not 
 inconsistent with my idea . not at all . it look to I as if she be 
 always think of he . he be something important in her life . you 
 know , I have see a lot of those people . whenever I come down from 
 the mine Mrs. Gould use to ask I to keep my eye on they . she like 
 Italians ; she have live a long time in Italy , I believe , and she take 
 a special fancy to that old Garibaldino . a remarkable chap enough . a 
 rugged and dreamy character , live in the republicanism of his 
 young day as if in a cloud . he have encourage much of the Capataz 's 
 confound nonsense - the high - string , exalt old beggar ! " 
 " what sort of nonsense ? " wonder the chief engineer . " I find the 
 Capataz always a very shrewd and sensible fellow , absolutely fearless , 
 and remarkably useful . a perfect handy man . Sir John be greatly 
 impressed by his resourcefulness and attention when he make that 
 overland journey from Sta . Marta . later on , as you might have hear , 
 he render we a service by disclose to the then chief of police 
 the presence in the town of some professional thief , who come from 
 a distance to wreck and rob our monthly pay train . he have certainly 
 organize the lighterage service of the harbour for the O.S.N. Company 
 with great ability . he know how to make himself obey , foreigner 
 though he be . it be true that the Cargadores be stranger here , too , 
 for the most part - immigrant , Islenos . " 
 " his prestige be his fortune , " mutter the doctor , sourly . 
 " the man have prove his trustworthiness up to the hilt on innumerable 
 occasion and in all sort of way , " argue the engineer . " when this 
 question of the silver arise , Captain Mitchell naturally be very warmly 
 of the opinion that his Capataz be the only man fit for the trust . as 
 a sailor , of course , I suppose so . but as a man , do not   you know , Gould , 
 Decoud , and myself judge that it do not   matter in the least who go . 
 any boatman would have do just as well . pray , what could a thief do 
 with such a lot of ingot ? if he run off with they he would have in 
 the end to land somewhere , and how could he conceal his cargo from the 
 knowledge of the people ashore ? we dismiss that consideration from our 
 mind . moreover , Decoud be go . there have be occasion when the 
 Capataz have be more implicitly trust . " 
 " he take a slightly different view , " the doctor say . " I hear he 
 declare in this very room that it would be the most desperate affair of 
 his life . he make a sort of verbal will here in my hearing , appoint 
 old Viola his executor ; and , by Jove ! do you know , he - he be not grow 
 rich by his fidelity to you good people of the railway and the harbour . 
 I suppose he obtain some - how do you say that ? - some spiritual value 
 for his labour , or else I do not   know why the devil he should be 
 faithful to you , Gould , Mitchell , or anybody else . he know this country 
 well . he know , for instance , that Gamacho , the Deputy from Javira , have 
 be nothing else but a ' tramposo ' of the commonest sort , a petty pedlar 
 of the Campo , till he manage to get enough good on credit from Anzani 
 to open a little store in the wild , and get himself elect by the 
 drunken mozos that hang about the Estancias and the poor sort of 
 ranchero who be in his debt . and Gamacho , who to - morrow will be 
 probably one of our high official , be a strange , too - an Isleno . 
 he might have be a Cargador on the O. S. N. wharf have he not   the 
 posadero of Rincon be ready to swear it   murder a pedlar in the wood 
 and steal his pack to begin life on . and do you think that Gamacho , 
 then , would have ever become a hero with the democracy of this place , 
 like our Capataz ? of course not . he be not   half the man . no ; decidedly , I 
 think that Nostromo be a fool . " 
 the doctor 's talk be distasteful to the builder of railway . " it be 
 impossible to argue that point , " he say , philosophically . " each man have 
 his gift . you should have hear Gamacho harangue his friend in the 
 street . he have a howl voice , and he shout like mad , lift his 
 clench fist right above his head , and throw his body half out 
 of the window . at every pause the rabble below yell , ' down with the 
 Oligarchs ! Viva la Libertad ! ' fuente inside look extremely miserable . 
 you know , he be the brother of Jorge Fuentes , who have be Minister of 
 the Interior for six month or so , some few year back . of course , he 
 have no conscience ; but he be a man of birth and education - at one time 
 the director of the Customs of Cayta . that idiot - brute Gamacho fasten 
 himself upon he with his following of the low rabble . his sickly 
 fear of that ruffian be the most rejoicing sight imaginable . " 
 he get up and go to the door to look out towards the harbour . " all 
 quiet , " he say ; " I wonder if Sotillo really mean to turn up here ? " 
 CHAPTER TWO 
 Captain Mitchell , pace the wharf , be ask himself the same 
 question . there be always the doubt whether the warning of the 
 Esmeralda telegraphist - a fragmentary and interrupted message - have be 
 properly understand . however , the good man have make up his mind not 
 to go to bed till daylight , if even then . he imagine himself to have 
 render an enormous service to Charles Gould . when he think of the 
 save silver he rub his hand together with satisfaction . in his 
 simple way he be proud at be a party to this extremely clever 
 expedient . it be he who have give it a practical shape by suggest 
 the possibility of intercept at sea the north - bind steamer . and it 
 be advantageous to his company , too , which would have lose a valuable 
 freight if the treasure have be leave ashore to be confiscate . 
 the pleasure of disappoint the Monterists be also very great . 
 authoritative by temperament and the long habit of command , Captain 
 Mitchell be no democrat . he even go so far as to profess a contempt 
 for parliamentarism itself . " his Excellency Don Vincente Ribiera , " he 
 use to say , " whom I and that fellow of mine , Nostromo , have the honour , 
 sir , and the pleasure of save from a cruel death , defer too much to 
 his Congress . it be a mistake - a distinct mistake , sir . " 
 the guileless old seaman superintend the O.S.N. service imagine that 
 the last three day have exhaust every startling surprise the political 
 life of Costaguana could offer . he use to confess afterwards that the 
 event which follow surpass his imagination . to begin with , Sulaco 
  because of the seizure of the cable and the disorganization of the 
 steam service   remain for a whole fortnight cut off from the rest of 
 the world like a besiege city . 
 " one would not have believe it possible ; but so it be , sir . a full 
 fortnight . " 
 the account of the extraordinary thing that happen during that 
 time , and the powerful emotion he experience , acquire a comic 
 impressiveness from the pompous manner of his personal narrative . he 
 open it always by assure his hearer that he be " in the thick 
 of thing from first to last . " then he would begin by describe the 
 get away of the silver , and his natural anxiety lest " his fellow " in 
 charge of the light should make some mistake . apart from the loss of 
 so much precious metal , the life of Senor Martin Decoud , an agreeable , 
 wealthy , and well - inform young gentleman , would have be jeopardize 
 through his fall into the hand of his political enemy . Captain 
 Mitchell also admit that in his solitary vigil on the wharf he have 
 feel a certain measure of concern for the future of the whole country . 
 " a feeling , sir , " he explain , " perfectly comprehensible in a man 
 properly grateful for the many kindness receive from the good 
 family of merchant and other native gentleman of independent mean , 
 who , barely save by we from the excess of the mob , seem , to my 
 mind 's eye , destine to become the prey in person and fortune of the 
 native soldiery , which , as be well know , behave with regrettable 
 barbarity to the inhabitant during their civil commotion . and then , 
 sir , there be the Goulds , for both of whom , man and wife , I could not 
 but entertain the warm feeling deserve by their hospitality and 
 kindness . I feel , too , the danger of the gentleman of the Amarilla 
 Club , who have make I honorary member , and have treat I with uniform 
 regard and civility , both in my capacity of Consular Agent and as 
 Superintendent of an important Steam Service . Miss Antonia Avellanos , 
 the most beautiful and accomplished young lady whom it have ever be my 
 privilege to speak to , be not a little in my mind , I confess . how the 
 interest of my Company would be affect by the impending change of 
 official claim a large share of my attention , too . in short , sir , 
 I be extremely anxious and very tired , as you may suppose , by the 
 exciting and memorable event in which I have take my little part . the 
 Company 's building contain my residence be within five minute ' 
 walk , with the attraction of some supper and of my hammock   I always 
 take my nightly rest in a hammock , as the most suitable to the climate ; 
 but somehow , sir , though evidently I could do nothing for any one by 
 remain about , I could not tear myself away from that wharf , where the 
 fatigue make I stumble painfully at time . the night be excessively 
 dark - the dark I remember in my life ; so that I begin to think that 
 the arrival of the transport from Esmeralda could not possibly take 
 place before daylight , owe to the difficulty of navigate the gulf . 
 the mosquito bit like fury . we have be infest here with mosquito 
 before the late improvement ; a peculiar harbour brand , sir , renowne 
 for its ferocity . they be like a cloud about my head , and I should not 
 wonder that but for their attack I would have doze off as I walk 
 up and down , and get a heavy fall . I keep on smoking cigar after cigar , 
 more to protect myself from be eat up alive than from any real 
 relish for the weed . then , sir , when perhaps for the twentieth time I 
 be approach my watch to the lighted end in order to see the time , 
 and observe with surprise that it want yet ten minute to midnight , 
 I hear the splash of a ship 's propeller - an unmistakable sound to a 
 sailor 's ear on such a calm night . it be faint indeed , because they 
 be advance with precaution and dead slow , both on account of the 
 darkness and from their desire of not reveal too soon their presence : 
 a very unnecessary care , because , I verily believe , in all the enormous 
 extent of this harbour I be the only live soul about . even the 
 usual staff of watchman and other have be absent from their post for 
 several night owe to the disturbance . I stand stock still , after 
 drop and stamp out my cigar - a circumstance highly agreeable , 
 I should think , to the mosquito , if I may judge from the state of my 
 face next morning . but that be a trifling inconvenience in comparison 
 with the brutal proceeding I become victim of on the part of Sotillo . 
 something utterly inconceivable , sir ; more like the proceeding of 
 a maniac than the action of a sane man , however lose to all sense 
 of honour and decency . but Sotillo be furious at the failure of his 
 thievish scheme . " 
 in this Captain Mitchell be right . Sotillo be indeed infuriate . 
 Captain Mitchell , however , have not be arrest at once ; a vivid 
 curiosity induce he to remain on the wharf   which be nearly four 
 hundred foot long   to see , or rather hear , the whole process of 
 disembarkation . conceal by the railway truck use for the silver , 
 which have be run back afterwards to the shore end of the jetty , 
 Captain Mitchell see the small detachment throw forward , pass by , 
 take different direction upon the plain . meantime , the troop be 
 be land and form into a column , whose head creep up gradually so 
 close to he that he make it out , bar nearly the whole width of 
 the wharf , only a very few yard from he . then the low , shuffle , 
 murmuring , clink sound cease , and the whole mass remain for about 
 an hour motionless and silent , await the return of the scout . on 
 land nothing be to be hear except the deep baying of the mastiff at 
 the railway yard , answer by the faint barking of the cur infest 
 the outer limit of the town . a detached knot of dark shape stand in 
 front of the head of the column . 
 presently the picket at the end of the wharf begin to challenge in 
 undertone single figure approach from the plain . those messenger 
 send back from the scout party fling to their comrade brief 
 sentence and pass on rapidly , become lose in the great motionless 
 mass , to make their report to the Staff . it occur to Captain Mitchell 
 that his position could become disagreeable and perhaps dangerous , when 
 suddenly , at the head of the jetty , there be a shout of command , a 
 bugle call , follow by a stir and a rattling of arm , and a murmuring 
 noise that run right up the column . near by a loud voice direct 
 hurriedly , " push that railway car out of the way ! " at the rush of bare 
 foot to execute the order Captain Mitchell skip back a pace or two ; 
 the car , suddenly impel by many hand , fly away from he along the 
 rail , and before he know what have happen he find himself surround 
 and seize by his arm and the collar of his coat . 
 " we have catch a man hide here , mi teniente ! " cry one of his 
 captor . 
 " hold he on one side till the rearguard come along , " answer the 
 voice . the whole column stream past Captain Mitchell at a run , the 
 thunder noise of their foot die away suddenly on the shore . his 
 captor hold he tightly , disregard his declaration that he be 
 an Englishman and his loud demand to be take at once before their 
 commanding officer . finally he lapse into dignified silence . with a 
 hollow rumble of wheel on the plank a couple of field gun , drag 
 by hand , roll by . then , after a small body of man have march past 
 escort four or five figure which walk in advance , with a jingle 
 of steel scabbard , he feel a tug at his arm , and be order to come 
 along . during the passage from the wharf to the Custom House it be to be 
 fear that Captain Mitchell be subject to certain indignity at 
 the hand of the soldier - such as jerk , thumps on the neck , forcible 
 application of the butt of a rifle to the small of his back . their idea 
 of speed be not in accord with his notion of his dignity . he become 
 flustered , flushed , and helpless . it be as if the world be come to 
 an end . 
 the long building be surround by troop , which be already pile 
 arm by company and prepare to pass the night lie on the ground in 
 their ponchos with their sack under their head . corporal move with 
 swing lantern post sentry all round the wall wherever there 
 be a door or an opening . Sotillo be take his measure to protect his 
 conquest as if it have indeed contain the treasure . his desire to 
 make his fortune at one audacious stroke of genius have overmaster his 
 reasoning faculty . he would not believe in the possibility of failure ; 
 the mere hint of such a thing make his brain reel with rage . every 
 circumstance pointing to it appear incredible . the statement of 
 Hirsch , which be so absolutely fatal to his hope , could by no mean 
 be admit . it be true , too , that Hirsch 's story have be tell so 
 incoherently , with such excessive sign of distraction , that it really 
 look improbable . it be extremely difficult , as the saying be , to make 
 head or tail of it . on the bridge of the steamer , directly after his 
 rescue , Sotillo and his officer , in their impatience and excitement , 
 would not give the wretched man time to collect such few wit as 
 remain to he . he ought to have be quiet , soothe , and reassure , 
 whereas he have be roughly handle , cuff , shaken , and address in 
 menacing tone . his struggle , his wriggle , his attempt to get down on 
 his knee , follow by the most violent effort to break away , as if he 
 mean incontinently to jump overboard , his shriek and shrinking and 
 cower wild glance have fill they first with amazement , then with 
 a doubt of his genuineness , as man be will not to suspect the sincerity of 
 every great passion . his Spanish , too , become so mixed up with German 
 that the well half of his statement remain incomprehensible . he 
 try to propitiate they by call they hochwohlgeboren herren , which 
 in itself sound suspicious . when admonish sternly not to trifle he 
 repeat his entreaty and protestation of loyalty and innocence again 
 in German , obstinately , because he be not aware in what language he be 
 speak . his identity , of course , be perfectly know as an inhabitant 
 of Esmeralda , but this make the matter no clear . as he keep on 
 forget Decoud 's name , mix he up with several other people he have 
 see in the Casa Gould , it look as if they all have be in the light 
 together ; and for a moment Sotillo think that he have drown every 
 prominent ribierist of Sulaco . the improbability of such a thing throw 
 a doubt upon the whole statement . Hirsch be either mad or play a 
 part - pretend fear and distraction on the spur of the moment to 
 cover the truth . Sotillo 's rapacity , excited to the high pitch by the 
 prospect of an immense booty , could believe in nothing adverse . this Jew 
 might have be very much frighten by the accident , but he know where 
 the silver be conceal , and have invent this story , with his jewish 
 cunning , to put he entirely off the track as to what have be do . 
 Sotillo have take up his quarter on the upper floor in a vast apartment 
 with heavy black beam . but there be no ceiling , and the eye lose 
 itself in the darkness under the high pitch of the roof . the thick 
 shutter stand open . on a long table could be see a large inkstand , 
 some stumpy , inky quill pen , and two square wooden box , each hold 
 half a hundred - weight of sand . sheet of grey coarse official paper 
 bestrew the floor . it must have be a room occupy by some high 
 official of the Customs , because a large leathern armchair stand behind 
 the table , with other high - back chair scatter about . a net hammock 
 be swing under one of the beam - for the official 's afternoon siesta , 
 no doubt . a couple of candle stick into tall iron candlestick give a 
 dim reddish light . the colonel 's hat , sword , and revolver lay between 
 they , and a couple of his more trusty officer lounge gloomily against 
 the table . the colonel throw himself into the armchair , and a big negro 
 with a sergeant 's stripe on his ragged sleeve , kneel down , pull 
 off his boot . Sotillo 's ebony moustache contrast violently with the 
 livid colouring of his cheek . his eye be sombre and as if sink very 
 far into his head . he seem exhausted by his perplexity , languid with 
 disappointment ; but when the sentry on the landing thrust his head in to 
 announce the arrival of a prisoner , he revive at once . 
 " let he be bring in , " he shout , fiercely . 
 the door fly open , and Captain Mitchell , bareheade , his waistcoat 
 open , the bow of his tie under his ear , be hustle into the room . 
 Sotillo recognize he at once . he could not have hop for a more 
 precious capture ; here be a man who could tell he , if he choose , 
 everything he wish to know - and directly the problem of how good to 
 make he talk to the point present itself to his mind . the resentment 
 of a foreign nation have no terror for Sotillo . the might of the whole 
 arm Europe would not have protect Captain Mitchell from insult and 
 ill - usage , so well as the quick reflection of Sotillo that this be an 
 Englishman who would most likely turn obstinate under bad treatment , and 
 become quite unmanageable . at all event , the colonel smooth the scowl 
 on his brow . 
 " what ! the excellent Senor Mitchell ! " he cry , in affected dismay . 
 the pretended anger of his swift advance and of his shout , " release 
 the caballero at once , " be so effective that the astounded soldier 
 positively spring away from their prisoner . thus suddenly deprive 
 of forcible support , Captain Mitchell reel as though about to fall . 
 Sotillo take he familiarly under the arm , lead he to a chair , wave his 
 hand at the room . " go out , all of you , " he command . 
 when they have be leave alone he stand look down , irresolute and 
 silent , watch till Captain Mitchell have recover his power of 
 speech . 
 here in his very grasp be one of the man concern in the removal of 
 the silver . Sotillo 's temperament be of that sort that he experience 
 an ardent desire to beat he ; just as formerly when negotiate with 
 difficulty a loan from the cautious Anzani , his finger always itch 
 to take the shopkeeper by the throat . as to Captain Mitchell , the 
 suddenness , unexpectedness , and general inconceivableness of this 
 experience have confuse his thought . moreover , he be physically out of 
 breath . 
 " I have   be knock down three time between this and the wharf , " he 
 gasp out at last . " somebody shall be make to pay for this . " he have 
 certainly stumble more than once , and have be drag along for some 
 distance before he could regain his stride . with his recover breath 
 his indignation seem to madden he . he jump up , crimson , all his 
 white hair bristling , his eye glare vengefully , and shake violently 
 the flap of his ruin waistcoat before the disconcert Sotillo . 
 " look ! those uniformed thief of yours downstairs have rob I of my 
 watch . " 
 the old sailor 's aspect be very threatening . Sotillo see himself cut 
 off from the table on which his sabre and revolver be lie . 
 " I demand restitution and apology , " Mitchell thunder at he , quite 
 beside himself . " from you ! yes , from you ! " 
 for the space of a second or so the colonel stand with a perfectly stony 
 expression of face ; then , as Captain Mitchell fling out an arm towards 
 the table as if to snatch up the revolver , Sotillo , with a yell of 
 alarm , bound to the door and be go in a flash , slam it after 
 he . Surprise calm Captain Mitchell 's fury . behind the closed door 
 Sotillo shout on the landing , and there be a great tumult of foot on 
 the wooden staircase . 
 " disarm he ! bind he ! " the colonel could be hear vociferate . 
 Captain Mitchell have just the time to glance once at the window , with 
 three perpendicular bar of iron each and some twenty foot from the 
 ground , as he well know , before the door fly open and the rush upon he 
 take place . in an incredibly short time he find himself bind with 
 many turn of a hide rope to a high - back chair , so that his head alone 
 remain free . not till then do Sotillo , who have be lean in the 
 doorway trembling visibly , venture again within . the soldier , pick 
 up from the floor the rifle they have drop to grapple with the 
 prisoner , file out of the room . the officer remain lean on their 
 sword and look on . 
 " the watch ! the watch ! " rave the colonel , pace to and fro like a 
 tiger in a cage . " give I that man 's watch . " 
 it be true , that when search for arm in the hall downstairs , before 
 be take into Sotillo 's presence , Captain Mitchell have be relieve 
 of his watch and chain ; but at the colonel 's clamour it be produce 
 quickly enough , a corporal bring it up , carry carefully in the 
 palm of his joined hand . Sotillo snatch it , and push the clench 
 fist from which it dangle close to Captain Mitchell 's face . 
 " now then ! you arrogant Englishman ! you dare to call the soldier of the 
 army thief ! behold your watch . " 
 he flourish his fist as if aim blow at the prisoner 's nose . 
 Captain Mitchell , helpless as a swathe infant , look anxiously at 
 the sixty - guinea gold half - chronometer , present to he year ago by 
 a Committee of Underwriters for save a ship from total loss by fire . 
 Sotillo , too , seem to perceive its valuable appearance . he become 
 silent suddenly , step aside to the table , and begin a careful 
 examination in the light of the candle . he have never see anything so 
 fine . his officer close in and crane their neck behind his back . 
 he become so interested that for an instant he forget his precious 
 prisoner . there be always something childish in the rapacity of the 
 passionate , clear - minded , southern race , want in the misty idealism 
 of the Northerners , who at the small encouragement dream of nothing 
 less than the conquest of the earth . Sotillo be fond of jewel , gold 
 trinket , of personal adornment . after a moment he turn about , and 
 with a commanding gesture make all his officer fall back . he lay down 
 the watch on the table , then , negligently , push his hat over it . 
 " ha ! " he begin , go up very close to the chair . " you dare call my 
 valiant soldier of the Esmeralda regiment , thief . you dare ! what 
 impudence ! you foreigner come here to rob our country of its wealth . 
 you never have enough ! your audacity know no bound . " 
 he look towards the officer , amongst whom there be an approve 
 murmur . the old major be move to declare - 
 " Si , mi colonel . they be all traitor . " 
 " I shall say nothing , " continue Sotillo , fix the motionless and 
 powerless Mitchell with an angry but uneasy stare . " I shall say nothing 
 of your treacherous attempt to get possession of my revolver to shoot I 
 while I be try to treat you with consideration you do not deserve . 
 you have forfeit your life . your only hope be in my clemency . " 
 he watch for the effect of his word , but there be no obvious sign of 
 fear on Captain Mitchell 's face . his white hair be full of dust , 
 which cover also the rest of his helpless person . as if he have hear 
 nothing , he twitch an eyebrow to get rid of a bit of straw which hang 
 amongst the hair . 
 Sotillo advance one leg and put his arm akimbo . " it be you , Mitchell , " 
 he say , emphatically , " who be the thief , not my soldier ! " he point 
 at his prisoner a forefinger with a long , almond - shape nail . " where 
 be the silver of the San Tome mine ? I ask you , Mitchell , where be the 
 silver that be deposit in this Custom House ? answer I that ! you 
 steal it . you be a party to steal it . it be steal from the 
 Government . aha ! you think I do not know what I say ; but I be up to your 
 foreign trick . it be go , the silver ! no ? go in one of your lanchas , 
 you miserable man ! how dare you ? " 
 this time he produce his effect . " how on earth could Sotillo know 
 that ? " think Mitchell . his head , the only part of his body that could 
 move , betray his surprise by a sudden jerk . 
 " ha ! you tremble , " Sotillo shout , suddenly . " it be a conspiracy . it be 
 a crime against the State . do you not know that the silver belong 
 to the Republic till the Government claim be satisfied ? where be it ? 
 where have you hide it , you miserable thief ? " 
 at this question Captain Mitchell 's sink spirit revive . in whatever 
 incomprehensible manner Sotillo have already get his information about 
 the light , he have not capture it . that be clear . in his outraged 
 heart , Captain Mitchell have resolve that nothing would induce he to 
 say a word while he remain so disgracefully bind , but his desire to 
 help the escape of the silver make he depart from this resolution . his 
 wit be very much at work . he detect in Sotillo a certain air of 
 doubt , of irresolution . 
 " that man , " he say to himself , " be not certain of what he advance . " 
 for all his pomposity in social intercourse , Captain Mitchell could meet 
 the reality of life in a resolute and ready spirit . now he have 
 get over the first shock of the abominable treatment he be cool and 
 collect enough . the immense contempt he feel for Sotillo steady he , 
 and he say oracularly , " no doubt it be well conceal by this time . " 
 Sotillo , too , have time to cool down . " Muy bien , Mitchell , " he say in a 
 cold and threatening manner . " but can you produce the Government receipt 
 for the royalty and the Custom House permit of embarkation , hey ? can 
 you ? no . then the silver have be remove illegally , and the guilty 
 shall be make to suffer , unless it be produce within five day from 
 this . " he give order for the prisoner to be unbound and lock up in 
 one of the small room downstairs . he walk about the room , moody and 
 silent , till Captain Mitchell , with each of his arm hold by a couple of 
 man , stand up , shake himself , and stamp his foot . 
 " how do you like to be tie up , Mitchell ? " he ask , derisively . 
 " it be the most incredible , abominable use of power ! " Captain Mitchell 
 declare in a loud voice . " and whatever your purpose , you shall gain 
 nothing from it , I can promise you . " 
 the tall colonel , livid , with his coal - black ringlet and moustache , 
 crouch , as it be , to look into the eye of the short , thick - set , 
 red - faced prisoner with rumpled white hair . 
 " that we shall see . you shall know my power a little well when I tie 
 you up to a potalon outside in the sun for a whole day . " he draw himself 
 up haughtily , and make a sign for Captain Mitchell to be lead away . 
 " what about my watch ? " cry Captain Mitchell , hang back from the 
 effort of the man pull he towards the door . 
 Sotillo turn to his officer . " no ! but only listen to this picaro , 
 caballero , " he pronounce with affected scorn , and be answer by a 
 chorus of derisive laughter . " he demand his watch ! " . . . he run up 
 again to Captain Mitchell , for the desire to relieve his feeling by 
 inflict blow and pain upon this Englishman be very strong within 
 he . " your watch ! you be a prisoner in war time , Mitchell ! in war time ! 
 you have no right and no property ! Caramba ! the very breath in your 
 body belong to I . remember that . " 
 " Bosh ! " say Captain Mitchell , conceal a disagreeable impression . 
 down below , in a great hall , with the earthen floor and with a tall 
 mound throw up by white ant in a corner , the soldier have kindle 
 a small fire with broken chair and table near the arched gateway , 
 through which the faint murmur of the harbour water on the beach could 
 be hear . while Captain Mitchell be be lead down the staircase , an 
 officer pass he , run up to report to Sotillo the capture of more 
 prisoner . a lot of smoke hang about in the vast gloomy place , the 
 fire crackle , and , as if through a haze , Captain Mitchell make out , 
 surround by short soldier with fix bayonet , the head of three 
 tall prisoner - the doctor , the engineer - in - chief , and the white leonine 
 mane of old Viola , who stand half - turn away from the other with his 
 chin on his breast and his arm cross . Mitchell 's astonishment know no 
 bound . he cry out ; the other two exclaim also . but he hurry on , 
 diagonally , across the big cavern - like hall . lot of thought , surmise , 
 hint of caution , and so on , crowd his head to distraction . 
 " be he actually keep you ? " shout the chief engineer , whose single 
 eyeglass glitter in the firelight . 
 an officer from the top of the stair be shout urgently , " bring they 
 all up - all three . " 
 in the clamour of voice and the rattle of arm , Captain Mitchell make 
 himself hear imperfectly : " by heaven ! the fellow have steal my watch . " 
 the engineer - in - chief on the staircase resist the pressure long enough 
 to shout , " what ? what do you say ? " 
 " my chronometer ! " Captain Mitchell yell violently at the very moment 
 of be thrust head foremost through a small door into a sort of cell , 
 perfectly black , and so narrow that he fetch up against the opposite 
 wall . the door have be instantly slam . he know where they have put 
 he . this be the strong room of the Custom House , whence the silver 
 have be remove only a few hour early . it be almost as narrow as 
 a corridor , with a small square aperture , bar by a heavy grating , at 
 the distant end . Captain Mitchell stagger for a few step , then sit 
 down on the earthen floor with his back to the wall . nothing , not even 
 a gleam of light from anywhere , interfere with Captain Mitchell 's 
 meditation . he do some hard but not very extensive thinking . it be 
 not of a gloomy cast . the old sailor , with all his small weakness 
 and absurdity , be constitutionally incapable of entertain for 
 any length of time a fear of his personal safety . it be not so much 
 firmness of soul as the lack of a certain kind of imagination - the kind 
 whose undue development cause intense suffering to Senor Hirsch ; that 
 sort of imagination which add the blind terror of bodily suffer and 
 of death , envisage as an accident to the body alone , strictly - to all 
 the other apprehension on which the sense of one 's existence be base . 
 unfortunately , Captain Mitchell have not much penetration of any kind ; 
 characteristic , illuminate trifle of expression , action , or movement , 
 escape he completely . he be too pompously and innocently aware of 
 his own existence to observe that of other . for instance , he could 
 not believe that Sotillo have be really afraid of he , and this simply 
 because it would never have enter into his head to shoot any one 
 except in the most pressing case of self - defence . anybody could see he 
 be not a murder kind of man , he reflect quite gravely . then 
 why this preposterous and insulting charge ? he ask himself . but his 
 thought mainly cling around the astounding and unanswerable question : 
 how the devil the fellow get to know that the silver have go off in the 
 light ? it be obvious that he have not capture it . and , obviously , he 
 could not have capture it ! in this last conclusion Captain Mitchell 
 be mislead by the assumption draw from his observation of the weather 
 during his long vigil on the wharf . he think that there have be much 
 more wind than usual that night in the gulf ; whereas , as a matter of 
 fact , the reverse be the case . 
 " how in the name of all that be marvellous do that confound fellow get 
 wind of the affair ? " be the first question he ask directly after the 
 bang , clatter , and flash of the open door   which be close again 
 almost before he could lift his drop head   inform he that he have a 
 companion of captivity . Dr. Monygham 's voice stop mutter curse in 
 English and Spanish . 
 " be that you , Mitchell ? " he make answer , surlily . " I strike my forehead 
 against this confound wall with enough force to fall an ox . where be 
 you ? " 
 Captain Mitchell , accustom to the darkness , could make out the doctor 
 stretch out his hand blindly . 
 " I be sit here on the floor . do not   fall over my leg , " Captain 
 Mitchell 's voice announce with great dignity of tone . the doctor , 
 entreat not to walk about in the dark , sink down to the ground , too . 
 the two prisoner of Sotillo , with their head nearly touching , begin to 
 exchange confidence . 
 " yes , " the doctor relate in a low tone to Captain Mitchell 's vehement 
 curiosity , " we have be nab in old Viola 's place . it seem that one 
 of their picket , command by an officer , push as far as the town 
 gate . they have order not to enter , but to bring along every soul they 
 could find on the plain . we have be talk in there with the door 
 open , and no doubt they see the glimmer of our light . they must have 
 be make their approach for some time . the engineer lay himself 
 on a bench in a recess by the fire - place , and I go upstairs to have a 
 look . I have not   hear any sound from there for a long time . Old Viola , 
 as soon as he see I come up , lift his arm for silence . I steal in 
 on tiptoe . by Jove , his wife be lie down and have go to sleep . the 
 woman have actually drop off to sleep ! ' Senor Doctor , ' Viola whisper 
 to I , ' it look as if her oppression be go to get well . ' ' yes , ' 
 I say , very much surprised ; ' your wife be a wonderful woman , Giorgio . ' 
 just then a shot be fire in the kitchen , which make we jump and cower 
 as if at a thunder - clap . it seem that the party of soldier have steal 
 quite close up , and one of they have creep up to the door . he look in , 
 think there be no one there , and , hold his rifle ready , enter 
 quietly . the chief tell I that he have just close his eye for a 
 moment . when he open they , he see the man already in the middle of 
 the room peer into the dark corner . the chief be so startled that , 
 without think , he make one leap from the recess right out in front 
 of the fireplace . the soldier , no less startle , up with his rifle 
 and pull the trigger , deafen and singe the engineer , but in his 
 flurry miss he completely . but , look what happen ! at the noise of 
 the report the sleep woman sit up , as if move by a spring , with a 
 shriek , ' the child , Gian ' Battista ! save the child ! ' I have it in 
 my ear now . it be the true cry of distress I ever hear . I stand as 
 if paralyze , but the old husband run across to the bedside , stretch 
 out his hand . she cling to they ! I could see her eye go glaze ; the 
 old fellow lower she down on the pillow and then look round at I . 
 she be dead ! all this take less than five minute , and then I run down 
 to see what be the matter . it be no use thinking of any resistance . 
 nothing we two could say avail with the officer , so I volunteer to 
 go up with a couple of soldier and fetch down old Viola . he be sit 
 at the foot of the bed , look at his wife 's face , and do not seem to 
 hear what I say ; but after I have pull the sheet over her head , he get 
 up and follow we downstairs quietly , in a sort of thoughtful way . 
 they march we off along the road , leave the door open and the candle 
 burning . the chief engineer strode on without a word , but I look back 
 once or twice at the feeble gleam . after we have go some considerable 
 distance , the Garibaldino , who be walk by my side , suddenly say , ' I 
 have bury many man on battlefield on this continent . the priest talk 
 of consecrated ground ! bah ! all the earth make by God be holy ; but 
 the sea , which know nothing of king and priest and tyrant , be 
 the holiest of all . Doctor ! I should like to bury she in the sea . no 
 mummery , candle , incense , no holy water mumble over by priest . the 
 spirit of liberty be upon the water . ' . . . amazing old man . he be 
 say all this in an undertone as if talk to himself . " 
 " yes , yes , " interrupt Captain Mitchell , impatiently . " poor old chap ! 
 but have you any idea how that ruffian Sotillo obtain his information ? 
 he do not get hold of any of our Cargadores who help with the truck , 
 do he ? but no , it be impossible ! these be pick man we have   have in 
 our boat for these five year , and I pay they myself specially for the 
 job , with instruction to keep out of the way for twenty - four hour at 
 least . I see they with my own eye march on with the Italians to the 
 railway yard . the chief promise to give they ration as long as they 
 want to remain there . " 
 " well , " say the doctor , slowly , " I can tell you that you may 
 say good - bye for ever to your good light , and to the Capataz of 
 Cargadores . " 
 at this , Captain Mitchell scramble up to his foot in the excess of 
 his excitement . the doctor , without give he time to exclaim , state 
 briefly the part play by Hirsch during the night . 
 Captain Mitchell be overcome . " drown ! " he mutter , in a bewilder 
 and appalled whisper . " drown ! " afterwards he keep still , apparently 
 listen , but too absorb in the news of the catastrophe to follow the 
 doctor 's narrative with attention . 
 the doctor have take up an attitude of perfect ignorance , till at last 
 Sotillo be induce to have Hirsch bring in to repeat the whole story , 
 which be get out of he again with the great difficulty , because 
 every moment he would break out into lamentation . at last , Hirsch 
 be lead away , look more dead than alive , and shut up in one of the 
 upstairs room to be close at hand . then the doctor , keep up his 
 character of a man not admit to the inner council of the San Tome 
 Administration , remark that the story sound incredible . of course , 
 he say , he could not   tell what have be the action of the Europeans , as 
 he have be exclusively occupy with his own work in look after the 
 wound , and also in attend Don Jose Avellanos . he have succeed in 
 assume so well a tone of impartial indifference , that Sotillo seem 
 to be completely deceive . till then a show of regular inquiry have 
 be keep up ; one of the officer sit at the table write down the 
 question and the answer , the other , lounge about the room , listen 
 attentively , puff at their long cigar and keep their eye on the 
 doctor . but at that point Sotillo order everybody out . 
 CHAPTER three 
 directly they be alone , the colonel 's severe official manner change . 
 he rise and approach the doctor . his eye shine with rapacity and 
 hope ; he become confidential . " the silver might have be indeed put on 
 board the light , but it be not conceivable that it should have be 
 take out to sea . " the doctor , watch every word , nod slightly , 
 smoke with apparent relish the cigar which Sotillo have offer he 
 as a sign of his friendly intention . the doctor 's manner of cold 
 detachment from the rest of the Europeans lead Sotillo on , till , from 
 conjecture to conjecture , he arrive at hint that in his opinion this 
 be a putup job on the part of Charles Gould , in order to get hold 
 of that immense treasure all to himself . the doctor , observant and 
 self - possess , mutter , " he be very capable of that . " 
 here Captain Mitchell exclaim with amazement , amusement , and 
 indignation , " you say that of Charles Gould ! " Disgust , and even some 
 suspicion , creep into his tone , for to he , too , as to other Europeans , 
 there appear to be something dubious about the doctor 's personality . 
 " what on earth make you say that to this watch - steal scoundrel ? " 
 he ask . " what be the object of an infernal lie of that sort ? that 
 confound pick - pocket be quite capable of believe you . " 
 he snort . for a time the doctor remain silent in the dark . 
 " yes , that be exactly what I do say , " he utter at last , in a tone 
 which would have make it clear enough to a third party that the pause 
 be not of a reluctant but of a reflective character . Captain Mitchell 
 think that he have never hear anything so brazenly impudent in his 
 life . 
 " well , well ! " he mutter to himself , but he have not the heart to voice 
 his thought . they be sweep away by other full of astonishment and 
 regret . a heavy sense of discomfiture crush he : the loss of the 
 silver , the death of Nostromo , which be really quite a blow to his 
 sensibility , because he have become attach to his Capataz as people 
 get attach to their inferior from love of ease and almost unconscious 
 gratitude . and when he think of Decoud be drown , too , his 
 sensibility be almost overcome by this miserable end . what a heavy 
 blow for that poor young woman ! Captain Mitchell do not belong to the 
 specie of crab old bachelor ; on the contrary , he like to see young 
 man pay attention to young woman . it seem to he a natural and 
 proper thing . proper especially . as to sailor , it be different ; it be 
 not their place to marry , he maintain , but it be on moral ground as 
 a matter of self - denial , for , he explain , life on board ship be not 
 fit for a woman even at good , and if you leave she on shore , first of 
 all it be not fair , and next she either suffer from it or do not   care 
 a bit , which , in both case , be bad . he could not   have tell what upset 
 he most - Charles Gould 's immense material loss , the death of Nostromo , 
 which be a heavy loss to himself , or the idea of that beautiful and 
 accomplish young woman be plunge into mourning . 
 " yes , " the doctor , who have be apparently reflect , begin again , " he 
 believe I right enough . I think he would have hug I . ' si , si , ' 
 he say , ' he will write to that partner of his , the rich Americano in 
 San Francisco , that it be all lose . why not ? there be enough to share 
 with many people . ' " 
 " but this be perfectly imbecile ! " cry Captain Mitchell . 
 the doctor remark that Sotillo be imbecile , and that his imbecility 
 be ingenious enough to lead he completely astray . he have help he 
 only but a little way . 
 " I mention , " the doctor say , " in a sort of casual way , that treasure 
 be generally bury in the earth rather than set afloat upon the sea . 
 at this my Sotillo slap his forehead . ' Por Dios , yes , ' he say ; ' they 
 must have bury it on the shore of this harbour somewhere before they 
 sail out . ' " 
 " Heavens and earth ! " mutter Captain Mitchell , " I should not have 
 believe that anybody could be ass enough - " he pause , then go on 
 mournfully : " but what be the good of all this ? it would have be a 
 clever enough lie if the light have be still afloat . it would have 
 keep that inconceivable idiot perhaps from send out the steamer to 
 cruise in the gulf . that be the danger that worry I no end . " Captain 
 Mitchell sigh profoundly . 
 " I have an object , " the doctor pronounce , slowly . 
 " have you ? " mutter Captain Mitchell . " well , that be lucky , or else 
 I would have think that you go on fool he for the fun of the 
 thing . and perhaps that be your object . well , I must say I personally 
 would not   condescend to that sort of thing . it be not to my taste . no , 
 no . blacken a friend 's character be not my idea of fun , if it be to 
 fool the great blackguard on earth . " 
 have it not be for Captain Mitchell 's depression , cause by the fatal 
 news , his disgust of Dr. Monygham would have take a more outspoken 
 shape ; but he think to himself that now it really do not matter what 
 that man , whom he have never like , would say and do . 
 " I wonder , " he grumble , " why they have shut we up together , or why 
 Sotillo should have shut you up at all , since it seem to I you have 
 be fairly chummy up there ? " 
 " yes , I wonder , " say the doctor grimly . 
 Captain Mitchell 's heart be so heavy that he would have prefer 
 for the time be a complete solitude to the good of company . but 
 any company would have be preferable to the doctor 's , at whom he have 
 always look askance as a sort of beachcomber of superior intelligence 
 partly reclaim from his abased state . that feeling lead he to ask - 
 " what have that ruffian do with the other two ? " 
 " the chief engineer he would have let go in any case , " say the doctor . 
 " he would not   like to have a quarrel with the railway upon his hand . 
 not just yet , at any rate . I do not   think , Captain Mitchell , that you 
 understand exactly what Sotillo 's position be - " 
 " I do not   see why I should bother my head about it , " snarl Captain 
 Mitchell . 
 " no , " assent the doctor , with the same grim composure . " I do not   see 
 why you should . it would not   help a single human being in the world if 
 you think ever so hard upon any subject whatever . " 
 " no , " say Captain Mitchell , simply , and with evident depression . " a man 
 lock up in a confound dark hole be not much use to anybody . " 
 " as to old Viola , " the doctor continue , as though he have not hear , 
 " Sotillo release he for the same reason he be presently go to 
 release you . " 
 " eh ? what ? " exclaim Captain Mitchell , star like an owl in the 
 darkness . " what be there in common between I and old Viola ? more likely 
 because the old chap have no watch and chain for the pickpocket to steal . 
 and I tell you what , Dr. Monygham , " he go on with rise choler , " he 
 will find it more difficult than he think to get rid of I . he will 
 burn his finger over that job yet , I can tell you . to begin with , I 
 will not   go without my watch , and as to the rest - we shall see . I dare say 
 it be no great matter for you to be lock up . but Joe Mitchell be a 
 different kind of man , sir . I do not   mean to submit tamely to insult and 
 robbery . I be a public character , sir . " 
 and then Captain Mitchell become aware that the bar of the opening have 
 become visible , a black grating upon a square of grey . the come of the 
 day silence Captain Mitchell as if by the reflection that now in all 
 the future day he would be deprive of the invaluable service of his 
 Capataz . he lean against the wall with his arm fold on his breast , 
 and the doctor walk up and down the whole length of the place with his 
 peculiar hobbling gait , as if slink about on damage foot . at the end 
 furth from the grating he would be lose altogether in the darkness . 
 only the slight limping shuffle could be hear . there be an air of 
 moody detachment in that painful prowl keep up without a pause . when the 
 door of the prison be suddenly fling open and his name shout out he 
 show no surprise . he swerve sharply in his walk , and pass out 
 at once , as though much depend upon his speed ; but Captain Mitchell 
 remain for some time with his shoulder against the wall , quite 
 undecided in the bitterness of his spirit whether it would not   be well 
 to refuse to stir a limb in the way of protest . he have half a mind to 
 get himself carry out , but after the officer at the door have 
 shout three or four time in tone of remonstrance and surprise he 
 condescend to walk out . 
 Sotillo 's manner have change . the colonel 's off - hand civility be 
 slightly irresolute , as though he be in doubt if civility be the 
 proper course in this case . he observe Captain Mitchell attentively 
 before he speak from the big armchair behind the table in a 
 condescend voice - 
 " I have conclude not to detain you , Senor Mitchell . I be of a forgiving 
 disposition . I make allowance . let this be a lesson to you , however . " 
 the peculiar dawn of Sulaco , which seem to break far away to the 
 westward and creep back into the shade of the mountain , mingle with 
 the reddish light of the candle . Captain Mitchell , in sign of contempt 
 and indifference , let his eye roam all over the room , and he give a 
 hard stare to the doctor , perch already on the casement of one of the 
 window , with his eyelid lower , careless and thoughtful - or perhaps 
 ashamed . 
 Sotillo , ensconce in the vast armchair , remark , " I should have 
 think that the feeling of a caballero would have dictate to you an 
 appropriate reply . " 
 he wait for it , but Captain Mitchell remain mute , more from extreme 
 resentment than from reasoned intention , Sotillo hesitate , glance 
 towards the doctor , who look up and nod , then go on with a slight 
 effort - 
 " here , Senor Mitchell , be your watch . learn how hasty and unjust have 
 be your judgment of my patriotic soldier . " 
 lie back in his seat , he extend his arm over the table and push 
 the watch away slightly . Captain Mitchell walk up with undisguised 
 eagerness , put it to his ear , then slip it into his pocket coolly . 
 Sotillo seem to overcome an immense reluctance . again he look aside 
 at the doctor , who star at he unwinkingly . 
 but as Captain Mitchell be turn away , without as much as a nod or a 
 glance , he hasten to say - 
 " you may go and wait downstairs for the senor doctor , whom I be go to 
 liberate , too . you foreigner be insignificant , to my mind . " 
 he force a slight , discordant laugh out of himself , while Captain 
 Mitchell , for the first time , look at he with some interest . 
 " the law shall take note later on of your transgression , " Sotillo 
 hurry on . " but as for I , you can live free , unguarded , unobserved . 
 do you hear , Senor Mitchell ? you may depart to your affair . you be 
 beneath my notice . my attention be claim by matter of the very 
 high importance . " 
 Captain Mitchell be very nearly provoke to an answer . it displease 
 he to be liberate insultingly ; but want of sleep , prolonged anxiety , 
 a profound disappointment with the fatal ending of the silver - save 
 business weigh upon his spirit . it be as much as he could do to 
 conceal his uneasiness , not about himself perhaps , but about thing 
 in general . it occur to he distinctly that something underhand be 
 go on . as he go out he ignore the doctor pointedly . 
 " a brute ! " say Sotillo , as the door shut . 
 Dr. Monygham slip off the window - sill , and , thrust his hand into 
 the pocket of the long , grey dust coat he be wear , make a few step 
 into the room . 
 Sotillo get up , too , and , put himself in the way , examine he from 
 head to foot . 
 " so your countryman do not confide in you very much , senor doctor . they 
 do not love you , eh ? why be that , I wonder ? " 
 the doctor , lift his head , answer by a long , lifeless stare and the 
 word , " perhaps because I have live too long in Costaguana . " 
 Sotillo have a gleam of white tooth under the black moustache . 
 " aha ! but you love yourself , " he say , encouragingly . 
 " if you leave they alone , " the doctor say , look with the same 
 lifeless stare at Sotillo 's handsome face , " they will betray themselves 
 very soon . meantime , I may try to make Don Carlos speak ? " 
 " Ah ! senor doctor , " say Sotillo , wag his head , " you be a man of 
 quick intelligence . we be make to understand each other . " he turn 
 away . he could bear no long that expressionless and motionless stare , 
 which seem to have a sort of impenetrable emptiness like the black 
 depth of an abyss . 
 even in a man utterly devoid of moral sense there remain an 
 appreciation of rascality which , be conventional , be perfectly clear . 
 Sotillo think that Dr. Monygham , so different from all Europeans , be 
 ready to sell his countryman and Charles Gould , his employer , for some 
 share of the San Tome silver . Sotillo do not despise he for that . the 
 colonel 's want of moral sense be of a profound and innocent character . 
 it border upon stupidity , moral stupidity . nothing that serve his 
 end could appear to he really reprehensible . nevertheless , he despise 
 Dr. Monygham . he have for he an immense and satisfactory contempt . 
 he despise he with all his heart because he do not mean to let the 
 doctor have any reward at all . he despise he , not as a man without 
 faith and honour , but as a fool . Dr. Monygham 's insight into his 
 character have deceive Sotillo completely . therefore he think the 
 doctor a fool . 
 since his arrival in Sulaco the colonel 's idea have undergo some 
 modification . 
 he no long wish for a political career in Montero 's administration . 
 he have always doubt the safety of that course . since he have learn 
 from the chief engineer that at daylight most likely he would 
 be confront by Pedro Montero his misgiving on that point have 
 considerably increase . the guerrillero brother of the general - the 
 Pedrito of popular speech - have a reputation of his own . he be not   safe 
 to deal with . Sotillo have vaguely plan seize not only the treasure 
 but the town itself , and then negotiate at leisure . but in the face of 
 fact learn from the chief engineer   who have frankly disclose to he 
 the whole situation   his audacity , never of a very dashing kind , have 
 be replace by a most cautious hesitation . 
 " an army - an army cross the mountain under Pedrito already , " he have 
 repeat , unable to hide his consternation . " if it have not be that I 
 be give the news by a man of your position I would never have believe 
 it . astonishing ! " 
 " an armed force , " correct the engineer , suavely . his aim be attain . 
 it be to keep Sulaco clear of any armed occupation for a few hour 
 long , to let those whom fear impel leave the town . in the general 
 dismay there be family hopeful enough to fly upon the road towards 
 Los Hatos , which be leave open by the withdrawal of the armed rabble 
 under Senores Fuentes and Gamacho , to Rincon , with their enthusiastic 
 welcome for Pedro Montero . it be a hasty and risky exodus , and it be 
 say that Hernandez , occupy with his band the wood about Los Hatos , 
 be receive the fugitive . that a good many people he know be 
 contemplate such a flight have be well know to the chief engineer . 
 Father Corbelan 's effort in the cause of that most pious robber have not 
 be altogether fruitless . the political chief of Sulaco have yield 
 at the last moment to the urgent entreaty of the priest , have sign a 
 provisional nomination appoint Hernandez a general , and call upon 
 he officially in this new capacity to preserve order in the town . the 
 fact be that the political chief , see the situation desperate , do 
 not care what he sign . it be the last official document he sign 
 before he leave the palace of the Intendencia for the refuge of the 
 O.S.N. Company 's office . but even have he mean his act to be effective 
 it be already too late . the riot which he fear and expect break out 
 in less than an hour after Father Corbelan have leave he . indeed , Father 
 Corbelan , who have appoint a meeting with Nostromo in the dominican 
 Convent , where he have his residence in one of the cell , never manage 
 to reach the place . from the Intendencia he have go straight on to the 
 Avellanos 's house to tell his brother - in - law , and though he stay there 
 no more than half an hour he have find himself cut off from his ascetic 
 abode . Nostromo , after wait there for some time , watch uneasily 
 the increase uproar in the street , have make his way to the office of 
 the Porvenir , and stay there till daylight , as Decoud have mention 
 in the letter to his sister . thus the Capataz , instead of rid towards 
 the Los Hatos wood as bearer of Hernandez 's nomination , have remain in 
 town to save the life of the President Dictator , to assist in repress 
 the outbreak of the mob , and at last to sail out with the silver of the 
 mine . 
 but Father Corbelan , escape to Hernandez , have the document in his 
 pocket , a piece of official writing turn a bandit into a general in 
 a memorable last official act of the ribierist party , whose watchword 
 be honesty , peace , and progress . probably neither the priest nor the 
 bandit see the irony of it . Father Corbelan must have find messenger 
 to send into the town , for early on the second day of the disturbance 
 there be rumour of Hernandez be on the road to Los Hatos ready 
 to receive those who would put themselves under his protection . a 
 strange - look horseman , elderly and audacious , have appear in the 
 town , rid slowly while his eye examine the front of the house , 
 as though he have never see such high building before . before the 
 cathedral he have dismount , and , kneel in the middle of the Plaza , 
 his bridle over his arm and his hat lie in front of he on the ground , 
 have bow his head , cross himself and beat his breast for some 
 little time . remount his horse , with a fearless but not unfriendly 
 look round the little gathering form about his public devotion , he 
 have ask for the Casa Avellanos . a score of hand be extend in 
 answer , with finger point up the Calle de la Constitucion . 
 the horseman have go on with only a glance of casual curiosity upwards 
 to the window of the Amarilla Club at the corner . his stentorian voice 
 shout periodically in the empty street , " which be the Casa Avellanos ? " 
 till an answer come from the scared porter , and he disappear under 
 the gate . the letter he be bring , write by Father Corbelan with 
 a pencil by the camp - fire of Hernandez , be address to Don Jose , of 
 whose critical state the priest be not aware . Antonia read it , and , 
 after consult Charles Gould , send it on for the information of the 
 gentleman garrison the Amarilla Club . for herself , her mind be make 
 up ; she would rejoin her uncle ; she would entrust the last day - the last 
 hour perhaps - of her father 's life to the keeping of the bandit , whose 
 existence be a protest against the irresponsible tyranny of all party 
 alike , against the moral darkness of the land . the gloom of Los Hatos 
 wood be preferable ; a life of hardship in the train of a robber band 
 less debasing . Antonia embrace with all her soul her uncle 's obstinate 
 defiance of misfortune . it be ground in the belief in the man whom 
 she love . 
 in his message the Vicar - General answer upon his head for Hernandez 's 
 fidelity . as to his power , he point out that he have remain unsubdued 
 for so many year . in that letter Decoud 's idea of the new Occidental 
 State   whose flourish and stable condition be a matter of common 
 knowledge now   be for the first time make public and use as an 
 argument . Hernandez , ex - bandit and the last general of Ribierist 
 creation , be confident of be able to hold the tract of country 
 between the wood of Los Hatos and the coast range till that devoted 
 patriot , Don Martin Decoud , could bring General Barrios back to Sulaco 
 for the reconquest of the town . 
 " Heaven itself will it . providence be on our side , " write Father 
 Corbelan ; there be no time to reflect upon or to controvert his 
 statement ; and if the discussion start upon the reading of that letter 
 in the Amarilla Club be violent , it be also shortlive . in the 
 general bewilderment of the collapse some jump at the idea with joyful 
 astonishment as upon the amazing discovery of a new hope . other become 
 fascinated by the prospect of immediate personal safety for their woman 
 and child . the majority catch at it as a drown man catch at 
 a straw . Father Corbelan be unexpectedly offer they a refuge from 
 Pedrito Montero with his llanero ally to Senores Fuentes and Gamacho 
 with their armed rabble . 
 all the latter part of the afternoon an animate discussion go on in 
 the big room of the Amarilla Club . even those member post at the 
 window with rifle and carbine to guard the end of the street in 
 case of an offensive return of the populace shout their opinion and 
 argument over their shoulder . as dusk fall Don Juste Lopez , invite 
 those caballero who be of his way of think to follow he , withdraw 
 into the corredor , where at a little table in the light of two 
 candle he busy himself in compose an address , or rather a solemn 
 declaration to be present to Pedrito Montero by a deputation of such 
 member of Assembly as have elect to remain in town . his idea be 
 to propitiate he in order to save the form at least of parliamentary 
 institution . seat before a blank sheet of paper , a goose - quill pen in 
 his hand and surge upon from all side , he turn to the right and to 
 the left , repeat with solemn insistence - 
 " Caballeros , a moment of silence ! a moment of silence ! we ought to make 
 it clear that we bow in all good faith to the accomplished fact . " 
 the utterance of that phrase seem to give he a melancholy 
 satisfaction . the hubbub of voice round he be grow strained and 
 hoarse . in the sudden pause the excited grimacing of the face would 
 sink all at once into the stillness of profound dejection . 
 meantime , the exodus have begin . carreta full of lady and child 
 roll sway across the Plaza , with man walk or rid by their 
 side ; mount party follow on mule and horse ; the poor be 
 set out on foot , man and woman carry bundle , clasp baby in 
 their arm , lead old people , drag along the big child . when 
 Charles Gould , after leave the doctor and the engineer at the Casa 
 Viola , enter the town by the harbour gate , all those that have mean to 
 go be go , and the other have barricade themselves in their house . 
 in the whole dark street there be only one spot of flickering light 
 and move figure , where the Senor Administrador recognize his wife 's 
 carriage wait at the door of the Avellanos 's house . he ride up , 
 almost unnoticed , and look on without a word while some of his own 
 servant come out of the gate carry Don Jose Avellanos , who , with 
 closed eye and motionless feature , appear perfectly lifeless . his 
 wife and Antonia walk on each side of the improvise stretcher , which 
 be put at once into the carriage . the two woman embrace ; while from 
 the other side of the landau Father Corbelan 's emissary , with his ragged 
 beard all streak with grey , and high , bronze cheek - bone , star , 
 sit upright in the saddle . then Antonia , dry - eye , get in by the 
 side of the stretcher , and , after make the sign of the cross rapidly , 
 lower a thick veil upon her face . the servant and the three or four 
 neighbour who have come to assist , stand back , uncover their head . 
 on the box , Ignacio , resign now to drive all night   and to have 
 perhaps his throat cut before daylight   look back surlily over his 
 shoulder . 
 " drive carefully , " cry Mrs. Gould in a tremulous voice . 
 " Si , carefully ; si nina , " he mumble , chew his lip , his round 
 leathery cheek quiver . and the landau roll slowly out of the 
 light . 
 " I will see they as far as the ford , " say Charles Gould to his wife . 
 she stand on the edge of the sidewalk with her hand clasp lightly , 
 and nod to he as he follow after the carriage . and now the window 
 of the Amarilla Club be dark . the last spark of resistance have die 
 out . turn his head at the corner , Charles Gould see his wife cross 
 over to their own gate in the lighted patch of the street . one of 
 their neighbour , a well - know merchant and landowner of the province , 
 follow at her elbow , talk with great gesture . as she pass in all 
 the light go out in the street , which remain dark and empty from 
 end to end . 
 the house of the vast Plaza be lose in the night . high up , like a 
 star , there be a small gleam in one of the tower of the cathedral ; 
 and the equestrian statue gleam pale against the black tree of the 
 Alameda , like a ghost of royalty haunt the scene of revolution . the 
 rare prowler they meet range themselves against the wall . beyond the 
 last house the carriage roll noiselessly on the soft cushion of dust , 
 and with a great obscurity a feeling of freshness seem to fall from 
 the foliage of the tree border the country road . the emissary from 
 Hernandez 's camp push his horse close to Charles Gould . 
 " Caballero , " he say in an interested voice , " you be he whom they call 
 the King of Sulaco , the master of the mine ? be it not so ? " 
 " yes , I be the master of the mine , " answer Charles Gould . 
 the man canter for a time in silence , then say , " I have a brother , a 
 sereno in your service in the San Tome valley . you have prove yourself 
 a just man . there have be no wrong do to any one since you call 
 upon the people to work in the mountain . my brother say that no 
 official of the Government , no oppressor of the Campo , have be see on 
 your side of the stream . your own official do not oppress the people 
 in the gorge . doubtless they be afraid of your severity . you be a just 
 man and a powerful one , " he add . 
 he speak in an abrupt , independent tone , but evidently he be 
 communicative with a purpose . he tell Charles Gould that he have be 
 a ranchero in one of the low valley , far south , a neighbour of 
 Hernandez in the old day , and godfather to his eld boy ; one of those 
 who join he in his resistance to the recruiting raid which be the 
 beginning of all their misfortune . it be he that , when his compadre 
 have be carry off , have bury his wife and child , murder by the 
 soldier . 
 " Si , senor , " he mutter , hoarsely , " I and two or three other , the 
 lucky one leave at liberty , bury they all in one grave near the ash 
 of their ranch , under the tree that have shade its roof . " 
 it be to he , too , that Hernandez come after he have desert , three 
 year afterwards . he have still his uniform on with the sergeant 's 
 stripe on the sleeve , and the blood of his colonel upon his hand and 
 breast . three trooper follow he , of those who have start in pursuit 
 but have ride on for liberty . and he tell Charles Gould how he and 
 a few friend , see those soldier , lie in ambush behind some rock 
 ready to pull the trigger on they , when he recognize his compadre and 
 jump up from cover , shout his name , because he know that 
 Hernandez could not have be come back on an errand of injustice and 
 oppression . those three soldier , together with the party who lay 
 behind the rock , have form the nucleus of the famous band , and he , the 
 narrator , have be the favourite lieutenant of Hernandez for many , many 
 year . he mention proudly that the official have put a price upon his 
 head , too ; but it do not prevent it get sprinkle with grey upon 
 his shoulder . and now he have live long enough to see his compadre make 
 a general . 
 he have a burst of muffled laughter . " and now from robber we have become 
 soldier . but look , Caballero , at those who make we soldier and he a 
 general ! look at these people ! " 
 Ignacio shout . the light of the carriage lamp , run along the 
 nopal hedge that crown the bank on each side , flash upon the scared 
 face of people stand aside in the road , sink deep , like an english 
 country lane , into the soft soil of the Campo . they cower ; their eye 
 glisten very big for a second ; and then the light , run on , fall 
 upon the half - denude root of a big tree , on another stretch of nopal 
 hedge , catch up another bunch of face glare back apprehensively . 
 three woman - of whom one be carry a child - and a couple of man in 
 civilian dress - one arm with a sabre and another with a gun - be 
 group about a donkey carry two bundle tie up in blanket . far 
 on Ignacio shout again to pass a carreta , a long wooden box on two 
 high wheel , with the door at the back swing open . some lady in it 
 must have recognize the white mule , because they scream out , " be it 
 you , Dona Emilia ? " 
 at the turn of the road the glare of a big fire fill the short stretch 
 vault over by the branch meet overhead . near the ford of a 
 shallow stream a roadside rancho of weave rush and a roof of grass have 
 be set on fire by accident , and the flame , roar viciously , light 
 up an open space block with horse , mule , and a distracted , shout 
 crowd of people . when Ignacio pull up , several lady on foot assail 
 the carriage , beg Antonia for a seat . to their clamour she answer 
 by point silently to her father . 
 " I must leave you here , " say Charles Gould , in the uproar . the flame 
 leap up sky - high , and in the recoil from the scorch heat across the 
 road the stream of fugitive press against the carriage . a middle - aged 
 lady dress in black silk , but with a coarse manta over her head and a 
 rough branch for a stick in her hand , stagger against the front wheel . 
 two young girl , frightened and silent , be cling to her arm . 
 Charles Gould know she very well . 
 " Misericordia ! we be get terribly bruise in this crowd ! " she 
 exclaim , smile up courageously to he . " we have start on foot . all 
 our servant run away yesterday to join the democrats . we be go to 
 put ourselves under the protection of Father Corbelan , of your sainted 
 uncle , Antonia . he have work a miracle in the heart of a most 
 merciless robber . a miracle ! " 
 she raise her voice gradually up to a scream as she be bear along by 
 the pressure of people get out of the way of some cart come up 
 out of the ford at a gallop , with loud yell and cracking of whip . 
 great mass of spark mingle with black smoke fly over the road ; 
 the bamboo of the wall detonate in the fire with the sound of an 
 irregular fusillade . and then the bright blaze sink suddenly , leave 
 only a red dusk crowd with aimless dark shadow drift in contrary 
 direction ; the noise of voice seem to die away with the flame ; 
 and the tumult of head , arm , quarrelling , and imprecation pass on 
 flee into the darkness . 
 " I must leave you now , " repeat Charles Gould to Antonia . she turn 
 her head slowly and uncover her face . the emissary and compadre of 
 Hernandez spur his horse close up . 
 " have not the master of the mine any message to send to Hernandez , the 
 master of the Campo ? " 
 the truth of the comparison strike Charles Gould heavily . in his 
 determined purpose he hold the mine , and the indomitable bandit hold 
 the Campo by the same precarious tenure . they be equal before the 
 lawlessness of the land . it be impossible to disentangle one 's activity 
 from its debasing contact . a close - mesh net of crime and corruption 
 lie upon the whole country . an immense and weary discouragement seal 
 his lip for a time . 
 " you be a just man , " urge the emissary of Hernandez . " look at those 
 people who make my compadre a general and have turn we all into 
 soldier . look at those oligarch flee for life , with only the 
 clothe on their back . my compadre do not think of that , but our 
 follower may be wonder greatly , and I would speak for they to you . 
 listen , senor ! for many month now the Campo have be our own . we 
 need ask no man for anything ; but soldier must have their pay to live 
 honestly when the war be over . it be believe that your soul be so 
 just that a prayer from you would cure the sickness of every beast , like 
 the orison of the upright judge . let I have some word from your lip 
 that would act like a charm upon the doubt of our partida , where all 
 be man . " 
 " do you hear what he say ? " Charles Gould say in English to Antonia . 
 " forgive we our misery ! " she exclaim , hurriedly . " it be your character 
 that be the inexhaustible treasure which may save we all yet ; your 
 character , Carlos , not your wealth . I entreat you to give this man your 
 word that you will accept any arrangement my uncle may make with their 
 chief . one word . he will want no more . " 
 on the site of the roadside hut there remain nothing but an enormous 
 heap of ember , throw afar a darken red glow , in which Antonia 's 
 face appear deeply flush with excitement . Charles Gould , with only a 
 short hesitation , pronounce the require pledge . he be like a man who 
 have venture on a precipitous path with no room to turn , where the only 
 chance of safety be to press forward . at that moment he understand 
 it thoroughly as he look down at Don Jose stretch out , hardly 
 breathing , by the side of the erect Antonia , vanquish in a lifelong 
 struggle with the power of moral darkness , whose stagnant depth breed 
 monstrous crime and monstrous illusion . in a few word the emissary 
 from Hernandez express his complete satisfaction . Stoically Antonia 
 lower her veil , resist the longing to inquire about Decoud 's 
 escape . but Ignacio leer morosely over his shoulder . 
 " take a good look at the mule , mi amo , " he grumble . " you shall never 
 see they again ! " 
 CHAPTER FOUR 
 Charles Gould turn towards the town . before he the jagged peak 
 of the Sierra come out all black in the clear dawn . here and there a 
 muffle lepero whisk round the corner of a grass - grow street before 
 the ringing hoof of his horse . dog bark behind the wall of the 
 garden ; and with the colourless light the chill of the snow seem to 
 fall from the mountain upon the disjoint pavement and the shuttered 
 house with broken cornice and the plaster peel in patch between 
 the flat pilaster of the front . the daybreak struggle with the 
 gloom under the arcade on the Plaza , with no sign of country people 
 dispose their good for the day 's market , pile of fruit , bundle of 
 vegetable ornament with flower , on low bench under enormous mat 
 umbrella ; with no cheery early morning bustle of villager , 
 woman , child , and load donkey . only a few scattered knot of 
 revolutionist stand in the vast space , all look one way from under 
 their slouch hat for some sign of news from Rincon . the large of 
 those group turn about like one man as Charles Gould pass , and 
 shout , " Viva la libertad ! " after he in a menacing tone . 
 Charles Gould ride on , and turn into the archway of his house . in the 
 patio litter with straw , a practicante , one of Dr. Monygham 's native 
 assistant , sit on the ground with his back against the rim of the 
 fountain , finger a guitar discreetly , while two girl of the low 
 class , stand up before he , shuffle their foot a little and wave 
 their arm , hum a popular dance tune . 
 Most of the wound during the two day of rioting have be take away 
 already by their friend and relation , but several figure could be 
 see sit up balance their bandaged head in time to the music . 
 Charles Gould dismount . a sleepy mozo come out of the bakery door 
 take hold of the horse 's bridle ; the practicante endeavour to conceal 
 his guitar hastily ; the girl , unabashed , step back smile ; and 
 Charles Gould , on his way to the staircase , glance into a dark corner 
 of the patio at another group , a mortally wound Cargador with a woman 
 kneeling by his side ; she mumble prayer rapidly , try at the same 
 time to force a piece of orange between the stiffening lip of the die 
 man . 
 the cruel futility of thing stand unveil in the levity and suffering 
 of that incorrigible people ; the cruel futility of life and of death 
 throw away in the vain endeavour to attain an endure solution of the 
 problem . unlike Decoud , Charles Gould could not play lightly a part in 
 a tragic farce . it be tragic enough for he in all conscience , but he 
 could see no farcical element . he suffer too much under a conviction 
 of irremediable folly . he be too severely practical and too idealistic 
 to look upon its terrible humour with amusement , as Martin Decoud , 
 the imaginative materialist , be able to do in the dry light of his 
 scepticism . to he , as to all of we , the compromise with his conscience 
 appear ugly than ever in the light of failure . his taciturnity , 
 assume with a purpose , have prevent he from tamper openly with 
 his thought ; but the Gould Concession have insidiously corrupt his 
 judgment . he might have know , he say to himself , lean over the 
 balustrade of the corredor , that ribierism could never come to anything . 
 the mine have corrupt his judgment by make he sick of bribe and 
 intriguing merely to have his work leave alone from day to day . like 
 his father , he do not like to be rob . it exasperate he . he have 
 persuade himself that , apart from high consideration , the backing up 
 of Don Jose 's hope of reform be good business . he have go forth into 
 the senseless fray as his poor uncle , whose sword hang on the wall of 
 his study , have go forth - in the defence of the commonest decency 
 of organized society . only his weapon be the wealth of the mine , more 
 far - reach and subtle than an honest blade of steel fit into a 
 simple brass guard . 
 more dangerous to the wielder , too , this weapon of wealth , double - edge 
 with the cupidity and misery of mankind , steep in all the vice of 
 self - indulgence as in a concoction of poisonous root , taint the very 
 cause for which it be draw , always ready to turn awkwardly in the hand . 
 there be nothing for it now but to go on use it . but he promise 
 himself to see it shatter into small bit before he let it be wrench 
 from his grasp . 
 after all , with his english parentage and english upbringing , he 
 perceive that he be an adventurer in Costaguana , the descendant of 
 adventurer enlist in a foreign legion , of man who have seek fortune 
 in a revolutionary war , who have plan revolution , who have believe in 
 revolution . for all the uprightness of his character , he have something 
 of an adventurer 's easy morality which take count of personal risk in 
 the ethical appraising of his action . he be prepare , if need be , to 
 blow up the whole San Tome mountain sky high out of the territory of the 
 Republic . this resolution express the tenacity of his character , the 
 remorse of that subtle conjugal infidelity through which his wife be 
 no long the sole mistress of his thought , something of his father 's 
 imaginative weakness , and something , too , of the spirit of a buccaneer 
 throw a lighted match into the magazine rather than surrender his 
 ship . 
 down below in the patio the wound Cargador have breathe his last . the 
 woman cry out once , and her cry , unexpected and shrill , make all the 
 wound sit up . the practicante scramble to his foot , and , guitar in 
 hand , gaze steadily in her direction with elevated eyebrow . the two 
 girl - sit now one on each side of their wound relative , with 
 their knee draw up and long cigar between their lip - nod at each 
 other significantly . 
 Charles Gould , look down over the balustrade , see three man dress 
 ceremoniously in black frock - coat with white shirt , and wear 
 european round hat , enter the patio from the street . one of they , head 
 and shoulder tall than the two other , advance with marked gravity , 
 lead the way . this be Don Juste Lopez , accompany by two of his 
 friend , member of Assembly , come to call upon the Administrador of 
 the San Tome mine at this early hour . they see he , too , wave their 
 hand to he urgently , walk up the stair as if in procession . 
 Don Juste , astonishingly change by have shave off altogether his 
 damage beard , have lose with it nine - tenth of his outward dignity . even 
 at that time of serious pre - occupation Charles Gould could not help 
 note the reveal ineptitude in the aspect of the man . his companion 
 look crestfallen and sleepy . one keep on pass the tip of his tongue 
 over his parch lip ; the other 's eye stray dully over the tile 
 floor of the corredor , while Don Juste , stand a little in advance , 
 harangue the Senor Administrador of the San Tome mine . it be his firm 
 opinion that form have to be observe . a new governor be always visit 
 by deputation from the Cabildo , which be the Municipal Council , 
 from the Consulado , the commercial Board , and it be proper that the 
 Provincial Assembly should send a deputation , too , if only to assert 
 the existence of parliamentary institution . Don Juste propose that Don 
 Carlos Gould , as the most prominent citizen of the province , should join 
 the Assembly 's deputation . his position be exceptional , his personality 
 know through the length and breadth of the whole Republic . official 
 courtesy must not be neglect , if they be go through with a 
 bleed heart . the acceptance of accomplished fact may save yet the 
 precious vestige of parliamentary institution . Don Juste 's eye glow 
 dully ; he believe in parliamentary institution - and the convinced 
 drone of his voice lose itself in the stillness of the house like the 
 deep buzzing of some ponderous insect . 
 Charles Gould have turn round to listen patiently , lean his elbow on 
 the balustrade . he shake his head a little , refuse , almost touch by 
 the anxious gaze of the President of the Provincial Assembly . it be not 
 Charles Gould 's policy to make the San Tome mine a party to any formal 
 proceeding . 
 " my advice , senor , be that you should wait for your fate in your 
 house . there be no necessity for you to give yourselves up formally 
 into Montero 's hand . submission to the inevitable , as Don Juste call 
 it , be all very well , but when the inevitable be call Pedrito 
 Montero there be no need to exhibit pointedly the whole extent of your 
 surrender . the fault of this country be the want of measure in 
 political life . flat acquiescence in illegality , follow by sanguinary 
 reaction - that , senor , be not the way to a stable and prosperous 
 future . " 
 Charles Gould stop before the sad bewilderment of the face , the 
 wonder , anxious glance of the eye . the feeling of pity for those 
 man , put all their trust into word of some sort , while murder and 
 rapine stalk over the land , have betray he into what seem empty 
 loquacity . Don Juste murmur - 
 " you be abandon we , Don Carlos . . . . and yet , parliamentary 
 institution - " 
 he could not finish from grief . for a moment he put his hand over his 
 eye . Charles Gould , in his fear of empty loquacity , make no answer 
 to the charge . he return in silence their ceremonious bow . his 
 taciturnity be his refuge . he understand that what they seek be to 
 get the influence of the San Tome mine on their side . they want to 
 go on a conciliate errand to the victor under the wing of the Gould 
 Concession . other public body - the Cabildo , the Consulado - would be 
 come , too , presently , seek the support of the most stable , the most 
 effective force they have ever know to exist in their province . 
 the doctor , arrive with his sharp , jerky walk , find that the master 
 have retire into his own room with order not to be disturb on any 
 account . but Dr. Monygham be not anxious to see Charles Gould at once . 
 he spend some time in a rapid examination of his wounded . he gaze down 
 upon each in turn , rub his chin between his thumb and forefinger ; 
 his steady stare meet without expression their silently inquisitive look . 
 all these case be do well ; but when he come to the dead Cargador 
 he stop a little long , survey not the man who have cease to 
 suffer , but the woman kneel in silent contemplation of the rigid 
 face , with its pinch nostril and a white gleam in the imperfectly 
 closed eye . she lift her head slowly , and say in a dull voice - 
 " it be not long since he have become a Cargador - only a few week . his 
 worship the Capataz have accept he after many entreaty . " 
 " I be not responsible for the great Capataz , " mutter the doctor , 
 move off . 
 direct his course upstairs towards the door of Charles Gould 's room , 
 the doctor at the last moment hesitate ; then , turn away from the 
 handle with a shrug of his uneven shoulder , slunk off hastily along the 
 corredor in search of Mrs. Gould 's camerista . 
 Leonardo tell he that the senora have not rise yet . the senora have 
 give into her charge the girl belong to that italian posadero . she , 
 Leonarda , have put they to bed in her own room . the fair girl have cry 
 herself to sleep , but the dark one - the big - have not close her eye 
 yet . she sit up in bed clutch the sheet right up under her chin and 
 star before she like a little witch . Leonarda do not approve of the 
 Viola child be admit to the house . she make this feeling clear 
 by the indifferent tone in which she inquire whether their mother be 
 dead yet . as to the senora , she must be asleep . ever since she have go 
 into her room after see the departure of Dona Antonia with her die 
 father , there have be no sound behind her door . 
 the doctor , rouse himself out of profound reflection , tell she 
 abruptly to call her mistress at once . he hobble off to wait for Mrs. 
 Gould in the sala . he be very tired , but too excited to sit down . in 
 this great drawing - room , now empty , in which his withered soul have be 
 refresh after many arid year and his outcast spirit have accept 
 silently the toleration of many side - glance , he wander haphazard 
 amongst the chair and table till Mrs. Gould , envelop in a morning 
 wrapper , come in rapidly . 
 " you know that I never approve of the silver be send away , " the 
 doctor begin at once , as a preliminary to the narrative of his night 's 
 adventure in association with Captain Mitchell , the engineer - in - chief , 
 and old Viola , at Sotillo 's headquarters . to the doctor , with his 
 special conception of this political crisis , the removal of the silver 
 have seem an irrational and ill - omen measure . it be as if a general 
 be send the good part of his troop away on the eve of battle 
 upon some recondite pretext . the whole lot of ingot might have be 
 conceal somewhere where they could have be get at for the purpose 
 of stave off the danger which be menace the security of the Gould 
 Concession . the Administrador have act as if the immense and powerful 
 prosperity of the mine have be found on method of probity , on the 
 sense of usefulness . and it be nothing of the kind . the method follow 
 have be the only one possible . the Gould Concession have ransom 
 its way through all those year . it be a nauseous process . he quite 
 understand that Charles Gould have get sick of it and have leave the old 
 path to back up that hopeless attempt at reform . the doctor do not 
 believe in the reform of Costaguana . and now the mine be back again in 
 its old path , with the disadvantage that henceforth it have to deal not 
 only with the greed provoke by its wealth , but with the resentment 
 awaken by the attempt to free itself from its bondage to moral 
 corruption . that be the penalty of failure . what make he uneasy be 
 that Charles Gould seem to he to have weaken at the decisive moment 
 when a frank return to the old method be the only chance . listen to 
 Decoud 's wild scheme have be a weakness . 
 the doctor fling up his arm , exclaim , " Decoud ! Decoud ! " he hobble 
 about the room with slight , angry laugh . many year ago both his ankle 
 have be seriously damage in the course of a certain investigation 
 conduct in the castle of Sta . Marta by a commission compose of 
 military man . their nomination have be signify to they unexpectedly 
 at the dead of night , with scowl brow , flash eye , and in a 
 tempestuous voice , by Guzman Bento . the old tyrant , madden by one of 
 his sudden access of suspicion , mingle splutter appeal to their 
 fidelity with imprecation and horrible menace . the cell and casement 
 of the castle on the hill have be already fill with prisoner . the 
 commission be charge now with the task of discover the iniquitous 
 conspiracy against the Citizen - Saviour of his country . 
 their dread of the rave tyrant translate itself into a hasty 
 ferocity of procedure . the Citizen - Saviour be not accustomed to wait . a 
 conspiracy have to be discover . the courtyard of the castle resound 
 with the clanking of leg - iron , sound of blow , yell of pain ; and 
 the commission of high officer labour feverishly , conceal their 
 distress and apprehension from each other , and especially from their 
 secretary , Father Beron , an army chaplain , at that time very much in 
 the confidence of the Citizen - Saviour . that priest be a big 
 round - shoulder man , with an unclean - looking , overgrown tonsure on the 
 top of his flat head , of a dingy , yellow complexion , softly fat , with 
 greasy stain all down the front of his lieutenant 's uniform , and a 
 small cross embroider in white cotton on his left breast . he have a 
 heavy nose and a pendant lip . Dr. Monygham remember he still . he 
 remember he against all the force of his will strive its utmost to 
 forget . Father Beron have be adjoin to the commission by Guzman Bento 
 expressly for the purpose that his enlightened zeal should assist they 
 in their labour . Dr. Monygham could by no manner of mean forget the 
 zeal of Father Beron , or his face , or the pitiless , monotonous voice in 
 which he pronounce the word , " will you confess now ? " 
 this memory do not make he shudder , but it have make of he what he be 
 in the eye of respectable people , a man careless of common decency , 
 something between a clever vagabond and a disreputable doctor . but 
 not all respectable people would have have the necessary delicacy of 
 sentiment to understand with what trouble of mind and accuracy of vision 
 Dr. Monygham , medical officer of the San Tome mine , remember Father 
 Beron , army chaplain , and once a secretary of a military commission . 
 after all these year Dr. Monygham , in his room at the end of the 
 hospital building in the San Tome gorge , remember Father Beron as 
 distinctly as ever . he remember that priest at night , sometimes , in 
 his sleep . on such night the doctor wait for daylight with a candle 
 light , and walk the whole length of his room to and fro , star 
 down at his bare foot , his arm hug his side tightly . he would 
 dream of Father Beron sit at the end of a long black table , behind 
 which , in a row , appear the head , shoulder , and epaulette of the 
 military member , nibble the feather of a quill pen , and listen 
 with weary and impatient scorn to the protestation of some prisoner 
 call heaven to witness of his innocence , till he burst out , " what be 
 the use of waste time over that miserable nonsense ! let I take 
 he outside for a while . " and Father Beron would go outside after 
 the clank prisoner , lead away between two soldier . such interlude 
 happen on many day , many time , with many prisoner . when the 
 prisoner return he be ready to make a full confession , Father Beron 
 would declare , lean forward with that dull , surfeit look which can 
 be see in the eye of gluttonous person after a heavy meal . 
 the priest 's inquisitorial instinct suffer but little from the want 
 of classical apparatus of the Inquisition at no time of the world 's 
 history have man be at a loss how to inflict mental and bodily anguish 
 upon their fellow - creature . this aptitude come to they in the 
 grow complexity of their passion and the early refinement of their 
 ingenuity . but it may safely be say that primeval man do not go to 
 the trouble of invent torture . he be indolent and pure of heart . 
 he brain his neighbour ferociously with a stone axe from necessity and 
 without malice . the stupid mind may invent a rankle phrase or brand 
 the innocent with a cruel aspersion . a piece of string and a ramrod ; a 
 few musket in combination with a length of hide rope ; or even a simple 
 mallet of heavy , hard wood apply with a swing to human finger or 
 to the joint of a human body be enough for the infliction of the most 
 exquisite torture . the doctor have be a very stubborn prisoner , and , as 
 a natural consequence of that " bad disposition "   so Father Beron call 
 it , his subjugation have be very crush and very complete . that be 
 why the limp in his walk , the twist of his shoulder , the scar on his 
 cheek be so pronounced . his confession , when they come at last , be 
 very complete , too . sometimes on the night when he walk the floor , 
 he wonder , grind his tooth with shame and rage , at the fertility 
 of his imagination when stimulate by a sort of pain which make truth , 
 honour , selfrespect , and life itself matter of little moment . 
 and he could not forget Father Beron with his monotonous phrase , " will 
 you confess now ? " reach he in an awful iteration and lucidity of 
 meaning through the delirious incoherence of unbearable pain . he could 
 not forget . but that be not the bad . have he meet Father Beron in the 
 street after all these year Dr. Monygham be sure he would have quail 
 before he . this contingency be not to be fear now . Father Beron be 
 dead ; but the sicken certitude prevent Dr. Monygham from look 
 anybody in the face . 
 Dr. Monygham have become , in a manner , the slave of a ghost . it be 
 obviously impossible to take his knowledge of Father Beron home to 
 Europe . when make his extort confession to the Military Board , 
 Dr. Monygham be not seek to avoid death . he long for it . sit 
 half - naked for hour on the wet earth of his prison , and so motionless 
 that the spider , his companion , attach their webs to his matted 
 hair , he console the misery of his soul with acute reasoning that he 
 have confess to crime enough for a sentence of death - that they have 
 go too far with he to let he live to tell the tale . 
 but , as if by a refinement of cruelty , Dr. Monygham be leave for month 
 to decay slowly in the darkness of his grave - like prison . it be no 
 doubt hop that it would finish he off without the trouble of an 
 execution ; but Dr. Monygham have an iron constitution . it be Guzman 
 Bento who die , not by the knife thrust of a conspirator , but from a 
 stroke of apoplexy , and Dr. Monygham be liberate hastily . his fetter 
 be strike off by the light of a candle , which , after month of gloom , 
 hurt his eye so much that he have to cover his face with his hand . he 
 be raise up . his heart be beat violently with the fear of this 
 liberty . when he try to walk the extraordinary lightness of his foot 
 make he giddy , and he fall down . two stick be thrust into his hand , 
 and he be push out of the passage . it be dusk ; candle glimmer 
 already in the window of the officer ' quarter round the courtyard ; 
 but the twilight sky daze he by its enormous and overwhelming 
 brilliance . a thin poncho hang over his naked , bony shoulder ; the rag 
 of his trouser come down no low than his knee ; an eighteen month ' 
 growth of hair fall in dirty grey lock on each side of his sharp 
 cheek - bone . as he drag himself past the guard - room door , one of the 
 soldier , loll outside , move by some obscure impulse , leap forward 
 with a strange laugh and ram a broken old straw hat on his head . and 
 Dr. Monygham , after have totter , continue on his way . he advance 
 one stick , then one maimed foot , then the other stick ; the other foot 
 follow only a very short distance along the ground , toilfully , as 
 though it be almost too heavy to be move at all ; and yet his leg 
 under the hang angle of the poncho appear no thick than the two 
 stick in his hand . a ceaseless tremble agitate his bent body , 
 all his waste limb , his bony head , the conical , ragged crown of the 
 sombrero , whose ample flat rim rest on his shoulder . 
 in such condition of manner and attire do Dr. Monygham go forth to 
 take possession of his liberty . and these condition seem to bind 
 he indissolubly to the land of Costaguana like an awful procedure of 
 naturalization , involve he deep in the national life , far deep than 
 any amount of success and honour could have do . they do away with his 
 europeanism ; for Dr. Monygham have make himself an ideal conception 
 of his disgrace . it be a conception eminently fit and proper for an 
 officer and a gentleman . Dr. Monygham , before he go out to Costaguana , 
 have be surgeon in one of her Majesty 's regiment of foot . it be a 
 conception which take no account of physiological fact or reasonable 
 argument ; but it be not stupid for all that . it be simple . a rule of 
 conduct rest mainly on severe rejection be necessarily simple . Dr. 
 Monygham 's view of what it behove he to do be severe ; it be an ideal 
 view , in so much that it be the imaginative exaggeration of a correct 
 feeling . it be also , in its force , influence , and persistency , the view 
 of an eminently loyal nature . 
 there be a great fund of loyalty in Dr. Monygham 's nature . he have 
 settle it all on Mrs. Gould 's head . he believe she worthy of every 
 devotion . at the bottom of his heart he feel an angry uneasiness before 
 the prosperity of the San Tome mine , because its growth be rob she 
 of all peace of mind . Costaguana be no place for a woman of that kind . 
 what could Charles Gould have be think of when he bring she 
 out there ! it be outrageous ! and the doctor have watch the course 
 of event with a grim and distant reserve which , he imagine , his 
 lamentable history impose upon he . 
 loyalty to Mrs. Gould could not , however , leave out of account the 
 safety of her husband . the doctor have contrive to be in town at the 
 critical time because he mistrust Charles Gould . he consider he 
 hopelessly infect with the madness of revolution . that be why he 
 hobble in distress in the drawing - room of the Casa Gould on that 
 morning , exclaim , " Decoud , Decoud ! " in a tone of mournful irritation . 
 Mrs. Gould , her colour heighten , and with glisten eye , look 
 straight before she at the sudden enormity of that disaster . the 
 finger - tip on one hand rest lightly on a low little table by her 
 side , and the arm tremble right up to the shoulder . the sun , which 
 look late upon Sulaco , issue in all the fulness of its power high 
 up on the sky from behind the dazzle snow - edge of Higuerota , have 
 precipitate the delicate , smooth , pearly greyness of light , in which 
 the town lie steep during the early hour , into sharp - cut mass of 
 black shade and space of hot , blind glare . three long rectangle 
 of sunshine fall through the window of the sala ; while just across the 
 street the front of the Avellanos 's house appear very sombre in its 
 own shadow see through the flood of light . 
 a voice say at the door , " what of Decoud ? " 
 it be Charles Gould . they have not hear he come along the corredor . 
 his glance just glide over his wife and strike full at the doctor . 
 " you have bring some news , doctor ? " 
 Dr. Monygham blurt it all out at once , in the rough . for some time 
 after he have do , the Administrador of the San Tome mine remain 
 look at he without a word . Mrs. Gould sink into a low chair with her 
 hand lie on her lap . a silence reign between those three motionless 
 person . then Charles Gould speak - 
 " you must want some breakfast . " 
 he stand aside to let his wife pass first . she catch up her husband 's 
 hand and press it as she go out , raise her handkerchief to her 
 eye . the sight of her husband have bring Antonia 's position to her 
 mind , and she could not contain her tear at the thought of the poor 
 girl . when she rejoin the two man in the diningroom after have 
 bath her face , Charles Gould be say to the doctor across the 
 table - 
 " no , there do not seem any room for doubt . " 
 and the doctor assent . 
 " no , I do not   see myself how we could question that wretche Hirsch 's 
 tale . it be only too true , I fear . " 
 she sit down desolately at the head of the table and look from one 
 to the other . the two man , without absolutely turn their head away , 
 try to avoid her glance . the doctor even make a show of be hungry ; 
 he seize his knife and fork , and begin to eat with emphasis , as if on 
 the stage . Charles Gould make no pretence of the sort ; with his elbow 
 raise squarely , he twist both end of his flame moustache - they 
 be so long that his hand be quite away from his face . 
 " I be not surprised , " he mutter , abandon his moustache and 
 throw one arm over the back of his chair . his face be calm with 
 that immobility of expression which betray the intensity of a mental 
 struggle . he feel that this accident have bring to a point all the 
 consequence involve in his line of conduct , with its conscious 
 and subconscious intention . there must be an end now of this silent 
 reserve , of that air of impenetrability behind which he have be 
 safeguard his dignity . it be the least ignoble form of dissembling 
 force upon he by that parody of civilized institution which offend 
 his intelligence , his uprightness , and his sense of right . he be like 
 his father . he have no ironic eye . he be not amuse at the absurdity 
 that prevail in this world . they hurt he in his innate gravity . he 
 feel that the miserable death of that poor Decoud take from he his 
 inaccessible position of a force in the background . it commit he 
 openly unless he wish to throw up the game - and that be impossible . 
 the material interest require from he the sacrifice of his 
 aloofness - perhaps his own safety too . and he reflect that Decoud 's 
 separationist plan have not go to the bottom with the lost silver . 
 the only thing that be not change be his position towards Mr. 
 Holroyd . the head of silver and steel interest have enter into 
 Costaguana affair with a sort of passion . Costaguana have become 
 necessary to his existence ; in the San Tome mine he have find the 
 imaginative satisfaction which other mind would get from drama , from 
 art , or from a risky and fascinating sport . it be a special form of the 
 great man 's extravagance , sanction by a moral intention , big enough to 
 flatter his vanity . even in this aberration of his genius he serve the 
 progress of the world . Charles Gould feel sure of be understand 
 with precision and judge with the indulgence of their common passion . 
 nothing now could surprise or startle this great man . and Charles Gould 
 imagine himself write a letter to San Francisco in some such word : 
 " . . . . the man at the head of the movement be dead or have flee ; the 
 civil organization of the province be at an end for the present ; 
 the Blanco party in Sulaco have collapse inexcusably , but in the 
 characteristic manner of this country . but barrio , untouched in Cayta , 
 remain still available . I be force to take up openly the plan of a 
 provincial revolution as the only way of place the enormous material 
 interest involve in the prosperity and peace of Sulaco in a position 
 of permanent safety . . . . " that be clear . he see these word as 
 if write in letter of fire upon the wall at which he be gaze 
 abstractedly . 
 Mrs Gould watch his abstraction with dread . it be a domestic and 
 frightful phenomenon that darken and chill the house for she like a 
 thundercloud pass over the sun . Charles Gould 's fit of abstraction 
 depict the energetic concentration of a will haunt by a fix idea . 
 a man haunt by a fix idea be insane . he be dangerous even if 
 that idea be an idea of justice ; for may he not bring the heaven down 
 pitilessly upon a love head ? the eye of Mrs. Gould , watch she 
 husband 's profile , fill with tear again . and again she seem to see 
 the despair of the unfortunate Antonia . 
 " what would I have do if Charley have be drown while we be 
 engage ? " she exclaim , mentally , with horror . her heart turn to ice , 
 while her cheek flame up as if scorch by the blaze of a funeral pyre 
 consume all her earthly affection . the tear burst out of her eye . 
 " Antonia will kill herself ! " she cry out . 
 this cry fall into the silence of the room with strangely little effect . 
 only the doctor , crumble up a piece of bread , with his head incline 
 on one side , raise his face , and the few long hair stick out of his 
 shaggy eyebrow stir in a slight frown . Dr. Monygham think quite 
 sincerely that Decoud be a singularly unworthy object for any woman 's 
 affection . then he lower his head again , with a curl of his lip , and 
 his heart full of tender admiration for Mrs. Gould . 
 " she think of that girl , " he say to himself ; ' she think of the Viola 
 child ; she think of I ; of the wound ; of the miner ; she always 
 think of everybody who be poor and miserable ! but what will she do if 
 Charles get the bad of it in this infernal scrimmage those confound 
 Avellanos have draw he into ? no one seem to be think of she . " 
 Charles Gould , star at the wall , pursue his reflection subtly . 
 " I shall write to Holroyd that the San Tome mine be big enough to take 
 in hand the making of a new state . it will please he . it will reconcile he 
 to the risk . " 
 but be Barrios really available ? perhaps . but he be inaccessible . 
 to send off a boat to Cayta be no long possible , since Sotillo be 
 master of the harbour , and have a steamer at his disposal . and now , with 
 all the democrats in the province up , and every Campo township in a 
 state of disturbance , where could he find a man who would make his 
 way successfully overland to Cayta with a message , a ten day ' ride 
 at least ; a man of courage and resolution , who would avoid arrest or 
 murder , and if arrest would faithfully eat the paper ? the Capataz 
 de Cargadores would have be just such a man . but the Capataz of the 
 Cargadores be no more . 
 and Charles Gould , withdraw his eye from the wall , say gently , 
 " that Hirsch ! what an extraordinary thing ! save himself by cling to 
 the anchor , do he ? I have no idea that he be still in Sulaco . I think 
 he have go back overland to Esmeralda more than a week ago . he come 
 here once to talk to I about his hide business and some other thing . I 
 make it clear to he that nothing could be do . " 
 " he be afraid to start back on account of Hernandez be about , " 
 remark the doctor . 
 " and but for he we might not have know anything of what have happen , " 
 marvel Charles Gould . 
 Mrs. Gould cry out - 
 " Antonia must not know ! she must not be tell . not now . " 
 " nobody be likely to carry the news , " remark the doctor . " it be no one 's 
 interest . moreover , the people here be afraid of Hernandez as if he 
 be the devil . " he turn to Charles Gould . " it be even awkward , 
 because if you want to communicate with the refugee you could find no 
 messenger . when Hernandez be range hundred of mile away from here 
 the Sulaco populace use to shudder at the tale of he roast his 
 prisoner alive . " 
 " yes , " murmur Charles Gould ; " Captain Mitchell 's Capataz be the 
 only man in the town who have see Hernandez eye to eye . Father Corbelan 
 employ he . he open the communication first . it be a pity that - " 
 his voice be cover by the booming of the great bell of the cathedral . 
 three single stroke , one after another , burst out explosively , die 
 away in deep and mellow vibration . and then all the bell in the 
 tower of every church , convent , or chapel in town , even those that have 
 remain shut up for year , peal out together with a crash . in this 
 furious flood of metallic uproar there be a power of suggest image 
 of strife and violence which blanch Mrs. Gould 's cheek . Basilio , 
 who have be wait at table , shrink within himself , clung to the 
 sideboard with chatter tooth . it be impossible to hear yourself 
 speak . 
 " shut these window ! " Charles Gould yell at he , angrily . all the 
 other servant , terrify at what they take for the signal of a general 
 massacre , have rush upstairs , tumble over each other , man and woman , 
 the obscure and generally invisible population of the ground floor on 
 the four side of the patio . the woman , scream " Misericordia ! " run 
 right into the room , and , fall on their knee against the wall , 
 begin to cross themselves convulsively . the star head of man block 
 the doorway in an instant - mozos from the stable , gardener , nondescript 
 helper live on the crumb of the munificent house - and Charles 
 Gould beheld all the extent of his domestic establishment , even to the 
 gatekeeper . this be a half - paralyze old man , whose long white lock 
 fall down to his shoulder : an heirloom take up by Charles Gould 's 
 familial piety . he could remember Henry Gould , an Englishman and a 
 Costaguanero of the second generation , chief of the Sulaco province ; 
 he have be his personal mozo year and year ago in peace and war ; have 
 be allow to attend his master in prison ; have , on the fatal morning , 
 follow the firing squad ; and , peep from behind one of the cypress 
 grow along the wall of the Franciscan Convent , have see , with his 
 eye start out of his head , Don Enrique throw up his hand and fall 
 with his face in the dust . Charles Gould note particularly the big 
 patriarchal head of that witness in the rear of the other servant . but 
 he be surprised to see a shrivelled old hag or two , of whose existence 
 within the wall of his house he have not be aware . they must have be 
 the mother , or even the grandmother of some of his people . there be 
 a few child , too , more or less naked , cry and cling to the leg 
 of their elder . he have never before notice any sign of a child in his 
 patio . even Leonarda , the camerista , come in a fright , push through , 
 with she spoil , pout face of a favourite maid , lead the Viola 
 girl by the hand . the crockery rattle on table and sideboard , and the 
 whole house seem to sway in the deafen wave of sound . 
 CHAPTER five 
 during the night the expectant populace have take possession of all the 
 belfry in the town in order to welcome Pedrito Montero , who be 
 make his entry after have sleep the night in Rincon . and first 
 come straggle in through the land gate the armed mob of all colour , 
 complexion , type , and state of raggedness , call themselves the 
 Sulaco National Guard , and command by Senor Gamacho . through the 
 middle of the street stream , like a torrent of rubbish , a mass of 
 straw hat , ponchos , gun - barrel , with an enormous green and yellow flag 
 flapping in their midst , in a cloud of dust , to the furious beating of 
 drum . the spectator recoil against the wall of the house shout 
 their Vivas ! behind the rabble could be see the lance of the cavalry , 
 the " army " of Pedro Montero . he advance between Senores Fuentes and 
 Gamacho at the head of his llaneros , who have accomplish the feat of 
 cross the Paramos of the Higuerota in a snow - storm . they ride four 
 abreast , mount on confiscate Campo horse , clothe in the heterogeneous 
 stock of roadside store they have loot hurriedly in their rapid ride 
 through the northern part of the province ; for Pedro Montero have be in 
 a great hurry to occupy Sulaco . the handkerchief knot loosely around 
 their bare throat be glaringly new , and all the right sleeve of 
 their cotton shirt have be cut off close to the shoulder for great 
 freedom in throw the lazo . emaciated greybeard ride by the side 
 of lean dark youth , mark by all the hardship of campaigning , with 
 strip of raw beef twin round the crown of their hat , and huge iron 
 spur fasten to their naked heel . those that in the pass of the 
 mountain have lose their lance have provide themselves with the goad 
 use by the Campo cattleman : slender shaft of palm fully ten foot long , 
 with a lot of loose ring jingle under the ironshod point . they be 
 arm with knife and revolver . a haggard fearlessness characterize 
 the expression of all these sun - black countenance ; they glare down 
 haughtily with their scorched eye at the crowd , or , blink upwards 
 insolently , point out to each other some particular head amongst the 
 woman at the window . when they have ride into the Plaza and catch 
 sight of the equestrian statue of the King dazzlingly white in the 
 sunshine , tower enormous and motionless above the surge of the 
 crowd , with its eternal gesture of salute , a murmur of surprise run 
 through their rank . " what be that saint in the big hat ? " they ask 
 each other . 
 they be a good sample of the cavalry of the plain with which Pedro 
 Montero have help so much the victorious career of his brother the 
 general . the influence which that man , bring up in coast town , 
 acquire in a short time over the plainsman of the Republic can be 
 ascribe only to a genius for treachery of so effective a kind that it 
 must have appear to those violent man but little remove from a state 
 of utter savagery , as the perfection of sagacity and virtue . the popular 
 lore of all nation testify that duplicity and cunning , together with 
 bodily strength , be look upon , even more than courage , as heroic 
 virtue by primitive mankind . to overcome your adversary be the 
 great affair of life . courage be take for grant . but the use of 
 intelligence awaken wonder and respect . stratagem , provide they do 
 not fail , be honourable ; the easy massacre of an unsuspecting enemy 
 evoke no feeling but those of gladness , pride , and admiration . not 
 perhaps that primitive man be more faithless than their descendant 
 of to - day , but that they go straighter to their aim , and be 
 more artless in their recognition of success as the only standard of 
 morality . 
 we have change since . the use of intelligence awaken little wonder and 
 less respect . but the ignorant and barbarous plainsman engage in civil 
 strife follow willingly a leader who often manage to deliver their 
 enemy bind , as it be , into their hand . Pedro Montero have a talent 
 for lull his adversary into a sense of security . and as man learn 
 wisdom with extreme slowness , and be always ready to believe promise 
 that flatter their secret hope , Pedro Montero be successful time after 
 time . whether only a servant or some inferior official in the Costaguana 
 Legation in Paris , he have rush back to his country directly he 
 hear that his brother have emerge from the obscurity of his frontier 
 commandancia . he have manage to deceive by his gift of plausibility 
 the chief of the Ribierist movement in the capital , and even the acute 
 agent of the San Tome mine have fail to understand he thoroughly . at 
 once he have obtain an enormous influence over his brother . they be 
 very much alike in appearance , both bald , with bunch of crisp hair 
 above their ear , argue the presence of some negro blood . only Pedro 
 be small than the general , more delicate altogether , with an 
 ape - like faculty for imitate all the outward sign of refinement and 
 distinction , and with a parrot - like talent for language . both brother 
 have receive some elementary instruction by the munificence of a great 
 european traveller , to whom their father have be a body - servant during 
 his journey in the interior of the country . in General Montero 's 
 case it enable he to rise from the rank . Pedrito , the young , 
 incorrigibly lazy and slovenly , have drift aimlessly from one coast 
 town to another , hang about counting - house , attach himself 
 to stranger as a sort of valet - de - place , pick up an easy and 
 disreputable living . his ability to read do nothing for he but fill 
 his head with absurd vision . his action be usually determine by 
 motif so improbable in themselves as to escape the penetration of a 
 rational person . 
 thus at first sight the agent of the Gould Concession in Sta . Marta 
 have credit he with the possession of sane view , and even with a 
 restrain power over the general 's everlastingly discontent vanity . 
 it could never have enter his head that Pedrito Montero , lackey or 
 inferior scribe , lodge in the garret of the various parisian hotel 
 where the Costaguana Legation use to shelter its diplomatic dignity , 
 have be devour the light sort of historical work in the french 
 language , such , for instance as the book of Imbert de Saint Amand upon 
 the Second Empire . but Pedrito have be strike by the splendour of a 
 brilliant court , and have conceive the idea of an existence for himself 
 where , like the Duc de Morny , he would associate the command of every 
 pleasure with the conduct of political affair and enjoy power supremely 
 in every way . nobody could have guess that . and yet this be one of 
 the immediate cause of the Monterist Revolution . this will appear less 
 incredible by the reflection that the fundamental cause be the 
 same as ever , root in the political immaturity of the people , in the 
 indolence of the upper class and the mental darkness of the low . 
 Pedrito Montero see in the elevation of his brother the road wide 
 open to his wild imagining . this be what make the Monterist 
 pronunciamiento so unpreventable . the general himself probably could 
 have be buy off , pacify with flattery , despatch on a 
 diplomatic mission to Europe . it be his brother who have egg he on 
 from first to last . he want to become the most brilliant statesman 
 of South America . he do not desire supreme power . he would have be 
 afraid of its labour and risk , in fact . before all , Pedrito Montero , 
 teach by his european experience , mean to acquire a serious fortune 
 for himself . with this object in view he obtain from his brother , on 
 the very morrow of the successful battle , the permission to push on 
 over the mountain and take possession of Sulaco . Sulaco be the land 
 of future prosperity , the choose land of material progress , the only 
 province in the Republic of interest to european capitalist . Pedrito 
 Montero , follow the example of the Duc de Morny , mean to have his 
 share of this prosperity . this be what he mean literally . now his 
 brother be master of the country , whether as President , Dictator , or 
 even as Emperor - why not as an Emperor ? - he mean to demand a share in 
 every enterprise - in railway , in mine , in sugar estate , in cotton 
 mill , in land company , in each and every undertaking - as the price of 
 his protection . the desire to be on the spot early be the real cause of 
 the celebrated ride over the mountain with some two hundred llanero , 
 an enterprise of which the danger have not appear at first clearly to 
 his impatience . come from a series of victory , it seem to he 
 that a Montero have only to appear to be master of the situation . this 
 illusion have betray he into a rashness of which he be become 
 aware . as he ride at the head of his llanero he regret that there 
 be so few of they . the enthusiasm of the populace reassure he . they 
 yell " Viva Montero ! Viva Pedrito ! " in order to make they still more 
 enthusiastic , and from the natural pleasure he have in dissembling , he 
 drop the rein on his horse 's neck , and with a tremendous effect of 
 familiarity and confidence slip his hand under the arm of Senores 
 Fuentes and Gamacho . in that posture , with a ragged town mozo hold 
 his horse by the bridle , he ride triumphantly across the Plaza to the 
 door of the Intendencia . its old gloomy wall seem to shake in the 
 acclamation that rent the air and cover the crash peal of the 
 cathedral bell . 
 Pedro Montero , the brother of the general , dismount into a shouting 
 and perspire throng of enthusiast whom the ragged Nationals be 
 push back fiercely . ascend a few step he survey the large crowd 
 gap at he and the bullet - speckle wall of the house opposite 
 lightly veil by a sunny haze of dust . the word " Pourvenir " in 
 immense black capital , alternate with broken window , star at 
 he across the vast space ; and he think with delight of the hour of 
 vengeance , because he be very sure of lay his hand upon Decoud . 
 on his left hand , Gamacho , big and hot , wipe his hairy wet face , 
 uncover a set of yellow fang in a grin of stupid hilarity . on his 
 right , Senor Fuentes , small and lean , look on with compress lip . 
 the crowd star literally open - mouthed , lose in eager stillness , as 
 though they have expect the great guerrillero , the famous Pedrito , to 
 begin scatter at once some sort of visible largesse . what he begin 
 be a speech . he begin it with the shout word " Citizens ! " which 
 reach even those in the middle of the Plaza . afterwards the great 
 part of the citizen remain fascinated by the orator 's action alone , 
 his tip - toeing , the arm fling above his head with the fist clench , 
 a hand lay flat upon the heart , the silver gleam of rolling eye , 
 the sweeping , point , embrace gesture , a hand lay familiarly 
 on Gamacho 's shoulder ; a hand wave formally towards the little 
 black - coat person of Senor Fuentes , advocate and politician and a true 
 friend of the people . the vivas of those near to the orator burst 
 out suddenly propagate themselves irregularly to the confine of the 
 crowd , like flame run over dry grass , and expire in the opening of 
 the street . in the interval , over the swarm Plaza brood a heavy 
 silence , in which the mouth of the orator go on opening and shutting , 
 and detach phrase - " the happiness of the people , " " son of the 
 country , " " the entire world , el mundo entiero " - reach even the pack 
 step of the cathedral with a feeble clear ring , thin as the buzzing 
 of a mosquito . but the orator strike his breast ; he seem to prance 
 between his two supporter . it be the supreme effort of his peroration . 
 then the two small figure disappear from the public gaze and the 
 enormous Gamacho , leave alone , advanced , raise his hat high above his 
 head . then he cover himself proudly and yell out , " Ciudadanos ! " a 
 dull roar greet Senor Gamacho , ex - pedlar of the Campo , Commandante of 
 the National Guards . 
 Upstairs Pedrito Montero walk about rapidly from one wreck room of 
 the Intendencia to another , snarl incessantly - 
 " what stupidity ! what destruction ! " 
 Senor Fuentes , follow , would relax his taciturn disposition to 
 murmur - 
 " it be all the work of Gamacho and his national ; " and then , incline 
 his head on his left shoulder , would press together his lip so firmly 
 that a little hollow would appear at each corner . he have his nomination 
 for Political Chief of the town in his pocket , and be all impatience to 
 enter upon his function . 
 in the long audience room , with its tall mirror all star by stone , 
 the hanging tear down and the canopy over the platform at the upper end 
 pull to piece , the vast , deep muttering of the crowd and the howling 
 voice of Gamacho speak just below reach they through the shutter 
 as they stand idly in dimness and desolation . 
 " the brute ! " observe his Excellency Don Pedro Montero through clench 
 tooth . " we must contrive as quickly as possible to send he and his 
 Nationals out there to fight Hernandez . " 
 the new Gefe Politico only jerk his head sideways , and take a puff at 
 his cigarette in sign of his agreement with this method for rid the 
 town of Gamacho and his inconvenient rabble . 
 Pedrito Montero look with disgust at the absolutely bare floor , and 
 at the belt of heavy gilt picture - frame run round the room , out 
 of which the remnant of torn and slash canvas flutter like dingy 
 rag . 
 " we be not barbarian , " he say . 
 this be what say his Excellency , the popular Pedrito , the guerrillero 
 skilled in the art of lay ambush , charge by his brother at his 
 own demand with the organization of Sulaco on democratic principle . the 
 night before , during the consultation with his partisan , who have 
 come out to meet he in Rincon , he have open his intention to Senor 
 Fuentes - 
 " we shall organize a popular vote , by yes or no , confide the destiny 
 of our beloved country to the wisdom and valiance of my heroic brother , 
 the invincible general . a plebiscite . do you understand ? " 
 and Senor Fuentes , puff out his leathery cheek , have incline his 
 head slightly to the left , let a thin , bluish jet of smoke escape 
 through his pursed lip . he have understand . 
 his Excellency be exasperate at the devastation . not a single chair , 
 table , sofa , etagere or console have be leave in the state room of the 
 Intendencia . his Excellency , though twitch all over with rage , be 
 restrain from burst into violence by a sense of his remoteness and 
 isolation . his heroic brother be very far away . meantime , how be he 
 go to take his siesta ? he have expect to find comfort and luxury 
 in the Intendencia after a year of hard camp life , end with the 
 hardship and privation of the daring dash upon Sulaco - upon the 
 province which be worth more in wealth and influence than all the rest 
 of the Republic 's territory . he would get even with Gamacho by - and - by . 
 and Senor Gamacho 's oration , delectable to popular ear , go on in the 
 heat and glare of the Plaza like the uncouth howling of an inferior 
 sort of devil cast into a white - hot furnace . every moment he have to wipe 
 his streaming face with his bare fore - arm ; he have fling off his coat , 
 and have turn up the sleeve of his shirt high above the elbow ; but 
 he keep on his head the large cocked hat with white plume . his 
 ingenuousness cherish this sign of his rank as Commandante of the 
 National Guards . approving and grave murmur greet his period . his 
 opinion be that war should be declare at once against France , England , 
 Germany , and the United States , who , by introduce railway , mining 
 enterprise , colonization , and under such other shallow pretence , aim 
 at rob poor people of their land , and with the help of these goth 
 and paralytic , the aristocrat would convert they into toil and 
 miserable slave . and the lepero , fling about the corner of their 
 dirty white manta , yell their approbation . General Montero , Gamacho 
 howl with conviction , be the only man equal to the patriotic task . 
 they assent to that , too . 
 the morning be wear on ; there be already sign of disruption , 
 current and eddy in the crowd . some be seek the shade of the 
 wall and under the tree of the Alameda . horseman spur through , 
 shouting ; group of sombrero set level on head against the vertical 
 sun be drift away into the street , where the open door of 
 pulperia reveal an enticing gloom resound with the gentle tinkling 
 of guitar . the National Guards be think of siesta , and the 
 eloquence of Gamacho , their chief , be exhaust . later on , when , in the 
 cooler hour of the afternoon , they try to assemble again for further 
 consideration of public affair , detachment of Montero 's cavalry camp 
 on the Alameda charge they without parley , at speed , with long lance 
 level at their fly back as far as the end of the street . the 
 National Guards of Sulaco be surprise by this proceeding . but they 
 be not indignant . no Costaguanero have ever learn to question the 
 eccentricity of a military force . they be part of the natural order 
 of thing . this must be , they conclude , some kind of administrative 
 measure , no doubt . but the motive of it escape their unaided 
 intelligence , and their chief and orator , Gamacho , Commandante of the 
 National Guard , be lie drunk and asleep in the bosom of his family . 
 his bare foot be upturned in the shadow repulsively , in the manner 
 of a corpse . his eloquent mouth have drop open . his young daughter , 
 scratch her head with one hand , with the other wave a green bough 
 over his scorched and peel face . 
 CHAPTER SIX 
 the decline sun have shift the shadow from west to east amongst the 
 house of the town . it have shift they upon the whole extent of the 
 immense Campo , with the white wall of its hacienda on the knoll 
 dominate the green distance ; with its grass - thatch ranch 
 crouch in the fold of ground by the bank of stream ; with the dark 
 island of cluster tree on a clear sea of grass , and the precipitous 
 range of the Cordillera , immense and motionless , emerge from the 
 billow of the low forest like the barren coast of a land of giant . 
 the sunset ray strike the snow - slope of Higuerota from afar give it 
 an air of rosy youth , while the serrate mass of distant peak remain 
 black , as if calcine in the fiery radiance . the undulating surface of 
 the forest seem powdered with pale gold dust ; and away there , beyond 
 Rincon , hide from the town by two woode spur , the rock of the 
 San Tome gorge , with the flat wall of the mountain itself crown by 
 gigantic fern , take on warm tone of brown and yellow , with red rusty 
 streak , and the dark green clump of bush root in crevice . from 
 the plain the stamp shed and the house of the mine appear dark and 
 small , high up , like the nest of bird cluster on the ledge of a 
 cliff . the zigzag path resemble faint tracing scratch on the wall 
 of a cyclopean blockhouse . to the two sereno of the mine on patrol 
 duty , strolling , carbine in hand , and watchful eye , in the shade of the 
 tree line the stream near the bridge , Don Pepe , descend the path 
 from the upper plateau , appear no big than a large beetle . 
 with his air of aimless , insect - like go to and fro upon the face of 
 the rock , Don Pepe 's figure keep on descend steadily , and , when near 
 the bottom , sink at last behind the roof of store - house , forge , and 
 workshop . for a time the pair of sereno stroll back and forth before 
 the bridge , on which they have stop a horseman hold a large white 
 envelope in his hand . then Don Pepe , emerge in the village street 
 from amongst the house , not a stone 's throw from the frontier bridge , 
 approach , stride in wide dark trouser tuck into boot , a white 
 linen jacket , sabre at his side , and revolver at his belt . in this 
 disturb time nothing could find the Senor Gobernador with his boot 
 off , as the saying be . 
 at a slight nod from one of the sereno , the man , a messenger from 
 the town , dismount , and cross the bridge , lead his horse by the 
 bridle . 
 Don Pepe receive the letter from his other hand , slap his left 
 side and his hip in succession , feel for his spectacle case . after 
 settle the heavy silvermounte affair astride his nose , and adjust 
 it carefully behind his ear , he open the envelope , hold it up at 
 about a foot in front of his eye . the paper he pull out contain 
 some three line of writing . he look at they for a long time . his grey 
 moustache move slightly up and down , and the wrinkle , radiate at the 
 corner of his eye , run together . he nod serenely . " Bueno , " he say . 
 " there be no answer . " 
 then , in his quiet , kindly way , he engage in a cautious conversation 
 with the man , who be willing to talk cheerily , as if something lucky 
 have happen to he recently . he have see from a distance Sotillo 's 
 infantry camp along the shore of the harbour on each side of the 
 Custom House . they have do no damage to the building . the foreigner 
 of the railway remain shut up within the yard . they be no long 
 anxious to shoot poor people . he curse the foreigner ; then he report 
 Montero 's entry and the rumour of the town . the poor be go to be 
 make rich now . that be very good . More he do not know , and , break 
 into propitiatory smile , he intimate that he be hungry and thirsty . 
 the old major direct he to go to the alcalde of the first village . 
 the man ride off , and Don Pepe , stride slowly in the direction of a 
 little wooden belfry , look over a hedge into a little garden , and see 
 Father Roman sit in a white hammock sling between two orange tree 
 in front of the presbytery . 
 an enormous tamarind shade with its dark foliage the whole white 
 framehouse . a young indian girl with long hair , big eye , and small 
 hand and foot , carry out a wooden chair , while a thin old woman , 
 crab and vigilant , watch she all the time from the verandah . 
 Don Pepe sit down in the chair and light a cigar ; the priest draw 
 in an immense quantity of snuff out of the hollow of his palm . on his 
 reddish - brown face , wear , hollow as if crumble , the eye , fresh and 
 candid , sparkle like two black diamond . 
 Don Pepe , in a mild and humorous voice , inform Father Roman that 
 Pedrito Montero , by the hand of Senor Fuentes , have ask he on what 
 term he would surrender the mine in proper working order to a legally 
 constituted commission of patriotic citizen , escort by a small 
 military force . the priest cast his eye up to heaven . however , Don Pepe 
 continue , the mozo who bring the letter say that Don Carlos Gould 
 be alive , and so far unmolested . 
 Father Roman express in a few word his thankfulness at hearing of the 
 Senor Administrador 's safety . 
 the hour of oration have go by in the silvery ringing of a bell in the 
 little belfry . the belt of forest close the entrance of the valley 
 stand like a screen between the low sun and the street of the village . 
 at the other end of the rocky gorge , between the wall of basalt and 
 granite , a forest - clothe mountain , hide all the range from the San Tome 
 dweller , rise steeply , light up and leafy to the very top . three 
 small rosy cloud hang motionless overhead in the great depth of blue . 
 knot of people sit in the street between the wattle hut . before the 
 casa of the alcalde , the foreman of the night - shift , already assemble 
 to lead their man , squat on the ground in a circle of leather 
 skull - cap , and , bow their bronze back , be pass round the gourd 
 of mate . the mozo from the town , have fasten his horse to a wooden 
 post before the door , be tell they the news of Sulaco as the 
 blacken gourd of the decoction pass from hand to hand . the grave 
 alcalde himself , in a white waistcloth and a flower chintz gown with 
 sleeve , open wide upon his naked stout person with an effect of a gaudy 
 bathing robe , stand by , wear a rough beaver hat at the back of his 
 head , and grasp a tall staff with a silver knob in his hand . 
 these insignia of his dignity have be confer upon he by the 
 Administration of the mine , the fountain of honour , of prosperity , and 
 peace . he have be one of the first immigrant into this valley ; his 
 son and son - in - law work within the mountain which seem with its 
 treasure to pour down the thunder ore shoot of the upper mesa , the 
 gift of well - being , security , and justice upon the toiler . he listen 
 to the news from the town with curiosity and indifference , as if 
 concern another world than his own . and it be true that they 
 appear to he so . in a very few year the sense of belong to a 
 powerful organization have be develop in these harass , half - wild 
 Indians . they be proud of , and attach to , the mine . it have secure 
 their confidence and belief . they invest it with a protect and 
 invincible virtue as though it be a fetish make by their own hand , 
 for they be ignorant , and in other respect do not differ appreciably 
 from the rest of mankind which put infinite trust in its own creation . 
 it never enter the alcalde 's head that the mine could fail in its 
 protection and force . politic be good enough for the people of the 
 town and the Campo . his yellow , round face , with wide nostril , and 
 motionless in expression , resemble a fierce full moon . he listen to 
 the excited vapouring of the mozo without misgiving , without surprise , 
 without any active sentiment whatever . 
 Padre Roman sit dejectedly balance himself , his foot just touch 
 the ground , his hand grip the edge of the hammock . with less 
 confidence , but as ignorant as his flock , he ask the major what do he 
 think be go to happen now . 
 Don Pepe , bolt upright in the chair , fold his hand peacefully on 
 the hilt of his sword , stand perpendicular between his thigh , and 
 answer that he do not know . the mine could be defend against any 
 force likely to be send to take possession . on the other hand , from the 
 arid character of the valley , when the regular supply from the Campo 
 have be cut off , the population of the three village could be starve 
 into submission . Don Pepe expose these contingency with serenity 
 to Father Roman , who , as an old campaigner , be able to understand the 
 reasoning of a military man . they talk with simplicity and directness . 
 Father Roman be sadden at the idea of his flock be scatter 
 or else enslave . he have no illusion as to their fate , not from 
 penetration , but from long experience of political atrocity , which 
 seem to he fatal and unavoidable in the life of a state . the working 
 of the usual public institution present itself to he most distinctly 
 as a series of calamity overtake private individual and flow 
 logically from each other through hate , revenge , folly , and rapacity , 
 as though they have be part of a divine dispensation . Father Roman 's 
 clear - sightedness be serve by an uninformed intelligence ; but his 
 heart , preserve its tenderness amongst scene of carnage , spoliation , 
 and violence , abhor these calamitie the more as his association with 
 the victim be close . he entertain towards the Indians of the valley 
 feeling of paternal scorn . he have be marry , baptize , confessing , 
 absolving , and bury the worker of the San Tome mine with dignity 
 and unction for five year or more ; and he believe in the sacredness of 
 these ministration , which make they his own in a spiritual sense . they 
 be dear to his sacerdotal supremacy . Mrs. Gould 's earnest interest in 
 the concern of these people enhance their importance in the priest 's 
 eye , because it really augment his own . when talk over with she 
 the innumerable Marias and Brigidas of the village , he feel his own 
 humanity expand . Padre Roman be incapable of fanaticism to an almost 
 reprehensible degree . the english senora be evidently a heretic ; but 
 at the same time she seem to he wonderful and angelic . whenever that 
 confused state of his feeling occur to he , while stroll , for 
 instance , his breviary under his arm , in the wide shade of the tamarind , 
 he would stop short to inhale with a strong snuffling noise a large 
 quantity of snuff , and shake his head profoundly . at the thought of 
 what might befall the illustrious senora presently , he become gradually 
 overcome with dismay . he voice it in an agitated murmur . even Don Pepe 
 lose his serenity for a moment . he lean forward stiffly . 
 " listen , Padre . the very fact that those thieve macaque in Sulaco be 
 try to find out the price of my honour prove that Senor Don Carlos 
 and all in the Casa Gould be safe . as to my honour , that also be safe , 
 as every man , woman , and child know . but the negro Liberals who have 
 snatch the town by surprise do not know that . Bueno . let they sit and 
 wait . while they wait they can do no harm . " 
 and he regain his composure . he regain it easily , because whatever 
 happen his honour of an old officer of Paez be safe . he have promise 
 Charles Gould that at the approach of an armed force he would defend the 
 gorge just long enough to give himself time to destroy scientifically 
 the whole plant , building , and workshop of the mine with heavy charge 
 of dynamite ; block with ruin the main tunnel , break down the pathway , 
 blow up the dam of the water - power , shatter the famous Gould Concession 
 into fragment , fly sky high out of a horrified world . the mine have 
 get hold of Charles Gould with a grip as deadly as ever it have lay upon 
 his father . but this extreme resolution have seem to Don Pepe the most 
 natural thing in the world . his measure have be take with judgment . 
 everything be prepare with a careful completeness . and Don Pepe fold 
 his hand pacifically on his sword hilt , and nod at the priest . in 
 his excitement , Father Roman have fling snuff in handfuls at his face , 
 and , all besmear with tobacco , round - eye , and beside himself , have get 
 out of the hammock to walk about , utter exclamation . 
 Don Pepe stroke his grey and pendant moustache , whose fine end hung 
 far below the clean - cut line of his jaw , and speak with a conscious 
 pride in his reputation . 
 " so , Padre , I do not   know what will happen . but I know that as long as 
 I be here Don Carlos can speak to that macaque , Pedrito Montero , and 
 threaten the destruction of the mine with perfect assurance that he will 
 be take seriously . for people know I . " 
 he begin to turn the cigar in his lip a little nervously , and go on - 
 " but that be talk - good for the politico . I be a military man . I do not 
 know what may happen . but I know what ought to be do - the mine should 
 march upon the town with gun , axis , knife tie up to stick - por Dios . 
 that be what should be do . only - " 
 his fold hand twitch on the hilt . the cigar turn fast in the 
 corner of his lip . 
 " and who should lead but I ? unfortunately - observe - I have give my word 
 of honour to Don Carlos not to let the mine fall into the hand of these 
 thief . in war - you know this , Padre - the fate of battle be uncertain , 
 and whom could I leave here to act for I in case of defeat ? the 
 explosive be ready . but it would require a man of high honour , 
 of intelligence , of judgment , of courage , to carry out the prepared 
 destruction . somebody I can trust with my honour as I can trust myself . 
 another old officer of Paez , for instance . or - or - perhaps one of Paez 's 
 old chaplain would do . " 
 he get up , long , lank , upright , hard , with his martial moustache and 
 the bony structure of his face , from which the glance of the sunken 
 eye seem to transfix the priest , who stand still , an empty wooden 
 snuff - box hold upside down in his hand , and glare back , speechless , at 
 the governor of the mine . 
 CHAPTER seven 
 at about that time , in the Intendencia of Sulaco , Charles Gould be 
 assure Pedrito Montero , who have send a request for his presence there , 
 that he would never let the mine pass out of his hand for the profit of 
 a Government who have rob he of it . the Gould Concession could not 
 be resume . his father have not desire it . the son would never surrender 
 it . he would never surrender it alive . and once dead , where be the 
 power capable of resuscitate such an enterprise in all its vigour and 
 wealth out of the ash and ruin of destruction ? there be no such power 
 in the country . and where be the skill and capital abroad that would 
 condescend to touch such an ill - omen corpse ? Charles Gould talk in 
 the impassive tone which have for many year serve to conceal his anger 
 and contempt . he suffer . he be disgusted with what he have to say . it 
 be too much like heroic . in he the strictly practical instinct be in 
 profound discord with the almost mystic view he take of his right . the 
 Gould Concession be symbolic of abstract justice . let the heaven 
 fall . but since the San Tome mine have develop into world - wide fame 
 his threat have enough force and effectiveness to reach the rudimentary 
 intelligence of Pedro Montero , wrap up as it be in the futility 
 of historical anecdote . the Gould Concession be a serious asset in the 
 country 's finance , and , what be more , in the private budget of many 
 official as well . it be traditional . it be know . it be say . it 
 be credible . every Minister of Interior draw a salary from the San 
 Tome mine . it be natural . and Pedrito intend to be Minister of the 
 Interior and President of the Council in his brother 's Government . the 
 Duc de Morny have occupy those high post during the Second French 
 Empire with conspicuous advantage to himself . 
 a table , a chair , a wooden bedstead have be procure for his 
 Excellency , who , after a short siesta , render absolutely necessary 
 by the labour and the pomp of his entry into Sulaco , have be get 
 hold of the administrative machine by make appointment , give 
 order , and sign proclamation . alone with Charles Gould in the 
 audience room , his Excellency manage with his well - know skill to 
 conceal his annoyance and consternation . he have begin at first to talk 
 loftily of confiscation , but the want of all proper feeling and mobility 
 in the Senor Administrador 's feature end by affect adversely 
 his power of masterful expression . Charles Gould have repeat : " the 
 Government can certainly bring about the destruction of the San Tome 
 mine if it like ; but without I it can do nothing else . " it be an 
 alarming pronouncement , and well calculate to hurt the sensibility of 
 a politician whose mind be bent upon the spoil of victory . and Charles 
 Gould say also that the destruction of the San Tome mine would cause 
 the ruin of other undertaking , the withdrawal of european capital , the 
 withholding , most probably , of the last instalment of the foreign loan . 
 that stony fiend of a man say all these thing   which be accessible 
 to his Excellency 's intelligence   in a coldbloode manner which make one 
 shudder . 
 a long course of read historical work , light and gossipy in tone , 
 carry out in garret of parisian hotel , sprawl on an untidy bed , 
 to the neglect of his duty , menial or otherwise , have affect the 
 manner of Pedro Montero . have he see around he the splendour of the 
 old Intendencia , the magnificent hanging , the gilt furniture range 
 along the wall ; have he stand upon a dais on a noble square of red 
 carpet , he would have probably be very dangerous from a sense of 
 success and elevation . but in this sacked and devastated residence , with 
 the three piece of common furniture huddle up in the middle of the 
 vast apartment , Pedrito 's imagination be subdue by a feeling of 
 insecurity and impermanence . that feeling and the firm attitude 
 of Charles Gould who have not once , so far , pronounce the word 
 " Excellency , " diminish he in his own eye . he assume the tone of an 
 enlightened man of the world , and beg Charles Gould to dismiss from 
 his mind every cause for alarm . he be now converse , he remind 
 he , with the brother of the master of the country , charge with a 
 reorganize mission . the trusted brother of the master of the country , 
 he repeat . nothing be far from the thought of that wise and 
 patriotic hero than idea of destruction . " I entreat you , Don Carlos , 
 not to give way to your anti - democratic prejudice , " he cry , in a 
 burst of condescend effusion . 
 Pedrito Montero surprise one at first sight by the vast development of 
 his bald forehead , a shiny yellow expanse between the crinkly coal - black 
 tuft of hair without any lustre , the engaging form of his mouth , and 
 an unexpectedly cultivate voice . but his eye , very glistening as if 
 freshly paint on each side of his hooked nose , have a round , hopeless , 
 birdlike stare when open fully . now , however , he narrow they 
 agreeably , throw his square chin up and speak with closed tooth 
 slightly through the nose , with what he imagine to be the manner of a 
 grand seigneur . 
 in that attitude , he declare suddenly that the high expression of 
 democracy be caesarism : the imperial rule base upon the direct popular 
 vote . caesarism be conservative . it be strong . it recognize the 
 legitimate need of democracy which require order , title , and 
 distinction . they would be shower upon deserve man . caesarism 
 be peace . it be progressive . it secure the prosperity of a country . 
 Pedrito Montero be carry away . look at what the Second Empire have 
 do for France . it be a regime which delight to honour man of Don 
 Carlos 's stamp . the Second Empire fall , but that be because its chief 
 be devoid of that military genius which have raise General Montero to 
 the pinnacle of fame and glory . Pedrito elevate his hand jerkily to 
 help the idea of pinnacle , of fame . " we shall have many talk yet . we 
 shall understand each other thoroughly , Don Carlos ! " he cry in a tone 
 of fellowship . Republicanism have do its work . imperial democracy be 
 the power of the future . Pedrito , the guerrillero , show his hand , 
 lower his voice forcibly . a man single out by his fellow - citizen for 
 the honourable nickname of El Rey de Sulaco could not but receive a full 
 recognition from an imperial democracy as a great captain of industry 
 and a person of weighty counsel , whose popular designation would be soon 
 replace by a more solid title . " eh , Don Carlos ? no ! what do you say ? 
 Conde de Sulaco - Eh ? - or marquis . . . " 
 he cease . the air be cool on the Plaza , where a patrol of cavalry rode 
 round and round without penetrate into the street , which resound 
 with shout and the strumming of guitar issue from the open door of 
 pulperia . the order be not to interfere with the enjoyment of the 
 people . and above the roof , next to the perpendicular line of the 
 cathedral tower the snowy curve of Higuerota block a large space of 
 darken blue sky before the window of the Intendencia . after a time 
 Pedrito Montero , thrust his hand in the bosom of his coat , bow his 
 head with slow dignity . the audience be over . 
 Charles Gould on go out pass his hand over his forehead as if to 
 disperse the mist of an oppressive dream , whose grotesque extravagance 
 leave behind a subtle sense of bodily danger and intellectual decay . in 
 the passage and on the staircase of the old palace Montero 's trooper 
 lounge about insolently , smoke and make way for no one ; the 
 clanking of sabre and spur resound all over the building . three 
 silent group of civilian in severe black wait in the main gallery , 
 formal and helpless , a little huddle up , each keep apart from the 
 other , as if in the exercise of a public duty they have be overcome 
 by a desire to shun the notice of every eye . these be the deputation 
 wait for their audience . the one from the Provincial Assembly , more 
 restless and uneasy in its corporate expression , be overtop by the 
 big face of Don Juste Lopez , soft and white , with prominent eyelid and 
 wreathe in impenetrable solemnity as if in a dense cloud . the President 
 of the Provincial Assembly , come bravely to save the last shred of 
 parliamentary institution   on the english model , avert his eye 
 from the Administrador of the San Tome mine as a dignified rebuke of his 
 little faith in that only save principle . 
 the mournful severity of that reproof do not affect Charles Gould , but 
 he be sensible to the glance of the other direct upon he without 
 reproach , as if only to read their own fate upon his face . all of they 
 have talk , shout , and declaim in the great sala of the Casa Gould . 
 the feeling of compassion for those man , strike with a strange impotence 
 in the toil of moral degradation , do not induce he to make a sign . he 
 suffer from his fellowship in evil with they too much . he cross the 
 Plaza unmoleste . the Amarilla Club be full of festive ragamuffin . 
 their frowsy head protrude from every window , and from within come 
 drunken shout , the thumping of foot , and the twanging of harp . break 
 bottle strew the pavement below . Charles Gould find the doctor still 
 in his house . 
 Dr. Monygham come away from the crack in the shutter through which he 
 have be watch the street . 
 " ah ! you be back at last ! " he say in a tone of relief . " I have be 
 tell Mrs. Gould that you be perfectly safe , but I be not by any 
 mean certain that the fellow would have let you go . " 
 " neither be I , " confess Charles Gould , lay his hat on the table . 
 " you will have to take action . " 
 the silence of Charles Gould seem to admit that this be the only 
 course . this be as far as Charles Gould be accustom to go towards 
 express his intention . 
 " I hope you do not warn Montero of what you mean to do , " the doctor 
 say , anxiously . 
 " I try to make he see that the existence of the mine be bind up 
 with my personal safety , " continue Charles Gould , look away from the 
 doctor , and fix his eye upon the water - colour sketch upon the wall . 
 " he believe you ? " the doctor ask , eagerly . 
 " God know ! " say Charles Gould . " I owe it to my wife to say that much . 
 he be well enough inform . he know that I have Don Pepe there . fuente 
 must have tell he . they know that the old major be perfectly capable of 
 blow up the San Tome mine without hesitation or compunction . have it 
 not be for that I do not   think I would have leave the Intendencia a free 
 man . he would blow everything up from loyalty and from hate - from hate 
 of these Liberals , as they call themselves . liberal ! the word one 
 know so well have a nightmarish meaning in this country . liberty , 
 democracy , patriotism , government - all of they have a flavour of folly 
 and murder . have not   they , doctor ? . . . I alone can restrain Don Pepe . 
 if they be to - to do away with I , nothing could prevent he . " 
 " they will try to tamper with he , " the doctor suggest , thoughtfully . 
 " it be very possible , " Charles Gould say very low , as if speak to 
 himself , and still gaze at the sketch of the San Tome gorge upon the 
 wall . " yes , I expect they will try that . " Charles Gould look for the 
 first time at the doctor . " it would give I time , " he add . 
 " exactly , " say Dr. Monygham , suppress his excitement . " especially if 
 Don Pepe behave diplomatically . why should not   he give they some hope 
 of success ? eh ? otherwise you would not   gain so much time . could not   he be 
 instruct to - " 
 Charles Gould , look at the doctor steadily , shake his head , but the 
 doctor continue with a certain amount of fire - 
 " yes , to enter into negotiation for the surrender of the mine . it be a 
 good notion . you would mature your plan . of course , I do not   ask what it 
 be . I do not   want to know . I would refuse to listen to you if you try 
 to tell I . I be not fit for confidence . " 
 " what nonsense ! " mutter Charles Gould , with displeasure . 
 he disapprove of the doctor 's sensitiveness about that far - off 
 episode of his life . so much memory shock Charles Gould . it be like 
 morbidness . and again he shake his head . he refuse to tamper with the 
 open rectitude of Don Pepe 's conduct , both from taste and from policy . 
 instruction would have to be either verbal or in writing . in either 
 case they run the risk of be intercept . it be by no mean certain 
 that a messenger could reach the mine ; and , besides , there be no one 
 to send . it be on the tip of Charles 's tongue to say that only the 
 late Capataz de Cargadores could have be employ with some chance 
 of success and the certitude of discretion . but he do not say that . he 
 point out to the doctor that it would have be bad policy . 
 directly Don Pepe let it be suppose that he could be buy over , the 
 Administrador 's personal safety and the safety of his friend would 
 become endanger . for there would be then no reason for moderation . the 
 incorruptibility of Don Pepe be the essential and restrain fact . the 
 doctor hang his head and admit that in a way it be so . 
 he could not   deny to himself that the reasoning be sound enough . Don 
 Pepe 's usefulness consist in his unstained character . as to his own 
 usefulness , he reflect bitterly it be also his own character . he 
 declare to Charles Gould that he have the mean of keep Sotillo from 
 join his force with Montero , at least for the present . 
 " if you have have all this silver here , " the doctor say , " or even if it 
 have be know to be at the mine , you could have bribe Sotillo to throw 
 off his recent Monterism . you could have induce he either to go away 
 in his steamer or even to join you . " 
 " certainly not that last , " Charles Gould declare , firmly . " what could 
 one do with a man like that , afterwards - tell I , doctor ? the silver be 
 go , and I be glad of it . it would have be an immediate and 
 strong temptation . the scramble for that visible plunder would have 
 precipitate a disastrous ending . I would have have to defend it , too . 
 I be glad we have   remove it - even if it be lose . it would have be a 
 danger and a curse . " 
 " perhaps he be right , " the doctor , an hour later , say hurriedly to Mrs. 
 Gould , whom he meet in the corridor . " the thing be do , and the shadow 
 of the treasure may do just as well as the substance . let I try to 
 serve you to the whole extent of my evil reputation . I be off now to 
 play my game of betrayal with Sotillo , and keep he off the town . " 
 she put out both her hand impulsively . " Dr. Monygham , you be run a 
 terrible risk , " she whisper , avert from his face her eye , full of 
 tear , for a short glance at the door of her husband 's room . she press 
 both his hand , and the doctor stand as if root to the spot , look 
 down at she , and try to twist his lip into a smile . 
 " oh , I know you will defend my memory , " he utter at last , and run 
 totter down the stair across the patio , and out of the house . in the 
 street he keep up a great pace with his smart hobbling walk , a case 
 of instrument under his arm . he be know for be loco . nobody 
 interfere with he . from under the seaward gate , across the dusty , arid 
 plain , intersperse with low bush , he see , more than a mile away , the 
 ugly enormity of the Custom House , and the two or three other building 
 which at that time constitute the seaport of Sulaco . far away to the 
 south grove of palm tree edge the curve of the harbour shore . the 
 distant peak of the Cordillera have lose their identity of clearcut 
 shape in the steadily deepen blue of the eastern sky . the doctor 
 walk briskly . a darkle shadow seem to fall upon he from the 
 zenith . the sun have set . for a time the snow of Higuerota continue 
 to glow with the reflect glory of the west . the doctor , hold a 
 straight course for the Custom House , appear lonely , hop amongst 
 the dark bush like a tall bird with a broken wing . 
 tint of purple , gold , and crimson be mirror in the clear water 
 of the harbour . a long tongue of land , straight as a wall , with the 
 grass - grow ruin of the fort make a sort of rounded green mound , 
 plainly visible from the inner shore , close its circuit ; while beyond 
 the Placid Gulf repeat those splendour of colour on a great 
 scale and with a more sombre magnificence . the great mass of cloud 
 fill the head of the gulf have long red smear amongst its convoluted 
 fold of grey and black , as of a float mantle stain with blood . 
 the three Isabels , overshadow and clear cut in a great smoothness 
 confound the sea and sky , appear suspend , purple - black , in the 
 air . the little wavelet seem to be toss tiny red spark upon the 
 sandy beach . the glassy band of water along the horizon give out a 
 fiery red glow , as if fire and water have be mingle together in the 
 vast bed of the ocean . 
 at last the conflagration of sea and sky , lie embrace and still in a 
 flaming contact upon the edge of the world , go out . the red spark in 
 the water vanish together with the stain of blood in the black mantle 
 drape the sombre head of the Placid Gulf ; a sudden breeze spring up 
 and die out after rustle heavily the growth of bush on the ruin 
 earthwork of the fort . Nostromo wake up from a fourteen hour ' sleep , 
 and arise full length from his lair in the long grass . he stand knee 
 deep amongst the whisper undulation of the green blade with the 
 lose air of a man just bear into the world . handsome , robust , and 
 supple , he throw back his head , fling his arm open , and stretch 
 himself with a slow twist of the waist and a leisurely growl yawn of 
 white tooth , as natural and free from evil in the moment of wake as a 
 magnificent and unconscious wild beast . then , in the suddenly steadied 
 glance fix upon nothing from under a thoughtful frown , appear the 
 man . 
 CHAPTER eight 
 after land from his swim Nostromo have scramble up , all dripping , 
 into the main quadrangle of the old fort ; and there , amongst ruin bit 
 of wall and rot remnant of roof and shed , he have sleep the day 
 through . he have sleep in the shadow of the mountain , in the white blaze 
 of noon , in the stillness and solitude of that overgrown piece of land 
 between the oval of the harbour and the spacious semi - circle of the 
 gulf . he lie as if dead . a rey - zamuro , appear like a tiny black speck 
 in the blue , stoop , circle prudently with a stealthiness of flight 
 startling in a bird of that great size . the shadow of his pearly - white 
 body , of his black - tip wing , fall on the grass no more silently than 
 he alight himself on a hillock of rubbish within three yard of that 
 man , lie as still as a corpse . the bird stretch his bare neck , 
 crane his bald head , loathsome in the brilliance of varied colouring , 
 with an air of voracious anxiety towards the promising stillness of that 
 prostrate body . then , sink his head deeply into his soft plumage , he 
 settle himself to wait . the first thing upon which Nostromo 's eye 
 fall on wake be this patient watcher for the sign of death and 
 corruption . when the man get up the vulture hop away in great , 
 side - long , flutter jump . he linger for a while , morose and 
 reluctant , before he rise , circle noiselessly with a sinister droop of 
 beak and claw . 
 long after he have vanish , Nostromo , lift his eye up to the sky , 
 mutter , " I be not dead yet . " 
 the Capataz of the Sulaco Cargadores have live in splendour and 
 publicity up to the very moment , as it be , when he take charge of the 
 light contain the treasure of silver ingot . 
 the last act he have perform in Sulaco be in complete harmony with his 
 vanity , and as such perfectly genuine . he have give his last dollar to 
 an old woman moan with the grief and fatigue of a dismal search 
 under the arch of the ancient gate . perform in obscurity and without 
 witness , it have still the characteristic of splendour and publicity , 
 and be in strict keeping with his reputation . but this awakening in 
 solitude , except for the watchful vulture , amongst the ruin of the 
 fort , have no such characteristic . his first confused feeling be 
 exactly this - that it be not in keep . it be more like the end of 
 thing . the necessity of living conceal somehow , for God know how 
 long , which assail he on his return to consciousness , make everything 
 that have go before for year appear vain and foolish , like a 
 flattering dream come suddenly to an end . 
 he climb the crumble slope of the rampart , and , put aside the 
 bush , look upon the harbour . he see a couple of ship at anchor upon 
 the sheet of water reflect the last gleam of light , and Sotillo 's 
 steamer moor to the jetty . and behind the pale long front of the 
 Custom House , there appear the extent of the town like a grove of 
 thick timber on the plain with a gateway in front , and the cupola , 
 tower , and mirador rise above the tree , all dark , as if surrender 
 already to the night . the thought that it be no long open to he to 
 ride through the street , recognize by everyone , great and little , as 
 he use to do every evening on his way to play monte in the posada of 
 the Mexican Domingo ; or to sit in the place of honour , listen to 
 song and look at dance , make it appear to he as a town that have no 
 existence . 
 for a long time he gaze on , then let the part bush spring back , 
 and , cross over to the other side of the fort , survey the vaster 
 emptiness of the great gulf . the Isabels stand out heavily upon the 
 narrow long band of red in the west , which gleam low between their 
 black shape , and the Capataz thought of Decoud alone there with the 
 treasure . that man be the only one who care whether he fall into the 
 hand of the Monterists or not , the Capataz reflect bitterly . and 
 that merely would be an anxiety for his own sake . as to the rest , they 
 neither know nor care . what he have hear Giorgio Viola say once be 
 very true . king , minister , aristocrat , the rich in general , keep the 
 people in poverty and subjection ; they keep they as they keep dog , to 
 fight and hunt for their service . 
 the darkness of the sky have descend to the line of the horizon , 
 envelop the whole gulf , the islet , and the lover of Antonia alone 
 with the treasure on the Great Isabel . the Capataz , turn his back on 
 these thing invisible and exist , sit down and take his face between 
 his fist . he feel the pinch of poverty for the first time in his life . 
 to find himself without money after a run of bad luck at monte in the 
 low , smoky room of Domingo 's posada , where the fraternity of Cargadores 
 gamble , sang , and dance of an evening ; to remain with empty pocket 
 after a burst of public generosity to some peyne d'oro girl or other 
  for whom he do not care , have none of the humiliation of destitution . 
 he remain rich in glory and reputation . but since it be no long 
 possible for he to parade the street of the town , and be hail with 
 respect in the usual haunt of his leisure , this sailor feel himself 
 destitute indeed . 
 his mouth be dry . it be dry with heavy sleep and extremely anxious 
 thinking , as it have never be dry before . it may be say that Nostromo 
 taste the dust and ash of the fruit of life into which he have bite 
 deeply in his hunger for praise . without remove his head from between 
 his fist , he try to spit before he - " tfui " - and mutter a curse 
 upon the selfishness of all the rich people . 
 since everything seem lose in Sulaco   and that be the feeling of his 
 waking , the idea of leave the country altogether have present itself 
 to Nostromo . at that thought he have see , like the beginning of another 
 dream , a vision of steep and tideless shore , with dark pine on the 
 height and white house low down near a very blue sea . he see the quay 
 of a big port , where the coast felucca , with their lateen sail 
 outspread like motionless wing , enter gliding silently between the 
 end of long mole of square block that project angularly towards 
 each other , hug a cluster of shipping to the superb bosom of a hill 
 cover with palace . he remember these sight not without some filial 
 emotion , though he have be habitually and severely beat as a boy 
 on one of these felucca by a short - neck , shaven Genoese , with a 
 deliberate and distrustful manner , who   he firmly believe   have cheat 
 he out of his orphan 's inheritance . but it be mercifully decreed that 
 the evil of the past should appear but faintly in retrospect . under 
 the sense of loneliness , abandonment , and failure , the idea of return to 
 these thing appear tolerable . but , what ? return ? with bare foot 
 and head , with one check shirt and a pair of cotton calzonero for all 
 worldly possession ? 
 the renowned Capataz , his elbow on his knee and a fist dig into each 
 cheek , laugh with self - derision , as he have spat with disgust , straight 
 out before he into the night . the confused and intimate impression 
 of universal dissolution which beset a subjective nature at any strong 
 check to its rule passion have a bitterness approach that of death 
 itself . he be simple . he be as ready to become the prey of any belief , 
 superstition , or desire as a child . 
 the fact of his situation he could appreciate like a man with a 
 distinct experience of the country . he see they clearly . he be as if 
 sober after a long bout of intoxication . his fidelity have be take 
 advantage of . he have persuade the body of Cargadores to side with the 
 Blancos against the rest of the people ; he have have interview with Don 
 Jose ; he have be make use of by Father Corbelan for negotiate with 
 Hernandez ; it be know that Don Martin Decoud have admit he to 
 a sort of intimacy , so that he have be free of the office of the 
 Porvenir . all these thing have flatter he in the usual way . what 
 do he care about their politic ? nothing at all . and at the end of it 
 all - Nostromo here and Nostromo there - where be Nostromo ? Nostromo can 
 do this and that - work all day and ride all night - behold ! he find 
 himself a marked ribierist for any sort of vengeance Gamacho , for 
 instance , would choose to take , now the Montero party , have , after all , 
 master the town . the Europeans have give up ; the Caballeros have give 
 up . Don Martin have indeed explain it be only temporary - that he 
 be go to bring Barrios to the rescue . where be that now - with Don 
 Martin   whose ironic manner of talk have always make the Capataz feel 
 vaguely uneasy   strand on the Great Isabel ? everybody have give up . 
 even Don Carlos have give up . the hurried removal of the treasure out 
 to sea mean nothing else than that . the Capataz de Cargadores , on a 
 revulsion of subjectiveness , exasperate almost to insanity , beheld all 
 his world without faith and courage . he have be betray ! 
 with the boundless shadow of the sea behind he , out of his silence and 
 immobility , face the lofty shape of the low peak crowd around 
 the white , misty sheen of Higuerota , Nostromo laugh aloud again , 
 spring abruptly to his foot , and stand still . he must go . but where ? 
 " there be no mistake . they keep we and encourage we as if we be dog 
 bear to fight and hunt for they . the vecchio be right , " he say , slowly 
 and scathingly . he remember old Giorgio take his pipe out of his 
 mouth to throw these word over his shoulder at the cafe , full of 
 engine - driver and fitter from the railway workshop . this image fix 
 his waver purpose . he would try to find old Giorgio if he could . God 
 know what might have happen to he ! he make a few step , then stop 
 again and shake his head . to the left and right , in front and behind 
 he , the scrubby bush rustle mysteriously in the darkness . 
 " Teresa be right , too , " he add in a low tone touch with awe . he 
 wonder whether she be dead in her anger with he or still alive . as 
 if in answer to this thought , half of remorse and half of hope , with 
 a soft flutter and oblique flight , a big owl , whose appalling cry : 
 " ya - acabo ! ya - acabo ! - it be finish ; it be finish " - announce 
 calamity and death in the popular belief , drift vaguely like a large 
 dark ball across his path . in the downfall of all the reality that 
 make his force , he be affect by the superstition , and shudder 
 slightly . Signora Teresa must have die , then . it could mean nothing 
 else . the cry of the ill - omen bird , the first sound he be to hear on 
 his return , be a fitting welcome for his betrayed individuality . the 
 unseen power which he have offend by refuse to bring a priest to a 
 die woman be lift up their voice against he . she be dead . with 
 admirable and human consistency he refer everything to himself . she 
 have be a woman of good counsel always . and the bereaved old Giorgio 
 remain stunned by his loss just as he be likely to require the advice 
 of his sagacity . the blow would render the dreamy old man quite stupid 
 for a time . 
 as to Captain Mitchell , Nostromo , after the manner of trusted 
 subordinate , consider he as a person fit by education perhaps 
 to sign paper in an office and to give order , but otherwise of no use 
 whatever , and something of a fool . the necessity of wind round his 
 little finger , almost daily , the pompous and testy self - importance of 
 the old seaman have grow irksome with use to Nostromo . at first it have 
 give he an inward satisfaction . but the necessity of overcome small 
 obstacle become wearisome to a self - confident personality as much by 
 the certitude of success as by the monotony of effort . he mistrust 
 his superior 's proneness to fussy action . that old Englishman have no 
 judgment , he say to himself . it be useless to suppose that , acquaint 
 with the true state of the case , he would keep it to himself . he would 
 talk of do impracticable thing . Nostromo fear he as one 
 would fear saddle one 's self with some persistent worry . he have no 
 discretion . he would betray the treasure . and Nostromo have make up his 
 mind that the treasure should not be betray . 
 the word have fix itself tenaciously in his intelligence . his 
 imagination have seize upon the clear and simple notion of betrayal to 
 account for the daze feeling of enlightenment as to be do for , of 
 have inadvertently go out of his existence on an issue in which his 
 personality have not be take into account . a man betray be a man 
 destroy . Signora Teresa   may God have her soul !   have be right . he 
 have never be take into account . destroy ! her white form sit 
 up bow in bed , the fall black hair , the wide - browed suffering 
 face raise to he , the anger of her denunciation appear to he now 
 majestic with the awfulness of inspiration and of death . for it be not 
 for nothing that the evil bird have utter its lamentable shriek over 
 his head . she be dead - may God have her soul ! 
 sharing in the anti - priestly freethought of the mass , his mind use 
 the pious formula from the superficial force of habit , but with a 
 deep - seat sincerity . the popular mind be incapable of scepticism ; 
 and that incapacity deliver their helpless strength to the wile of 
 swindler and to the pitiless enthusiasm of leader inspire by vision 
 of a high destiny . she be dead . but would God consent to receive her 
 soul ? she have die without confession or absolution , because he have 
 not be willing to spare she another moment of his time . his scorn of 
 priest as priest remain ; but after all , it be impossible to know 
 whether what they affirm be not true . power , punishment , pardon , 
 be simple and credible notion . the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores , 
 deprive of certain simple reality , such as the admiration of woman , 
 the adulation of man , the admire publicity of his life , be ready to 
 feel the burden of sacrilegious guilt descend upon his shoulder . 
 bareheade , in a thin shirt and drawer , he feel the linger warmth of 
 the fine sand under the sol of his foot . the narrow strand gleam 
 far ahead in a long curve , define the outline of this wild side of the 
 harbour . he flit along the shore like a pursue shadow between the 
 sombre palm - grove and the sheet of water lie as still as death on his 
 right hand . he stride with headlong haste in the silence and solitude 
 as though he have forget all prudence and caution . but he know that on 
 this side of the water he run no risk of discovery . the only inhabitant 
 be a lonely , silent , apathetic Indian in charge of the palmaria , who 
 bring sometimes a load of cocoanut to the town for sale . he live 
 without a woman in an open shed , with a perpetual fire of dry stick 
 smoulder near an old canoe lie bottom up on the beach . he could be 
 easily avoid . 
 the barking of the dog about that man 's ranche be the first thing that 
 check his speed . he have forget the dog . he swerve sharply , and 
 plunge into the palm - grove , as into a wilderness of column in an 
 immense hall , whose dense obscurity seem to whisper and rustle faintly 
 high above his head . he traverse it , enter a ravine , and climb to 
 the top of a steep ridge free of tree and bush . 
 from there , open and vague in the starlight , he see the plain between 
 the town and the harbour . in the wood above some night - bird make a 
 strange drumming noise . below beyond the palmaria on the beach , the 
 Indian 's dog continue to bark uproariously . he wonder what have upset 
 they so much , and , peer down from his elevation , be surprised to 
 detect unaccountable movement of the ground below , as if several oblong 
 piece of the plain have be in motion . those dark , shift patch , 
 alternately catch and elude the eye , alter their place always 
 away from the harbour , with a suggestion of consecutive order and 
 purpose . a light dawn upon he . it be a column of infantry on a night 
 march towards the high broken country at the foot of the hill . but he 
 be too much in the dark about everything for wonder and speculation . 
 the plain have resume its shadowy immobility . he descend the ridge and 
 find himself in the open solitude , between the harbour and the town . 
 its spaciousness , extend indefinitely by an effect of obscurity , 
 render more sensible his profound isolation . his pace become slow . 
 no one wait for he ; no one thought of he ; no one expect or wish 
 his return . " betray ! betray ! " he mutter to himself . no one 
 care . he might have be drown by this time . no one would have 
 care - unless , perhaps , the child , he think to himself . but they 
 be with the English signora , and not think of he at all . 
 he waver in his purpose of make straight for the Casa Viola . to what 
 end ? what could he expect there ? his life seem to fail he in all 
 its detail , even to the scornful reproach of Teresa . he be 
 aware painfully of his reluctance . be it that remorse which she have 
 prophesy with , what he see now , be her last breath ? 
 meantime , he have deviate from the straight course , incline by a sort 
 of instinct to the right , towards the jetty and the harbour , the scene 
 of his daily labour . the great length of the Custom House loom up all 
 at once like the wall of a factory . not a soul challenge his approach , 
 and his curiosity become excited as he pass cautiously towards the 
 front by the unexpected sight of two light window . 
 they have the fascination of a lonely vigil keep by some mysterious 
 watcher up there , those two window shin dimly upon the harbour in 
 the whole vast extent of the abandon building . the solitude could 
 almost be feel . a strong smell of wood smoke hang about in a thin haze , 
 which be faintly perceptible to his raised eye against the glitter 
 of the star . as he advance in the profound silence , the shrilling of 
 innumerable cicala in the dry grass seem positively deafen to his 
 strained ear . slowly , step by step , he find himself in the great hall , 
 sombre and full of acrid smoke . 
 a fire build against the staircase have burn down impotently to a low 
 heap of ember . the hard wood have fail to catch ; only a few step at 
 the bottom smoulder , with a creep glow of spark define their 
 charred edge . at the top he see a streak of light from an open door . it 
 fall upon the vast landing , all foggy with a slow drift of smoke . that 
 be the room . he climb the stair , then check himself , because he 
 have see within the shadow of a man cast upon one of the wall . it be 
 a shapeless , high - shoulder shadow of somebody stand still , with 
 lower head , out of his line of sight . the Capataz , remember that he 
 be totally unarmed , step aside , and , efface himself upright in a 
 dark corner , wait with his eye fix on the door . 
 the whole enormous ruin barrack of a place , unfinished , without 
 ceiling under its lofty roof , be pervade by the smoke sway to and 
 fro in the faint cross draught play in the obscurity of many lofty 
 room and barnlike passage . once one of the swing shutter come 
 against the wall with a single sharp crack , as if push by an impatient 
 hand . a piece of paper scurry out from somewhere , rustle along the 
 landing . the man , whoever he be , do not darken the lighted doorway . 
 twice the Capataz , advance a couple of step out of his corner , 
 crane his neck in the hope of catch sight of what he could be at , 
 so quietly , in there . but every time he see only the distorted shadow 
 of broad shoulder and bow head . he be do apparently nothing , and 
 stir not from the spot , as though he be meditate - or , perhaps , 
 read a paper . and not a sound issue from the room . 
 once more the Capataz step back . he wonder who it be - some 
 Monterist ? but he dread to show himself . to discover his presence 
 on shore , unless after many day , would , he believe , endanger the 
 treasure . with his own knowledge possess his whole soul , it seem 
 impossible that anybody in Sulaco should fail to jump at the right 
 surmise . after a couple of week or so it would be different . who could 
 tell he have not return overland from some port beyond the limit of 
 the Republic ? the existence of the treasure confuse his thought with 
 a peculiar sort of anxiety , as though his life have become bind up with 
 it . it render he timorous for a moment before that enigmatic , light 
 door . Devil take the fellow ! he do not want to see he . there would be 
 nothing to learn from his face , know or unknown . he be a fool to waste 
 his time there in wait . 
 Less than five minute after enter the place the Capataz begin his 
 retreat . he get away down the stair with perfect success , give one 
 upward look over his shoulder at the light on the landing , and run 
 stealthily across the hall . but at the very moment he be turn out of 
 the great door , with his mind fix upon escape the notice of the man 
 upstairs , somebody he have not hear come briskly along the front ran 
 full into he . both mutter a stifled exclamation of surprise , and 
 leap back and stand still , each indistinct to the other . Nostromo be 
 silent . the other man speak first , in an amazed and deaden tone . 
 " who be you ? " 
 already Nostromo have seem to recognize Dr. Monygham . he have no doubt 
 now . he hesitate the space of a second . the idea of bolt without a 
 word present itself to his mind . no use ! an inexplicable repugnance 
 to pronounce the name by which he be know keep he silent a little 
 long . at last he say in a low voice - 
 " a Cargador . " 
 he walk up to the other . Dr. Monygham have receive a shock . he fling 
 his arm up and cry out his wonder aloud , forget himself before 
 the marvel of this meeting . Nostromo angrily warn he to moderate 
 his voice . the Custom House be not so deserted as it look . there be 
 somebody in the lighted room above . 
 there be no more evanescent quality in an accomplished fact than its 
 wonderfulness . solicit incessantly by the consideration affect 
 its fear and desire , the human mind turn naturally away from the 
 marvellous side of event . and it be in the most natural way possible 
 that the doctor ask this man whom only two minute before he believe 
 to have be drown in the gulf - 
 " you have see somebody up there ? have you ? " 
 " no , I have not see he . " 
 " then how do you know ? " 
 " I be run away from his shadow when we meet . " 
 " his shadow ? " 
 " yes . his shadow in the lighted room , " say Nostromo , in a contemptuous 
 tone . lean back with fold arm at the foot of the immense building , 
 he drop his head , bite his lip slightly , and not look at the 
 doctor . " now , " he think to himself , " he will begin ask I about the 
 treasure . " 
 but the doctor 's thought be concern with an event not as marvellous 
 as Nostromo 's appearance , but in itself much less clear . why have Sotillo 
 take himself off with his whole command with this suddenness and 
 secrecy ? what do this move portend ? however , it dawn upon the 
 doctor that the man upstairs be one of the officer leave behind by the 
 disappointed colonel to communicate with he . 
 " I believe he be wait for I , " he say . 
 " it be possible . " 
 " I must see . do not go away yet , Capataz . " 
 " go away where ? " mutter Nostromo . 
 already the doctor have leave he . he remain lean against the wall , 
 star at the dark water of the harbour ; the shrilling of cicala 
 fill his ear . an invincible vagueness come over his thought take 
 from they all power to determine his will . 
 " Capataz ! capataz ! " the doctor 's voice call urgently from above . 
 the sense of betrayal and ruin float upon his sombre indifference as 
 upon a sluggish sea of pitch . but he step out from under the wall , 
 and , look up , see Dr. Monygham lean out of a lighted window . 
 " come up and see what Sotillo have do . you need not fear the man up 
 here . " 
 he answer by a slight , bitter laugh . fear a man ! the Capataz of the 
 Sulaco Cargadores fear a man ! it anger he that anybody should suggest 
 such a thing . it anger he to be disarm and skulking and in danger 
 because of the accursed treasure , which be of so little account to the 
 people who have tie it round his neck . he could not shake off the worry 
 of it . to Nostromo the doctor represent all these people . . . . and 
 he have never even ask after it . not a word of inquiry about the most 
 desperate undertaking of his life . 
 think these thought , Nostromo pass again through the cavernous 
 hall , where the smoke be considerably thin , and go up the stair , 
 not so warm to his foot now , towards the streak of light at the top . the 
 doctor appear in it for a moment , agitated and impatient . 
 " come up ! come up ! " 
 at the moment of cross the doorway the Capataz experience a shock of 
 surprise . the man have not move . he see his shadow in the same place . 
 he start , then step in with a feeling of be about to solve a 
 mystery . 
 it be very simple . for an infinitesimal fraction of a second , against 
 the light of two flaring and gutter candle , through a blue , pungent , 
 thin haze which make his eye smart , he see the man stand , as he 
 have imagine he , with his back to the door , cast an enormous and 
 distorted shadow upon the wall . swifter than a flash of lightning 
 follow the impression of his constrained , topple attitude - the 
 shoulder project forward , the head sink low upon the breast . then 
 he distinguish the arm behind his back , and wrench so terribly that 
 the two clench fist , lash together , have be force up high than 
 the shoulder - blade . from there his eye trace in one instantaneous 
 glance the hide rope go upwards from the tie wrist over a heavy 
 beam and down to a staple in the wall . he do not want to look at the 
 rigid leg , at the foot hang down nervelessly , with their bare toe 
 some six inch above the floor , to know that the man have be give the 
 estrapade till he have swoon . his first impulse be to dash forward and 
 sever the rope at one blow . he feel for his knife . he have no knife - not 
 even a knife . he stand quiver , and the doctor , perch on the edge of 
 the table , face thoughtfully the cruel and lamentable sight , his chin 
 in his hand , utter , without stir - 
 " tortured - and shoot dead through the breast - get cold . " 
 this information calm the Capataz . one of the candle flicker in 
 the socket go out . " who do this ? " he ask . 
 " Sotillo , I tell you . who else ? torture - of course . but why shoot ? " the 
 doctor look fixedly at Nostromo , who shrug his shoulder slightly . 
 " and mark , shoot suddenly , on impulse . it be evident . I wish I have his 
 secret . " 
 Nostromo have advance , and stoop slightly to look . " I seem to have 
 see that face somewhere , " he mutter . " who be he ? " 
 the doctor turn his eye upon he again . " I may yet come to envy 
 his fate . what do you think of that , Capataz , eh ? " 
 but Nostromo do not even hear these word . seize the remain light , 
 he thrust it under the droop head . the doctor sit oblivious , with 
 a lost gaze . then the heavy iron candlestick , as if strike out of 
 Nostromo 's hand , clatter on the floor . 
 " Hullo ! " exclaim the doctor , look up with a start . he could hear 
 the Capataz stagger against the table and gasp . in the sudden extinction 
 of the light within , the dead blackness seal the window - frame become 
 alive with star to his sight . 
 " of course , of course , " the doctor mutter to himself in English . 
 " enough to make he jump out of his skin . " 
 Nostromo 's heart seem to force itself into his throat . his head swam . 
 Hirsch ! the man be Hirsch ! he hold on tight to the edge of the table . 
 " but he be hide in the light , " he almost shout his voice fall . 
 " in the light , and - and - " 
 " and Sotillo bring he in , " say the doctor . " he be no more startling 
 to you than you be to I . what I want to know be how he induce some 
 compassionate soul to shoot he . " 
 " so Sotillo know - " begin Nostromo , in a more equable voice . 
 " everything ! " interrupt the doctor . 
 the Capataz be hear strike the table with his fist . " everything ? 
 what be you say , there ? everything ? know everything ? it be 
 impossible ! everything ? " 
 " of course . what do you mean by impossible ? I tell you I have hear 
 this Hirsch question last night , here , in this very room . he know your 
 name , Decoud 's name , and all about the loading of the silver . . . . 
 the light be cut in two . he be grovel in abject terror before 
 Sotillo , but he remember that much . what do you want more ? he know 
 least about himself . they find he cling to their anchor . he must 
 have catch at it just as the light go to the bottom . " 
 " go to the bottom ? " repeat Nostromo , slowly . " Sotillo believe that ? 
 Bueno ! " 
 the doctor , a little impatiently , be unable to imagine what else could 
 anybody believe . yes , Sotillo believe that the light be sink , and 
 the Capataz de Cargadores , together with Martin Decoud and perhaps one 
 or two other political fugitive , have be drown . 
 " I tell you well , senor doctor , " remark Nostromo at that point , " that 
 Sotillo do not know everything . " 
 " eh ? what do you mean ? " 
 " he do not know I be not dead . " 
 " neither do we . " 
 " and you do not care - none of you caballero on the wharf - once you get 
 off a man of flesh and blood like yourself on a fool 's business that 
 could not end well . " 
 " you forget , Capataz , I be not on the wharf . and I do not think well 
 of the business . so you need not taunt I . I tell you what , man , we have 
 but little leisure to think of the dead . death stand near behind we 
 all . you be go . " 
 " I go , indeed ! " break in Nostromo . " and for the sake of what - tell 
 I ? " 
 " ah ! that be your own affair , " the doctor say , roughly . " do not ask 
 I . " 
 their flow murmur pause in the dark . perch on the edge of the 
 table with slightly avert face , they feel their shoulder touch , and 
 their eye remain direct towards an upright shape nearly lose in the 
 obscurity of the inner part of the room , that with project head and 
 shoulder , in ghastly immobility , seem intent on catch every word . 
 " Muy bien ! " Nostromo mutter at last . " so be it . Teresa be right . it 
 be my own affair . " 
 " Teresa be dead , " remark the doctor , absently , while his mind 
 follow a new line of thought suggest by what might have be call 
 Nostromo 's return to life . " she die , the poor woman . " 
 " without a priest ? " the Capataz ask , anxiously . 
 " what a question ! who could have get a priest for her last night ? " 
 " may God keep her soul ! " ejaculate Nostromo , with a gloomy and hopeless 
 fervour which have no time to surprise Dr. Monygham , before , revert to 
 their previous conversation , he continue in a sinister tone , " Si , 
 senor doctor . as you be say , it be my own affair . a very desperate 
 affair . " 
 " there be no two man in this part of the world that could have save 
 themselves by swim as you have do , " the doctor say , admiringly . 
 and again there be silence between those two man . they be both 
 reflect , and the diversity of their nature make their thought bear 
 from their meeting swing afar from each other . the doctor , impel to 
 risky action by his loyalty to the Goulds , wonder with thankfulness at 
 the chain of accident which have bring that man back where he would be 
 of the great use in the work of save the San Tome mine . the doctor 
 be loyal to the mine . it present itself to his fifty - year ' old eye 
 in the shape of a little woman in a soft dress with a long train , with 
 a head attractively overweighte by a great mass of fair hair and the 
 delicate preciousness of her inner worth , partake of a gem and 
 a flower , reveal in every attitude of her person . as the danger 
 thicken round the San Tome mine this illusion acquire force , 
 permanency , and authority . it claim he at last ! this claim , exalt 
 by a spiritual detachment from the usual sanction of hope and reward , 
 make Dr. Monygham 's thinking , acting , individuality extremely dangerous 
 to himself and to other , all his scruple vanish in the proud 
 feeling that his devotion be the only thing that stand between an 
 admirable woman and a frightful disaster . 
 it be a sort of intoxication which make he utterly indifferent to 
 Decoud 's fate , but leave his wit perfectly clear for the appreciation 
 of Decoud 's political idea . it be a good idea - and Barrios be the only 
 instrument of its realization . the doctor 's soul , wither and shrink by 
 the shame of a moral disgrace , become implacable in the expansion of its 
 tenderness . Nostromo 's return be providential . he do not think of he 
 humanely , as of a fellow - creature just escape from the jaw of death . 
 the Capataz for he be the only possible messenger to Cayta . the very 
 man . the doctor 's misanthropic mistrust of mankind   the bitterer because 
 base on personal failure   do not lift he sufficiently above common 
 weakness . he be under the spell of an establish reputation . 
 trumpet by Captain Mitchell , grow in repetition , and fix in 
 general assent , Nostromo 's faithfulness have never be question by Dr. 
 Monygham as a fact . it be not likely to be question now he stand in 
 desperate need of it himself . Dr. Monygham be human ; he accept the 
 popular conception of the Capataz 's incorruptibility simply because no 
 word or fact have ever contradict a mere affirmation . it seem to be 
 a part of the man , like his whisker or his tooth . it be impossible to 
 conceive he otherwise . the question be whether he would consent to 
 go on such a dangerous and desperate errand . the doctor be observant 
 enough to have become aware from the first of something peculiar in the 
 man 's temper . he be no doubt sore about the loss of the silver . 
 " it will be necessary to take he into my full confidence , " he say 
 to himself , with a certain acuteness of insight into the nature he have 
 to deal with . 
 on Nostromo 's side the silence have be full of black irresolution , 
 anger , and mistrust . he be the first to break it , however . 
 " the swimming be no great matter , " he say . " it be what go 
 before - and what come after that - " 
 he do not quite finish what he mean to say , break off short , as 
 though his thought have butt against a solid obstacle . the doctor 's 
 mind pursue its own scheme with machiavellian subtlety . he say as 
 sympathetically as he be able - 
 " it be unfortunate , Capataz . but no one would think of blame you . very 
 unfortunate . to begin with , the treasure ought never to have leave the 
 mountain . but it be Decoud who - however , he be dead . there be no need 
 to talk of he . " 
 " no , " assent Nostromo , as the doctor pause , " there be no need to talk 
 of dead man . but I be not dead yet . " 
 " you be all right . only a man of your intrepidity could have save 
 himself . " 
 in this Dr. Monygham be sincere . he esteem highly the intrepidity of 
 that man , whom he value but little , be disillusion as to mankind 
 in general , because of the particular instance in which his own manhood 
 have fail . have have to encounter singlehande during his period of 
 eclipse many physical danger , he be well aware of the most dangerous 
 element common to they all : of the crushing , paralyze sense of human 
 littleness , which be what really defeat a man struggle with natural 
 force , alone , far from the eye of his fellow . he be eminently fit 
 to appreciate the mental image he make for himself of the Capataz , after 
 hour of tension and anxiety , precipitate suddenly into an abyss of 
 water and darkness , without earth or sky , and confront it not only 
 with an undismayed mind , but with sensible success . of course , the man 
 be an incomparable swimmer , that be know , but the doctor judge that 
 this instance testify to a still great intrepidity of spirit . it be 
 pleasing to he ; he augur well from it for the success of the arduous 
 mission with which he mean to entrust the Capataz so marvellously 
 restore to usefulness . and in a tone vaguely gratify , he observe - 
 " it must have be terribly dark ! " 
 " it be the bad darkness of the Golfo , " the Capataz assent , briefly . 
 he be mollify by what seem a sign of some faint interest in such 
 thing as have befall he , and drop a few descriptive phrase with 
 an affected and curt nonchalance . at that moment he feel communicative . 
 he expect the continuance of that interest which , whether accept 
 or reject , would have restore to he his personality - the only thing 
 lose in that desperate affair . but the doctor , engross by a desperate 
 adventure of his own , be terrible in the pursuit of his idea . he let an 
 exclamation of regret escape he . 
 " I could almost wish you have shout and show a light . " 
 this unexpected utterance astound the Capataz by its character of 
 cold - blooded atrocity . it be as much as to say , " I wish you have show 
 yourself a coward ; I wish you have have your throat cut for your pain . " 
 naturally he refer it to himself , whereas it relate only to the 
 silver , be utter simply and with many mental reservation . surprise 
 and rage render he speechless , and the doctor pursue , practically 
 unheard by Nostromo , whose stir blood be beat violently in his 
 ear . 
 " for I be convince Sotillo in possession of the silver would have 
 turn short round and make for some small port abroad . economically it 
 would have be wasteful , but still less wasteful than have it sink . 
 it be the next good thing to have it at hand in some safe place , and 
 use part of it to buy up Sotillo . but I doubt whether Don Carlos would 
 have ever make up his mind to it . he be not fit for Costaguana , and that 
 be a fact , Capataz . " 
 the Capataz have master the fury that be like a tempest in his ear in 
 time to hear the name of Don Carlos . he seem to have come out of it a 
 change man - a man who speak thoughtfully in a soft and even voice . 
 " and would Don Carlos have be content if I have surrender this 
 treasure ? " 
 " I should not wonder if they be all of that way of thinking now , " the 
 doctor say , grimly . " I be never consult . Decoud have it his own way . 
 their eye be open by this time , I should think . I for one know that 
 if that silver turn up this moment miraculously ashore I would give it 
 to Sotillo . and , as thing stand , I would be approve . " 
 " turn up miraculously , " repeat the Capataz very low ; then raise 
 his voice . " that , senor , would be a great miracle than any saint could 
 perform . " 
 " I believe you , Capataz , " say the doctor , drily . 
 he go on to develop his view of Sotillo 's dangerous influence upon the 
 situation . and the Capataz , listen as if in a dream , feel himself of 
 as little account as the indistinct , motionless shape of the dead man 
 whom he see upright under the beam , with his air of listen also , 
 disregarded , forget , like a terrible example of neglect . 
 " be it for an unconsidered and foolish whim that they come to I , 
 then ? " he interrupt suddenly . " have I not do enough for they to be 
 of some account , por Dios ? be it that the hombre finos - the 
 gentleman - need not think as long as there be a man of the people ready 
 to risk his body and soul ? or , perhaps , we have no soul - like dog ? " 
 " there be Decoud , too , with his plan , " the doctor remind he again . 
 " Si ! and the rich man in San Francisco who have something to do with 
 that treasure , too - what do I know ? no ! I have hear too many thing . it 
 seem to I that everything be permit to the rich . " 
 " I understand , Capataz , " the doctor begin . 
 " what Capataz ? " break in Nostromo , in a forcible but even voice . " the 
 Capataz be undo , destroy . there be no Capataz . oh , no ! you will find 
 the Capataz no more . " 
 " come , this be childish ! " remonstrate the doctor ; and the other calm 
 down suddenly . 
 " I have be indeed like a little child , " he mutter . 
 and as his eye meet again the shape of the murder man suspend in 
 his awful immobility , which seem the uncomplaine immobility of 
 attention , he ask , wonder gently - 
 " why do Sotillo give the estrapade to this pitiful wretch ? do you 
 know ? no torture could have be bad than his fear . kill I can 
 understand . his anguish be intolerable to behold . but why should he 
 torment he like this ? he could tell no more . " 
 " no ; he could tell nothing more . any sane man would have see that . he 
 have tell he everything . but I tell you what it be , Capataz . Sotillo 
 would not believe what he be tell . not everything . " 
 " what be it he would not believe ? I can not understand . " 
 " I can , because I have see the man . he refuse to believe that the 
 treasure be lose . " 
 " what ? " the Capataz cry out in a discomposed tone . 
 " that startle you - eh ? " 
 " be I to understand , senor , " Nostromo go on in a deliberate and , as it 
 be , watchful tone , " that Sotillo think the treasure have be save by 
 some mean ? " 
 " no ! no ! that would be impossible , " say the doctor , with conviction ; 
 and Nostromo emit a grunt in the dark . " that would be impossible . he 
 think that the silver be no long in the light when she be sink . 
 he have convince himself that the whole show of get it away to sea 
 be a mere sham get up to deceive Gamacho and his Nationals , Pedrito 
 Montero , Senor Fuentes , our new Gefe Politico , and himself , too . only , 
 he say , he be no such fool . " 
 " but he be devoid of sense . he be the great imbecile that ever call 
 himself a colonel in this country of evil , " growl Nostromo . 
 " he be no more unreasonable than many sensible man , " say the doctor . 
 " he have convince himself that the treasure can be find because he 
 desire passionately to possess himself of it . and he be also afraid of 
 his officer turn upon he and go over to Pedrito , whom he have not 
 the courage either to fight or trust . do you see that , Capataz ? he need 
 fear no desertion as long as some hope remain of that enormous plunder 
 turn up . I have make it my business to keep this very hope up . " 
 " you have ? " the Capataz de Cargadores repeat cautiously . " well , that 
 be wonderful . and how long do you think you be go to keep it up ? " 
 " as long as I can . " 
 " what do that mean ? " 
 " I can tell you exactly . as long as I live , " the doctor retort in 
 a stubborn voice . then , in a few word , he describe the story of his 
 arrest and the circumstance of his release . " I be go back to that 
 silly scoundrel when we meet , " he conclude . 
 Nostromo have listen with profound attention . " you have make up your 
 mind , then , to a speedy death , " he mutter through his clenched tooth . 
 " perhaps , my illustrious Capataz , " the doctor say , testily . " you be 
 not the only one here who can look an ugly death in the face . " 
 " no doubt , " mumble Nostromo , loud enough to be overhear . " there may be 
 even more than two fool in this place . who know ? " 
 " and that be my affair , " say the doctor , curtly . 
 " as take out the accursed silver to sea be my affair , " retort 
 Nostromo . " I see . Bueno ! each of we have his reason . but you be the 
 last man I converse with before I start , and you talk to I as if I 
 be a fool . " 
 Nostromo have a great distaste for the doctor 's sardonic treatment of his 
 great reputation . Decoud 's faintly ironic recognition use to make he 
 uneasy ; but the familiarity of a man like Don Martin be flattering , 
 whereas the doctor be a nobody . he could remember he a penniless 
 outcast , slink about the street of Sulaco , without a single friend 
 or acquaintance , till Don Carlos Gould take he into the service of the 
 mine . 
 " you may be very wise , " he go on , thoughtfully , star into the 
 obscurity of the room , pervade by the gruesome enigma of the torture 
 and murder Hirsch . " but I be not such a fool as when I start . I have 
 learn one thing since , and that be that you be a dangerous man . " 
 Dr. Monygham be too startled to do more than exclaim - 
 " what be it you say ? " 
 " if he could speak he would say the same thing , " pursue Nostromo , with 
 a nod of his shadowy head silhouette against the starlit window . 
 " I do not understand you , " say Dr. Monygham , faintly . 
 " no ? perhaps , if you have not confirm Sotillo in his madness , he would 
 have be in no haste to give the estrapade to that miserable Hirsch . " 
 the doctor start at the suggestion . but his devotion , absorb all 
 his sensibility , have leave his heart steel against remorse and pity . 
 still , for complete relief , he feel the necessity of repel it loudly 
 and contemptuously . 
 " Bah ! you dare to tell I that , with a man like Sotillo . I confess I 
 do not give a thought to Hirsch . if I have it would have be useless . 
 anybody can see that the luckless wretch be doom from the moment he 
 catch hold of the anchor . he be doom , I tell you ! just as I myself 
 be doom - most probably . " 
 this be what Dr. Monygham say in answer to Nostromo 's remark , which be 
 plausible enough to prick his conscience . he be not a callous man . but 
 the necessity , the magnitude , the importance of the task he have take 
 upon himself dwarf all merely humane consideration . he have undertake 
 it in a fanatical spirit . he do not like it . to lie , to deceive , to 
 circumvent even the basest of mankind be odious to he . it be odious 
 to he by training , instinct , and tradition . to do these thing in the 
 character of a traitor be abhorrent to his nature and terrible to his 
 feeling . he have make that sacrifice in a spirit of abasement . he have 
 say to himself bitterly , " I be the only one fit for that dirty work . " 
 and he believe this . he be not subtle . his simplicity be such that , 
 though he have no sort of heroic idea of seek death , the risk , deadly 
 enough , to which he expose himself , have a sustain and comfort 
 effect . to that spiritual state the fate of Hirsch present itself 
 as part of the general atrocity of thing . he consider that episode 
 practically . what do it mean ? be it a sign of some dangerous change in 
 Sotillo 's delusion ? that the man should have be kill like this be 
 what the doctor could not understand . 
 " yes . but why shoot ? " he murmur to himself . 
 Nostromo keep very still . 
 CHAPTER nine 
 distract between doubt and hope , dismay by the sound of bell 
 peal out the arrival of Pedrito Montero , Sotillo have spend the 
 morning in battle with his thought ; a contest to which he be 
 unequal , from the vacuity of his mind and the violence of his passion . 
 disappointment , greed , anger , and fear make a tumult , in the colonel 's 
 breast louder than the din of bell in the town . nothing he have plan 
 have come to pass . neither Sulaco nor the silver of the mine have fall 
 into his hand . he have perform no military exploit to secure his 
 position , and have obtain no enormous booty to make off with . Pedrito 
 Montero , either as friend or foe , fill he with dread . the sound of 
 bell madden he . 
 imagine at first that he might be attack at once , he have make his 
 battalion stand to arm on the shore . he walk to and fro all the 
 length of the room , stop sometimes to gnaw the finger - tip of his 
 right hand with a lurid sideways glare fix on the floor ; then , with 
 a sullen , repel glance all round , he would resume his tramping in 
 savage aloofness . his hat , horsewhip , sword , and revolver be lie on 
 the table . his officer , crowd the window give the view of the town 
 gate , dispute amongst themselves the use of his field - glass buy last 
 year on long credit from Anzani . it pass from hand to hand , and the 
 possessor for the time be be besiege by anxious inquiry . 
 " there be nothing ; there be nothing to see ! " he would repeat 
 impatiently . 
 there be nothing . and when the picket in the bush near the Casa 
 Viola have be order to fall back upon the main body , no stir of life 
 appear on the stretch of dusty and arid land between the town and the 
 water of the port . but late in the afternoon a horseman issue from 
 the gate be make out rid up fearlessly . it be an emissary from 
 Senor Fuentes . be all alone he be allow to come on . dismount at 
 the great door he greet the silent bystander with cheery impudence , 
 and beg to be take up at once to the " muy valliente " colonel . 
 Senor Fuentes , on enter upon his function of Gefe Politico , have 
 turn his diplomatic ability to get hold of the harbour as well 
 as of the mine . the man he pitch upon to negotiate with Sotillo be a 
 Notary Public , whom the revolution have find languish in the common 
 jail on a charge of forge document . liberate by the mob along with 
 the other " victim of Blanco tyranny , " he have hasten to offer his 
 service to the new Government . 
 he set out determined to display much zeal and eloquence in try to 
 induce Sotillo to come into town alone for a conference with Pedrito 
 Montero . nothing be far from the colonel 's intention . the mere 
 fleeting idea of trust himself into the famous Pedrito 's hand have 
 make he feel unwell several time . it be out of the question - it be 
 madness . and to put himself in open hostility be madness , too . it would 
 render impossible a systematic search for that treasure , for that wealth 
 of silver which he seem to feel somewhere about , to scent somewhere 
 near . 
 but where ? where ? heaven ! where ? oh ! why have he allow that doctor 
 to go ! imbecile that he be . but no ! it be the only right course , he 
 reflect distractedly , while the messenger wait downstairs chat 
 agreeably to the officer . it be in that scoundrelly doctor 's true 
 interest to return with positive information . but what if anything 
 stop he ? a general prohibition to leave the town , for instance ! 
 there would be patrol ! 
 the colonel , seize his head in his hand , turn in his track as if 
 strike with vertigo . a flash of craven inspiration suggest to he an 
 expedient not unknown to european statesman when they wish to delay a 
 difficult negotiation . boot and spur , he scramble into the hammock 
 with undignified haste . his handsome face have turn yellow with the 
 strain of weighty care . the ridge of his shapely nose have grow sharp ; 
 the audacious nostril appear mean and pinch . the velvety , caressing 
 glance of his fine eye seem dead , and even decompose ; for these 
 almond - shape , languish orb have become inappropriately bloodshot 
 with much sinister sleeplessness . he address the surprised envoy 
 of Senor Fuentes in a deaden , exhausted voice . it come pathetically 
 feeble from under a pile of ponchos , which bury his elegant person 
 right up to the black moustache , uncurled , pendant , in sign of bodily 
 prostration and mental incapacity . fever , fever - a heavy fever 
 have overtake the " muy valliente " colonel . a waver wildness of 
 expression , cause by the pass spasm of a slight colic which have 
 declare itself suddenly , and the rattle tooth of repressed panic , have 
 a genuineness which impress the envoy . it be a cold fit . the colonel 
 explain that he be unable to think , to listen , to speak . with an 
 appearance of superhuman effort the colonel gasp out that he be 
 not in a state to return a suitable reply or to execute any of his 
 Excellency 's order . but to - morrow ! to - morrow ! ah ! to - morrow ! let his 
 Excellency Don Pedro be without uneasiness . the brave Esmeralda Regiment 
 hold the harbour , hold - and close his eye , he roll his ache head 
 like a half - delirious invalid under the inquisitive stare of the envoy , 
 who be oblige to bend down over the hammock in order to catch the 
 painful and broken accent . meantime , Colonel Sotillo trust that his 
 Excellency 's humanity would permit the doctor , the english doctor , to 
 come out of town with his case of foreign remedy to attend upon he . 
 he beg anxiously his worship the caballero now present for the grace 
 of look in as he pass the Casa Gould , and inform the English 
 doctor , who be probably there , that his service be immediately 
 require by Colonel Sotillo , lie ill of fever in the Custom House . 
 immediately . most urgently require . await with extreme impatience . 
 a thousand thank . he close his eye wearily and would not open 
 they again , lie perfectly still , deaf , dumb , insensible , overcome , 
 vanquish , crush , annihilate by the fell disease . 
 but as soon as the other have shut after he the door of the landing , the 
 colonel leap out with a fling of both foot in an avalanche of woollen 
 covering . his spur have become entangled in a perfect welter of 
 ponchos he nearly pitch on his head , and do not recover his balance 
 till the middle of the room . conceal behind the half - close jalousie 
 he listen to what go on below . 
 the envoy have already mount , and turn to the morose officer 
 occupy the great doorway , take off his hat formally . 
 " caballero , " he say , in a very loud tone , " allow I to recommend 
 you to take great care of your colonel . it have do I much honour and 
 gratification to have see you all , a fine body of man exercise the 
 soldierly virtue of patience in this expose situation , where there 
 be much sun , and no water to speak of , while a town full of wine and 
 feminine charm be ready to embrace you for the brave man you be . 
 caballero , I have the honour to salute you . there will be much dancing 
 to - night in Sulaco . good - bye ! " 
 but he rein in his horse and incline his head sideways on see 
 the old major step out , very tall and meagre , in a straight narrow 
 coat come down to his ankle as it be the casing of the regimental 
 colour roll round their staff . 
 the intelligent old warrior , after enunciate in a dogmatic tone the 
 general proposition that the " world be full of traitor , " go on 
 pronounce deliberately a panegyric upon Sotillo . he ascribe to he 
 with leisurely emphasis every virtue under heaven , sum it all up in 
 an absurd colloquialism current amongst the low class of occidental 
  especially about Esmeralda . " and , " he conclude , with a sudden rise in 
 the voice , " a man of many tooth - ' hombre de muchos diente . ' Si , senor . 
 as to we , " he pursue , portentous and impressive , " your worship be 
 behold the fine body of officer in the Republic , man unequalle 
 for valour and sagacity , ' y hombres de muchos diente . ' " 
 " what ? all of they ? " inquire the disreputable envoy of Senor Fuentes , 
 with a faint , derisive smile . 
 " Todos . Si , senor , " the major affirm , gravely , with conviction . " man 
 of many tooth . " 
 the other wheel his horse to face the portal resemble the high gate 
 of a dismal barn . he raise himself in his stirrup , extend one arm . 
 he be a facetious scoundrel , entertain for these stupid occidental 
 a feeling of great scorn natural in a native from the central province . 
 the folly of Esmeraldians especially arouse his amused contempt . he 
 begin an oration upon Pedro Montero , keep a solemn countenance . he 
 flourish his hand as if introduce he to their notice . and when he 
 see every face set , all the eye fix upon his lip , he begin to 
 shout a sort of catalogue of perfection : " generous , valorous , affable , 
 profound " -   he snatch off his hat enthusiastically   - " a statesman , an 
 invincible chief of partisan - " he drop his voice startlingly to a 
 deep , hollow note - " and a dentist . " 
 he be off instantly at a smart walk ; the rigid straddle of his leg , 
 the turn - out foot , the stiff back , the rakish slant of the sombrero 
 above the square , motionless set of the shoulder express an 
 infinite , awe - inspire impudence . 
 Upstairs , behind the jalousie , Sotillo do not move for a long time . 
 the audacity of the fellow appal he . what be his officer say 
 below ? they be say nothing . complete silence . he quake . it be not 
 thus that he have imagine himself at that stage of the expedition . he 
 have see himself triumphant , unquestione , appeased , the idol of the 
 soldier , weigh in secret complacency the agreeable alternative of 
 power and wealth open to his choice . alas ! how different ! distract , 
 restless , supine , burn with fury , or freeze with terror , he feel 
 a dread as fathomless as the sea creep upon he from every side . that 
 rogue of a doctor have to come out with his information . that be clear . 
 it would be of no use to he - alone . he could do nothing with it . 
 Malediction ! the doctor would never come out . he be probably under 
 arrest already , shut up together with Don Carlos . he laugh aloud 
 insanely . ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! it be Pedrito Montero who would get the 
 information . ha ! ha ! ha ! ha ! - and the silver . ha ! 
 all at once , in the midst of the laugh , he become motionless and silent 
 as if turn into stone . he too , have a prisoner . a prisoner who must , 
 must know the real truth . he would have to be make to speak . and 
 Sotillo , who all that time have not quite forget Hirsch , feel an 
 inexplicable reluctance at the notion of proceed to extremity . 
 he feel a reluctance - part of that unfathomable dread that creep on all 
 side upon he . he remember reluctantly , too , the dilated eye of the 
 hide merchant , his contortion , his loud sob and protestation . it 
 be not compassion or even mere nervous sensibility . the fact be that 
 though Sotillo do never for a moment believe his story - he could not 
 believe it ; nobody could believe such nonsense - yet those accent of 
 despairing truth impress he disagreeably . they make he feel sick . 
 and he suspect also that the man might have go mad with fear . a 
 lunatic be a hopeless subject . bah ! a pretence . nothing but a pretence . 
 he would know how to deal with that . 
 he be work himself up to the right pitch of ferocity . his fine eye 
 squint slightly ; he clap his hand ; a bare - footed orderly appear 
 noiselessly , a corporal , with his bayonet hang on his thigh and a 
 stick in his hand . 
 the colonel give his order , and presently the miserable Hirsch , push 
 in by several soldier , find he frown awfully in a broad armchair , 
 hat on head , knee wide apart , arm akimbo , masterful , imposing , 
 irresistible , haughty , sublime , terrible . 
 Hirsch , with his arm tie behind his back , have be bundle violently 
 into one of the small room . for many hour he remain apparently 
 forget , stretch lifelessly on the floor . from that solitude , full 
 of despair and terror , he be tear out brutally , with kick and blow , 
 passive , sink in hebetude . he listen to threat and admonition , and 
 afterwards make his usual answer to question , with his chin sink on 
 his breast , his hand tie behind his back , sway a little in front of 
 Sotillo , and never look up . when he be force to hold up his head , 
 by mean of a bayonet - point prod he under the chin , his eye have a 
 vacant , trance - like stare , and drop of perspiration as big as pea be 
 see hail down the dirt , bruise , and scratch of his white face . 
 then they stop suddenly . 
 Sotillo look at he in silence . " will you depart from your obstinacy , 
 you rogue ? " he ask . already a rope , whose one end be fasten to 
 Senor Hirsch 's wrist , have be throw over a beam , and three soldier 
 hold the other end , wait . he make no answer . his heavy low lip hung 
 stupidly . Sotillo make a sign . Hirsch be jerk up off his foot , and a 
 yell of despair and agony burst out in the room , fill the passage of 
 the great building , rent the air outside , cause every soldier of the 
 camp along the shore to look up at the window , start some of the 
 officer in the hall babble excitedly , with shin eye ; other , 
 set their lip , look gloomily at the floor . 
 Sotillo , follow by the soldier , have leave the room . the sentry on the 
 landing present arm . Hirsch go on scream all alone behind the 
 half - close jalousie while the sunshine , reflect from the water of 
 the harbour , make an ever - run ripple of light high up on the wall . 
 he scream with uplifted eyebrow and a wide - open mouth - incredibly 
 wide , black , enormous , full of tooth - comical . 
 in the still burn air of the windless afternoon he make the wave 
 of his agony travel as far as the O. S. N. Company 's office . captain 
 Mitchell on the balcony , try to make out what go on generally , have 
 hear he faintly but distinctly , and the feeble and appalling sound 
 linger in his ear after he have retreat indoor with blanched 
 cheek . he have be drive off the balcony several time during that 
 afternoon . 
 Sotillo , irritable , moody , walk restlessly about , held consultation 
 with his officer , give contradictory order in this shrill clamour 
 pervade the whole empty edifice . sometimes there would be long and 
 awful silence . several time he have enter the torture - chamber where 
 his sword , horsewhip , revolver , and field - glass be lie on the table , 
 to ask with forced calmness , " will you speak the truth now ? no ? I can 
 wait . " but he could not afford to wait much long . that be just it . 
 every time he go in and come out with a slam of the door , the sentry 
 on the landing present arm , and get in return a black , venomous , 
 unsteady glance , which , in reality , see nothing at all , be merely the 
 reflection of the soul within - a soul of gloomy hatred , irresolution , 
 avarice , and fury . 
 the sun have set when he go in once more . a soldier carry in two 
 light candle and slunk out , shut the door without noise . 
 " speak , thou jewish child of the devil ! the silver ! the silver , I say ! 
 where be it ? where have you foreign rogue hide it ? Confess or - " 
 a slight quiver pass up the taut rope from the rack limb , but the 
 body of Senor Hirsch , enterprise business man from Esmeralda , hung 
 under the heavy beam perpendicular and silent , face the colonel 
 awfully . the inflow of the night air , cool by the snow of the Sierra , 
 spread gradually a delicious freshness through the close heat of the 
 room . 
 " speak - thief - scoundrel - picaro - or - " 
 Sotillo have seize the riding - whip , and stand with his arm lift up . 
 for a word , for one little word , he feel he would have kneel , cringe , 
 grovel on the floor before the drowsy , conscious stare of those fix 
 eyeball start out of the grimy , dishevel head that droop very 
 still with its mouth close askew . the colonel grind his tooth with 
 rage and strike . the rope vibrate leisurely to the blow , like the long 
 string of a pendulum start from a rest . but no swing motion be 
 impart to the body of Senor Hirsch , the well - know hide merchant on 
 the coast . with a convulsive effort of the twisted arm it leap up a 
 few inch , curl upon itself like a fish on the end of a line . Senor 
 Hirsch 's head be fling back on his strain throat ; his chin tremble . 
 for a moment the rattle of his chatter tooth pervade the vast , 
 shadowy room , where the candle make a patch of light round the two 
 flame burn side by side . and as Sotillo , stay his raise hand , 
 wait for he to speak , with the sudden flash of a grin and a straining 
 forward of the wrenched shoulder , he spit violently into his face . 
 the uplifted whip fall , and the colonel spring back with a low cry of 
 dismay , as if asperse by a jet of deadly venom . quick as think he 
 snatch up his revolver , and fire twice . the report and the concussion 
 of the shot seem to throw he at once from ungovernable rage into 
 idiotic stupor . he stand with droop jaw and stony eye . what have he 
 do , Sangre de Dios ! what have he do ? he be basely appal at his 
 impulsive act , seal for ever these lip from which so much be to 
 be extort . what could he say ? how could he explain ? idea of headlong 
 flight somewhere , anywhere , pass through his mind ; even the craven and 
 absurd notion of hide under the table occur to his cowardice . 
 it be too late ; his officer have rush in tumultuously , in a great 
 clatter of scabbard , clamouring , with astonishment and wonder . but 
 since they do not immediately proceed to plunge their sword into his 
 breast , the brazen side of his character assert itself . pass the 
 sleeve of his uniform over his face he pull himself together , his 
 truculent glance turn slowly here and there , check the noise where 
 it fall ; and the stiff body of the late Senor Hirsch , merchant , after 
 sway imperceptibly , make a half turn , and come to a rest in the midst 
 of awed murmur and uneasy shuffling . 
 a voice remark loudly , " behold a man who will never speak again . " and 
 another , from the back row of face , timid and pressing , cry out - 
 " why do you kill he , mi colonel ? " 
 " because he have confess everything , " answer Sotillo , with the 
 hardihood of desperation . he feel himself cornered . he brazen it out 
 on the strength of his reputation with very fair success . his hearer 
 think he very capable of such an act . they be disposed to believe 
 his flattering tale . there be no credulity so eager and blind as the 
 credulity of covetousness , which , in its universal extent , measure the 
 moral misery and the intellectual destitution of mankind . ah ! he have 
 confess everything , this fractious Jew , this bribon . good ! then he 
 be no long want . a sudden dense guffaw be hear from the senior 
 captain - a big - headed man , with little round eye and monstrously fat 
 cheek which never move . the old major , tall and fantastically ragged 
 like a scarecrow , walk round the body of the late Senor Hirsch , 
 mutter to himself with ineffable complacency that like this there be 
 no need to guard against any future treachery of that scoundrel . the 
 other star , shift from foot to foot , and whisper short remark 
 to each other . 
 Sotillo buckle on his sword and give curt , peremptory order to hasten 
 the retirement decide upon in the afternoon . Sinister , impressive , his 
 sombrero pull right down upon his eyebrow , he march first through 
 the door in such disorder of mind that he forget utterly to provide for 
 Dr. Monygham 's possible return . as the officer troop out after he , 
 one or two look back hastily at the late Senor Hirsch , merchant from 
 Esmeralda , leave swing rigidly at rest , alone with the two burn 
 candle . in the emptiness of the room the burly shadow of head and 
 shoulder on the wall have an air of life . 
 below , the troop fall in silently and move off by company without 
 drum or trumpet . the old scarecrow major command the rearguard ; but 
 the party he leave behind with order to fire the Custom House   and " burn 
 the carcass of the treacherous Jew where it hang "   fail somehow in 
 their haste to set the staircase properly alight . the body of the 
 late Senor Hirsch dwell alone for a time in the dismal solitude of the 
 unfinished building , resound weirdly with sudden slam and click 
 of door and latch , with rustle scurry of tear paper , and the 
 tremulous sigh that at each gust of wind pass under the high roof . 
 the light of the two candle burn before the perpendicular and 
 breathless immobility of the late Senor Hirsch throw a gleam afar over 
 land and water , like a signal in the night . he remain to startle 
 Nostromo by his presence , and to puzzle Dr. Monygham by the mystery of 
 his atrocious end . 
 " but why shoot ? " the doctor again ask himself , audibly . this time he 
 be answer by a dry laugh from Nostromo . 
 " you seem much concerned at a very natural thing , senor doctor . I wonder 
 why ? it be very likely that before long we shall all get shoot one after 
 another , if not by Sotillo , then by Pedrito , or fuente , or Gamacho . 
 and we may even get the estrapade , too , or bad - quien sabe ? - with your 
 pretty tale of the silver you put into Sotillo 's head . " 
 " it be in his head already , " the doctor protest . " I only - " 
 " yes . and you only nail it there so that the devil himself - " 
 " that be precisely what I mean to do , " catch up the doctor . 
 " that be what you mean to do . Bueno . it be as I say . you be a 
 dangerous man . " 
 their voice , which without rise have be grow quarrelsome , cease 
 suddenly . the late Senor Hirsch , erect and shadowy against the star , 
 seem to be wait attentive , in impartial silence . 
 but Dr. Monygham have no mind to quarrel with Nostromo . at this supremely 
 critical point of Sulaco 's fortune it be bear upon he at last that 
 this man be really indispensable , more indispensable than ever the 
 infatuation of Captain Mitchell , his proud discoverer , could conceive ; 
 far beyond what Decoud 's well dry raillery about " my illustrious friend , 
 the unique Capataz de Cargadores , " have ever intend . the fellow be 
 unique . he be not " one in a thousand . " he be absolutely the only 
 one . the doctor surrender . there be something in the genius of that 
 genoese seaman which dominate the destiny of great enterprise and 
 of many people , the fortune of Charles Gould , the fate of an admirable 
 woman . at this last thought the doctor have to clear his throat before he 
 could speak . 
 in a completely change tone he point out to the Capataz that , to 
 begin with , he personally run no great risk . as far as everybody know he 
 be dead . it be an enormous advantage . he have only to keep out of sight 
 in the Casa Viola , where the old Garibaldino be know to be alone - with 
 his dead wife . the servant have all run away . no one would think of 
 search for he there , or anywhere else on earth , for that matter . 
 " that would be very true , " Nostromo speak up , bitterly , " if I have not 
 meet you . " 
 for a time the doctor keep silent . " do you mean to say that you think I 
 may give you away ? " he ask in an unsteady voice . " why ? why should I do 
 that ? " 
 " what do I know ? why not ? to gain a day perhaps . it would take Sotillo a 
 day to give I the estrapade , and try some other thing perhaps , before 
 he put a bullet through my heart - as he do to that poor wretch here . 
 why not ? " 
 the doctor swallow with difficulty . his throat have go dry in a 
 moment . it be not from indignation . the doctor , pathetically enough , 
 believe that he have forfeit the right to be indignant with any 
 one - for anything . it be simple dread . have the fellow hear his story 
 by some chance ? if so , there be an end of his usefulness in that 
 direction . the indispensable man escape his influence , because of 
 that indelible blot which make he fit for dirty work . a feeling as of 
 sickness come upon the doctor . he would have give anything to know , but 
 he dare not clear up the point . the fanaticism of his devotion , feed on 
 the sense of his abasement , harden his heart in sadness and scorn . 
 " why not , indeed ? " he reecho , sardonically . " then the safe thing for 
 you be to kill I on the spot . I would defend myself . but you may just 
 as well know I be go about unarmed . " 
 " Por Dios ! " say the Capataz , passionately . " you fine people be all 
 alike . all dangerous . all betrayer of the poor who be your dog . " 
 " you do not understand , " begin the doctor , slowly . 
 " I understand you all ! " cry the other with a violent movement , as 
 shadowy to the doctor 's eye as the persistent immobility of the late 
 Senor Hirsch . " a poor man amongst you have get to look after himself . I 
 say that you do not care for those that serve you . look at I ! after all 
 these year , suddenly , here I find myself like one of these cur that 
 bark outside the wall - without a kennel or a dry bone for my tooth . 
  Caramba ! " but he relent with a contemptuous fairness . " of course , " he 
 go on , quietly , " I do not suppose that you would hasten to give I 
 up to Sotillo , for example . it be not that . it be that I be nothing ! 
 suddenly - " he swing his arm downward . " nothing to any one , " he 
 repeat . 
 the doctor breathe freely . " listen , Capataz , " he say , stretch out 
 his arm almost affectionately towards Nostromo 's shoulder . " I be go 
 to tell you a very simple thing . you be safe because you be need . I 
 would not give you away for any conceivable reason , because I want you . " 
 in the dark Nostromo bit his lip . he have hear enough of that . he know 
 what that mean . no more of that for he . but he have to look after 
 himself now , he think . and he think , too , that it would not be 
 prudent to part in anger from his companion . the doctor , admit to be 
 a great healer , have , amongst the populace of Sulaco , the reputation 
 of be an evil sort of man . it be base solidly on his personal 
 appearance , which be strange , and on his rough ironic manner - proof 
 visible , sensible , and incontrovertible of the doctor 's malevolent 
 disposition . and Nostromo be of the people . so he only grunt 
 incredulously . 
 " you , to speak plainly , be the only man , " the doctor pursue . " it be 
 in your power to save this town and . . . everybody from the destructive 
 rapacity of man who - " 
 " no , senor , " say Nostromo , sullenly . " it be not in my power to get the 
 treasure back for you to give up to Sotillo , or Pedrito , or Gamacho . 
 what do I know ? " 
 " nobody expect the impossible , " be the answer . 
 " you have say it yourself - nobody , " mutter Nostromo , in a gloomy , 
 threaten tone . 
 but Dr. Monygham , full of hope , disregard the enigmatic word and the 
 threaten tone . to their eye , accustom to obscurity , the late 
 Senor Hirsch , grow more distinct , seem to have come nearer . and 
 the doctor lower his voice in expose his scheme as though afraid of 
 be overhear . 
 he be take the indispensable man into his full confidence . its 
 imply flattery and suggestion of great risk come with a familiar 
 sound to the Capataz . his mind , float in irresolution and discontent , 
 recognize it with bitterness . he understand well that the doctor be 
 anxious to save the San Tome mine from annihilation . he would be nothing 
 without it . it be his interest . just as it have be the interest of 
 Senor Decoud , of the Blancos , and of the Europeans to get his cargadore 
 on their side . his thought become arrest upon Decoud . what would 
 happen to he ? 
 Nostromo 's prolonged silence make the doctor uneasy . he point out , 
 quite unnecessarily , that though for the present he be safe , he could 
 not live conceal for ever . the choice be between accept the 
 mission to Barrios , with all its danger and difficulty , and leave 
 Sulaco by stealth , ingloriously , in poverty . 
 " none of your friend could reward you and protect you just now , 
 Capataz . not even Don Carlos himself . " 
 " I would have none of your protection and none of your reward . I 
 only wish I could trust your courage and your sense . when I return in 
 triumph , as you say , with Barrios , I may find you all destroy . you 
 have the knife at your throat now . " 
 it be the doctor 's turn to remain silent in the contemplation of 
 horrible contingency . 
 " well , we would trust your courage and your sense . and you , too , have a 
 knife at your throat . " 
 " ah ! and whom be I to thank for that ? what be your politic and your 
 mine to I - your silver and your constitution - your Don Carlos this , 
 and Don Jose that - " 
 " I do not   know , " burst out the exasperate doctor . " there be innocent 
 people in danger whose little finger be worth more than you or I and all 
 the Ribierists together . I do not   know . you should have ask yourself 
 before you allow Decoud to lead you into all this . it be your place 
 to think like a man ; but if you do not think then , try to act like a 
 man now . do you imagine Decoud care very much for what would happen to 
 you ? " 
 " no more than you care for what will happen to I , " mutter the other . 
 " no ; I care for what will happen to you as little as I care for what 
 will happen to myself . " 
 " and all this because you be such a devoted ribierist ? " Nostromo say 
 in an incredulous tone . 
 " all this because I be such a devoted ribierist , " repeat Dr. Monygham , 
 grimly . 
 again Nostromo , gaze abstractedly at the body of the late Senor 
 Hirsch , remain silent , think that the doctor be a dangerous person 
 in more than one sense . it be impossible to trust he . 
 " do you speak in the name of Don Carlos ? " he ask at last . 
 " yes . I do , " the doctor say , loudly , without hesitation . " he must come 
 forward now . he must , " he add in a mutter , which Nostromo do not 
 catch . 
 " what do you say , senor ? " 
 the doctor start . " I say that you must be true to yourself , Capataz . 
 it would be bad than folly to fail now . " 
 " true to myself , " repeat Nostromo . " how do you know that I would 
 not be true to myself if I tell you to go to the devil with your 
 proposition ? " 
 " I do not know . maybe you would , " the doctor say , with a roughness of 
 tone intend to hide the sinking of his heart and the faltering of his 
 voice . " all I know be , that you have well get away from here . some of 
 Sotillo 's man may turn up here look for I . " 
 he slip off the table , listen intently . the Capataz , too , stand 
 up . 
 " suppose I go to Cayta , what would you do meantime ? " he ask . 
 " I would go to Sotillo directly you have leave - in the way I be think 
 of . " 
 " a very good way - if only that engineer - in - chief consent . remind he , 
 senor , that I look after the old rich Englishman who pay for the 
 railway , and that I save the life of some of his people that time when 
 a gang of thief come from the south to wreck one of his pay - train . 
 it be I who discover it all at the risk of my life , by pretend to 
 enter into their plan . just as you be do with Sotillo . " 
 " yes . yes , of course . but I can offer he well argument , " the doctor 
 say , hastily . " leave it to I . " 
 " ah , yes ! true . I be nothing . " 
 " not at all . you be everything . " 
 they move a few pace towards the door . behind they the late Senor 
 Hirsch preserve the immobility of a disregarded man . 
 " that will be all right . I know what to say to the engineer , " pursue 
 the doctor , in a low tone . " my difficulty will be with Sotillo . " 
 and Dr. Monygham stop short in the doorway as if intimidate by the 
 difficulty . he have make the sacrifice of his life . he consider this 
 a fitting opportunity . but he do not want to throw his life away too 
 soon . in his quality of betrayer of Don Carlos ' confidence , he would 
 have ultimately to indicate the hiding - place of the treasure . that would 
 be the end of his deception , and the end of himself as well , at the 
 hand of the infuriated colonel . he want to delay he to the very 
 last moment ; and he have be rack his brain to invent some place of 
 concealment at once plausible and difficult of access . 
 he impart his trouble to Nostromo , and conclude - 
 " do you know what , Capataz ? I think that when the time come and some 
 information must be give , I shall indicate the Great Isabel . that be 
 the good place I can think of . what be the matter ? " 
 a low exclamation have escape Nostromo . the doctor wait , surprised , 
 and after a moment of profound silence , hear a thick voice stammer out , 
 " utter folly , " and stop with a gasp . 
 " why folly ? " 
 " ah ! you do not see it , " begin Nostromo , scathingly , gather scorn as 
 he go on . " three man in half an hour would see that no ground have be 
 disturb anywhere on that island . do you think that such a treasure can 
 be bury without leave trace of the work - eh ! senor doctor ? why ! you 
 would not gain half a day more before have your throat cut by Sotillo . 
 the Isabel ! what stupidity ! what miserable invention ! ah ! you be all 
 alike , you fine man of intelligence . all you be fit for be to betray 
 man of the people into undertake deadly risk for object that you be 
 not even sure about . if it come off you get the benefit . if not , then 
 it do not matter . he be only a dog . ah ! Madre de Dios , I would - " he 
 shake his fist above his head . 
 the doctor be overwhelmed at first by this fierce , hiss vehemence . 
 " well ! it seem to I on your own showing that the man of the people 
 be no mean fool , too , " he say , sullenly . " no , but come . you be so 
 clever . have you a well place ? " 
 Nostromo have calm down as quickly as he have flare up . 
 " I be clever enough for that , " he say , quietly , almost with 
 indifference . " you want to tell he of a hiding - place big enough to take 
 day in ransack - a place where a treasure of silver ingot can be 
 bury without leave a sign on the surface . " 
 " and close at hand , " the doctor put in . 
 " just so , senor . tell he it be sink . " 
 " this have the merit of be the truth , " the doctor say , 
 contemptuously . " he will not believe it . " 
 " you tell he that it be sink where he may hope to lay his hand on it , 
 and he will believe you quick enough . tell he it have be sink in the 
 harbour in order to be recover afterwards by diver . tell he you 
 find out that I have order from Don Carlos Gould to lower the case 
 quietly overboard somewhere in a line between the end of the jetty and 
 the entrance . the depth be not too great there . he have no diver , but he 
 have a ship , boat , rope , chain , sailor - of a sort . let he fish for 
 the silver . let he set his fool to drag backwards and forwards and 
 crossway while he sit and watch till his eye drop out of his head . " 
 " really , this be an admirable idea , " mutter the doctor . 
 " Si . you tell he that , and see whether he will not believe you ! he will 
 spend day in rage and torment - and still he will believe . he will have 
 no thought for anything else . he will not give up till he be drive 
 off - why , he may even forget to kill you . he will neither eat nor sleep . 
 he - " 
 " the very thing ! the very thing ! " the doctor repeat in an excited 
 whisper . " Capataz , I begin to believe that you be a great genius in 
 your way . " 
 Nostromo have pause ; then begin again in a change tone , sombre , 
 speak to himself as though he have forget the doctor 's existence . 
 " there be something in a treasure that fasten upon a man 's mind . he 
 will pray and blaspheme and still persevere , and will curse the day he 
 ever hear of it , and will let his last hour come upon he unawares , 
 still believe that he miss it only by a foot . he will see it every 
 time he close his eye . he will never forget it till he be dead - and 
 even then - - Doctor , do you ever hear of the miserable gringo on 
 Azuera , that can not die ? ha ! ha ! sailor like myself . there be no 
 get away from a treasure that once fasten upon your mind . " 
 " you be a devil of a man , Capataz . it be the most plausible thing . " 
 Nostromo press his arm . 
 " it will be bad for he than thirst at sea or hunger in a town full of 
 people . do you know what that be ? he shall suffer great torment than 
 he inflict upon that terrify wretch who have no invention . none ! 
 none ! not like I . I could have tell Sotillo a deadly tale for very 
 little pain . " 
 he laugh wildly and turn in the doorway towards the body of the late 
 Senor Hirsch , an opaque long blotch in the semi - transparent obscurity 
 of the room between the two tall parallelogram of the window full of 
 star . 
 " you man of fear ! " he cry . " you shall be avenge by I - Nostromo . out 
 of my way , doctor ! stand aside - or , by the suffer soul of a woman 
 dead without confession , I will strangle you with my two hand . " 
 he bound downwards into the black , smoky hall . with a grunt of 
 astonishment , Dr. Monygham throw himself recklessly into the pursuit . at 
 the bottom of the charred stair he have a fall , pitch forward on his 
 face with a force that would have stun a spirit less intent upon a 
 task of love and devotion . he be up in a moment , jarred , shaken , with a 
 queer impression of the terrestrial globe have be fling at his head 
 in the dark . but it want more than that to stop Dr. Monygham 's body , 
 possess by the exaltation of self - sacrifice ; a reasonable exaltation , 
 determine not to lose whatever advantage chance put into its way . he 
 run with headlong , totter swiftness , his arm go like a windmill 
 in his effort to keep his balance on his crippled foot . he lose his hat ; 
 the tail of his open gaberdine fly behind he . he have no mind to lose 
 sight of the indispensable man . but it be a long time , and a long way 
 from the Custom House , before he manage to seize his arm from behind , 
 roughly , out of breath . 
 " stop ! be you mad ? " 
 already Nostromo be walk slowly , his head drop , as if check in 
 his pace by the weariness of irresolution . 
 " what be that to you ? ah ! I forget you want I for something . always . 
 Siempre Nostromo . " 
 " what do you mean by talk of strangle I ? " pant the doctor . 
 " what do I mean ? I mean that the king of the devil himself have send you 
 out of this town of coward and talker to meet I to - night of all the 
 night of my life . " 
 under the starry sky the Albergo d'ltalia Una emerge , black and low , 
 break the dark level of the plain . Nostromo stop altogether . 
 " the priest say he be a tempter , do they not ? " he add , through his 
 clench tooth . 
 " my good man , you drivel . the devil have nothing to do with this . neither 
 have the town , which you may call by what name you please . but Don Carlos 
 Gould be neither a coward nor an empty talker . you will admit that ? " he 
 wait . " well ? " 
 " could I see Don Carlos ? " 
 " great heaven ! no ! why ? what for ? " exclaim the doctor in agitation . 
 " I tell you it be madness . I will not let you go into the town for 
 anything . " 
 " I must . " 
 " you must not ! " hiss the doctor , fiercely , almost beside himself with 
 the fear of the man do away with his usefulness for an imbecile whim 
 of some sort . " I tell you you shall not . I would rather - - " 
 he stop at loss for word , feel fag out , powerless , hold on 
 to Nostromo 's sleeve , absolutely for support after his run . 
 " I be betray ! " mutter the Capataz to himself ; and the doctor , who 
 overheard the last word , make an effort to speak calmly . 
 " that be exactly what would happen to you . you would be betray . " 
 he think with a sicken dread that the man be so well know that he 
 could not escape recognition . the house of the Senor Administrador be 
 beset by spy , no doubt . and even the very servant of the casa be 
 not to be trust . " reflect , Capataz , " he say , impressively . . . . 
 " what be you laugh at ? " 
 " I be laugh to think that if somebody that do not approve of 
 my presence in town , for instance - you understand , senor doctor - if 
 somebody be to give I up to Pedrito , it would not be beyond my power 
 to make friend even with he . it be true . what do you think of that ? " 
 " you be a man of infinite resource , Capataz , " say Dr. Monygham , 
 dismally . " I recognize that . but the town be full of talk about you ; and 
 those few cargadore that be not in hiding with the railway people have 
 be shout ' Viva Montero ' on the Plaza all day . " 
 " my poor cargadore ! " mutter Nostromo . " betray ! betray ! " 
 " I understand that on the wharf you be pretty free in lay about you 
 with a stick amongst your poor cargadore , " the doctor say in a grim 
 tone , which show that he be recover from his exertion . " make no 
 mistake . Pedrito be furious at Senor Ribiera 's rescue , and at have 
 lose the pleasure of shoot Decoud . already there be rumour in the 
 town of the treasure have be spirit away . to have miss that do 
 not please Pedrito either ; but let I tell you that if you have all that 
 silver in your hand for ransom it would not save you . " 
 turn swiftly , and catch the doctor by the shoulder , Nostromo 
 thrust his face close to his . 
 " Maladetta ! you follow I speak of the treasure . you have swear my 
 ruin . you be the last man who look upon I before I go out with 
 it . and Sidoni the engine - driver say you have an evil eye . " 
 " he ought to know . I save his break leg for he last year , " the doctor 
 say , stoically . he feel on his shoulder the weight of these hand 
 fame amongst the populace for snap thick rope and bend 
 horseshoe . " and to you I offer the good mean of save yourself - let 
 I go - and of retrieve your great reputation . you boast of make 
 the Capataz de Cargadores famous from one end of America to the other 
 about this wretched silver . but I bring you a well opportunity - let I 
 go , hombre ! " 
 Nostromo release he abruptly , and the doctor fear that the 
 indispensable man would run off again . but he do not . he walk on 
 slowly . the doctor hobble by his side till , within a stone 's throw from 
 the Casa Viola , Nostromo stop again . 
 silent in inhospitable darkness , the Casa Viola seem to have change 
 its nature ; his home appear to repel he with an air of hopeless and 
 inimical mystery . the doctor say - 
 " you will be safe there . go in , Capataz . " 
 " how can I go in ? " Nostromo seem to ask himself in a low , inward tone . 
 " she can not unsay what she say , and I can not undo what I have do . " 
 " I tell you it be all right . Viola be all alone in there . I look in 
 as I come out of the town . you will be perfectly safe in that house till 
 you leave it to make your name famous on the Campo . I be go now to 
 arrange for your departure with the engineer - in - chief , and I shall bring 
 you news here long before daybreak . " 
 Dr. Monygham , disregarding , or perhaps fear to penetrate the meaning 
 of Nostromo 's silence , clap he lightly on the shoulder , and start 
 off with his smart , lame walk , vanish utterly at the third or fourth 
 hop in the direction of the railway track . arrest between the two 
 wooden post for people to fasten their horse to , Nostromo do not 
 move , as if he , too , have be plant solidly in the ground . at the end 
 of half an hour he lift his head to the deep baying of the dog at the 
 railway yard , which have burst out suddenly , tumultuous and deaden as 
 if come from under the plain . that lame doctor with the evil eye have 
 get there pretty fast . 
 step by step Nostromo approach the Albergo d'Italia Una , which he have 
 never know so lightless , so silent , before . the door , all black in the 
 pale wall , stand open as he have leave it twenty - four hour before , 
 when he have nothing to hide from the world . he remain before it , 
 irresolute , like a fugitive , like a man betray . poverty , misery , 
 starvation ! where have he hear these word ? the anger of a die woman 
 have prophesy that fate for his folly . it look as if it would come 
 true very quickly . and the lepero would laugh - she have say . yes , they 
 would laugh if they know that the Capataz de Cargadores be at the mercy 
 of the mad doctor whom they could remember , only a few year ago , buy 
 cook food from a stall on the Plaza for a copper coin - like one of 
 themselves . 
 at that moment the notion of seek Captain Mitchell pass through his 
 mind . he glance in the direction of the jetty and see a small gleam of 
 light in the O.S.N. Company 's building . the thought of light window 
 be not attractive . two light window have decoy he into the empty 
 Custom House , only to fall into the clutch of that doctor . no ! he 
 would not go near light window again on that night . Captain Mitchell 
 be there . and what could he be tell ? that doctor would worm it all out 
 of he as if he be a child . 
 on the threshold he call out " Giorgio ! " in an undertone . nobody 
 answer . he step in . " Ola ! viejo ! be you there ? . . . " in the 
 impenetrable darkness his head swam with the illusion that the obscurity 
 of the kitchen be as vast as the Placid Gulf , and that the floor dip 
 forward like a sink light . " Ola ! viejo ! " he repeat , falteringly , 
 sway where he stand . his hand , extend to steady himself , fall 
 upon the table . move a step forward , he shift it , and feel a box 
 of match under his finger . he fancy he have hear a quiet sigh . he 
 listen for a moment , hold his breath ; then , with tremble hand , 
 try to strike a light . 
 the tiny piece of wood flame up quite blindingly at the end of his 
 finger , raise above his blink eye . a concentrated glare fall 
 upon the leonine white head of old Giorgio against the black 
 fire - place - show he lean forward in a chair in star immobility , 
 surround , overhung , by great mass of shadow , his leg cross , his 
 cheek in his hand , an empty pipe in the corner of his mouth . it seem 
 hour before he attempt to turn his face ; at the very moment the match 
 go out , and he disappear , overwhelm by the shadow , as if the 
 wall and roof of the desolate house have collapse upon his white head 
 in ghostly silence . 
 Nostromo hear he stir and utter dispassionately the word - 
 " it may have be a vision . " 
 " no , " he say , softly . " it be no vision , old man . " 
 a strong chest voice ask in the dark - 
 " be that you I hear , Giovann ' Battista ? " 
 " Si , viejo . steady . not so loud . " 
 after his release by Sotillo , Giorgio Viola , attend to the very door 
 by the good - natured engineer - in - chief , have reentere his house , which 
 he have be make to leave almost at the very moment of his wife 's death . 
 all be still . the lamp above be burn . he nearly call out to she 
 by name ; and the thought that no call from he would ever again evoke 
 the answer of her voice , make he drop heavily into the chair with 
 a loud groan , wring out by the pain as of a keen blade pierce his 
 breast . 
 the rest of the night he make no sound . the darkness turn to grey , and 
 on the colourless , clear , glassy dawn the jagged sierra stand out flat 
 and opaque , as if cut out of paper . 
 the enthusiastic and severe soul of Giorgio Viola , sailor , champion of 
 oppress humanity , enemy of king , and , by the grace of Mrs. Gould , 
 hotel - keeper of the Sulaco harbour , have descend into the open abyss of 
 desolation amongst the shattered vestige of his past . he remember 
 his wooing between two campaign , a single short week in the season of 
 gathering olive . nothing approach the grave passion of that time but 
 the deep , passionate sense of his bereavement . he discover all the 
 extent of his dependence upon the silence voice of that woman . it 
 be her voice that he miss . abstract , busy , lose in inward 
 contemplation , he seldom look at his wife in those later year . the 
 thought of his girl be a matter of concern , not of consolation . it 
 be her voice that he would miss . and he remember the other child - the 
 little boy who die at sea . ah ! a man would have be something to lean 
 upon . and , alas ! even Gian ' Battista - he of whom , and of Linda , his 
 wife have speak to he so anxiously before she drop off into her last 
 sleep on earth , he on whom she have call aloud to save the child , 
 just before she die - even he be dead ! 
 and the old man , bend forward , his head in his hand , sit through the day 
 in immobility and solitude . he never hear the brazen roar of the bell 
 in town . when it cease the earthenware filter in the corner of the 
 kitchen keep on its swift musical drip , drip into the great porous jar 
 below . 
 towards sunset he get up , and with slow movement disappear up the 
 narrow staircase . his bulk fill it ; and the rubbing of his shoulder 
 make a small noise as of a mouse run behind the plaster of a wall . 
 while he remain up there the house be as dumb as a grave . then , 
 with the same faint rubbing noise , he descend . he have to catch at the 
 chair and table to regain his seat . he seize his pipe off the 
 high mantel of the fire - place - but make no attempt to reach the 
 tobacco - thrust it empty into the corner of his mouth , and sit down 
 again in the same staring pose . the sun of Pedrito 's entry into Sulaco , 
 the last sun of Senor Hirsch 's life , the first of Decoud 's solitude on 
 the Great Isabel , pass over the Albergo d'ltalia Una on its way to 
 the west . the tinkle drip , drip of the filter have cease , the lamp 
 upstairs have burn itself out , and the night beset Giorgio Viola and his 
 dead wife with its obscurity and silence that seem invincible till the 
 Capataz de Cargadores , return from the dead , put they to flight with 
 the splutter and flare of a match . 
 " Si , viejo . it be I . wait . " 
 Nostromo , after barricade the door and close the shutter carefully , 
 grope upon a shelf for a candle , and light it . 
 Old Viola have rise . he follow with his eye in the dark the sound 
 make by Nostromo . the light disclose he stand without support , as 
 if the mere presence of that man who be loyal , brave , incorruptible , 
 who be all his son would have be , be enough for the support of his 
 decaying strength . 
 he extend his hand grasp the briar - wood pipe , whose bowl be 
 char on the edge , and knit his bushy eyebrow heavily at the 
 light . 
 " you have return , " he say , with shaky dignity . " ah ! very well ! I - - " 
 he break off . Nostromo , lean back against the table , his arm fold 
 on his breast , nod at he slightly . 
 " you think I be drown ! no ! the good dog of the rich , of the 
 aristocrat , of these fine man who can only talk and betray the people , 
 be not dead yet . " 
 the Garibaldino , motionless , seem to drink in the sound of the 
 well - know voice . his head move slightly once as if in sign of 
 approval ; but Nostromo see clearly that the old man understand nothing 
 of the word . there be no one to understand ; no one he could take into 
 the confidence of Decoud 's fate , of his own , into the secret of the 
 silver . that doctor be an enemy of the people - a tempter . . . . 
 Old Giorgio 's heavy frame shake from head to foot with the effort 
 to overcome his emotion at the sight of that man , who have share the 
 intimacy of his domestic life as though he have be a grow - up son . 
 " she believe you would return , " he say , solemnly . 
 Nostromo raise his head . 
 " she be a wise woman . how could I fail to come back - - ? " 
 he finish the thought mentally : " since she have prophesy for I an 
 end of poverty , misery , and starvation . " these word of Teresa 's anger , 
 from the circumstance in which they have be utter , like the cry of 
 a soul prevent from make its peace with God , stir the obscure 
 superstition of personal fortune from which even the great genius 
 amongst man of adventure and action be seldom free . they reign over 
 Nostromo 's mind with the force of a potent malediction . and what a curse 
 it be that which her word have lay upon he ! he have be orphan 
 so young that he could remember no other woman whom he call mother . 
 henceforth there would be no enterprise in which he would not fail . the 
 spell be work already . death itself would elude he now . . . . he 
 say violently - 
 " come , viejo ! get I something to eat . I be hungry ! Sangre de Dios ! the 
 emptiness of my belly make I lightheade . " 
 with his chin drop again upon his bare breast above his fold arm , 
 barefoote , watch from under a gloomy brow the movement of old Viola 
 forage amongst the cupboard , he seem as if indeed fall under a 
 curse - a ruined and sinister Capataz . 
 Old Viola walk out of a dark corner , and , without a word , empty upon 
 the table out of his hollowed palm a few dry crust of bread and half a 
 raw onion . 
 while the Capataz begin to devour this beggar 's fare , take up with 
 stony - eyed voracity piece after piece lie by his side , the Garibaldino 
 go off , and squat down in another corner fill an earthenware mug 
 with red wine out of a wicker - cover demijohn . with a familiar gesture , 
 as when serve customer in the cafe , he have thrust his pipe between 
 his tooth to have his hand free . 
 the Capataz drink greedily . a slight flush deepen the bronze of his 
 cheek . before he , Viola , with a turn of his white and massive head 
 towards the staircase , take his empty pipe out of his mouth , and 
 pronounce slowly - 
 " after the shot be fire down here , which kill she as surely as if 
 the bullet have strike her oppressed heart , she call upon you to save 
 the child . upon you , Gian ' Battista . " 
 the Capataz look up . 
 " do she do that , Padrone ? to save the child ! they be with the 
 English senora , their rich benefactress . hey ! old man of the people . thy 
 benefactress . . . . " 
 " I be old , " mutter Giorgio Viola . " an Englishwoman be allow to give 
 a bed to Garibaldi lie wound in prison . the great man that ever 
 live . a man of the people , too - a sailor . I may let another keep a 
 roof over my head . si . . . I be old . I may let she . life last too long 
 sometimes . " 
 " and she herself may not have a roof over her head before many day be 
 out , unless I . . . what do you say ? be I to keep a roof over her head ? 
 be I to try - and save all the Blancos together with she ? " 
 " you shall do it , " say old Viola in a strong voice . " you shall do it as 
 my son would have . . . . " 
 " Thy son , viejo ! .. .. there never have be a man like thy son . ha , I 
 must try . . . . but what if it be only a part of the curse to lure I 
 on ? . . . and so she call upon I to save - and then - - ? " 
 " she speak no more . " the heroic follower of Garibaldi , at the thought 
 of the eternal stillness and silence fall upon the shroud form 
 stretch out on the bed upstairs , avert his face and raise his hand 
 to his furrowed brow . " she be dead before I could seize her hand , " he 
 stammer out , pitifully . 
 before the wide eye of the Capataz , star at the doorway of the dark 
 staircase , float the shape of the Great Isabel , like a strange ship in 
 distress , freight with enormous wealth and the solitary life of a man . 
 it be impossible for he to do anything . he could only hold his 
 tongue , since there be no one to trust . the treasure would be lose , 
 probably - unless Decoud . . . . and his thought come abruptly to an end . 
 he perceive that he could not imagine in the least what Decoud be 
 likely to do . 
 Old Viola have not stir . and the motionless Capataz drop his 
 long , soft eyelash , which give to the upper part of his fierce , 
 black - whisker face a touch of feminine ingenuousness . the silence have 
 last for a long time . 
 " God rest her soul ! " he murmur , gloomily . 
 CHAPTER ten 
 the next day be quiet in the morning , except for the faint sound of 
 fire to the northward , in the direction of Los Hatos . Captain Mitchell 
 have listen to it from his balcony anxiously . the phrase , " in 
 my delicate position as the only consular agent then in the port , 
 everything , sir , everything be a just cause for anxiety , " have its place 
 in the more or less stereotyped relation of the " historical event " 
 which for the next few year be at the service of distinguished 
 stranger visit Sulaco . the mention of the dignity and neutrality of 
 the flag , so difficult to preserve in his position , " right in the 
 thick of these event between the lawlessness of that piratical villain 
 Sotillo and the more regularly establish but scarcely less atrocious 
 tyranny of his Excellency Don Pedro Montero , " come next in order . 
 Captain Mitchell be not the man to enlarge upon mere danger much . but 
 he insist that it be a memorable day . on that day , towards dusk , 
 he have see " that poor fellow of mine - Nostromo . the sailor whom I 
 discover , and , I may say , make , sir . the man of the famous ride to 
 Cayta , sir . an historical event , sir ! " 
 regard by the O. S. N. Company as an old and faithful servant , Captain 
 Mitchell be allow to attain the term of his usefulness in ease and 
 dignity at the head of the enormously extend service . the augmentation 
 of the establishment , with its crowd of clerk , an office in town , the 
 old office in the harbour , the division into department - passenger , 
 cargo , lighterage , and so on - secure a great leisure for his last 
 year in the regenerated Sulaco , the capital of the Occidental Republic . 
 like by the native for his good nature and the formality of his 
 manner , self - important and simple , know for year as a " friend of our 
 country , " he feel himself a personality of mark in the town . get 
 up early for a turn in the market - place while the gigantic shadow of 
 Higuerota be still lie upon the fruit and flower stall pile up 
 with mass of gorgeous colouring , attend easily to current affair , 
 welcome in house , greet by lady on the Alameda , with his 
 entry into all the club and a footing in the Casa Gould , he lead his 
 privileged old bachelor , man - about - town existence with great comfort and 
 solemnity . but on mail - boat day he be down at the Harbour Office at an 
 early hour , with his own gig , man by a smart crew in white and 
 blue , ready to dash off and board the ship directly she show her bow 
 between the harbour head . 
 it would be into the Harbour Office that he would lead some privileged 
 passenger he have bring off in his own boat , and invite he to take a 
 seat for a moment while he sign a few paper . and Captain Mitchell , 
 seat himself at his desk , would keep on talk hospitably - 
 " there be not   much time if you be to see everything in a day . we shall 
 be off in a moment . we will have lunch at the Amarilla Club - though I 
 belong also to the anglo - american - mining engineer and business man , 
 do not   you know - and to the Mirliflores as well , a new club - English , 
 French , Italians , all sort - lively young fellow mostly , who want 
 to pay a compliment to an old resident , sir . but we will lunch at the 
 Amarilla . interest you , I fancy . real thing of the country . man of the 
 first family . the President of the Occidental Republic himself belong 
 to it , sir . fine old bishop with a broken nose in the patio . remarkable 
 piece of statuary , I believe . Cavaliere Parrochetti - you know 
 Parrochetti , the famous italian sculptor - be work here for two 
 year - think very highly of our old bishop . . . . there ! I be very 
 much at your service now . " 
 Proud of his experience , penetrate by the sense of historical 
 importance of man , event , and building , he talk pompously in jerky 
 period , with slight sweep of his short , thick arm , let nothing 
 " escape the attention " of his privileged captive . 
 " lot of building go on , as you observe . before the separation it 
 be a plain of burn grass smother in cloud of dust , with an ox - cart 
 track to our Jetty . nothing more . this be the Harbour Gate . Picturesque , 
 be it not ? formerly the town stop short there . we enter now the Calle 
 de la Constitucion . observe the old spanish house . great dignity . eh ? I 
 suppose it be just as it be in the time of the Viceroys , except for the 
 pavement . wood block now . Sulaco National Bank there , with the sentry 
 box each side of the gate . Casa Avellanos this side , with all the 
 ground - floor window shutter . a wonderful woman live there - Miss 
 Avellanos - the beautiful Antonia . a character , sir ! a historical woman ! 
 Opposite - Casa Gould . noble gateway . yes , the Goulds of the original 
 Gould Concession , that all the world know of now . I hold seventeen of 
 the thousand - dollar share in the Consolidated San Tome mine . all the 
 poor saving of my lifetime , sir , and it will be enough to keep I in 
 comfort to the end of my day at home when I retire . I get in on the 
 ground - floor , you see . Don Carlos , great friend of mine . seventeen 
 share - quite a little fortune to leave behind one , too . I have a 
 niece - marry a parson - most worthy man , incumbent of a small parish in 
 Sussex ; no end of child . I be never marry myself . a sailor should 
 exercise self - denial . stand under that very gateway , sir , with some 
 young engineer - fellow , ready to defend that house where we have receive 
 so much kindness and hospitality , I see the first and last charge of 
 Pedrito 's horseman upon Barrios 's troop , who have just take the Harbour 
 Gate . they could not stand the new rifle bring out by that poor 
 Decoud . it be a murderous fire . in a moment the street become block 
 with a mass of dead man and horse . they never come on again . " 
 and all day Captain Mitchell would talk like this to his more or less 
 willing victim - 
 " the Plaza . I call it magnificent . twice the area of Trafalgar Square . " 
 from the very centre , in the blaze sunshine , he point out the 
 building - 
 " the Intendencia , now President 's Palace - Cabildo , where the Lower 
 Chamber of Parliament sit . you notice the new house on that side 
 of the Plaza ? Compania Anzani , a great general store , like those 
 cooperative thing at home . Old Anzani be murder by the National 
 Guards in front of his safe . it be even for that specific crime that 
 the deputy Gamacho , command the Nationals , a bloodthirsty and 
 savage brute , be execute publicly by garrotte upon the sentence of 
 a court - martial order by Barrios . Anzani 's nephew convert the 
 business into a company . all that side of the Plaza have be burn ; use 
 to be colonnade before . a terrible fire , by the light of which I see 
 the last of the fighting , the llaneros fly , the national throw 
 their arm down , and the miner of San Tome , all Indians from the 
 Sierra , roll by like a torrent to the sound of pipe and cymbal , 
 green flag fly , a wild mass of man in white ponchos and green hat , 
 on foot , on mule , on donkey . such a sight , sir , will never be see 
 again . the miner , sir , have march upon the town , Don Pepe lead on 
 his black horse , and their very wife in the rear on burro , scream 
 encouragement , sir , and beat tambourine . I remember one of these 
 woman have a green parrot seat on her shoulder , as calm as a bird 
 of stone . they have just save their Senor Administrador ; for Barrios , 
 though he order the assault at once , at night , too , would have be 
 too late . Pedrito Montero have Don Carlos lead out to be shoot - like his 
 uncle many year ago - and then , as Barrios say afterwards , ' Sulaco 
 would not have be worth fight for . ' Sulaco without the Concession 
 be nothing ; and there be ton and ton of dynamite distribute all 
 over the mountain with detonator arrange , and an old priest , Father 
 Roman , stand by to annihilate the San Tome mine at the first news of 
 failure . Don Carlos have make up his mind not to leave it behind , and he 
 have the right man to see to it , too . " 
 thus Captain Mitchell would talk in the middle of the Plaza , hold 
 over his head a white umbrella with a green lining ; but inside the 
 cathedral , in the dim light , with a faint scent of incense float in 
 the cool atmosphere , and here and there a kneel female figure , black 
 or all white , with a veiled head , his lowered voice become solemn and 
 impressive . 
 " here , " he would say , point to a niche in the wall of the dusky 
 aisle , " you see the bust of Don Jose Avellanos , ' Patriot and Statesman , ' 
 as the inscription say , ' Minister to Courts of England and Spain , etc . , 
 etc . , die in the wood of Los Hatos wear out with his lifelong struggle 
 for Right and Justice at the dawn of the New Era . ' a fair likeness . 
 Parrochetti 's work from some old photograph and a pencil sketch by Mrs. 
 Gould . I be well acquainted with that distinguished spanish - american of 
 the old school , a true Hidalgo , belove by everybody who know he . 
 the marble medallion in the wall , in the antique style , represent 
 a veiled woman seat with her hand clasp loosely over her knee , 
 commemorate that unfortunate young gentleman who sail out with 
 Nostromo on that fatal night , sir . see , ' to the memory of Martin Decoud , 
 his betroth Antonia Avellanos . ' Frank , simple , noble . there you have 
 that lady , sir , as she be . an exceptional woman . those who think she 
 would give way to despair be mistaken , sir . she have be blame in 
 many quarter for not have take the veil . it be expect of she . but 
 Dona Antonia be not the stuff they make nun of . Bishop Corbelan , her 
 uncle , live with she in the Corbelan town house . he be a fierce sort of 
 priest , everlastingly worry the Government about the old Church land 
 and convent . I believe they think a lot of he in Rome . now let we go 
 to the Amarilla Club , just across the Plaza , to get some lunch . " 
 directly outside the cathedral on the very top of the noble flight 
 of step , his voice rise pompously , his arm find again its sweeping 
 gesture . 
 " Porvenir , over there on that first floor , above those french 
 plate - glass shop - front ; our big daily . conservative , or , rather , I 
 should say , parliamentary . we have the parliamentary party here of which 
 the actual Chief of the State , Don Juste Lopez , be the head ; a very 
 sagacious man , I think . a first - rate intellect , sir . the democratic 
 party in opposition rest mostly , I be sorry to say , on these 
 socialistic Italians , sir , with their secret society , camorra , and 
 such - like . there be lot of Italians settle here on the railway land , 
 dismiss navvy , mechanic , and so on , all along the trunk line . there 
 be whole village of Italians on the Campo . and the native , too , be 
 be draw into these way . . . american bar ? yes . and over there you 
 can see another . New Yorkers mostly frequent that one - - here we be at 
 the Amarilla . observe the bishop at the foot of the stair to the right 
 as we go in . " 
 and the lunch would begin and terminate its lavish and leisurely course 
 at a little table in the gallery , Captain Mitchell nodding , bow , 
 get up to speak for a moment to different official in black 
 clothe , merchant in jacket , officer in uniform , middle - aged 
 caballero from the Campo - sallow , little , nervous man , and fat , placid , 
 swarthy man , and Europeans or North Americans of superior standing , 
 whose face look very white amongst the majority of dark complexion 
 and black , glisten eye . 
 Captain Mitchell would lie back in the chair , cast around look of 
 satisfaction , and tender over the table a case full of thick cigar . 
 " try a weed with your coffee . local tobacco . the black coffee you get at 
 the Amarilla , sir , you do not   meet anywhere in the world . we get the bean 
 from a famous cafeteria in the foot - hill , whose owner send three sack 
 every year as a present to his fellow member in remembrance of the 
 fight against Gamacho 's national , carry on from these very window by 
 the caballero . he be in town at the time , and take part , sir , to the 
 bitter end . it arrive on three mule - not in the common way , by rail ; 
 no fear ! - right into the patio , escort by mount peon , in charge of 
 the Mayoral of his estate , who walk upstairs , boot and spur , and 
 deliver it to our committee formally with the word , ' for the sake of 
 those fall on the third of May . ' we call it Tres de Mayo coffee . taste 
 it . " 
 Captain Mitchell , with an expression as though make ready to hear a 
 sermon in a church , would lift the tiny cup to his lip . and the nectar 
 would be sip to the bottom during a restful silence in a cloud of 
 cigar smoke . 
 " look at this man in black just go out , " he would begin , lean 
 forward hastily . " this be the famous Hernandez , Minister of War . the 
 Times ' special correspondent , who write that striking series of letter 
 call the Occidental Republic the ' Treasure House of the World , ' give 
 a whole article to he and the force he have organize - the renowne 
 Carabineers of the Campo . " 
 Captain Mitchell 's guest , star curiously , would see a figure in a 
 long - tail black coat walk gravely , with downcast eyelid in a long , 
 compose face , a brow furrow horizontally , a pointed head , whose grey 
 hair , thin at the top , comb down carefully on all side and roll at 
 the end , fall low on the neck and shoulder . this , then , be the famous 
 bandit of whom Europe have hear with interest . he put on a high - crown 
 sombrero with a wide flat brim ; a rosary of wooden bead be twist 
 about his right wrist . and Captain Mitchell would proceed - 
 " the protector of the Sulaco refugee from the rage of Pedrito . as 
 general of cavalry with Barrios he distinguish himself at the storming 
 of Tonoro , where Senor Fuentes be kill with the last remnant of the 
 Monterists . he be the friend and humble servant of Bishop Corbelan . 
 hear three Masses every day . I bet you he will step into the cathedral 
 to say a prayer or two on his way home to his siesta . " 
 he take several puff at his cigar in silence ; then , in his most 
 important manner , pronounce : 
 " the spanish race , sir , be prolific of remarkable character in every 
 rank of life . . . . I propose we go now into the billiard - room , which be 
 cool , for a quiet chat . there be never anybody there till after five . 
 I could tell you episode of the separationist revolution that would 
 astonish you . when the great heat be over , we will take a turn on the 
 Alameda . " 
 the programme go on relentless , like a law of Nature . the turn on the 
 Alameda be take with slow step and stately remark . 
 " all the great world of Sulaco here , sir . " Captain Mitchell bow right 
 and leave with no end of formality ; then with animation , " Dona Emilia , 
 Mrs. Gould 's carriage . look . always white mule . the kind , most 
 gracious woman the sun ever shine upon . a great position , sir . a great 
 position . first lady in Sulaco - far before the President 's wife . and 
 worthy of it . " he take off his hat ; then , with a study change of tone , 
 add , negligently , that the man in black by her side , with a high white 
 collar and a scarred , snarly face , be Dr. Monygham , Inspector of State 
 Hospitals , chief medical officer of the Consolidated San Tome mine . " a 
 familiar of the house . everlastingly there . no wonder . the Goulds make 
 he . very clever man and all that , but I never like he . nobody do . I 
 can recollect he limp about the street in a check shirt and native 
 sandal with a watermelon under his arm - all he would get to eat for the 
 day . a big - wig now , sir , and as nasty as ever . however . . . there be no 
 doubt he play his part fairly well at the time . he save we all from 
 the deadly incubus of Sotillo , where a more particular man might have 
 fail - - " 
 his arm go up . 
 " the equestrian statue that use to stand on the pedestal over there 
 have be remove . it be an anachronism , " Captain Mitchell comment , 
 obscurely . " there be some talk of replace it by a marble shaft 
 commemorative of separation , with angel of peace at the four corner , 
 and bronze Justice hold an even balance , all gilt , on the top . 
 Cavaliere Parrochetti be ask to make a design , which you can see 
 frame under glass in the Municipal Sala . name be to be engrave all 
 round the base . well ! they could do no well than begin with the name 
 of Nostromo . he have do for separation as much as anybody else , and , " 
 add Captain Mitchell , " have get less than many other by it - when it 
 come to that . " he drop on to a stone seat under a tree , and tap 
 invitingly at the place by his side . " he carry to Barrios the letter 
 from Sulaco which decide the General to abandon Cayta for a time , and 
 come back to our help here by sea . the transport be still in harbour 
 fortunately . Sir , I do not even know that my Capataz de Cargadores be 
 alive . I have no idea . it be Dr. Monygham who come upon he , by chance , 
 in the Custom House , evacuate an hour or two before by the wretched 
 Sotillo . I be never tell ; never give a hint , nothing - as if I be 
 unworthy of confidence . Monygham arrange it all . he go to the railway 
 yard , and get admission to the engineer - in - chief , who , for the sake of 
 the Goulds as much as for anything else , consent to let an engine 
 make a dash down the line , one hundred and eighty mile , with Nostromo 
 aboard . it be the only way to get he off . in the Construction Camp 
 at the railhead , he obtain a horse , arm , some clothing , and start 
 alone on that marvellous ride - four hundred mile in six day , through 
 a disturbed country , end by the feat of pass through the Monterist 
 line outside Cayta . the history of that ride , sir , would make a 
 most exciting book . he carry all our life in his pocket . devotion , 
 courage , fidelity , intelligence be not enough . of course , he be 
 perfectly fearless and incorruptible . but a man be want that would 
 know how to succeed . he be that man , sir . on the fifth of May , be 
 practically a prisoner in the Harbour Office of my Company , I suddenly 
 hear the whistle of an engine in the railway yard , a quarter of a mile 
 away . I could not believe my ear . I make one jump on to the balcony , 
 and beheld a locomotive under a great head of steam run out of the yard 
 gate , screech like mad , envelop in a white cloud , and then , just 
 abreast of old Viola 's inn , check almost to a standstill . I make out , 
 sir , a man - I could not   tell who - dash out of the Albergo d'ltalia Una , 
 climb into the cab , and then , sir , that engine seem positively to leap 
 clear of the house , and be go in the twinkling of an eye . as you blow 
 a candle out , sir ! there be a first - rate driver on the foot - plate , sir , 
 I can tell you . they be fire heavily upon by the National Guards in 
 Rincon and one other place . fortunately the line have not be tear 
 up . in four hour they reach the Construction Camp . Nostromo have his 
 start . . . . the rest you know . you have   get only to look round you . there 
 be people on this Alameda that ride in their carriage , or even be 
 alive at all to - day , because year ago I engage a runaway italian 
 sailor for a foreman of our wharf simply on the strength of his look . 
 and that be a fact . you can not   get over it , sir . on the seventeenth of 
 May , just twelve day after I see the man from the Casa Viola get on the 
 engine , and wonder what it mean , Barrios 's transport be enter 
 this harbour , and the ' Treasure House of the World , ' as the Times man 
 call Sulaco in his book , be save intact for civilization - for a 
 great future , sir . Pedrito , with Hernandez on the west , and the San Tome 
 miner press on the land gate , be not able to oppose the landing . he 
 have be send message to Sotillo for a week to join he . have Sotillo 
 do so there would have be massacre and proscription that would have 
 leave no man or woman of position alive . but that be where Dr. Monygham 
 come in . Sotillo , blind and deaf to everything , stick on board his 
 steamer watch the dragging for silver , which he believe to be sink 
 at the bottom of the harbour . they say that for the last three day he 
 be out of his mind rave and foam with disappointment at get 
 nothing , fly about the deck , and yelling curse at the boat with the 
 drag , order they in , and then suddenly stamp his foot and cry 
 out , ' and yet it be there ! I see it ! I feel it ! ' 
 " he be prepare to hang Dr. Monygham   whom he have on board   at the end 
 of the after - derrick , when the first of Barrios 's transport , one of our 
 own ship at that , steam right in , and range close alongside open 
 a small - arm fire without as much preliminary as a hail . it be the 
 complete surprise in the world , sir . they be too astounded at first 
 to bolt below . man be fall right and leave like ninepin . it be a 
 miracle that Monygham , stand on the after - hatch with the rope already 
 round his neck , escape be riddle through and through like a sieve . 
 he tell I since that he have give himself up for lost , and keep on 
 yell with all the strength of his lung : ' hoist a white flag ! hoist 
 a white flag ! ' suddenly an old major of the Esmeralda regiment , stand 
 by , unsheathe his sword with a shriek : ' die , perjure traitor ! ' and run 
 Sotillo clean through the body , just before he fall himself shoot through 
 the head . " 
 Captain Mitchell stop for a while . 
 " Begad , sir ! I could spin you a yarn for hour . but it be time we start 
 off to Rincon . it would not do for you to pass through Sulaco and not 
 see the light of the San Tome mine , a whole mountain ablaze like a 
 light palace above the dark Campo . it be a fashionable drive . . . . but 
 let I tell you one little anecdote , sir ; just to show you . a fortnight 
 or more later , when Barrios , declare Generalissimo , be go in pursuit 
 of Pedrito away south , when the Provisional Junta , with Don Juste Lopez 
 at its head , have promulgate the new Constitution , and our Don Carlos 
 Gould be pack up his trunk bind on a mission to San Francisco 
 and Washington   the United States , sir , be the first great power to 
 recognize the Occidental Republic   - a fortnight later , I say , when we 
 be begin to feel that our head be safe on our shoulder , if 
 I may express myself so , a prominent man , a large shipper by our line , 
 come to see I on business , and , say he , the first thing : ' I say , 
 Captain Mitchell , be that fellow '   mean Nostromo   ' still the Capataz 
 of your Cargadores or not ? ' ' what be the matter ? ' say I. ' because , if 
 he be , then I do not   mind ; I send and receive a good lot of cargo by your 
 ship ; but I have observe he several day loaf about the wharf , 
 and just now he stop I as cool as you please , with a request for a 
 cigar . now , you know , my cigar be rather special , and I can not   get they 
 so easily as all that . ' ' I hope you stretch a point , ' I say , 
 very gently . ' why , yes . but it be a confounded nuisance . the fellow 's 
 everlastingly cadge for smoke . ' Sir , I turn my eye away , and then 
 ask , ' be not   you one of the prisoner in the Cabildo ? ' ' you know very 
 well I be , and in chain , too , ' say he . ' and under a fine of fifteen 
 thousand dollar ? ' he colour , sir , because it get about that he 
 faint from fright when they come to arrest he , and then behave 
 before fuente in a manner to make the very policianos , who have drag 
 he there by the hair of his head , smile at his cringing . ' yes , ' he 
 say , in a sort of shy way . ' why ? ' ' oh , nothing . you stand to lose a 
 tidy bit , ' say I , ' even if you save your life . . . . but what can I do 
 for you ? ' he never even see the point . not he . and that be how the world 
 wag , sir . " 
 he rise a little stiffly , and the drive to Rincon would be take with 
 only one philosophical remark , utter by the merciless cicerone , with 
 his eye fix upon the light of San Tome , that seem suspend in the 
 dark night between earth and heaven . 
 " a great power , this , for good and evil , sir . a great power . " 
 and the dinner of the Mirliflores would be eat , excellent as to 
 cooking , and leave upon the traveller 's mind an impression that there 
 be in Sulaco many pleasant , able young man with salary apparently 
 too large for their discretion , and amongst they a few , mostly 
 Anglo - Saxon , skilled in the art of , as the saying be , " take a rise " 
 out of his kind host . 
 with a rapid , jingle drive to the harbour in a two - wheel machine 
  which Captain Mitchell call a curricle   behind a fleet and scraggy 
 mule beat all the time by an obviously Neapolitan driver , the cycle 
 would be nearly close before the light - up office of the O. S. N. 
 Company , remain open so late because of the steamer . nearly - but not 
 quite . 
 " ten o'clock . your ship will not   be ready to leave till half - past twelve , 
 if by then . come in for a brandy - and - soda and one more cigar . " 
 and in the superintendent 's private room the privileged passenger by the 
 Ceres , or Juno , or Pallas , stun and as it be annihilate mentally 
 by a sudden surfeit of sight , sound , name , fact , and complicated 
 information imperfectly apprehend , would listen like a tired child 
 to a fairy tale ; would hear a voice , familiar and surprising in its 
 pompousness , tell he , as if from another world , how there be " in this 
 very harbour " an international naval demonstration , which put an end to 
 the Costaguana - Sulaco War . how the United States cruiser , Powhattan , be 
 the first to salute the occidental flag - white , with a wreath of green 
 laurel in the middle encircle a yellow amarilla flower . would hear how 
 General Montero , in less than a month after proclaim himself Emperor 
 of Costaguana , be shoot dead   during a solemn and public distribution 
 of order and cross   by a young artillery officer , the brother of his 
 then mistress . 
 " the abominable Pedrito , sir , flee the country , " the voice would say . 
 and it would continue : " a captain of one of our ship tell I lately 
 that he recognize Pedrito the guerrillero , array in purple slipper 
 and a velvet smoking - cap with a gold tassel , keep a disorderly house 
 in one of the southern port . " 
 " abominable Pedrito ! who the devil be he ? " would wonder the 
 distinguished bird of passage hover on the confine of wake and 
 sleep with resolutely open eye and a faint but amiable curl upon his 
 lip , from between which stick out the eighteenth or twentieth cigar of 
 that memorable day . 
 " he appear to I in this very room like a haunt ghost , 
 sir " - Captain Mitchell be talk of his Nostromo with true warmth of 
 feeling and a touch of wistful pride . " you may imagine , sir , what an 
 effect it produce on I . he have come round by sea with Barrios , of 
 course . and the first thing he tell I after I become fit to hear he 
 be that he have pick up the light 's boat float in the gulf ! 
 he seem quite overcome by the circumstance . and a remarkable enough 
 circumstance it be , when you remember that it be then sixteen day 
 since the sinking of the silver . at once I could see he be another man . 
 he star at the wall , sir , as if there have be a spider or something 
 run about there . the loss of the silver preyed on his mind . the 
 first thing he ask I about be whether Dona Antonia have hear yet of 
 Decoud 's death . his voice tremble . I have to tell he that Dona Antonia , 
 as a matter of fact , be not back in town yet . poor girl ! and just as I 
 be make ready to ask he a thousand question , with a sudden , ' Pardon 
 I , senor , ' he clear out of the office altogether . I do not see he 
 again for three day . I be terribly busy , you know . it seem that he 
 wander about in and out of the town , and on two night turn up 
 to sleep in the baracoon of the railway people . he seem absolutely 
 indifferent to what go on . I ask he on the wharf , ' when be you 
 go to take hold again , Nostromo ? there will be plenty of work for the 
 Cargadores presently . ' 
 " ' senor , ' say he , look at I in a slow , inquisitive manner , ' would 
 it surprise you to hear that I be too tired to work just yet ? and what 
 work could I do now ? how can I look my cargadore in the face after 
 lose a light ? ' 
 " I beg he not to think any more about the silver , and he smile . a 
 smile that go to my heart , sir . ' it be no mistake , ' I tell he . ' it 
 be a fatality . a thing that could not be help . ' ' si , si ! " he say , 
 and turn away . I think it well to leave he alone for a bit to get 
 over it . Sir , it take he year really , to get over it . I be present 
 at his interview with Don Carlos . I must say that Gould be rather a cold 
 man . he have to keep a tight hand on his feeling , deal with thief 
 and rascal , in constant danger of ruin for himself and wife for so many 
 year , that it have become a second nature . they look at each other for 
 a long time . Don Carlos ask what he could do for he , in his quiet , 
 reserved way . 
 " ' my name be know from one end of Sulaco to the other , ' he say , as 
 quiet as the other . ' what more can you do for I ? ' that be all that 
 pass on that occasion . later , however , there be a very fine coasting 
 schooner for sale , and Mrs. Gould and I put our head together to get 
 she buy and present to he . it be do , but he pay all the price 
 back within the next three year . business be boom all along this 
 seaboard , sir . moreover , that man always succeed in everything 
 except in save the silver . poor Dona Antonia , fresh from her terrible 
 experience in the wood of Los Hatos , have an interview with he , too . 
 want to hear about Decoud : what they say , what they do , what they 
 think up to the last on that fatal night . Mrs. Gould tell I his 
 manner be perfect for quietness and sympathy . Miss Avellanos burst into 
 tear only when he tell she how Decoud have happen to say that his plan 
 would be a glorious success . . . . and there be no doubt , sir , that it 
 be . it be a success . " 
 the cycle be about to close at last . and while the privileged 
 passenger , shiver with the pleasant anticipation of his berth , 
 forget to ask himself , " what on earth Decoud 's plan could be ? " Captain 
 Mitchell be say , " sorry we must part so soon . your intelligent 
 interest make this a pleasant day to I . I shall see you now on board . 
 you have a glimpse of the ' Treasure House of the World . ' a very good name 
 that . " and the coxswain 's voice at the door , announce that the gig be 
 ready , close the cycle . 
 Nostromo have , indeed , find the light 's boat , which he have leave on 
 the Great Isabel with Decoud , float empty far out in the gulf . he be 
 then on the bridge of the first of Barrios 's transport , and within an 
 hour 's steaming from Sulaco . barrio , always delight with a feat of 
 daring and a good judge of courage , have take a great liking to the 
 Capataz . during the passage round the coast the General keep Nostromo 
 near his person , address he frequently in that abrupt and boisterous 
 manner which be the sign of his high favour . 
 Nostromo 's eye be the first to catch , broad on the bow , the tiny , 
 elusive dark speck , which , alone with the form of the Three Isabels 
 right ahead , appear on the flat , shimmer emptiness of the gulf . 
 there be time when no fact should be neglect as insignificant ; 
 a small boat so far from the land might have have some meaning worth 
 find out . at a nod of consent from Barrios the transport sweep out 
 of her course , pass near enough to ascertain that no one man the 
 little cockle - shell . it be merely a common small boat go adrift with 
 her oar in she . but Nostromo , to whose mind Decoud have be insistently 
 present for day , have long before recognize with excitement the dinghy 
 of the light . 
 there could be no question of stop to pick up that thing . every 
 minute of time be momentous with the life and future of a whole town . 
 the head of the lead ship , with the General on board , fall off to she 
 course . behind she , the fleet of transport , scatter haphazard over a 
 mile or so in the offing , like the finish of an ocean race , press on , 
 all black and smoke on the western sky . 
 " Mi General , " Nostromo 's voice ring out loud , but quiet , from behind a 
 group of officer , " I should like to save that little boat . Por Dios , I 
 know she . she belong to my company . " 
 " and , por Dios , " guffaw Barrios , in a noisy , good - humour voice , " you 
 belong to I . I be go to make you a captain of cavalry directly we 
 get within sight of a horse again . " 
 " I can swim far well than I can ride , mi General , " cry Nostromo , 
 push through to the rail with a set stare in his eye . " let I - - " 
 " let you ? what a conceited fellow that be , " banter the General , 
 jovially , without even look at he . " let he go ! ha ! ha ! ha ! he want 
 I to admit that we can not take Sulaco without he ! ha ! ha ! ha ! would 
 you like to swim off to she , my son ? " 
 a tremendous shout from one end of the ship to the other stop his 
 guffaw . Nostromo have leap overboard ; and his black head bob up far 
 away already from the ship . the General mutter an appalled " Cielo ! 
 Sinner that I be ! " in a thunderstruck tone . one anxious glance be 
 enough to show he that Nostromo be swim with perfect ease ; and 
 then he thunder terribly , " no ! no ! we shall not stop to pick up this 
 impertinent fellow . let he drown - that mad Capataz . " 
 nothing short of main force would have keep Nostromo from leaping 
 overboard . that empty boat , come out to meet he mysteriously , as if 
 row by an invisible spectre , exercise the fascination of some sign , 
 of some warning , seem to answer in a startling and enigmatic way the 
 persistent thought of a treasure and of a man 's fate . he would have 
 leap if there have be death in that half - mile of water . it be as 
 smooth as a pond , and for some reason shark be unknown in the Placid 
 Gulf , though on the other side of the Punta Mala the coastline swarm 
 with they . 
 the Capataz seize hold of the stern and blow with force . a queer , faint 
 feeling have come over he while he swam . he have get rid of his boot and 
 coat in the water . he hang on for a time , regain his breath . in 
 the distance the transport , more in a bunch now , hold on straight for 
 Sulaco , with their air of friendly contest , of nautical sport , of 
 a regatta ; and the united smoke of their funnel drive like a thin , 
 sulphurous fogbank right over his head . it be his daring , his courage , 
 his act that have set these ship in motion upon the sea , hurry on 
 to save the life and fortune of the Blancos , the taskmaster of the 
 people ; to save the San Tome mine ; to save the child . 
 with a vigorous and skilful effort he clamber over the stern . the 
 very boat ! no doubt of it ; no doubt whatever . it be the dinghy of the 
 light no . 3 - the dinghy leave with Martin Decoud on the Great Isabel so 
 that he should have some mean to help himself if nothing could be do 
 for he from the shore . and here she have come out to meet he empty 
 and inexplicable . what have become of Decoud ? the Capataz make a minute 
 examination . he look for some scratch , for some mark , for some sign . 
 all he discover be a brown stain on the gunwale abreast of the 
 thwart . he bend his face over it and rub hard with his finger . then 
 he sit down in the stern sheet , passive , with his knee close together 
 and leg aslant . 
 stream from head to foot , with his hair and whisker hang lank 
 and dripping and a lustreless stare fix upon the bottom board , the 
 Capataz of the Sulaco Cargadores resemble a drowned corpse come up from 
 the bottom to idle away the sunset hour in a small boat . the excitement 
 of his adventurous ride , the excitement of the return in time , 
 of achievement , of success , all this excitement centre round the 
 associate idea of the great treasure and of the only other man who 
 know of its existence , have depart from he . to the very last moment 
 he have be cudgel his brain as to how he could manage to visit 
 the Great Isabel without loss of time and undetecte . for the idea of 
 secrecy have come to be connect with the treasure so closely that even 
 to Barrios himself he have refrain from mention the existence of 
 Decoud and of the silver on the island . the letter he carry to the 
 General , however , make brief mention of the loss of the light , as 
 have its bearing upon the situation in Sulaco . in the circumstance , 
 the one - eyed tiger - slayer , scent battle from afar , have not waste his 
 time in make inquiry from the messenger . in fact , Barrios , talk 
 with Nostromo , assume that both Don Martin Decoud and the ingot of San 
 Tome be lose together , and Nostromo , not question directly , have keep 
 silent , under the influence of some indefinable form of resentment and 
 distrust . let Don Martin speak of everything with his own lip - be what 
 he tell himself mentally . 
 and now , with the mean of gain the Great Isabel throw thus in his 
 way at the early possible moment , his excitement have depart , as 
 when the soul take flight leave the body inert upon an earth it know 
 no more . Nostromo do not seem to know the gulf . for a long time even 
 his eyelid do not flutter once upon the glaze emptiness of his stare . 
 then slowly , without a limb have stir , without a twitch of muscle 
 or quiver of an eyelash , an expression , a live expression come upon 
 the still feature , deep thought creep into the empty stare - as if an 
 outcast soul , a quiet , brood soul , find that untenanted body in 
 its way , have come in stealthily to take possession . 
 the Capataz frown : and in the immense stillness of sea , island , and 
 coast , of cloud form on the sky and trail of light upon the water , the 
 knitting of that brow have the emphasis of a powerful gesture . nothing 
 else budge for a long time ; then the Capataz shake his head and again 
 surrender himself to the universal repose of all visible thing . 
 suddenly he seize the oar , and with one movement make the dinghy spin 
 round , head - on to the Great Isabel . but before he begin to pull he bent 
 once more over the brown stain on the gunwale . 
 " I know that thing , " he mutter to himself , with a sagacious jerk of 
 the head . " that be blood . " 
 his stroke be long , vigorous , and steady . now and then he look 
 over his shoulder at the Great Isabel , present its low cliff to his 
 anxious gaze like an impenetrable face . at last the stem touch the 
 strand . he fling rather than drag the boat up the little beach . at 
 once , turn his back upon the sunset , he plunge with long stride 
 into the ravine , make the water of the stream spurt and fly upwards at 
 every step , as if spurn its shallow , clear , murmur spirit with his 
 foot . he want to save every moment of daylight . 
 a mass of earth , grass , and smash bush have fall down very 
 naturally from above upon the cavity under the lean tree . Decoud have 
 attend to the concealment of the silver as instruct , use the spade 
 with some intelligence . but Nostromo 's half - smile of approval change 
 into a scornful curl of the lip by the sight of the spade itself fling 
 there in full view , as if in utter carelessness or sudden panic , give 
 away the whole thing . ah ! they be all alike in their folly , these 
 hombre fino that invent law and government and barren task for 
 the people . 
 the Capataz pick up the spade , and with the feel of the handle in his 
 palm the desire of have a look at the horse - hide box of treasure 
 come upon he suddenly . in a very few stroke he uncover the edge and 
 corner of several ; then , clear away more earth , become aware that 
 one of they have be slash with a knife . 
 he exclaim at that discovery in a stifle voice , and drop on his 
 knee with a look of irrational apprehension over one shoulder , then 
 over the other . the stiff hide have close , and he hesitate before he 
 push his hand through the long slit and feel the ingot inside . there 
 they be . one , two , three . yes , four gone . take away . four ingot . 
 but who ? Decoud ? nobody else . and why ? for what purpose ? for what curse 
 fancy ? let he explain . four ingot carry off in a boat , and - blood ! 
 in the face of the open gulf , the sun , clear , unclouded , unaltered , 
 plunge into the water in a grave and untroubled mystery of 
 self - immolation consummate far from all mortal eye , with an infinite 
 majesty of silence and peace . four ingot short ! - and blood ! 
 the Capataz get up slowly . 
 " he might simply have cut his hand , " he mutter . " but , then - - " 
 he sit down on the soft earth , unresiste , as if he have be chain 
 to the treasure , his draw - up leg clasp in his hand with an air of 
 hopeless submission , like a slave set on guard . once only he lift his 
 head smartly : the rattle of hot musketry fire have reach his ear , like 
 pour from on high a stream of dry pea upon a drum . after listen 
 for a while , he say , half aloud - 
 " he will never come back to explain . " 
 and he lower his head again . 
 " impossible ! " he mutter , gloomily . 
 the sound of firing die out . the loom of a great conflagration in 
 Sulaco flash up red above the coast , play on the cloud at the head 
 of the gulf , seem to touch with a ruddy and sinister reflection the 
 form of the Three Isabels . he never see it , though he raise his head . 
 " but , then , I can not know , " he pronounce , distinctly , and remain 
 silent and star for hour . 
 he could not know . nobody be to know . as might have be suppose , the 
 end of Don Martin Decoud never become a subject of speculation for any 
 one except Nostromo . have the truth of the fact be know , there would 
 always have remain the question . why ? whereas the version of his death 
 at the sinking of the light have no uncertainty of motive . the young 
 apostle of Separation have die strive for his idea by an ever - lament 
 accident . but the truth be that he die from solitude , the enemy know 
 but to few on this earth , and whom only the simple of we be fit to 
 withstand . the brilliant Costaguanero of the boulevard have die from 
 solitude and want of faith in himself and other . 
 for some good and valid reason beyond mere human comprehension , the 
 sea - bird of the gulf shun the Isabels . the rocky head of Azuera be 
 their haunt , whose stony level and chasm resound with their wild 
 and tumultuous clamour as if they be for ever quarrel over the 
 legendary treasure . 
 at the end of his first day on the Great Isabel , Decoud , turn in his 
 lair of coarse grass , under the shade of a tree , say to himself - 
 " I have not see as much as one single bird all day . " 
 and he have not hear a sound , either , all day but that one now of his 
 own muttering voice . it have be a day of absolute silence - the first 
 he have know in his life . and he have not sleep a wink . not for all these 
 wakeful night and the day of fighting , planning , talk ; not for all 
 that last night of danger and hard physical toil upon the gulf , have he 
 be able to close his eye for a moment . and yet from sunrise to sunset 
 he have be lie prone on the ground , either on his back or on his 
 face . 
 he stretch himself , and with slow step descend into the gully to 
 spend the night by the side of the silver . if Nostromo return - as he 
 might have do at any moment - it be there that he would look first ; 
 and night would , of course , be the proper time for an attempt to 
 communicate . he remember with profound indifference that he have not 
 eat anything yet since he have be leave alone on the island . 
 he spend the night open - eye , and when the day break he eat something 
 with the same indifference . the brilliant " Son Decoud , " the spoil 
 darling of the family , the lover of Antonia and journalist of Sulaco , 
 be not fit to grapple with himself single - handed . solitude from mere 
 outward condition of existence become very swiftly a state of soul in 
 which the affectation of irony and scepticism have no place . it take 
 possession of the mind , and drive forth the thought into the exile of 
 utter unbelief . after three day of wait for the sight of some 
 human face , Decoud catch himself entertain a doubt of his own 
 individuality . it have merge into the world of cloud and water , of 
 natural force and form of nature . in our activity alone do we find 
 the sustain illusion of an independent existence as against the 
 whole scheme of thing of which we form a helpless part . Decoud lose all 
 belief in the reality of his action past and to come . on the fifth day 
 an immense melancholy descend upon he palpably . he resolve not to 
 give himself up to these people in Sulaco , who have beset he , unreal and 
 terrible , like jibbere and obscene spectre . he see himself struggle 
 feebly in their midst , and Antonia , gigantic and lovely like an 
 allegorical statue , look on with scornful eye at his weakness . 
 not a living being , not a speck of distant sail , appear within 
 the range of his vision ; and , as if to escape from this solitude , 
 he absorb himself in his melancholy . the vague consciousness of a 
 misdirect life give up to impulse whose memory leave a bitter taste 
 in his mouth be the first moral sentiment of his manhood . but at the 
 same time he feel no remorse . what should he regret ? he have recognize 
 no other virtue than intelligence , and have erect passion into duty . 
 both his intelligence and his passion be swallow up easily in this 
 great unbroken solitude of wait without faith . Sleeplessness have 
 rob his will of all energy , for he have not sleep seven hour in the 
 seven day . his sadness be the sadness of a sceptical mind . he behold 
 the universe as a succession of incomprehensible image . Nostromo be 
 dead . everything have fail ignominiously . he no long dare to think 
 of Antonia . she have not survive . but if she survive he could not face 
 she . and all exertion seem senseless . 
 on the tenth day , after a night spend without even doze off once   it 
 have occur to he that Antonia could not possibly have ever love 
 a being so impalpable as himself , the solitude appear like a great 
 void , and the silence of the gulf like a tense , thin cord to which he 
 hang suspend by both hand , without fear , without surprise , without 
 any sort of emotion whatever . only towards the evening , in the 
 comparative relief of coolness , he begin to wish that this cord would 
 snap . he imagine it snap with a report as of a pistol - a sharp , 
 full crack . and that would be the end of he . he contemplate that 
 eventuality with pleasure , because he dread the sleepless night in 
 which the silence , remain unbroken in the shape of a cord to which he 
 hang with both hand , vibrate with senseless phrase , always the same 
 but utterly incomprehensible , about Nostromo , Antonia , Barrios , and 
 proclamation mingle into an ironical and senseless buzzing . in the 
 daytime he could look at the silence like a still cord stretch to 
 breaking - point , with his life , his vain life , suspend to it like a 
 weight . 
 " I wonder whether I would hear it snap before I fall , " he ask himself . 
 the sun be two hour above the horizon when he get up , gaunt , dirty , 
 white - faced , and look at it with his red - rimmed eye . his limb obey 
 he slowly , as if full of lead , yet without tremor ; and the effect 
 of that physical condition give to his movement an unhesitating , 
 deliberate dignity . he act as if accomplish some sort of rite . he 
 descend into the gully ; for the fascination of all that silver , with 
 its potential power , survive alone outside of himself . he pick up the 
 belt with the revolver , that be lie there , and buckle it round his 
 waist . the cord of silence could never snap on the island . it must let 
 he fall and sink into the sea , he think . and sink ! he be look at 
 the loose earth cover the treasure . in the sea ! his aspect be that 
 of a somnambulist . he lower himself down on his knee slowly and go 
 on grub with his finger with industrious patience till he uncover 
 one of the box . without a pause , as if do some work do many 
 time before , he slit it open and take four ingot , which he put in his 
 pocket . he cover up the expose box again and step by step come out 
 of the gully . the bush close after he with a swish . 
 it be on the third day of his solitude that he have drag the dinghy 
 near the water with an idea of row away somewhere , but have desist 
 partly at the whisper of linger hope that Nostromo would return , 
 partly from conviction of utter uselessness of all effort . now she 
 want only a slight shove to be set afloat . he have eat a little every 
 day after the first , and have some muscular strength leave yet . take up 
 the oar slowly , he pull away from the cliff of the Great Isabel , that 
 stand behind he warm with sunshine , as if with the heat of life , bath 
 in a rich light from head to foot as if in a radiance of hope and joy . 
 he pull straight towards the set sun . when the gulf have grow 
 dark , he cease row and fling the scull in . the hollow clatter they 
 make in fall be the loud noise he have ever hear in his life . it 
 be a revelation . it seem to recall he from far away , actually the 
 thought , " perhaps I may sleep to - night , " pass through his mind . but he 
 do not believe it . he believe in nothing ; and he remain sit on 
 the thwart . 
 the dawn from behind the mountain put a gleam into his unwinke eye . 
 after a clear daybreak the sun appear splendidly above the peak of 
 the range . the great gulf burst into a glitter all around the boat ; and 
 in this glory of merciless solitude the silence appear again before 
 he , stretch taut like a dark , thin string . 
 his eye look at it while , without haste , he shift his seat from 
 the thwart to the gunwale . they look at it fixedly , while his hand , 
 feel about his waist , unbutton the flap of the leather case , draw 
 the revolver , cock it , bring it forward point at his breast , 
 pull the trigger , and , with convulsive force , send the still - smoke 
 weapon hurtle through the air . his eye look at it while he fall 
 forward and hang with his breast on the gunwale and the finger of his 
 right hand hook under the thwart . they look - - 
 " it be do , " he stammer out , in a sudden flow of blood . his last 
 thought be : " I wonder how that Capataz die . " the stiffness of the 
 finger relax , and the lover of Antonia Avellanos roll overboard 
 without have hear the cord of silence snap in the solitude of the 
 Placid Gulf , whose glitter surface remain untroubled by the fall of 
 his body . 
 a victim of the disillusioned weariness which be the retribution mete 
 out to intellectual audacity , the brilliant Don Martin Decoud , weight 
 by the bar of San Tome silver , disappear without a trace , swallow 
 up in the immense indifference of thing . his sleepless , crouch 
 figure be go from the side of the San Tome silver ; and for a time the 
 spirit of good and evil that hover near every conceal treasure of 
 the earth might have think that this one have be forget by all 
 mankind . then , after a few day , another form appear stride away 
 from the set sun to sit motionless and awake in the narrow black 
 gully all through the night , in nearly the same pose , in the same place 
 in which have sit that other sleepless man who have go away for ever so 
 quietly in a small boat , about the time of sunset . and the spirit of 
 good and evil that hover about a forbid treasure understand well that 
 the silver of San Tome be provide now with a faithful and lifelong 
 slave . 
 the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores , victim of the disenchanted vanity 
 which be the reward of audacious action , sit in the weary pose of a 
 hunt outcast through a night of sleeplessness as torment as any 
 know to Decoud , his companion in the most desperate affair of his life . 
 and he wonder how Decoud have die . but he know the part he have 
 play himself . first a woman , then a man , abandon both in their last 
 extremity , for the sake of this accurse treasure . it be pay for by 
 a soul lose and by a vanish life . the blank stillness of awe be 
 succeed by a gust of immense pride . there be no one in the world but 
 Gian ' Battista Fidanza , Capataz de Cargadores , the incorruptible and 
 faithful Nostromo , to pay such a price . 
 he have make up his mind that nothing should be allow now to rob he of 
 his bargain . nothing . Decoud have die . but how ? that he be dead he have 
 not a shadow of a doubt . but four ingot ? . . . what for ? do he mean to 
 come for more - some other time ? 
 the treasure be put forth its latent power . it trouble the clear 
 mind of the man who have pay the price . he be sure that Decoud be 
 dead . the island seem full of that whisper . dead ! go ! and he 
 catch himself listen for the swish of bush and the splash of the 
 footfall in the bed of the brook . dead ! the talker , the novio of Dona 
 Antonia ! 
 " ha ! " he murmur , with his head on his knee , under the livid clouded 
 dawn break over the liberate Sulaco and upon the gulf as gray as 
 ash . " it be to she that he will fly . to she that he will fly ! " 
 and four ingot ! do he take they in revenge , to cast a spell , like the 
 angry woman who have prophesy remorse and failure , and yet have lay 
 upon he the task of save the child ? well , he have save the 
 child . he have defeat the spell of poverty and starvation . he have 
 do it all alone - or perhaps help by the devil . who care ? he have 
 do it , betray as he be , and save by the same stroke the San Tome 
 mine , which appear to he hateful and immense , lord it by its vast 
 wealth over the valour , the toil , the fidelity of the poor , over war and 
 peace , over the labour of the town , the sea , and the Campo . 
 the sun light up the sky behind the peak of the Cordillera . the Capataz 
 look down for a time upon the fall of loose earth , stone , and smash 
 bush , conceal the hiding - place of the silver . 
 " I must grow rich very slowly , " he meditate , aloud . 
 CHAPTER ELEVEN 
 Sulaco outstrip Nostromo 's prudence , grow rich swiftly on the 
 hide treasure of the earth , hover over by the anxious spirit of 
 good and evil , tear out by the labour hand of the people . it be 
 like a second youth , like a new life , full of promise , of unrest , of 
 toil , scatter lavishly its wealth to the four corner of an excited 
 world . material change sweep along in the train of material interest . 
 and other change more subtle , outwardly unmarked , affect the mind 
 and heart of the worker . Captain Mitchell have go home to live on his 
 saving invest in the San Tome mine ; and Dr. Monygham have grow old , 
 with his head steel - grey and the unchanged expression of his face , 
 live on the inexhaustible treasure of his devotion draw upon in the 
 secret of his heart like a store of unlawful wealth . 
 the Inspector - General of State Hospitals   whose maintenance be a charge 
 upon the Gould Concession , Official Adviser on Sanitation to the 
 Municipality , Chief Medical Officer of the San Tome Consolidated Mines 
  whose territory , contain gold , silver , copper , lead , cobalt , 
 extend for mile along the foot - hill of the Cordillera , have feel 
 poverty - stricken , miserable , and starve during the prolonged , second 
 visit the Goulds pay to Europe and the United States of America . 
 intimate of the casa , prove friend , a bachelor without tie and without 
 establishment   except of the professional sort , he have be ask to 
 take up his quarter in the Gould house . in the eleven month of their 
 absence the familiar room , recall at every glance the woman to 
 whom he have give all his loyalty , have grow intolerable . as the day 
 approach for the arrival of the mail boat Hermes   the late addition 
 to the O. S. N. Co. 's splendid fleet , the doctor hobble about more 
 vivaciously , snap more sardonically at simple and gentle out of sheer 
 nervousness . 
 he pack up his modest trunk with speed , with fury , with enthusiasm , 
 and see it carry out past the old porter at the gate of the Casa Gould 
 with delight , with intoxication ; then , as the hour approach , sit 
 alone in the great landau behind the white mule , a little sideway , his 
 draw - in face positively venomous with the effort of self - control , and 
 hold a pair of new glove in his left hand , he drive to the harbour . 
 his heart dilate within he so , when he see the Goulds on the deck of 
 the Hermes , that his greeting be reduce to a casual mutter . drive 
 back to town , all three be silent . and in the patio the doctor , in a 
 more natural manner , say - 
 " I will leave you now to yourself . I will call to - morrow if I may ? " 
 " come to lunch , dear Dr. Monygham , and come early , " say Mrs. Gould , in 
 her travel dress and her veil down , turn to look at he at the 
 foot of the stair ; while at the top of the flight the Madonna , in blue 
 robe and the child on her arm , seem to welcome she with an aspect of 
 pity tenderness . 
 " do not   expect to find I at home , " Charles Gould warn he . " I will be 
 off early to the mine . " 
 after lunch , Dona Emilia and the senor doctor come slowly through 
 the inner gateway of the patio . the large garden of the Casa Gould , 
 surround by high wall , and the red - tile slope of neighbour roof , 
 lie open before they , with mass of shade under the tree and level 
 surface of sunlight upon the lawn . a triple row of old orange tree 
 surround the whole . barefoote , brown gardener , in snowy white shirt 
 and wide calzonera , dot the ground , squat over flowerbed , 
 pass between the tree , drag slender India - rubber tube across 
 the gravel of the path ; and the fine jet of water cross each other 
 in graceful curve , sparkle in the sunshine with a slight pattering 
 noise upon the bush , and an effect of showered diamond upon the 
 grass . 
 Dona Emilia , hold up the train of a clear dress , walk by the side 
 of Dr. Monygham , in a longish black coat and severe black bow on 
 an immaculate shirtfront . under a shady clump of tree , where stand 
 scatter little table and wicker easy - chair , Mrs. Gould sit down in a 
 low and ample seat . 
 " do not   go yet , " she say to Dr. Monygham , who be unable to tear himself 
 away from the spot . his chin nestling within the point of his collar , 
 he devour she stealthily with his eye , which , luckily , be round and 
 hard like clouded marble , and incapable of disclose his sentiment . 
 his pity emotion at the mark of time upon the face of that woman , 
 the air of frailty and weary fatigue that have settle upon the eye and 
 temple of the " never - tired Senora "   as Don Pepe year ago use to call 
 she with admiration , touch he almost to tear . " do not   go yet . 
 to - day be all my own , " Mrs. Gould urge , gently . " we be not back yet 
 officially . no one will come . it be only to - morrow that the window of 
 the Casa Gould be to be light up for a reception . " 
 the doctor drop into a chair . 
 " give a tertulia ? " he say , with a detach air . 
 " a simple greeting for all the kind friend who care to come . " 
 " and only to - morrow ? " 
 " yes . Charles would be tired out after a day at the mine , and so I - - it 
 would be good to have he to myself for one evening on our return to 
 this house I love . it have see all my life . " 
 " ah , yes ! " snarl the doctor , suddenly . " woman count time from the 
 marriage feast . do not   you live a little before ? " 
 " yes ; but what be there to remember ? there be no care . " 
 Mrs. Gould sigh . and as two friend , after a long separation , will 
 revert to the most agitated period of their life , they begin to talk of 
 the Sulaco Revolution . it seem strange to Mrs. Gould that people who 
 have take part in it seem to forget its memory and its lesson . 
 " and yet , " strike in the doctor , " we who play our part in it have our 
 reward . Don Pepe , though superannuate , still can sit a horse . barrio 
 be drink himself to death in jovial company away somewhere on his 
 fundacion beyond the Bolson de Tonoro . and the heroic Father Roman - I 
 imagine the old padre blow up systematically the San Tome mine , 
 utter a pious exclamation at every bang , and take handfuls of 
 snuff between the explosion - the heroic Padre Roman say that he be not 
 afraid of the harm Holroyd 's missionary can do to his flock , as long 
 as he be alive . " 
 Mrs. Gould shudder a little at the allusion to the destruction that 
 have come so near to the San Tome mine . 
 " ah , but you , dear friend ? " 
 " I do the work I be fit for . " 
 " you face the most cruel danger of all . something more than death . " 
 " no , Mrs. Gould ! only death - by hang . and I be reward beyond my 
 desert . " 
 Noticing Mrs. Gould 's gaze fix upon he , he drop his eye . 
 " I have   make my career - as you see , " say the Inspector - General of State 
 Hospitals , take up lightly the lapel of his superfine black coat . 
 the doctor 's self - respect mark inwardly by the almost complete 
 disappearance from his dream of Father Beron appear visibly in what , 
 by contrast with former carelessness , seem an immoderate cult of 
 personal appearance . carry out within severe limit of form and 
 colour , and in perpetual freshness , this change of apparel give to Dr. 
 Monygham an air at the same time professional and festive ; while his 
 gait and the unchanged crab character of his face acquire from it a 
 startling force of incongruity . 
 " yes , " he go on . " we all have our reward - the engineer - in - chief , 
 Captain Mitchell - - " 
 " we see he , " interrupt Mrs. Gould , in her charming voice . " the poor 
 dear man come up from the country on purpose to call on we in our hotel 
 in London . he comport himself with great dignity , but I fancy he 
 regret Sulaco . he ramble feebly about ' historical event ' till I feel 
 I could have a cry . " 
 " H'm , " grunt the doctor ; " get old , I suppose . even Nostromo be 
 get old - though he be not change . and , speak of that fellow , I 
 want to tell you something - - " 
 for some time the house have be full of murmur , of agitation . suddenly 
 the two gardener , busy with rose tree at the side of the garden 
 arch , fall upon their knee with bow head on the passage of Antonia 
 Avellanos , who appear walk beside her uncle . 
 invest with the red hat after a short visit to Rome , where he have 
 be invite by the Propaganda , Father Corbelan , missionary to the 
 wild Indians , conspirator , friend and patron of Hernandez the robber , 
 advance with big , slow stride , gaunt and lean forward , with his 
 powerful hand clasp behind his back . the first Cardinal - archbishop 
 of Sulaco have preserve his fanatical and morose air ; the aspect of a 
 chaplain of bandit . it be believe that his unexpected elevation 
 to the purple be a counter - move to the protestant invasion of Sulaco 
 organize by the Holroyd Missionary Fund . Antonia , the beauty of she 
 face as if a little blur , her figure slightly full , advance with 
 her light walk and her high serenity , smile from a distance at Mrs. 
 Gould . she have bring her uncle over to see dear Emilia , without 
 ceremony , just for a moment before the siesta . 
 when all be seat again , Dr. Monygham , who have come to dislike 
 heartily everybody who approach Mrs. Gould with any intimacy , keep 
 aside , pretend to be lose in profound meditation . a loud phrase of 
 Antonia make he lift his head . 
 " how can we abandon , groan under oppression , those who have be 
 our countryman only a few year ago , who be our countryman now ? " Miss 
 Avellanos be say . " how can we remain blind , and deaf without pity to 
 the cruel wrong suffer by our brother ? there be a remedy . " 
 " Annex the rest of Costaguana to the order and prosperity of Sulaco , " 
 snap the doctor . " there be no other remedy . " 
 " I be convince , senor doctor , " Antonia say , with the earnest calm 
 of invincible resolution , " that this be from the first poor Martin 's 
 intention . " 
 " yes , but the material interest will not let you jeopardize their 
 development for a mere idea of pity and justice , " the doctor mutter 
 grumpily . " and it be just as well perhaps . " 
 the Cardinal - Archbishop straighten up his gaunt , bony frame . 
 " we have work for they ; we have make they , these material interest 
 of the foreigner , " the last of the Corbelans utter in a deep , 
 denunciatory tone . 
 " and without they you be nothing , " cry the doctor from the distance . 
 " they will not let you . " 
 " let they beware , then , lest the people , prevent from their 
 aspiration , should rise and claim their share of the wealth and their 
 share of the power , " the popular Cardinal - Archbishop of Sulaco declare , 
 significantly , menacingly . 
 a silence ensue , during which his eminence star , frown at the 
 ground , and Antonia , graceful and rigid in her chair , breathe calmly 
 in the strength of her conviction . then the conversation take a 
 social turn , touch on the visit of the Goulds to Europe . the 
 Cardinal - Archbishop , when in Rome , have suffer from neuralgia in the 
 head all the time . it be the climate - the bad air . 
 when uncle and niece have go away , with the servant again fall 
 on their knee , and the old porter , who have know Henry Gould , almost 
 totally blind and impotent now , creep up to kiss his Eminence 's 
 extended hand , Dr. Monygham , look after they , pronounce the one 
 word - 
 " incorrigible ! " 
 Mrs. Gould , with a look upwards , drop wearily on her lap her white 
 hand flash with the gold and stone of many ring . 
 " conspire . yes ! " say the doctor . " the last of the Avellanos and the 
 last of the Corbelans be conspire with the refugee from Sta . Marta 
 that flock here after every revolution . the Cafe Lambroso at the corner 
 of the Plaza be full of they ; you can hear their chatter across the 
 street like the noise of a parrot - house . they be conspire for the 
 invasion of Costaguana . and do you know where they go for strength , 
 for the necessary force ? to the secret society amongst immigrant and 
 native , where Nostromo - I should say Captain Fidanza - be the great man . 
 what give he that position ? who can say ? genius ? he have genius . he be 
 great with the populace than ever he be before . it be as if he have 
 some secret power ; some mysterious mean to keep up his influence . he 
 hold conference with the Archbishop , as in those old day which you 
 and I remember . barrio be useless . but for a military head they have 
 the pious Hernandez . and they may raise the country with the new cry of 
 the wealth for the people . " 
 " will there be never any peace ? will there be no rest ? " Mrs. Gould 
 whisper . " I think that we - - " 
 " no ! " interrupt the doctor . " there be no peace and no rest in the 
 development of material interest . they have their law , and their 
 justice . but it be found on expediency , and be inhuman ; it be without 
 rectitude , without the continuity and the force that can be find only 
 in a moral principle . Mrs. Gould , the time approach when all that the 
 Gould Concession stand for shall weigh as heavily upon the people as 
 the barbarism , cruelty , and misrule of a few year back . " 
 " how can you say that , Dr. Monygham ? " she cry out , as if hurt in the 
 most sensitive place of her soul . 
 " I can say what be true , " the doctor insist , obstinately . " it will weigh 
 as heavily , and provoke resentment , bloodshe , and vengeance , because 
 the man have grow different . do you think that now the mine would march 
 upon the town to save their Senor Administrador ? do you think that ? " 
 she press the back of her entwined hand on her eye and murmur 
 hopelessly - 
 " be it this we have work for , then ? " 
 the doctor lower his head . he could follow her silent thought . be it 
 for this that her life have be rob of all the intimate felicity of 
 daily affection which her tenderness need as the human body need air 
 to breathe ? and the doctor , indignant with Charles Gould 's blindness , 
 hasten to change the conversation . 
 " it be about Nostromo that I want to talk to you . ah ! that fellow have 
 some continuity and force . nothing will put an end to he . but never 
 mind that . there be something inexplicable go on - or perhaps only too 
 easy to explain . you know , Linda be practically the lighthouse keeper of 
 the Great Isabel light . the Garibaldino be too old now . his part be to 
 clean the lamp and to cook in the house ; but he can not   get up the stair 
 any long . the black - eyed Linda sleep all day and watch the light 
 all night . not all day , though . she be up towards five in the afternoon , 
 when our Nostromo , whenever he be in harbour with his schooner , come 
 out on his courting visit , pull in a small boat . " 
 " be not   they marry yet ? " Mrs. Gould ask . " the mother wish it , as 
 far as I can understand , while Linda be yet quite a child . when I have 
 the girl with I for a year or so during the War of Separation , that 
 extraordinary Linda use to declare quite simply that she be go to 
 be Gian ' Battista 's wife . " 
 " they be not married yet , " say the doctor , curtly . " I have look 
 after they a little . " 
 " thank you , dear Dr. Monygham , " say Mrs. Gould ; and under the shade 
 of the big tree her little , even tooth gleam in a youthful smile of 
 gentle malice . " People do not   know how really good you be . you will not 
 let they know , as if on purpose to annoy I , who have put my faith in 
 your good heart long ago . " 
 the doctor , with a lifting up of his upper lip , as though he be 
 long to bite , bow stiffly in his chair . with the utter absorption 
 of a man to whom love come late , not as the most splendid of illusion , 
 but like an enlightening and priceless misfortune , the sight of that 
 woman   of whom he have be deprive for nearly a year   suggest idea 
 of adoration , of kiss the hem of her robe . and this excess of feeling 
 translate itself naturally into an augmented grimness of speech . 
 " I be afraid of be overwhelm by too much gratitude . however , these 
 people interest I . I go out several time to the Great Isabel light 
 to look after old Giorgio . " 
 he do not tell Mrs. Gould that it be because he find there , in her 
 absence , the relief of an atmosphere of congenial sentiment in 
 old Giorgio 's austere admiration for the " English signora - the 
 benefactress " ; in black - eyed Linda 's voluble , torrential , passionate 
 affection for " our Dona Emilia - that angel " ; in the white - throate , fair 
 Giselle 's adore upward turn of the eye , which then glide towards he 
 with a sidelong , half - arch , half - candid glance , which make the doctor 
 exclaim to himself mentally , " if I be not   what I be , old and ugly , I 
 would think the minx be make eye at I . and perhaps she be . I dare 
 say she would make eye at anybody . " Dr. Monygham say nothing of this 
 to Mrs. Gould , the providence of the Viola family , but revert to what 
 he call " our great Nostromo . " 
 " what I want to tell you be this : our great Nostromo do not take much 
 notice of the old man and the child for some year . it be true , too , 
 that he be away on his coast voyage certainly ten month out of the 
 twelve . he be make his fortune , as he tell Captain Mitchell once . he 
 seem to have do uncommonly well . it be only to be expect . he be 
 a man full of resource , full of confidence in himself , ready to take 
 chance and risk of every sort . I remember be in Mitchell 's office 
 one day , when he come in with that calm , grave air he always carry 
 everywhere . he have be away trading in the Gulf of California , he say , 
 look straight past we at the wall , as his manner be , and be glad to 
 see on his return that a lighthouse be be build on the cliff of the 
 Great Isabel . very glad , he repeat . Mitchell explain that it be 
 the O. S. N. Co. who be build it , for the convenience of the mail 
 service , on his own advice . Captain Fidanza be good enough to say that 
 it be excellent advice . I remember he twist up his moustache and 
 look all round the cornice of the room before he propose that old 
 Giorgio should be make the keeper of that light . " 
 " I hear of this . I be consult at the time , " Mrs. Gould say . " I 
 doubt whether it would be good for these girl to be shut up on that 
 island as if in a prison . " 
 " the proposal fall in with the old Garibaldino 's humour . as to Linda , 
 any place be lovely and delightful enough for she as long as it be 
 Nostromo 's suggestion . she could wait for her Gian ' Battista 's good 
 pleasure there as well as anywhere else . my opinion be that she be 
 always in love with that incorruptible Capataz . moreover , both father 
 and sister be anxious to get Giselle away from the attention of a 
 certain Ramirez . " 
 " ah ! " say Mrs. Gould , interested . " Ramirez ? what sort of man be that ? " 
 " just a mozo of the town . his father be a Cargador . as a lanky boy he 
 run about the wharf in rag , till Nostromo take he up and make a man of 
 he . when he get a little old , he put he into a light and very soon 
 give he charge of the no . 3 boat - the boat which take the silver away , 
 Mrs. Gould . Nostromo select that light for the work because she 
 be the good sailing and the strong boat of all the Company 's fleet . 
 Young Ramirez be one of the five Cargadores entrust with the removal 
 of the treasure from the Custom House on that famous night . as the boat 
 he have charge of be sunk , Nostromo , on leave the Company 's service , 
 recommend he to Captain Mitchell for his successor . he have train 
 he in the routine of work perfectly , and thus Mr. Ramirez , from a 
 starving waif , become a man and the Capataz of the Sulaco Cargadores . " 
 " thank to Nostromo , " say Mrs. Gould , with warm approval . 
 " thank to Nostromo , " repeat Dr. Monygham . " upon my word , the fellow 's 
 power frighten I when I think of it . that our poor old Mitchell be 
 only too glad to appoint somebody train to the work , who save he 
 trouble , be not surprising . what be wonderful be the fact that the 
 Sulaco Cargadores accept Ramirez for their chief , simply because such 
 be Nostromo 's good pleasure . of course , he be not a second Nostromo , 
 as he fondly imagine he would be ; but still , the position be brilliant 
 enough . it embolden he to make up to Giselle Viola , who , you know , be 
 the recognize beauty of the town . the old Garibaldino , however , take a 
 violent dislike to he . I do not   know why . perhaps because he be not 
 a model of perfection like his Gian ' Battista , the incarnation of the 
 courage , the fidelity , the honour of ' the people . ' Signor Viola do 
 not think much of Sulaco native . both of they , the old Spartan and that 
 white - faced Linda , with her red mouth and coal - black eye , be look 
 rather fiercely after the fair one . Ramirez be warn off . Father 
 Viola , I be tell , threaten he with his gun once . " 
 " but what of Giselle herself ? " ask Mrs. Gould . 
 " she be a bit of a flirt , I believe , " say the doctor . " I do not   think 
 she care much one way or another . of course she like man 's attention . 
 Ramirez be not the only one , let I tell you , Mrs. Gould . there be one 
 engineer , at least , on the railway staff who get warn off with a gun , 
 too . Old Viola do not allow any trifling with his honour . he have grow 
 uneasy and suspicious since his wife die . he be very pleased to remove 
 his young girl away from the town . but look what happen , Mrs. Gould . 
 Ramirez , the honest , lovelorn swain , be forbid the island . very well . 
 he respect the prohibition , but naturally turn his eye frequently 
 towards the Great Isabel . it seem as though he have be in the habit of 
 gaze late at night upon the light . and during these sentimental vigil 
 he discover that Nostromo , Captain Fidanza that be , return very late 
 from his visit to the Violas . as late as midnight at time . " 
 the doctor pause and star meaningly at Mrs. Gould . 
 " yes . but I do not   understand , " she begin , look puzzle . 
 " now come the strange part , " go on Dr. Monygham . " Viola , who be king 
 on his island , will allow no visitor on it after dark . even Captain 
 Fidanza have get to leave after sunset , when Linda have go up to 
 tend the light . and Nostromo go away obediently . but what happen 
 afterwards ? what do he do in the gulf between half - past six and 
 midnight ? he have be see more than once at that late hour pull 
 quietly into the harbour . Ramirez be devour by jealousy . he dare not 
 approach old Viola ; but he pluck up courage to rail at Linda about it 
 on Sunday morning as she come on the mainland to hear mass and visit her 
 mother 's grave . there be a scene on the wharf , which , as a matter of 
 fact , I witness . it be early morning . he must have be wait for 
 she on purpose . I be there by the mere chance , have be call 
 to an urgent consultation by the doctor of the german gunboat in the 
 harbour . she pour wrath , scorn , and flame upon Ramirez , who seem out 
 of his mind . it be a strange sight , Mrs. Gould : the long jetty , with 
 this rave Cargador in his crimson sash and the girl all in black , at 
 the end ; the early Sunday morning quiet of the harbour in the shade of 
 the mountain ; nothing but a canoe or two move between the ship at 
 anchor , and the german gunboat 's gig come to take I off . Linda pass 
 I within a foot . I notice her wild eye . I call out to she . she 
 never hear I . she never see I . but I look at her face . it be awful 
 in its anger and wretchedness . " 
 Mrs. Gould sit up , open her eye very wide . 
 " what do you mean , Dr. Monygham ? do you mean to say that you suspect the 
 young sister ? " 
 " Quien sabe ! who can tell ? " say the doctor , shrug his shoulder 
 like a bear Costaguanero . " Ramirez come up to I on the wharf . he 
 reel - he look insane . he take his head into his hand . he have to 
 talk to someone - simply have to . of course for all his mad state he 
 recognize I . People know I well here . I have live too long amongst 
 they to be anything else but the evil - eyed doctor , who can cure all the 
 ill of the flesh , and bring bad luck by a glance . he come up to I . he 
 try to be calm . he try to make it out that he want merely to 
 warn I against Nostromo . it seem that Captain Fidanza at some secret 
 meeting or other have mention I as the bad despiser of all the 
 poor - of the people . it be very possible . he honour I with his undye 
 dislike . and a word from the great Fidanza may be quite enough to send 
 some fool 's knife into my back . the Sanitary Commission I preside 
 over be not in favour with the populace . ' beware of he , senor doctor . 
 destroy he , senor doctor , ' Ramirez hiss right into my face . and then 
 he break out . ' that man , ' he splutter , ' have cast a spell upon both 
 these girl . ' as to himself , he have say too much . he must run away 
 now - run away and hide somewhere . he moan tenderly about Giselle , and 
 then call she name that can not be repeat . if he think she could 
 be make to love he by any mean , he would carry she off from the 
 island . off into the wood . but it be no good . . . . he stride away , 
 flourish his arm above his head . then I notice an old negro , who 
 have be sit behind a pile of case , fish from the wharf . he 
 wind up his line and slunk away at once . but he must have hear 
 something , and must have talk , too , because some of the old 
 Garibaldino 's railway friend , I suppose , warn he against Ramirez . at 
 any rate , the father have be warn . but Ramirez have disappear from 
 the town . " 
 " I feel I have a duty towards these girl , " say Mrs. Gould , uneasily . 
 " be Nostromo in Sulaco now ? " 
 " he be , since last Sunday . " 
 " he ought to be speak to - at once . " 
 " who will dare speak to he ? even the love - mad Ramirez run away from 
 the mere shadow of Captain Fidanza . " 
 " I can . I will , " Mrs. Gould declare . " a word will be enough for a man 
 like Nostromo . " 
 the doctor smile sourly . 
 " he must end this situation which lend itself to - - I can not   believe it 
 of that child , " pursue Mrs. Gould . 
 " he be very attractive , " mutter the doctor , gloomily . 
 " he will see it , I be sure . he must put an end to all this by marry 
 Linda at once , " pronounce the first lady of Sulaco with immense 
 decision . 
 through the garden gate emerge Basilio , grow fat and sleek , with an 
 elderly hairless face , wrinkle at the corner of his eye , and his 
 jet - black , coarse hair plaster down smoothly . stoop carefully 
 behind an ornamental clump of bush , he put down with precaution a 
 small child he have be carry on his shoulder - his own and Leonarda 's 
 last bear . the pouting , spoil Camerista and the head mozo of the Casa 
 Gould have be marry for some year now . 
 he remain squat on his heel for a time , gaze fondly at his 
 offspring , which return his stare with imperturbable gravity ; then , 
 solemn and respectable , walk down the path . 
 " what be it , Basilio ? " ask Mrs. Gould . 
 " a telephone come through from the office of the mine . the master 
 remain to sleep at the mountain to - night . " 
 Dr. Monygham have get up and stand look away . a profound silence 
 reign for a time under the shade of the big tree in the lovely 
 garden of the Casa Gould . 
 " very well , Basilio , " say Mrs. Gould . she watch he walk away along 
 the path , step aside behind the flower bush , and reappear with the 
 child seat on his shoulder . he pass through the gateway between the 
 garden and the patio with measured step , careful of his light burden . 
 the doctor , with his back to Mrs. Gould , contemplate a flower - bed away 
 in the sunshine . People believe he scornful and soured . the truth 
 of his nature consist in his capacity for passion and in the 
 sensitiveness of his temperament . what he lack be the polished 
 callousness of man of the world , the callousness from which spring 
 an easy tolerance for oneself and other ; the tolerance wide as 
 pole asunder from true sympathy and human compassion . this want of 
 callousness account for his sardonic turn of mind and his bite 
 speech . 
 in profound silence , and glare viciously at the brilliant flower - bed , 
 Dr. Monygham pour mental imprecation on Charles Gould 's head . behind 
 he the immobility of Mrs. Gould add to the grace of her seat 
 figure the charm of art , of an attitude catch and interpret for ever . 
 turn abruptly , the doctor take his leave . 
 Mrs. Gould lean back in the shade of the big tree plant in a 
 circle . she lean back with her eye close and her white hand lie 
 idle on the arm of her seat . the half - light under the thick mass of 
 leaf bring out the youthful prettiness of her face ; make the clear , 
 light fabric and white lace of her dress appear luminous . small and 
 dainty , as if radiate a light of her own in the deep shade of the 
 interlaced bough , she resemble a good fairy , weary with a long career 
 of well - doing , touch by the wither suspicion of the uselessness of 
 her labour , the powerlessness of her magic . 
 have anybody ask she of what she be think , alone in the garden 
 of the Casa , with her husband at the mine and the house close to the 
 street like an empty dwelling , her frankness would have have to evade the 
 question . it have come into her mind that for life to be large and full , 
 it must contain the care of the past and of the future in every pass 
 moment of the present . our daily work must be do to the glory of the 
 dead , and for the good of those who come after . she think that , and 
 sigh without open her eye - without move at all . Mrs. Gould 's 
 face become set and rigid for a second , as if to receive , without 
 flinching , a great wave of loneliness that sweep over her head . and it 
 come into her mind , too , that no one would ever ask she with solicitude 
 what she be think of . no one . no one , but perhaps the man who have 
 just go away . no ; no one who could be answer with careless sincerity 
 in the ideal perfection of confidence . 
 the word " incorrigible " - a word lately pronounce by Dr. 
 Monygham - float into she still and sad immobility . incorrigible in 
 his devotion to the great silver mine be the Senor Administrador ! 
 Incorrigible in his hard , determined service of the material interest 
 to which he have pin his faith in the triumph of order and justice . 
 poor boy ! she have a clear vision of the grey hair on his temple . 
 he be perfect - perfect . what more could she have expect ? it be 
 a colossal and lasting success ; and love be only a short moment of 
 forgetfulness , a short intoxication , whose delight one remember with 
 a sense of sadness , as if it have be a deep grief live through . there 
 be something inherent in the necessity of successful action which 
 carry with it the moral degradation of the idea . she see the San Tome 
 mountain hang over the Campo , over the whole land , fear , hat , 
 wealthy ; more soulless than any tyrant , more pitiless and autocratic 
 than the bad government ; ready to crush innumerable life in the 
 expansion of its greatness . he do not see it . he could not see it . it 
 be not his fault . he be perfect , perfect ; but she would never have he 
 to herself . never ; not for one short hour altogether to herself in 
 this old spanish house she love so well ! Incorrigible , the last of the 
 Corbelans , the last of the Avellanos , the doctor have say ; but she see 
 clearly the San Tome mine possessing , consume , burn up the life of 
 the last of the Costaguana Goulds ; master the energetic spirit of the 
 son as it have master the lamentable weakness of the father . a terrible 
 success for the last of the Goulds . the last ! she have hop for a long , 
 long time , that perhaps - - but no ! there be to be no more . an immense 
 desolation , the dread of her own continued life , descend upon the 
 first lady of Sulaco . with a prophetic vision she see herself survive 
 alone the degradation of her young ideal of life , of love , of work - all 
 alone in the Treasure House of the World . the profound , blind , suffer 
 expression of a painful dream settle on her face with its closed eye . 
 in the indistinct voice of an unlucky sleeper lie passive in the grip 
 of a merciless nightmare , she stammer out aimlessly the word - 
 " material interest . " 
 CHAPTER TWELVE 
 Nostromo have be grow rich very slowly . it be an effect of his 
 prudence . he could command himself even when throw off his balance . 
 and to become the slave of a treasure with full self - knowledge be an 
 occurrence rare and mentally disturbing . but it be also in a great part 
 because of the difficulty of convert it into a form in which it 
 could become available . the mere act of get it away from the island 
 piecemeal , little by little , be surround by difficulty , by the 
 danger of imminent detection . he have to visit the Great Isabel in 
 secret , between his voyage along the coast , which be the ostensible 
 source of his fortune . the crew of his own schooner be to be fear as 
 if they have be spy upon their dread captain . he do not dare stay 
 too long in port . when his coaster be unload , he hurry away on 
 another trip , for he fear arouse suspicion even by a day 's delay . 
 sometimes during a week 's stay , or more , he could only manage one visit 
 to the treasure . and that be all . a couple of ingot . he suffer 
 through his fear as much as through his prudence . to do thing by 
 stealth humiliate he . and he suffer most from the concentration of 
 his thought upon the treasure . 
 a transgression , a crime , enter a man 's existence , eat it up like a 
 malignant growth , consume it like a fever . Nostromo have lose his peace ; 
 the genuineness of all his quality be destroy . he feel it himself , 
 and often curse the silver of San Tome . his courage , his magnificence , 
 his leisure , his work , everything be as before , only everything be a 
 sham . but the treasure be real . he cling to it with a more tenacious , 
 mental grip . but he hat the feel of the ingot . sometimes , after 
 put away a couple of they in his cabin - the fruit of a secret night 
 expedition to the Great Isabel - he would look fixedly at his finger , as 
 if surprised they have leave no stain on his skin . 
 he have find mean of dispose of the silver bar in distant port . the 
 necessity to go far afield make his coast voyage long , and cause 
 his visit to the Viola household to be rare and far between . he be 
 fat to have his wife from there . he have say so once to Giorgio 
 himself . but the Garibaldino have put the subject aside with a majestic 
 wave of his hand , clutch a smoulder black briar - root pipe . there 
 be plenty of time ; he be not the man to force his girl upon anybody . 
 as time go on , Nostromo discover his preference for the young of 
 the two . they have some profound similarity of nature , which must 
 exist for complete confidence and understanding , no matter what 
 outward difference of temperament there may be to exercise their own 
 fascination of contrast . his wife would have to know his secret or else 
 life would be impossible . he be attract by Giselle , with her candid 
 gaze and white throat , pliable , silent , fond of excitement under her 
 quiet indolence ; whereas Linda , with her intense , passionately pale 
 face , energetic , all fire and word , touch with gloom and scorn , a 
 chip of the old block , true daughter of the austere republican , but with 
 Teresa 's voice , inspire he with a deep - seat mistrust . moreover , the 
 poor girl could not conceal her love for Gian ' Battista . he could see it 
 would be violent , exact , suspicious , uncompromising - like her soul . 
 Giselle , by her fair but warm beauty , by the surface placidity of her 
 nature hold a promise of submissiveness , by the charm of her girlish 
 mysteriousness , excite his passion and allay his fear as to the 
 future . 
 his absence from Sulaco be long . on return from the long of 
 they , he make out lighter load with block of stone lie under 
 the cliff of the Great Isabel ; crane and scaffold above ; workman 's 
 figure move about , and a small lighthouse already rise from its 
 foundation on the edge of the cliff . 
 at this unexpected , undreamt - of , startling sight , he think himself 
 lose irretrievably . what could save he from detection now ? nothing ! he 
 be strike with amazed dread at this turn of chance , that would kindle 
 a far - reach light upon the only secret spot of his life ; that life 
 whose very essence , value , reality , consist in its reflection from the 
 admire eye of man . all of it but that thing which be beyond common 
 comprehension ; which stand between he and the power that hear and 
 give effect to the evil intention of curse . it be dark . not every man 
 have such a darkness . and they be go to put a light there . a light ! 
 he see it shin upon disgrace , poverty , contempt . somebody be sure 
 to . . . . perhaps somebody have already . . . . 
 the incomparable Nostromo , the Capataz , the respected and fear Captain 
 Fidanza , the unquestioned patron of secret society , a republican like 
 old Giorgio , and a revolutionist at heart   but in another manner , be 
 on the point of jump overboard from the deck of his own schooner . 
 that man , subjective almost to insanity , look suicide deliberately in 
 the face . but he never lose his head . he be check by the thought 
 that this be no escape . he imagine himself dead , and the disgrace , 
 the shame go on . or , rather , properly speak , he could not imagine 
 himself dead . he be possess too strongly by the sense of his own 
 existence , a thing of infinite duration in its change , to grasp the 
 notion of finality . the earth go on for ever . 
 and he be courageous . it be a corrupt courage , but it be as good 
 for his purpose as the other kind . he sail close to the cliff of the 
 Great Isabel , throw a penetrate glance from the deck at the mouth 
 of the ravine , tangle in an undisturbed growth of bush . he sail 
 close enough to exchange hail with the workman , shade their eye on 
 the edge of the sheer drop of the cliff overhang by the jib - head of a 
 powerful crane . he perceive that none of they have any occasion even to 
 approach the ravine where the silver lie hide ; let alone to enter it . 
 in the harbour he learn that no one sleep on the island . the labour 
 gang return to port every evening , sing chorus song in the empty 
 lighter tow by a harbour tug . for the moment he have nothing to fear . 
 but afterwards ? he ask himself . later , when a keeper come to live in 
 the cottage that be be build some hundred and fifty yard back from 
 the low lighttower , and four hundred or so from the dark , shaded , jungly 
 ravine , contain the secret of his safety , of his influence , of his 
 magnificence , of his power over the future , of his defiance of ill - luck , 
 of every possible betrayal from rich and poor alike - what then ? he could 
 never shake off the treasure . his audacity , great than that of other 
 man , have weld that vein of silver into his life . and the feeling 
 of fearful and ardent subjection , the feeling of his slavery - so 
 irremediable and profound that often , in his thought , he compare 
 himself to the legendary gringo , neither dead nor alive , bind down 
 to their conquest of unlawful wealth on Azuera - weigh heavily on the 
 independent Captain Fidanza , owner and master of a coast schooner , 
 whose smart appearance   and fabulous good - luck in trading   be so well 
 know along the western seaboard of a vast continent . 
 fiercely whisker and grave , a shade less supple in his walk , the 
 vigour and symmetry of his powerful limb lose in the vulgarity of a 
 brown tweed suit , make by Jews in the slum of London , and sell by the 
 clothing department of the Compania Anzani , Captain Fidanza be see in 
 the street of Sulaco attend to his business , as usual , that trip . 
 and , as usual , he allow it to get about that he have make a great 
 profit on his cargo . it be a cargo of salt fish , and Lent be 
 approach . he be see in tramcar go to and fro between the town 
 and the harbour ; he talk with people in a cafe or two in his measured , 
 steady voice . Captain Fidanza be see . the generation that would know 
 nothing of the famous ride to Cayta be not bear yet . 
 Nostromo , the miscalled Capataz de Cargadores , have make for himself , 
 under his rightful name , another public existence , but modify by 
 the new condition , less picturesque , more difficult to keep up in the 
 increase size and varied population of Sulaco , the progressive capital 
 of the Occidental Republic . 
 Captain Fidanza , unpicturesque , but always a little mysterious , be 
 recognize quite sufficiently under the lofty glass and iron roof of the 
 Sulaco railway station . he take a local train , and get out in Rincon , 
 where he visit the widow of the Cargador who have die of his wound 
  at the dawn of the New Era , like Don Jose Avellanos   in the patio 
 of the Casa Gould . he consent to sit down and drink a glass of cool 
 lemonade in the hut , while the woman , stand up , pour a perfect 
 torrent of word to which he do not listen . he leave some money with 
 she , as usual . the orphan child , grow up and well school , 
 call he uncle , clamour for his blessing . he give that , too ; and in 
 the doorway pause for a moment to look at the flat face of the San Tome 
 mountain with a faint frown . this slight contraction of his bronzed brow 
 cast a marked tinge of severity upon his usual unbending expression , 
 be observe at the Lodge which he attend - but go away before the 
 banquet . he wear it at the meeting of some good comrade , Italians 
 and occidental , assemble in his honour under the presidency of an 
 indigent , sickly , somewhat hunchbacke little photographer , with a white 
 face and a magnanimous soul dye crimson by a bloodthirsty hate of 
 all capitalist , oppressor of the two hemisphere . the heroic Giorgio 
 Viola , old revolutionist , would have understand nothing of his opening 
 speech ; and Captain Fidanza , lavishly generous as usual to some poor 
 comrade , make no speech at all . he have listen , frown , with his 
 mind far away , and walk off unapproachable , silent , like a man full of 
 care . 
 his frown deepen as , in the early morning , he watch the stone - mason 
 go off to the Great Isabel , in lighter load with square block of 
 stone , enough to add another course to the squat light - tower . that be 
 the rate of the work . one course per day . 
 and Captain Fidanza meditate . the presence of stranger on the island 
 would cut he completely off the treasure . it have be difficult and 
 dangerous enough before . he be afraid , and he be angry . he think 
 with the resolution of a master and the cunning of a cowed slave . then 
 he go ashore . 
 he be a man of resource and ingenuity ; and , as usual , the expedient he 
 find at a critical moment be effective enough to alter the situation 
 radically . he have the gift of evolve safety out of the very danger , 
 this incomparable Nostromo , this " fellow in a thousand . " with Giorgio 
 establish on the Great Isabel , there would be no need for concealment . 
 he would be able to go openly , in daylight , to see his daughter - one of 
 his daughter - and stay late talk to the old Garibaldino . then in the 
 dark . . . night after night . . . he would dare to grow rich quicker 
 now . he yearn to clasp , embrace , absorb , subjugate in unquestioned 
 possession this treasure , whose tyranny have weigh upon his mind , his 
 action , his very sleep . 
 he go to see his friend Captain Mitchell - and the thing be do as 
 Dr. Monygham have relate to Mrs. Gould . when the project be moot to 
 the Garibaldino , something like the faint reflection , the dim ghost of a 
 very ancient smile , steal under the white and enormous moustache of the 
 old hater of king and minister . his daughter be the object of his 
 anxious care . the young , especially . Linda , with her mother 's voice , 
 have take more her mother 's place . her deep , vibrate " Eh , Padre ? " 
 seem , but for the change of the word , the very echo of the 
 impassione , remonstrate " eh , Giorgio ? " of poor Signora Teresa . it be 
 his fix opinion that the town be no proper place for his girl . 
 the infatuated but guileless Ramirez be the object of his profound 
 aversion , as resume the sin of the country whose people be blind , 
 vile esclavos . 
 on his return from his next voyage , Captain Fidanza find the Violas 
 settle in the light - keeper 's cottage . his knowledge of Giorgio 's 
 idiosyncrasy have not play he false . the Garibaldino have refuse 
 to entertain the idea of any companion whatever , except his girl . 
 and Captain Mitchell , anxious to please his poor Nostromo , with that 
 felicity of inspiration which only true affection can give , have formally 
 appoint Linda Viola as under - keeper of the Isabel 's light . 
 " the light be private property , " he use to explain . " it belong to my 
 Company . I have   the power to nominate whom I like , and Viola it shall be . 
 it be about the only thing Nostromo - a man worth his weight in gold , mind 
 you - have ever ask I to do for he . " 
 directly his schooner be anchor opposite the New Custom House , with 
 its sham air of a greek temple , flatroofe , with a colonnade , Captain 
 Fidanza go pull his small boat out of the harbour , bind for the 
 Great Isabel , openly in the light of a decline day , before all man 's 
 eye , with a sense of have master the fate . he must establish a 
 regular position . he would ask he for his daughter now . he think of 
 Giselle as he pull . Linda love he , perhaps , but the old man would be 
 glad to keep the elder , who have his wife 's voice . 
 he do not pull for the narrow strand where he have land with Decoud , 
 and afterwards alone on his first visit to the treasure . he make for the 
 beach at the other end , and walk up the regular and gentle slope of 
 the wedge - shape island . Giorgio Viola , whom he see from afar , sit 
 on a bench under the front wall of the cottage , lift his arm slightly 
 to his loud hail . he walk up . neither of the girl appear . 
 " it be good here , " say the old man , in his austere , far - away manner . 
 Nostromo nod ; then , after a short silence - 
 " you see my schooner pass in not two hour ago ? do you know why I be 
 here before , so to speak , my anchor have fairly bite into the ground of 
 this port of Sulaco ? " 
 " you be welcome like a son , " the old man declare , quietly , star 
 away upon the sea . 
 " ah ! thy son . I know . I be what thy son would have be . it be well , 
 viejo . it be a very good welcome . listen , I have come to ask you 
 for - - " 
 a sudden dread come upon the fearless and incorruptible Nostromo . he 
 dare not utter the name in his mind . the slight pause only impart a 
 mark weight and solemnity to the changed end of the phrase . 
 " for my wife ! " . . . his heart be beat fast . " it be time you - - " 
 the Garibaldino arrest he with an extended arm . " that be leave for 
 you to judge . " 
 he get up slowly . his beard , unclipped since Teresa 's death , thick , 
 snow - white , cover his powerful chest . he turn his head to the door , 
 and call out in his strong voice - 
 " Linda . " 
 her answer come sharp and faint from within ; and the appalled Nostromo 
 stand up , too , but remain mute , gaze at the door . he be afraid . he 
 be not afraid of be refuse the girl he love - no mere refusal could 
 stand between he and a woman he desire - but the shin spectre of 
 the treasure rise before he , claim his allegiance in a silence that 
 could not be gainsay . he be afraid , because , neither dead nor 
 alive , like the Gringos on Azuera , he belong body and soul to the 
 unlawfulness of his audacity . he be afraid of be forbid the 
 island . he be afraid , and say nothing . 
 see the two man stand up side by side to await she , Linda stop 
 in the doorway . nothing could alter the passionate dead whiteness of she 
 face ; but her black eye seem to catch and concentrate all the light 
 of the low sun in a flaming spark within the black depth , cover at 
 once by the slow descent of heavy eyelid . 
 " behold thy husband , master , and benefactor . " Old Viola 's voice 
 resound with a force that seem to fill the whole gulf . 
 she step forward with her eye nearly closed , like a sleep - walker in 
 a beatific dream . 
 Nostromo make a superhuman effort . " it be time , Linda , we two be 
 betroth , " he say , steadily , in his level , careless , unbend tone . 
 she put her hand into his offer palm , lower her head , dark with 
 bronze glint , upon which her father 's hand rest for a moment . 
 " and so the soul of the dead be satisfied . " 
 this come from Giorgio Viola , who go on talk for a while of his 
 dead wife ; while the two , sit side by side , never look at each 
 other . then the old man cease ; and Linda , motionless , begin to speak . 
 " ever since I feel I live in the world , I have live for you alone , 
 Gian ' Battista . and that you know ! you know it . . . Battistino . " 
 she pronounce the name exactly with her mother 's intonation . a gloom as 
 of the grave cover Nostromo 's heart . 
 " yes . I know , " he say . 
 the heroic Garibaldino sit on the same bench bow his hoary head , his 
 old soul dwell alone with its memory , tender and violent , terrible 
 and dreary - solitary on the earth full of man . 
 and Linda , his well - love daughter , be say , " I be yours ever since 
 I can remember . I have only to think of you for the earth to become empty 
 to my eye . when you be there , I could see no one else . I be your . 
 nothing be change . the world belong to you , and you let I live in 
 it . " . . . she drop she low , vibrate voice to a still low note , 
 and find other thing to say - torturing for the man at her side . her 
 murmur run on ardent and voluble . she do not seem to see her sister , 
 who come out with an altar - cloth she be embroider in her hand , and 
 pass in front of they , silent , fresh , fair , with a quick glance and a 
 faint smile , to sit a little away on the other side of Nostromo . 
 the evening be still . the sun sink almost to the edge of a purple 
 ocean ; and the white lighthouse , livid against the background of cloud 
 fill the head of the gulf , bear the lantern red and glowing , like a 
 live ember kindle by the fire of the sky . Giselle , indolent and demure , 
 raise the altar - cloth from time to time to hide nervous yawn , as of a 
 young panther . 
 suddenly Linda rush at her sister , and seize her head , cover she 
 face with kiss . Nostromo 's brain reel . when she leave she , as if 
 stun by the violent caress , with her hand lie in her lap , the 
 slave of the treasure feel as if he could shoot that woman . Old Giorgio 
 lift his leonine head . 
 " where be you go , Linda ? " 
 " to the light , padre mio . " 
 " Si , si - to your duty . " 
 he get up , too , look after his eld daughter ; then , in a tone whose 
 festive note seem the echo of a mood lose in the night of age - 
 " I be go in to cook something . Aha ! Son ! the old man know where to 
 find a bottle of wine , too . " 
 he turn to Giselle , with a change to austere tenderness . 
 " and you , little one , pray not to the God of priest and slave , but to 
 the God of orphan , of the oppress , of the poor , of little child , 
 to give thee a man like this one for a husband . " 
 his hand rest heavily for a moment on Nostromo 's shoulder ; then he 
 go in . the hopeless slave of the San Tome silver feel at these word 
 the venomous fang of jealousy bite deep into his heart . he be 
 appal by the novelty of the experience , by its force , by its physical 
 intimacy . a husband ! a husband for she ! and yet it be natural that 
 Giselle should have a husband at some time or other . he have never 
 realize that before . in discover that her beauty could belong 
 to another he feel as though he could kill this one of old Giorgio 's 
 daughter also . he mutter moodily - 
 " they say you love Ramirez . " 
 she shake her head without look at he . coppery glint ripple to and 
 fro on the wealth of her gold hair . her smooth forehead have the soft , 
 pure sheen of a priceless pearl in the splendour of the sunset , mingle 
 the gloom of starry space , the purple of the sea , and the crimson of 
 the sky in a magnificent stillness . 
 " no , " she say , slowly . " I never love he . I think I never . . . he 
 love I - perhaps . " 
 the seduction of her slow voice die out of the air , and her raise eye 
 remain fix on nothing , as if indifferent and without thought . 
 " Ramirez tell you he love you ? " ask Nostromo , restrain himself . 
 " ah ! once - one evening . . . " 
 " the miserable . . . ha ! " 
 he have jump up as if sting by a gad - fly , and stand before her mute 
 with anger . 
 " Misericordia Divina ! you , too , Gian ' Battista ! poor wretch that I be ! " 
 she lament in ingenuous tone . " I tell Linda , and she scold - she 
 scold . be I to live blind , dumb , and deaf in this world ? and she tell 
 father , who take down his gun and clean it . poor Ramirez ! then you 
 come , and she tell you . " 
 he look at she . he fasten his eye upon the hollow of her white 
 throat , which have the invincible charm of thing young , palpitating , 
 delicate , and alive . be this the child he have know ? be it possible ? 
 it dawn upon he that in these last year he have really see very 
 little - nothing - of she . nothing . she have come into the world like 
 a thing unknown . she have come upon he unawares . she be a danger . a 
 frightful danger . the instinctive mood of fierce determination that have 
 never fail he before the peril of this life add its steady force 
 to the violence of his passion . she , in a voice that recall to he the 
 song of run water , the tinkling of a silver bell , continue - 
 " and between you three you have bring I here into this captivity to 
 the sky and water . nothing else . sky and water . oh , Sanctissima Madre . 
 my hair shall turn grey on this tedious island . I could hate you , Gian ' 
 Battista ! " 
 he laugh loudly . her voice envelop he like a caress . she bemoan 
 her fate , spread unconsciously , like a flower its perfume in the 
 coolness of the evening , the indefinable seduction of her person . be 
 it her fault that nobody ever have admire Linda ? even when they be 
 little , go out with their mother to Mass , she remember that people 
 take no notice of Linda , who be fearless , and choose instead to frighten 
 she , who be timid , with their attention . it be her hair like gold , she 
 suppose . 
 he break out - 
 " your hair like gold , and your eye like violet , and your lip like the 
 rise ; your round arm , your white throat . " . . . 
 imperturbable in the indolence of her pose , she blush deeply all 
 over to the root of her hair . she be not conceited . she be no more 
 self - conscious than a flower . but she be pleased . and perhaps even 
 a flower love to hear itself praise . he glance down , and add , 
 impetuously - 
 " your little foot ! " 
 lean back against the rough stone wall of the cottage , she seem to 
 bask languidly in the warmth of the rosy flush . only her lowered eye 
 glance at her little foot . 
 " and so you be go at last to marry our Linda . she be terrible . ah ! 
 now she will understand well since you have tell she you love she . she 
 will not be so fierce . " 
 " Chica ! " say Nostromo , " I have not tell she anything . " 
 " then make haste . come to - morrow . come and tell she , so that I may have 
 some peace from her scolding and - perhaps - who know . . . " 
 " be allow to listen to your Ramirez , eh ? be that it ? you . . . " 
 " mercy of God ! how violent you be , Giovanni , " she say , unmoved . " who 
 be Ramirez . . . Ramirez . . . who be he ? " she repeat , dreamily , in 
 the dusk and gloom of the clouded gulf , with a low red streak in the 
 west like a hot bar of glow iron lay across the entrance of a world 
 sombre as a cavern , where the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores have 
 hide his conquest of love and wealth . 
 " listen , Giselle , " he say , in measured tone ; " I will tell no word of 
 love to your sister . do you want to know why ? " 
 " alas ! I could not understand perhaps , Giovanni . Father say you be not 
 like other man ; that no one have ever understand you properly ; that the 
 rich will be surprised yet . . . . oh ! saint in heaven ! I be weary . " 
 she raise her embroidery to conceal the low part of her face , then 
 let it fall on her lap . the lantern be shade on the land side , but 
 slant away from the dark column of the lighthouse they could see the 
 long shaft of light , kindle by Linda , go out to strike the expiring 
 glow in a horizon of purple and red . 
 Giselle Viola , with her head rest against the wall of the house , 
 her eye half close , and her little foot , in white stocking and black 
 slipper , cross over each other , seem to surrender herself , tranquil 
 and fatal , to the gathering dusk . the charm of her body , the promising 
 mysteriousness of her indolence , go out into the night of the Placid 
 Gulf like a fresh and intoxicating fragrance spread out in the 
 shadow , impregnate the air . the incorruptible Nostromo breathe 
 her ambient seduction in the tumultuous heaving of his breast . before 
 leave the harbour he have throw off the store clothing of Captain 
 Fidanza , for great ease in the long pull out to the island . he stand 
 before she in the red sash and check shirt as he use to appear on the 
 Company 's wharf - a Mediterranean sailor come ashore to try his luck in 
 Costaguana . the dusk of purple and red envelop he , too - close , soft , 
 profound , as no more than fifty yard from that spot it have gather 
 evening after evening about the self - destructive passion of Don Martin 
 Decoud 's utter scepticism , flame up to death in solitude . 
 " you have get to hear , " he begin at last , with perfect self - control . " I 
 shall say no word of love to your sister , to whom I be betroth from 
 this evening , because it be you that I love . it be you ! " . . . 
 the dusk let he see yet the tender and voluptuous smile that come 
 instinctively upon her lip shape for love and kiss , freeze hard in 
 the draw , haggard line of terror . he could not restrain himself any 
 long . while she shrink from his approach , her arm go out to he , 
 abandon and regal in the dignity of her languid surrender . he hold she 
 head in his two hand , and shower rapid kiss upon the upturned face 
 that gleam in the purple dusk . masterful and tender , he be enter 
 slowly upon the fulness of his possession . and he perceive that she be 
 cry . then the incomparable Capataz , the man of careless love , became 
 gentle and caressing , like a woman to the grief of a child . he murmur 
 to she fondly . he sit down by she and nurse her fair head on his 
 breast . he call she his star and his little flower . 
 it have grow dark . from the living - room of the light - keeper 's cottage , 
 where Giorgio , one of the Immortal Thousand , be bend his leonine and 
 heroic head over a charcoal fire , there come the sound of sizzling and 
 the aroma of an artistic frittura . 
 in the obscure disarray of that thing , happen like a cataclysm , it 
 be in her feminine head that some gleam of reason survive . he be lose 
 to the world in their embrace stillness . but she say , whisper into 
 his ear - 
 " God of mercy ! what will become of I - here - now - between this sky and 
 this water I hate ? Linda , Linda - I see she ! " . . . she try to get out 
 of his arm , suddenly relax at the sound of that name . but there be 
 no one approach their black shape , enlace and struggle on the 
 white background of the wall . " Linda ! poor Linda ! I tremble ! I shall die 
 of fear before my poor sister Linda , betroth to - day to Giovanni - my 
 lover ! Giovanni , you must have be mad ! I can not understand you ! you 
 be not like other man ! I will not give you up - never - only to God 
 himself ! but why have you do this blind , mad , cruel , frightful thing ? " 
 release , she hang her head , let fall her hand . the altar - cloth , as if 
 toss by a great wind , lie far away from they , gleam white on the 
 black ground . 
 " from fear of lose my hope of you , " say Nostromo . 
 " you know that you have my soul ! you know everything ! it be make for 
 you ! but what could stand between you and I ? what ? tell I ! " she 
 repeat , without impatience , in superb assurance . 
 " your dead mother , " he say , very low . 
 " ah ! . . . poor mother ! she have always . . . she be a saint in heaven 
 now , and I can not give you up to she . no , Giovanni . only to God alone . 
 you be mad - but it be do . oh ! what have you do ? Giovanni , my 
 beloved , my life , my master , do not leave I here in this grave of 
 cloud . you can not leave I now . you must take I away - at once - this 
 instant - in the little boat . Giovanni , carry I off to - night , from my 
 fear of Linda 's eye , before I have to look at she again . " 
 she nestle close to he . the slave of the San Tome silver feel the 
 weight as of chain upon his limb , a pressure as of a cold hand upon 
 his lip . he struggle against the spell . 
 " I can not , " he say . " not yet . there be something that stand between we 
 two and the freedom of the world . " 
 she press her form close to his side with a subtle and naive instinct 
 of seduction . 
 " you rave , Giovanni - my lover ! " she whisper , engagingly . " what can 
 there be ? carry I off - in thy very hand - to Dona Emilia - away from 
 here . I be not very heavy . " 
 it seem as though she expect he to lift she up at once in his two 
 palm . she have lose the notion of all impossibility . anything could 
 happen on this night of wonder . as he make no movement , she almost cry 
 aloud - 
 " I tell you I be afraid of Linda ! " and still he do not move . she become 
 quiet and wily . " what can there be ? " she ask , coaxingly . 
 he feel her warm , breathing , alive , quiver in the hollow of his 
 arm . in the exult consciousness of his strength , and the triumphant 
 excitement of his mind , he strike out for his freedom . 
 " a treasure , " he say . all be still . she do not understand . " a 
 treasure . a treasure of silver to buy a gold crown for thy brow . " 
 " a treasure ? " she repeat in a faint voice , as if from the depth of a 
 dream . " what be it you say ? " 
 she disengage herself gently . he get up and look down at she , aware 
 of her face , of her hair , her lip , the dimple on her cheek - see 
 the fascination of her person in the night of the gulf as if in the 
 blaze of noonday . her nonchalant and seductive voice tremble with the 
 excitement of admire awe and ungovernable curiosity . 
 " a treasure of silver ! " she stammer out . then press on fast : 
 " what ? where ? how do you get it , Giovanni ? " 
 he wrestle with the spell of captivity . it be as if strike a heroic 
 blow that he burst out - 
 " like a thief ! " 
 the dense blackness of the Placid Gulf seem to fall upon his head . 
 he could not see she now . she have vanish into a long , obscure abysmal 
 silence , whence her voice come back to he after a time with a faint 
 glimmer , which be her face . 
 " I love you ! I love you ! " 
 these word give he an unwonted sense of freedom ; they cast a spell 
 strong than the accursed spell of the treasure ; they change his weary 
 subjection to that dead thing into an exulting conviction of his power . 
 he would cherish she , he say , in a splendour as great as Dona Emilia 's . 
 the rich live on wealth steal from the people , but he have take from 
 the rich nothing - nothing that be not lose to they already by their 
 folly and their betrayal . for he have be betray - he say - deceive , 
 tempt . she believe he . . . . he have keep the treasure for purpose 
 of revenge ; but now he care nothing for it . he care only for she . he 
 would put her beauty in a palace on a hill crown with olive tree - a 
 white palace above a blue sea . he would keep she there like a jewel in 
 a casket . he would get land for she - her own land fertile with vine and 
 corn - to set she little foot upon . he kiss they . . . . he have already 
 pay for it all with the soul of a woman and the life of a man . . . . 
 the Capataz de Cargadores taste the supreme intoxication of his 
 generosity . he fling the master treasure superbly at her foot in 
 the impenetrable darkness of the gulf , in the darkness defy - as man 
 say - the knowledge of God and the wit of the devil . but she must let 
 he grow rich first - he warn she . 
 she listen as if in a trance . her finger stir in his hair . he get 
 up from his knee reel , weak , empty , as though he have fling his soul 
 away . 
 " make haste , then , " she say . " make haste , Giovanni , my lover , my 
 master , for I will give thee up to no one but God . and I be afraid of 
 Linda . " 
 he guess at her shudder , and swear to do his good . he trust the 
 courage of her love . she promise to be brave in order to be love 
 always - far away in a white palace upon a hill above a blue sea . then 
 with a timid , tentative eagerness she murmur - 
 " where be it ? where ? tell I that , Giovanni . " 
 he open his mouth and remain silent - thunderstruck . 
 " not that ! not that ! " he gasp out , appal at the spell of secrecy 
 that have keep he dumb before so many people fall upon his lip again 
 with unimpaired force . not even to she . not even to she . it be too 
 dangerous . " I forbid thee to ask , " he cry at she , deaden cautiously 
 the anger of his voice . 
 he have not regain his freedom . the spectre of the unlawful treasure 
 arise , stand by her side like a figure of silver , pitiless and 
 secret , with a finger on its pale lip . his soul die within he at the 
 vision of himself creep in presently along the ravine , with the smell 
 of earth , of damp foliage in his nostril - creep in , determine in 
 a purpose that numb his breast , and creep out again load with 
 silver , with his ear alert to every sound . it must be do on this very 
 night - that work of a craven slave ! 
 he stoop low , press the hem of her skirt to his lip , with a 
 muttered command - 
 " tell he I would not stay , " and be go suddenly from she , silent , 
 without as much as a footfall in the dark night . 
 she sit still , her head rest indolently against the wall , and her 
 little foot in white stocking and black slipper cross over each 
 other . Old Giorgio , come out , do not seem to be surprised at the 
 intelligence as much as she have vaguely fear . for she be full of 
 inexplicable fear now - fear of everything and everybody except of her 
 Giovanni and his treasure . but that be incredible . 
 the heroic Garibaldino accept Nostromo 's abrupt departure with a 
 sagacious indulgence . he remember his own feeling , and exhibit a 
 masculine penetration of the true state of the case . 
 " Va bene . let he go . ha ! ha ! no matter how fair the woman , it gall a 
 little . liberty , liberty . there be more than one kind ! he have say 
 the great word , and son Gian ' Battista be not tame . " he seem to be 
 instruct the motionless and scared Giselle . . . . " a man should not 
 be tame , " he add , dogmatically out of the doorway . her stillness and 
 silence seem to displease he . " do not give way to the enviousness of 
 your sister 's lot , " he admonish she , very grave , in his deep voice . 
 presently he have to come to the door again to call in his young 
 daughter . it be late . he shout her name three time before she 
 even move her head . leave alone , she have become the helpless prey of 
 astonishment . she walk into the bedroom she share with Linda like 
 a person profoundly asleep . that aspect be so marked that even old 
 Giorgio , spectacle , raise his eye from the Bible , shake his head as 
 she shut the door behind she . 
 she walk right across the room without look at anything , and sit 
 down at once by the open window . Linda , steal down from the tower in 
 the exuberance of her happiness , find she with a light candle at she 
 back , face the black night full of sigh gust of wind and the sound 
 of distant shower - a true night of the gulf , too dense for the eye of 
 God and the wile of the devil . she do not turn her head at the opening 
 of the door . 
 there be something in that immobility which reach Linda in the depth 
 of her paradise . the eld sister guess angrily : the child be 
 think of that wretched Ramirez . Linda long to talk . she say in 
 her arbitrary voice , " Giselle ! " and be not answer by the slight 
 movement . 
 the girl that be go to live in a palace and walk on ground of she 
 own be ready to die with terror . not for anything in the world would 
 she have turn her head to face her sister . her heart be beat 
 madly . she say with subdue haste - 
 " do not speak to I . I be pray . " 
 Linda , disappoint , go out quietly ; and Giselle sit on unbelieving , 
 lost , daze , patient , as if wait for the confirmation of the 
 incredible . the hopeless blackness of the cloud seem part of a dream , 
 too . she wait . 
 she do not wait in vain . the man whose soul be dead within he , 
 creep out of the ravine , weight with silver , have see the gleam 
 of the lighted window , and could not help retrace his step from the 
 beach . 
 on that impenetrable background , obliterate the lofty mountain by 
 the seaboard , she see the slave of the San Tome silver , as if by 
 an extraordinary power of a miracle . she accept his return as if 
 henceforth the world could hold no surprise for all eternity . 
 she rise , compel and rigid , and begin to speak long before the light 
 from within fall upon the face of the approach man . 
 " you have come back to carry I off . it be well ! open thy arm , 
 Giovanni , my lover . I be come . " 
 his prudent footstep stop , and with his eye glisten wildly , he 
 speak in a harsh voice : 
 " not yet . I must grow rich slowly . " . . . a threatening note come into 
 his tone . " do not forget that you have a thief for your lover . " 
 " yes ! yes ! " she whisper , hastily . " come nearer ! listen ! do not give I 
 up , Giovanni ! never , never ! . . . I will be patient ! . . . " 
 her form droop consolingly over the low casement towards the slave of 
 the unlawful treasure . the light in the room go out , and weight with 
 silver , the magnificent Capataz clasp her round her white neck in the 
 darkness of the gulf as a drown man clutch at a straw . 
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
 on the day Mrs. Gould be go , in Dr. Monygham 's word , to " give a 
 tertulia , " Captain Fidanza go down the side of his schooner lie in 
 Sulaco harbour , calm , unbending , deliberate in the way he sit down 
 in his dinghy and take up his scull . he be later than usual . the 
 afternoon be well advanced before he land on the beach of the Great 
 Isabel , and with a steady pace climb the slope of the island . 
 from a distance he make out Giselle sit in a chair tilt back 
 against the end of the house , under the window of the girl 's room . she 
 have her embroidery in her hand , and hold it well up to her eye . the 
 tranquillity of that girlish figure exasperate the feeling of perpetual 
 struggle and strife he carry in his breast . he become angry . it seem 
 to he that she ought to hear the clanking of his fetter - his silver 
 fetter , from afar . and while ashore that day , he have meet the doctor 
 with the evil eye , who have look at he very hard . 
 the raising of her eye mollify he . they smile in their flower - like 
 freshness straight upon his heart . then she frown . it be a warning to 
 be cautious . he stop some distance away , and in a loud , indifferent 
 tone , say - 
 " good day , Giselle . be Linda up yet ? " 
 " yes . she be in the big room with father . " 
 he approach then , and , look through the window into the bedroom 
 for fear of be detect by Linda return there for some reason , he 
 say , move only his lip - 
 " you love I ? " 
 " More than my life . " she go on with her embroidery under his 
 contemplating gaze and continue to speak , look at her work , " or I 
 could not live . I could not , Giovanni . for this life be like death . oh , 
 Giovanni , I shall perish if you do not take I away . " 
 he smile carelessly . " I will come to the window when it be dark , " he 
 say . 
 " no , do not , Giovanni . not - to - night . Linda and father have be talk 
 together for a long time today . " 
 " what about ? " 
 " Ramirez , I fancy I hear . I do not know . I be afraid . I be always 
 afraid . it be like die a thousand time a day . your love be to I like 
 your treasure to you . it be there , but I can never get enough of it . " 
 he look at she very still . she be beautiful . his desire have grow 
 within he . he have two master now . but she be incapable of sustained 
 emotion . she be sincere in what she say , but she sleep placidly at 
 night . when she see he she flame up always . then only an increase 
 taciturnity mark the change in she . she be afraid of betray 
 herself . she be afraid of pain , of bodily harm , of sharp word , of 
 face anger , and witness violence . for her soul be light and tender 
 with a pagan sincerity in its impulse . she murmur - 
 " give up the palazzo , Giovanni , and the vineyard on the hill , for which 
 we be starve our love . " 
 she cease , see Linda stand silent at the corner of the house . 
 Nostromo turn to his affiance wife with a greeting , and be amazed at 
 her sunken eye , at her hollow cheek , at the air of illness and anguish 
 in her face . 
 " have you be ill ? " he ask , try to put some concern into this 
 question . 
 her black eye blaze at he . " be I thin ? " she ask . 
 " yes - perhaps - a little . " 
 " and old ? " 
 " every day count - for all of we . " 
 " I shall go grey , I fear , before the ring be on my finger , " she say , 
 slowly , keep her gaze fasten upon he . 
 she wait for what he would say , roll down her turn - up sleeve . 
 " no fear of that , " he say , absently . 
 she turn away as if it have be something final , and busy herself 
 with household care while Nostromo talk with her father . conversation 
 with the old Garibaldino be not easy . Age have leave his faculty 
 unimpaire , only they seem to have withdraw somewhere deep within 
 he . his answer be slow in come , with an effect of august gravity . 
 but that day he be more animate , quick ; there seem to be more 
 life in the old lion . he be uneasy for the integrity of his honour . 
 he believe Sidoni 's warning as to Ramirez 's design upon his young 
 daughter . and he do not trust she . she be flighty . he say nothing of 
 his care to " Son Gian ' Battista . " it be a touch of senile vanity . he 
 want to show that he be equal yet to the task of guard alone the 
 honour of his house . 
 Nostromo go away early . as soon as he have disappear , walk towards 
 the beach , Linda step over the threshold and , with a haggard smile , 
 sit down by the side of her father . 
 ever since that Sunday , when the infatuated and desperate Ramirez have 
 wait for she on the wharf , she have no doubt whatever . the jealous 
 raving of that man be no revelation . they have only fix with 
 precision , as with a nail drive into her heart , that sense of unreality 
 and deception which , instead of bliss and security , she have find in 
 her intercourse with her promise husband . she have pass on , pour 
 indignation and scorn upon Ramirez ; but , that Sunday , she nearly die 
 of wretchedness and shame , lie on the carved and lettered stone of 
 Teresa 's grave , subscribe for by the engine - driver and the fitter of 
 the railway workshop , in sign of their respect for the hero of italian 
 Unity . Old Viola have not be able to carry out his desire of bury 
 his wife in the sea ; and Linda weep upon the stone . 
 the gratuitous outrage appal she . if he wish to break she 
 heart - well and good . everything be permit to Gian ' Battista . but 
 why trample upon the piece ; why seek to humiliate her spirit ? aha ! he 
 could not break that . she dry her tear . and Giselle ! Giselle ! the 
 little one that , ever since she could toddle , have always clung to 
 her skirt for protection . what duplicity ! but she could not help it 
 probably . when there be a man in the case the poor featherheade wretch 
 could not help herself . 
 Linda have a good share of the Viola stoicism . she resolve to say 
 nothing . but woman - like she put passion into her stoicism . Giselle 's 
 short answer , prompt by fearful caution , drive she beside herself by 
 their curtness that resemble disdain . one day she fling herself upon 
 the chair in which her indolent sister be lie and impress the mark 
 of her tooth at the base of the white neck in Sulaco . Giselle cry 
 out . but she have her share of the Viola heroism . ready to faint with 
 terror , she only say , in a lazy voice , " Madre de Dios ! be you go to 
 eat I alive , Linda ? " and this outburst pass off leave no trace upon 
 the situation . " she know nothing . she can not know any thing , " reflect 
 Giselle . " perhaps it be not true . it can not be true , " Linda try to 
 persuade herself . 
 but when she see Captain Fidanza for the first time after her meeting 
 with the distract Ramirez , the certitude of her misfortune return . 
 she watch he from the doorway go away to his boat , ask herself 
 stoically , " will they meet to - night ? " she make up her mind not to leave 
 the tower for a second . when he have disappear she come out and sit 
 down by her father . 
 the venerable Garibaldino feel , in his own word , " a young man yet . " in 
 one way or another a good deal of talk about Ramirez have reach he 
 of late ; and his contempt and dislike of that man who obviously be 
 not what his son would have be , have make he restless . he sleep very 
 little now ; but for several night past instead of reading - or only 
 sitting , with Mrs. Gould 's silver spectacle on his nose , before the 
 open Bible , he have be prowl actively all about the island with his 
 old gun , on watch over his honour . 
 Linda , lay her thin brown hand on his knee , try to soothe his 
 excitement . Ramirez be not in Sulaco . nobody know where he be . he be 
 go . his talk of what he would do mean nothing . 
 " no , " the old man interrupt . " but son Gian ' Battista tell I - quite 
 of himself - that the cowardly esclavo be drink and gamble with the 
 rascal of Zapiga , over there on the north side of the gulf . he may get 
 some of the bad scoundrel of that scoundrelly town of negro to help 
 he in his attempt upon the little one . . . . but I be not so old . no ! " 
 she argue earnestly against the probability of any attempt be make ; 
 and at last the old man fall silent , chew his white moustache . woman 
 have their obstinate notion which must be humour - his poor wife be 
 like that , and Linda resemble her mother . it be not seemly for a man 
 to argue . " may be . may be , " he mumble . 
 she be by no mean easy in her mind . she love Nostromo . she turn 
 her eye upon Giselle , sit at a distance , with something of maternal 
 tenderness , and the jealous anguish of a rival outraged in her defeat . 
 then she rise and walk over to she . 
 " listen - you , " she say , roughly . 
 the invincible candour of the gaze , raise up all violet and dew , 
 excite her rage and admiration . she have beautiful eye - the Chica - this 
 vile thing of white flesh and black deception . she do not know whether 
 she want to tear they out with shout of vengeance or cover up their 
 mysterious and shameless innocence with kiss of pity and love . and 
 suddenly they become empty , gaze blankly at she , except for a little 
 fear not quite bury deep enough with all the other emotion in 
 Giselle 's heart . 
 Linda say , " Ramirez be boast in town that he will carry you off from 
 the island . " 
 " what folly ! " answer the other , and in a perversity bear of long 
 restraint , she add : " he be not the man , " in a jesting tone with a 
 trembling audacity . 
 " no ? " say Linda , through her clench tooth . " be he not ? well , then , 
 look to it ; because father have be walk about with a loaded gun at 
 night . " 
 " it be not good for he . you must tell he not to , Linda . he will not 
 listen to I . " 
 " I shall say nothing - never any more - to anybody , " cry Linda , 
 passionately . 
 this could not last , think Giselle . Giovanni must take she away 
 soon - the very next time he come . she would not suffer these terror for 
 ever so much silver . to speak with her sister make she ill . but she be 
 not uneasy at her father 's watchfulness . she have beg Nostromo not 
 to come to the window that night . he have promise to keep away for this 
 once . and she do not know , could not guess or imagine , that he have 
 another reason for come on the island . 
 Linda have go straight to the tower . it be time to light up . she 
 unlock the little door , and go heavily up the spiral staircase , 
 carry her love for the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores like an 
 ever - increase load of shameful fetter . no ; she could not throw it 
 off . no ; let Heaven dispose of these two . and move about the lantern , 
 fill with twilight and the sheen of the moon , with careful movement 
 she light the lamp . then her arm fall along her body . 
 " and with our mother look on , " she murmur . " my own sister - the 
 Chica ! " 
 the whole refracting apparatus , with its brass fitting and ring of 
 prism , glitter and sparkle like a domeshape shrine of diamond , 
 contain not a lamp , but some sacred flame , dominate the sea . and 
 Linda , the keeper , in black , with a pale face , droop low in a wooden 
 chair , alone with her jealousy , far above the shame and passion of the 
 earth . a strange , drag pain as if somebody be pull she about 
 brutally by her dark hair with bronze glint , make she put her hand up 
 to her temple . they would meet . they would meet . and she know where , 
 too . at the window . the sweat of torture fall in drop on her cheek , 
 while the moonlight in the offing close as if with a colossal bar of 
 silver the entrance of the Placid Gulf - the sombre cavern of cloud and 
 stillness in the surf - fret seaboard . 
 Linda Viola stand up suddenly with a finger on her lip . he love neither 
 she nor her sister . the whole thing seem so objectless as to frighten 
 she , and also give she some hope . why do he not carry she off ? what 
 prevent he ? he be incomprehensible . what be they wait for ? for 
 what end be these two lie and deceive ? not for the end of their 
 love . there be no such thing . the hope of regain he for herself 
 make she break her vow of not leave the tower that night . she must 
 talk at once to her father , who be wise , and would understand . she run 
 down the spiral stair . at the moment of open the door at the bottom 
 she hear the sound of the first shot ever fire on the Great Isabel . 
 she feel a shock , as though the bullet have strike her breast . she run on 
 without pause . the cottage be dark . she cry at the door , " Giselle ! 
 Giselle ! " then dash round the corner and scream her sister 's name 
 at the open window , without get an answer ; but as she be rush , 
 distracted , round the house , Giselle come out of the door , and dart 
 past she , run silently , her hair loose , and her eye star 
 straight ahead . she seem to skim along the grass as if on tiptoe , and 
 vanish . 
 Linda walk on slowly , with her arm stretch out before she . all 
 be still on the island ; she do not know where she be go . the tree 
 under which Martin Decoud spend his last day , behold life like a 
 succession of senseless image , throw a large blotch of black shade upon 
 the grass . suddenly she see her father , stand quietly all alone in 
 the moonlight . 
 the Garibaldino - big , erect , with his snow - white hair and beard - have a 
 monumental repose in his immobility , lean upon a rifle . she put she 
 hand upon his arm lightly . he never stir . 
 " what have you do ? " she ask , in her ordinary voice . 
 " I have shoot Ramirez - infame ! " he answer , with his eye direct to 
 where the shade be black . " like a thief he come , and like a thief he 
 fall . the child have to be protect . " 
 he do not offer to move an inch , to advance a single step . he stand 
 there , rugged and unstirring , like a statue of an old man guard the 
 honour of his house . Linda remove her trembling hand from his arm , 
 firm and steady like an arm of stone , and , without a word , enter the 
 blackness of the shade . she see a stir of formless shape on the ground , 
 and stop short . a murmur of despair and tear grow louder to she 
 strained hearing . 
 " I entreat you not to come to - night . oh , my Giovanni ! and you 
 promise . oh ! why - why do you come , Giovanni ? " 
 it be her sister 's voice . it break on a heartrending sob . and the voice 
 of the resourceful Capataz de Cargadores , master and slave of the 
 San Tome treasure , who have be catch unawares by old Giorgio while 
 steal across the open towards the ravine to get some more silver , 
 answer careless and cool , but sound startlingly weak from the 
 ground . 
 " it seem as though I could not live through the night without see 
 thee once more - my star , my little flower . " 
         
 the brilliant tertulia be just over , the last guest have depart , and 
 the Senor Administrador have go to his room already , when Dr. Monygham , 
 who have be expect in the evening but have not turn up , arrive 
 drive along the wood - block pavement under the electric - lamp of the 
 desert Calle de la Constitucion , and find the great gateway of the 
 Casa still open . 
 he limp in , stump up the stair , and find the fat and sleek Basilio 
 on the point of turn off the light in the sala . the prosperous 
 majordomo remain open - mouthed at this late invasion . 
 " do not   put out the light , " command the doctor . " I want to see the 
 senora . " 
 " the senora be in the Senor Adminstrador 's cancillaria , " say Basilio , 
 in an unctuous voice . " the Senor Administrador start for the mountain 
 in an hour . there be some trouble with the workman to be fear , it 
 appear . a shameless people without reason and decency . and idle , senor . 
 Idle . " 
 " you be shamelessly lazy and imbecile yourself , " say the doctor , 
 with that faculty for exasperation which make he so generally beloved . 
 " do not   put the light out . " 
 Basilio retire with dignity . Dr. Monygham , wait in the brilliantly 
 light sala , hear presently a door close at the further end of the 
 house . a jingle of spur die out . the Senor Administrador be off to 
 the mountain . 
 with a measured swish of her long train , flash with jewel and the 
 shimmer of silk , her delicate head bow as if under the weight of a 
 mass of fair hair , in which the silver thread be lose , the " first 
 lady of Sulaco , " as Captain Mitchell use to describe she , move along 
 the lighted corredor , wealthy beyond great dream of wealth , consider , 
 love , respect , honour , and as solitary as any human being have ever 
 be , perhaps , on this earth . 
 the doctor 's " Mrs. Gould ! one minute ! " stop she with a start at the 
 door of the lighted and empty sala . from the similarity of mood and 
 circumstance , the sight of the doctor , stand there all alone amongst 
 the group of furniture , recall to her emotional memory her unexpected 
 meeting with Martin Decoud ; she seem to hear in the silence the voice 
 of that man , dead miserably so many year ago , pronounce the word , 
 " Antonia leave her fan here . " but it be the doctor 's voice that speak , a 
 little altered by his excitement . she remark his shin eye . 
 " Mrs. Gould , you be want . do you know what have happen ? you remember 
 what I tell you yesterday about Nostromo . well , it seem that a lancha , 
 a deck boat , come from Zapiga , with four negro in she , pass 
 close to the Great Isabel , be hail from the cliff by a woman 's 
 voice - Linda 's , as a matter of fact - command they   it be a moonlight 
 night   to go round to the beach and take up a wound man to the town . 
 the patron   from whom I have   hear all this , of course , do so at once . 
 he tell I that when they get round to the low side of the Great Isabel , 
 they find Linda Viola wait for they . they follow she : she lead they 
 under a tree not far from the cottage . there they find Nostromo lie 
 on the ground with his head in the young girl 's lap , and father Viola 
 stand some distance off lean on his gun . under Linda 's direction 
 they get a table out of the cottage for a stretcher , after break off 
 the leg . they be here , Mrs. Gould . I mean Nostromo and - and Giselle . 
 the negro bring he in to the first - aid hospital near the harbour . 
 he make the attendant send for I . but it be not I he want to 
 see - it be you , Mrs. Gould ! it be you . " 
 " I ? " whisper Mrs. Gould , shrink a little . 
 " yes , you ! " the doctor burst out . " he beg I - his enemy , as he 
 think - to bring you to he at once . it seem he have something to say to 
 you alone . " 
 " impossible ! " murmur Mrs. Gould . 
 " he say to I , ' remind she that I have do something to keep a roof 
 over her head . ' . . . Mrs. Gould , " the doctor pursue , in the great 
 excitement . " do you remember the silver ? the silver in the light - that 
 be lose ? " 
 Mrs. Gould remember . but she do not say she hat the mere mention of 
 that silver . frankness personify , she remember with an exaggerated 
 horror that for the first and last time of her life she have conceal 
 the truth from her husband about that very silver . she have be 
 corrupt by her fear at that time , and she have never forgive herself . 
 moreover , that silver , which would never have come down if her husband 
 have be make acquainted with the news bring by Decoud , have be in 
 a roundabout way nearly the cause of Dr. Monygham 's death . and these 
 thing appear to her very dreadful . 
 " be it lose , though ? " the doctor exclaim . " I have   always feel that 
 there be a mystery about our Nostromo ever since . I do believe he want 
 now , at the point of death - - " 
 " the point of death ? " repeat Mrs. Gould . 
 " yes . yes . . . . he want perhaps to tell you something concern that 
 silver which - - " 
 " oh , no ! no ! " exclaim Mrs. Gould , in a low voice . " be not   it lose and 
 do with ? be not   there enough treasure without it to make everybody in 
 the world miserable ? " 
 the doctor remain still , in a submissive , disappointed silence . at 
 last he venture , very low - 
 " and there be that Viola girl , Giselle . what be we to do ? it look as 
 though father and sister have - - " 
 Mrs. Gould admit that she feel in duty bind to do she good for these 
 girl . 
 " I have a volante here , " the doctor say . " if you do not   mind get 
 into that - - " 
 he wait , all impatience , till Mrs. Gould reappear , have throw 
 over her dress a grey cloak with a deep hood . 
 it be thus that , cloak and monastically hood over her evening 
 costume , this woman , full of endurance and compassion , stand by the side 
 of the bed on which the splendid Capataz de Cargadores lie stretch 
 out motionless on his back . the whiteness of sheet and pillow give a 
 sombre and energetic relief to his bronzed face , to the dark , nervous 
 hand , so good on a tiller , upon a bridle and on a trigger , lie open 
 and idle upon a white coverlet . 
 " she be innocent , " the Capataz be say in a deep and level voice , as 
 though afraid that a loud word would break the slender hold his 
 spirit still keep upon his body . " she be innocent . it be I alone . but no 
 matter . for these thing I would answer to no man or woman alive . " 
 he pause . Mrs. Gould 's face , very white within the shadow of the hood , 
 bent over he with an invincible and dreary sadness . and the low sob 
 of Giselle Viola , kneel at the end of the bed , her gold hair with 
 coppery gleam loose and scatter over the Capataz 's foot , hardly 
 trouble the silence of the room . 
 " ha ! Old Giorgio - the guardian of thine honour ! Fancy the Vecchio come 
 upon I so light of foot , so steady of aim . I myself could have do no 
 well . but the price of a charge of powder might have be save . the 
 honour be safe . . . . Senora , she would have follow to the end of 
 the world Nostromo the thief . . . . I have say the word . the spell be 
 break ! " 
 a low moan from the girl make he cast his eye down . 
 " I can not see she . . . . no matter , " he go on , with the shadow of the 
 old magnificent carelessness in his voice . " one kiss be enough , if 
 there be no time for more . an airy soul , senora ! bright and warm , like 
 sunshine - soon cloud , and soon serene . they would crush it there 
 between they . Senora , cast on her the eye of your compassion , as fame 
 from one end of the land to the other as the courage and daring of 
 the man who speak to you . she will console herself in time . and even 
 Ramirez be not a bad fellow . I be not angry . no ! it be not Ramirez 
 who overcome the Capataz of the Sulaco Cargadores . " he pause , make an 
 effort , and in loud voice , a little wildly , declare - 
 " I die betray - betray by - - " 
 but he do not say by whom or by what he be die betray . 
 " she would not have betray I , " he begin again , open his eye very 
 wide . " she be faithful . we be go very far - very soon . I could have 
 tear myself away from that accurse treasure for she . for that child I 
 would have leave box and box of it - full . and Decoud take four . four 
 ingot . why ? Picardia ! to betray I ? how could I give back the treasure 
 with four ingot miss ? they would have say I have purloin they . the 
 doctor would have say that . alas ! it hold I yet ! " 
 Mrs. Gould bend low , fascinated - cold with apprehension . 
 " what become of Don Martin on that night , Nostromo ? " 
 " who know ? I wonder what would become of I . now I know . death be 
 to come upon I unawares . he go away ! he betray I . and you think 
 I have kill he ! you be all alike , you fine people . the silver have 
 kill I . it have hold I . it hold I yet . nobody know where it be . 
 but you be the wife of Don Carlos , who put it into my hand and say , 
 ' save it on your life . ' and when I return , and you all think it 
 be lose , what do I hear ? ' it be nothing of importance . let it go . up , 
 Nostromo , the faithful , and ride away to save we , for dear life ! ' " 
 " Nostromo ! " Mrs. Gould whisper , bend very low . " I , too , have hat 
 the idea of that silver from the bottom of my heart . " 
 " marvellous ! - that one of you should hate the wealth that you know so 
 well how to take from the hand of the poor . the world rest upon the 
 poor , as old Giorgio say . you have be always good to the poor . but 
 there be something accurse in wealth . Senora , shall I tell you where 
 the treasure be ? to you alone . . . . shin ! Incorruptible ! " 
 a pained , involuntary reluctance linger in his tone , in his eye , 
 plain to the woman with the genius of sympathetic intuition . she avert 
 her glance from the miserable subjection of the die man , appalled , 
 wish to hear no more of the silver . 
 " no , Capataz , " she say . " no one miss it now . let it be lose for 
 ever . " 
 after hear these word , Nostromo close his eye , utter no word , 
 make no movement . outside the door of the sick - room Dr. Monygham , 
 excited to the high pitch , his eye shin with eagerness , come up 
 to the two woman . 
 " now , Mrs. Gould , " he say , almost brutally in his impatience , " tell I , 
 be I right ? there be a mystery . you have get the word of it , have you 
 not ? he tell you - - " 
 " he tell I nothing , " say Mrs. Gould , steadily . 
 the light of his temperamental enmity to Nostromo go out of Dr. 
 Monygham 's eye . he step back submissively . he do not believe Mrs. 
 Gould . but her word be law . he accept her denial like an inexplicable 
 fatality affirm the victory of Nostromo 's genius over his own . even 
 before that woman , whom he love with secret devotion , he have be 
 defeat by the magnificent Capataz de Cargadores , the man who have live 
 his own life on the assumption of unbroken fidelity , rectitude , and 
 courage ! 
 " pray send at once somebody for my carriage , " speak Mrs. Gould from 
 within her hood . then , turn to Giselle Viola , " come near I , child ; 
 come close . we will wait here . " 
 Giselle Viola , heartbroken and childlike , her face veil in her fall 
 hair , creep up to her side . Mrs. Gould slip her hand through the arm 
 of the unworthy daughter of old Viola , the immaculate republican , the 
 hero without a stain . slowly , gradually , as a withered flower droop , 
 the head of the girl , who would have follow a thief to the end of the 
 world , rest on the shoulder of Dona Emilia , the first lady of Sulaco , 
 the wife of the Senor Administrador of the San Tome mine . and Mrs. 
 Gould , feel she suppress sobbing , nervous and excited , have the 
 first and only moment of bitterness in her life . it be worthy of Dr. 
 Monygham himself . 
 " console yourself , child . very soon he would have forget you for his 
 treasure . " 
 " Senora , he love I . he love I , " Giselle whisper , despairingly . " he 
 love I as no one have ever be love before . " 
 " I have be love , too , " Mrs. Gould say in a severe tone . 
 Giselle clung to she convulsively . " oh , senora , but you shall live 
 adore to the end of your life , " she sob out . 
 Mrs. Gould keep an unbroken silence till the carriage arrive . she 
 help in the half - faint girl . after the doctor have shut the door of 
 the landau , she lean over to he . 
 " you can do nothing ? " she whisper . 
 " no , Mrs. Gould . moreover , he will not   let we touch he . it do not 
 matter . I just have one look . . . . useless . " 
 but he promise to see old Viola and the other girl that very night . he 
 could get the police - boat to take he off to the island . he remain 
 in the street , look after the landau roll away slowly behind the 
 white mule . 
 the rumour of some accident - an accident to Captain Fidanza - have be 
 spread along the new quay with their row of lamp and the dark 
 shape of tower crane . a knot of night prowler - the poor of the 
 poor - hang about the door of the first - aid hospital , whisper in the 
 moonlight of the empty street . 
 there be no one with the wound man but the pale photographer , small , 
 frail , bloodthirsty , the hater of capitalist , perch on a high stool 
 near the head of the bed with his knee up and his chin in his hand . he 
 have be fetch by a comrade who , work late on the wharf , have 
 hear from a negro belong to a lancha , that Captain Fidanza have be 
 bring ashore mortally wounded . 
 " have you any disposition to make , comrade ? " he ask , anxiously . " do 
 not forget that we want money for our work . the rich must be fight with 
 their own weapon . " 
 Nostromo make no answer . the other do not insist , remain huddle 
 up on the stool , shock - head , wildly hairy , like a hunchbacked monkey . 
 then , after a long silence - 
 " Comrade Fidanza , " he begin , solemnly , " you have refuse all aid from 
 that doctor . be he really a dangerous enemy of the people ? " 
 in the dimly light room Nostromo roll his head slowly on the pillow and 
 open his eye , direct at the weird figure perch by his bedside a 
 glance of enigmatic and profound inquiry . then his head roll back , his 
 eyelid fall , and the Capataz de Cargadores die without a word or moan 
 after an hour of immobility , break by short shudder testify to the 
 most atrocious suffering . 
 Dr. Monygham , go out in the police - galley to the island , beheld the 
 glitter of the moon upon the gulf and the high black shape of the Great 
 Isabel send a shaft of light afar , from under the canopy of cloud . 
 " pull easy , " he say , wonder what he would find there . he try to 
 imagine Linda and her father , and discover a strange reluctance within 
 himself . " pull easy , " he repeat . 
           
 from the moment he fire at the thief of his honour , Giorgio Viola have 
 not stir from the spot . he stand , his old gun ground , his hand 
 grasp the barrel near the muzzle . after the lancha carry off 
 Nostromo for ever from she have leave the shore , Linda , come up , stop 
 before he . he do not seem to be aware of her presence , but when , 
 lose her forced calmness , she cry out - 
 " do you know whom you have kill ? " he answer - 
 " Ramirez the vagabond . " 
 White , and star insanely at her father , Linda laugh in his face . 
 after a time he join she faintly in a deep - toned and distant echo of 
 her peal . then she stop , and the old man speak as if startle - 
 " he cry out in son Gian ' Battista 's voice . " 
 the gun fall from his open hand , but the arm remain extended for a 
 moment as if still support . Linda seize it roughly . 
 " you be too old to understand . come into the house . " 
 he let she lead he . on the threshold he stumble heavily , nearly come 
 to the ground together with his daughter . his excitement , his activity 
 of the last few day , have be like the flare of a die lamp . he catch 
 at the back of his chair . 
 " in son Gian ' Battista 's voice , " he repeat in a severe tone . " I hear 
 he - Ramirez - the miserable - - " 
 Linda help he into the chair , and , bend low , hiss into his ear - 
 " you have kill Gian ' Battista . " 
 the old man smile under his thick moustache . woman have strange fancy . 
 " where be the child ? " he ask , surprised at the penetrate chilliness 
 of the air and the unwonted dimness of the lamp by which he use to sit 
 up half the night with the open Bible before he . 
 Linda hesitate a moment , then avert her eye . 
 " she be asleep , " she say . " we shall talk of she tomorrow . " 
 she could not bear to look at he . he fill she with terror and with an 
 almost unbearable feeling of pity . she have observe the change that come 
 over he . he would never understand what he have do ; and even to she 
 the whole thing remain incomprehensible . he say with difficulty - 
 " give I the book . " 
 Linda lay on the table the closed volume in its worn leather cover , the 
 Bible give he age ago by an Englishman in Palermo . 
 " the child have to be protect , " he say , in a strange , mournful voice . 
 behind his chair Linda wring her hand , cry without noise . suddenly 
 she start for the door . he hear her move . 
 " where be you go ? " he ask . 
 " to the light , " she answer , turn round to look at he balefully . 
 " the light ! Si - duty . " 
 very upright , white - haired , leonine , heroic in his absorbed quietness , 
 he feel in the pocket of his red shirt for the spectacle give he by 
 Dona Emilia . he put they on . after a long period of immobility he open 
 the book , and from on high look through the glass at the small print 
 in double column . a rigid , stern expression settle upon his feature 
 with a slight frown , as if in response to some gloomy thought or 
 unpleasant sensation . but he never detach his eye from the book while 
 he sway forward , gently , gradually , till his snow - white head 
 rest upon the open page . a wooden clock tick methodically on the 
 white - wash wall , and grow slowly cold the Garibaldino lie alone , 
 rugged , undecayed , like an old oak uproot by a treacherous gust of 
 wind . 
 the light of the Great Isabel burn unfailing above the lose treasure 
 of the San Tome mine . into the bluish sheen of a night without star 
 the lantern send out a yellow beam towards the far horizon . like a black 
 speck upon the shin pane , Linda , crouch in the outer gallery , 
 rest her head on the rail . the moon , droop in the western board , 
 look at she radiantly . 
 below , at the foot of the cliff , the regular splash of oar from a 
 pass boat cease , and Dr. Monygham stand up in the stern sheet . 
 " Linda ! " he shout , throw back his head . " Linda ! " 
 Linda stand up . she have recognize the voice . 
 " be he dead ? " she cry , bend over . 
 " yes , my poor girl . I be come round , " the doctor answer from below . 
 " pull to the beach , " he say to the rower . 
 Linda 's black figure detach itself upright on the light of the lantern 
 with her arm raise above her head as though she be go to throw 
 herself over . 
 " it be I who love you , " she whisper , with a face as set and white 
 as marble in the moonlight . " I ! only I ! she will forget thee , kill 
 miserably for her pretty face . I can not understand . I can not understand . 
 but I shall never forget thee . never ! " 
 she stand silent and still , collect her strength to throw all her 
 fidelity , her pain , bewilderment , and despair into one great cry . 
 " never ! Gian ' Battista ! " 
 Dr. Monygham , pull round in the police - galley , hear the name pass 
 over his head . it be another of Nostromo 's triumph , the great , the 
 most enviable , the most sinister of all . in that true cry of undye 
 passion that seem to ring aloud from Punta Mala to Azuera and away to 
 the bright line of the horizon , overhang by a big white cloud shin 
 like a mass of solid silver , the genius of the magnificent Capataz de 
 Cargadores dominate the dark gulf contain his conquest of treasure 
 and love . 
