ALMAYER 'S FOLLY : a story of an EASTERN RIVER 
 by Joseph Conrad 
 Qui de nous n'a eu sa terre promise , son jour d'extase et sa fin en 
 exil ? - AMIEL . 
  LONDON : T. FISHER UNWIN , LTD . 
 ADELPHI TERRACE 
  First Edition . . . 1895 
  Second Impression , 1907 
  Third , , 1914 
  Fourth , , 1915 
 to the memory of T. B. 
 CHAPTER I. 
 " Kaspar ! Makan ! " 
 the well - know shrill voice startle Almayer from his dream of splendid 
 future into the unpleasant reality of the present hour . an unpleasant 
 voice too . he have hear it for many year , and with every year he like 
 it less . no matter ; there would be an end to all this soon . 
 he shuffle uneasily , but take no further notice of the call . lean 
 with both his elbow on the balustrade of the verandah , he go on 
 look fixedly at the great river that flow - indifferent and 
 hurry - before his eye . he like to look at it about the time of 
 sunset ; perhaps because at that time the sink sun would spread a 
 glow gold tinge on the water of the Pantai , and Almayer 's thought 
 be often busy with gold ; gold he have fail to secure ; gold the other 
 have secure - dishonestly , of course - or gold he mean to secure yet , 
 through his own honest exertion , for himself and Nina . he absorb 
 himself in his dream of wealth and power away from this coast where he 
 have dwell for so many year , forget the bitterness of toil and strife 
 in the vision of a great and splendid reward . they would live in Europe , 
 he and his daughter . they would be rich and respected . nobody would 
 think of her mixed blood in the presence of her great beauty and of his 
 immense wealth . witness her triumph he would grow young again , he 
 would forget the twenty - five year of heart - break struggle on this 
 coast where he feel like a prisoner . all this be nearly within his 
 reach . let only Dain return ! and return soon he must - in his own 
 interest , for his own share . he be now more than a week late ! perhaps 
 he would return to - night . such be Almayer 's thought as , stand on 
 the verandah of his new but already decay house - that last failure of 
 his life - he look on the broad river . there be no tinge of gold on it 
 this evening , for it have be swell by the rain , and roll an angry 
 and muddy flood under his inattentive eye , carry small drift - wood and 
 big dead log , and whole uproot tree with branch and foliage , 
 amongst which the water swirl and roar angrily . 
 one of those drift tree ground on the shelve shore , just by the 
 house , and Almayer , neglect his dream , watch it with languid 
 interest . the tree swing slowly round , amid the hiss and foam of the 
 water , and soon get free of the obstruction begin to move down stream 
 again , roll slowly over , raise upwards a long , denude branch , like 
 a hand lift in mute appeal to heaven against the river 's brutal and 
 unnecessary violence . Almayer 's interest in the fate of that tree 
 increase rapidly . he lean over to see if it would clear the low point 
 below . it do ; then he draw back , think that now its course be free 
 down to the sea , and he envy the lot of that inanimate thing now 
 grow small and indistinct in the deepening darkness . as he lose sight 
 of it altogether he begin to wonder how far out to sea it would drift . 
 would the current carry it north or south ? south , probably , till it 
 drift in sight of Celebes , as far as Macassar , perhaps ! 
 Macassar ! Almayer 's quicken fancy distance the tree on its imaginary 
 voyage , but his memory lag behind some twenty year or more in point 
 of time see a young and slim Almayer , clothe all in white and 
 modest - look , land from the dutch mail - boat on the dusty jetty of 
 Macassar , come to woo fortune in the godown of old Hudig . it be an 
 important epoch in his life , the beginning of a new existence for he . 
 his father , a subordinate official employ in the Botanical Gardens of 
 Buitenzorg , be no doubt delighted to place his son in such a firm . the 
 young man himself too be nothing loth to leave the poisonous shore of 
 Java , and the meagre comfort of the parental bungalow , where the father 
 grumble all day at the stupidity of native gardener , and the mother 
 from the depth of her long easy - chair bewail the lose glory of 
 Amsterdam , where she have be bring up , and of her position as the 
 daughter of a cigar dealer there . 
 Almayer have leave his home with a light heart and a light pocket , 
 speak English well , and strong in arithmetic ; ready to conquer the 
 world , never doubt that he would . 
 after those twenty year , stand in the close and stifle heat of a 
 bornean evening , he recall with pleasurable regret the image of Hudig 's 
 lofty and cool warehouse with their long and straight avenue of gin 
 case and bale of Manchester good ; the big door swing noiselessly ; 
 the dim light of the place , so delightful after the glare of the street ; 
 the little rail - off space amongst pile of merchandise where the 
 chinese clerk , neat , cool , and sad - eyed , write rapidly and in silence 
 amidst the din of the working gang roll cask or shift case to a 
 muttered song , end with a desperate yell . at the upper end , face 
 the great door , there be a large space rail off , well light ; there 
 the noise be subdue by distance , and above it rise the soft and 
 continuous clink of silver guilde which other discreet Chinamen be 
 count and pile up under the supervision of Mr. Vinck , the cashier , 
 the genius preside in the place - the right hand of the Master . 
 in that clear space Almayer work at his table not far from a little 
 green paint door , by which always stand a Malay in a red sash and 
 turban , and whose hand , hold a small string dangle from above , move 
 up and down with the regularity of a machine . the string work a punkah 
 on the other side of the green door , where the so - call private office 
 be , and where old Hudig - the Master - sit enthrone , hold noisy 
 reception . sometimes the little door would fly open disclosing to the 
 outer world , through the bluish haze of tobacco smoke , a long table 
 load with bottle of various shape and tall water - pitcher , rattan 
 easy - chair occupy by noisy man in sprawl attitude , while the 
 Master would put his head through and , hold by the handle , would grunt 
 confidentially to Vinck ; perhaps send an order thunder down the 
 warehouse , or spy a hesitating stranger and greet he with a friendly 
 roar , " Welgome , Gapitan ! ver ' you gome vrom ? Bali , eh ? Got bonie ? I 
 vant bonie ! Vant all you get ; ha ! ha ! ha ! Gome in ! " then the stranger 
 be drag in , in a tempest of yell , the door be shut , and the usual 
 noise refill the place ; the song of the workman , the rumble of 
 barrel , the scratch of rapid pen ; while above all rise the musical 
 chink of broad silver piece stream ceaselessly through the yellow 
 finger of the attentive Chinamen . 
 at that time Macassar be teem with life and commerce . it be the 
 point in the island where tend all those bold spirit who , fit out 
 schooner on the australian coast , invade the Malay Archipelago in 
 search of money and adventure . bold , reckless , keen in business , not 
 disinclined for a brush with the pirate that be to be find on many a 
 coast as yet , make money fast , they use to have a general " rendezvous " 
 in the bay for purpose of trade and dissipation . the dutch merchant 
 call those man english pedlar ; some of they be undoubtedly gentleman 
 for whom that kind of life have a charm ; most be seaman ; the 
 acknowledge king of they all be Tom Lingard , he whom the malays , honest 
 or dishonest , quiet fisherman or desperate cut - throat , recognise as 
 " the Rajah - Laut " - the King of the Sea . 
 Almayer have hear of he before he have be three day in Macassar , have 
 hear the story of his smart business transaction , his love , and also 
 of his desperate fight with the Sulu pirate , together with the romantic 
 tale of some child - a girl - find in a piratical prau by the victorious 
 Lingard , when , after a long contest , he board the craft , drive the 
 crew overboard . this girl , it be generally know , Lingard have adopt , 
 be have she educate in some convent in Java , and speak of she as " my 
 daughter . " he have swear a mighty oath to marry she to a white man before 
 he go home and to leave she all his money . " and Captain Lingard have 
 lot of money , " would say Mr. Vinck solemnly , with his head on one side , 
 " lot of money ; more than Hudig ! " and after a pause - just to let his 
 hearer recover from their astonishment at such an incredible 
 assertion - he would add in an explanatory whisper , " you know , he have 
 discover a river . " 
 that be it ! he have discover a river ! that be the fact place old 
 Lingard so much above the common crowd of sea - go adventurer who 
 trade with Hudig in the daytime and drank champagne , gamble , sing noisy 
 song , and make love to half - caste girl under the broad verandah of the 
 Sunda Hotel at night . into that river , whose entrance himself only 
 know , Lingard use to take his assorted cargo of Manchester good , brass 
 gong , rifle and gunpowder . his brig Flash , which he command 
 himself , would on those occasion disappear quietly during the night from 
 the roadstead while his companion be sleep off the effect of the 
 midnight carouse , Lingard see they drunk under the table before go 
 on board , himself unaffected by any amount of liquor . many try to 
 follow he and find that land of plenty for gutta - percha and rattan , 
 pearl shell and bird ' nest , wax and gum - dammar , but the little Flash 
 could outsail every craft in those sea . a few of they come to grief on 
 hide sandbank and coral reef , lose their all and barely escape 
 with life from the cruel grip of this sunny and smile sea ; other get 
 discourage ; and for many year the green and peaceful - look island 
 guard the entrance to the promise land keep their secret with all 
 the merciless serenity of tropical nature . and so Lingard come and go 
 on his secret or open expedition , become a hero in Almayer 's eye by 
 the boldness and enormous profit of his venture , seem to Almayer a 
 very great man indeed as he see he march up the warehouse , grunt a 
 " how be you ? " to Vinck , or greet Hudig , the Master , with a boisterous 
 " Hallo , old pirate ! alive yet ? " as a preliminary to transact business 
 behind the little green door . often of an evening , in the silence of the 
 then deserted warehouse , Almayer put away his paper before drive 
 home with Mr. Vinck , in whose household he live , would pause listening 
 to the noise of a hot discussion in the private office , would hear the 
 deep and monotonous growl of the Master , and the roar - out interruption 
 of Lingard - two mastiff fight over a marrowy bone . but to Almayer 's 
 ear it sound like a quarrel of Titans - a battle of the god . 
 after a year or so Lingard , have be bring often in contact with 
 Almayer in the course of business , take a sudden and , to the onlooker , a 
 rather inexplicable fancy to the young man . he sing his praise , late at 
 night , over a convivial glass to his crony in the Sunda Hotel , and one 
 fine morning electrify Vinck by declare that he must have " that young 
 fellow for a supercargo . kind of captain 's clerk . do all my 
 quill - drive for I . " Hudig consent . Almayer , with youth 's natural 
 craving for change , be nothing loth , and pack his few belonging , 
 start in the Flash on one of those long cruise when the old seaman 
 be will not to visit almost every island in the archipelago . month slip 
 by , and Lingard 's friendship seem to increase . often pace the deck 
 with Almayer , when the faint night breeze , heavy with aromatic 
 exhalation of the island , shove the brig gently along under the 
 peaceful and sparkling sky , do the old seaman open his heart to his 
 entrance listener . he speak of his past life , of escape danger , of 
 big profit in his trade , of new combination that be in the future to 
 bring profit big still . often he have mention his daughter , the 
 girl find in the pirate prau , speak of she with a strange assumption 
 of fatherly tenderness . " she must be a big girl now , " he use to say . 
 " it be nigh unto four year since I have see she ! Damme , Almayer , if I 
 do not   think we will run into Sourabaya this trip . " and after such a 
 declaration he always dive into his cabin mutter to himself , 
 " something must be do - must be do . " More than once he would astonish 
 Almayer by walk up to he rapidly , clear his throat with a powerful 
 " Hem ! " as if he be go to say something , and then turn abruptly 
 away to lean over the bulwark in silence , and watch , motionless , for 
 hour , the gleam and sparkle of the phosphorescent sea along the ship 's 
 side . it be the night before arrive in Sourabaya when one of those 
 attempt at confidential communication succeed . after clear his 
 throat he speak . he speak to some purpose . he want Almayer to marry 
 his adopt daughter . " and do not   you kick because you be white ! " he 
 shout , suddenly , not give the surprised young man the time to say a 
 word . " none of that with I ! nobody will see the colour of your wife 's 
 skin . the dollar be too thick for that , I tell you ! and mind you , 
 they will be thick yet before I die . there will be million , Kaspar ! 
 million I say ! and all for she - and for you , if you do what you be 
 tell . " 
 startle by the unexpected proposal , Almayer hesitate , and remain 
 silent for a minute . he be gift with a strong and active imagination , 
 and in that short space of time he see , as in a flash of dazzle light , 
 great pile of shin guilde , and realise all the possibility of an 
 opulent existence . the consideration , the indolent ease of life - for 
 which he feel himself so well fit - his ship , his warehouse , his 
 merchandise   old Lingard would not live for ever , and , crown all , in 
 the far future gleam like a fairy palace the big mansion in Amsterdam , 
 that earthly paradise of his dream , where , make king amongst man by old 
 Lingard 's money , he would pass the evening of his day in inexpressible 
 splendour . as to the other side of the picture - the companionship for 
 life of a Malay girl , that legacy of a boatful of pirate - there be only 
 within he a confused consciousness of shame that he a white man - still , 
 a convent education of four year ! - and then she may mercifully die . he 
 be always lucky , and money be powerful ! go through it . why not ? he 
 have a vague idea of shut she up somewhere , anywhere , out of his 
 gorgeous future . easy enough to dispose of a malay woman , a slave , after 
 all , to his eastern mind , convent or no convent , ceremony or no ceremony . 
 he lift his head and confront the anxious yet irate seaman . 
 " I - of course - anything you wish , Captain Lingard . " 
 " call I father , my boy . she do , " say the mollify old adventurer . 
 " Damme , though , if I do not   think you be go to refuse . mind you , 
 Kaspar , I always get my way , so it would have be no use . but you be 
 no fool . " 
 he remember well that time - the look , the accent , the word , the effect 
 they produce on he , his very surrounding . he remember the narrow 
 slanting deck of the brig , the silent sleeping coast , the smooth black 
 surface of the sea with a great bar of gold lay on it by the rise 
 moon . he remember it all , and he remember his feeling of mad 
 exultation at the thought of that fortune throw into his hand . he be 
 no fool then , and he be no fool now . circumstance have be against 
 he ; the fortune be go , but hope remain . 
 he shiver in the night air , and suddenly become aware of the intense 
 darkness which , on the sun 's departure , have close in upon the river , 
 blot out the outline of the opposite shore . only the fire of dry 
 branch light outside the stockade of the Rajah 's compound call fitfully 
 into view the ragged trunk of the surround tree , put a stain of 
 glow red half - way across the river where the drift log be 
 hurry towards the sea through the impenetrable gloom . he have a hazy 
 recollection of have be call some time during the evening by his 
 wife . to his dinner probably . but a man busy contemplate the wreckage 
 of his past in the dawn of new hope can not be hungry whenever his rice 
 be ready . time he go home , though ; it be get late . 
 he step cautiously on the loose plank towards the ladder . a lizard , 
 disturb by the noise , emit a plaintive note and scurry through the 
 long grass grow on the bank . Almayer descend the ladder carefully , 
 now thoroughly recall to the reality of life by the care necessary to 
 prevent a fall on the uneven ground where the stone , decay plank , 
 and half - saw beam be pile up in inextricable confusion . as he 
 turn towards the house where he live - " my old house " he call it - his 
 ear detect the splash of paddle away in the darkness of the river . he 
 stand still in the path , attentive and surprised at anybody be on the 
 river at this late hour during such a heavy freshet . now he could hear 
 the paddle distinctly , and even a rapidly exchange word in low tone , 
 the heavy breathing of man fight with the current , and hug the 
 bank on which he stand . quite close , too , but it be too dark to 
 distinguish anything under the overhang bush . 
 " Arabs , no doubt , " mutter Almayer to himself , peer into the solid 
 blackness . " what be they up to now ? some of Abdulla 's business ; curse 
 he ! " 
 the boat be very close now . 
 " oh , ya ! man ! " hail Almayer . 
 the sound of voice cease , but the paddle work as furiously as 
 before . then the bush in front of Almayer shake , and the sharp sound of 
 the paddle fall into the canoe rang in the quiet night . they be 
 hold on to the bush now ; but Almayer could hardly make out an 
 indistinct dark shape of a man 's head and shoulder above the bank . 
 " you Abdulla ? " say Almayer , doubtfully . 
 a grave voice answer - 
 " Tuan Almayer be speak to a friend . there be no Arab here . " 
 Almayer 's heart give a great leap . 
 " dain ! " he exclaim . " at last ! at last ! I have be wait for you 
 every day and every night . I have nearly give you up . " 
 " nothing could have stop I from come back here , " say the other , 
 almost violently . " not even death , " he whisper to himself . 
 " this be a friend 's talk , and be very good , " say Almayer , heartily . " but 
 you be too far here . drop down to the jetty and let your man cook their 
 rice in my campong while we talk in the house . " 
 there be no answer to that invitation . 
 " what be it ? " ask Almayer , uneasily . " there be nothing wrong with the 
 brig , I hope ? " 
 " the brig be where no Orang Blanda can lay his hand on she , " say Dain , 
 with a gloomy tone in his voice , which Almayer , in his elation , fail to 
 notice . 
 " right , " he say . " but where be all your man ? there be only two with 
 you . " 
 " listen , Tuan Almayer , " say Dain . " to - morrow 's sun shall see I in your 
 house , and then we will talk . now I must go to the Rajah . " 
 " to the Rajah ! why ? what do you want with Lakamba ? " 
 " Tuan , to - morrow we talk like friend . I must see Lakamba to - night . " 
 " dain , you be not go to abandon I now , when all be ready ? " ask 
 Almayer , in a plead voice . 
 " have I not return ? but I must see Lakamba first for your good and 
 mine . " 
 the shadowy head disappear abruptly . the bush , release from the grasp 
 of the bowman , spring back with a swish , scatter a shower of muddy 
 water over Almayer , as he bend forward , try to see . 
 in a little while the canoe shoot into the streak of light that stream 
 on the river from the big fire on the opposite shore , disclose the 
 outline of two man bend to their work , and a third figure in the stern 
 flourish the steering paddle , his head cover with an enormous round 
 hat , like a fantastically exaggerated mushroom . 
 Almayer watch the canoe till it pass out of the line of light . 
 shortly after the murmur of many voice reach he across the water . he 
 could see the torch be snatch out of the burn pile , and 
 render visible for a moment the gate in the stockade round which they 
 crowd . then they go in apparently . the torch disappear , and the 
 scatter fire send out only a dim and fitful glare . 
 Almayer step homeward with long stride and mind uneasy . surely Dain 
 be not think of play he false . it be absurd . Dain and Lakamba 
 be both too much interested in the success of his scheme . trust to 
 Malays be poor work ; but then even Malays have some sense and understand 
 their own interest . all would be well - must be well . at this point in 
 his meditation he find himself at the foot of the step lead to the 
 verandah of his home . from the low point of land where he stand he could 
 see both branch of the river . the main branch of the Pantai be lose 
 in complete darkness , for the fire at the Rajah 's have go out 
 altogether ; but up the Sambir reach his eye could follow the long line of 
 malay house crowd the bank , with here and there a dim light twinkle 
 through bamboo wall , or a smoky torch burn on the platform build out 
 over the river . far away , where the island end in a low cliff , 
 rise a dark mass of building tower above the Malay structure . 
 found solidly on a firm ground with plenty of space , star by many 
 light burn strong and white , with a suggestion of paraffin and lamp- 
 glass , stand the house and the godown of Abdulla bin Selim , the great 
 trader of Sambir . to Almayer the sight be very distasteful , and he 
 shake his fist towards the building that in their evident prosperity 
 look to he cold and insolent , and contemptuous of his own fall 
 fortune . 
 he mount the step of his house slowly . 
 in the middle of the verandah there be a round table . on it a paraffin 
 lamp without a globe shed a hard glare on the three inner side . the 
 fourth side be open , and face the river . between the rough support of 
 the high - pitch roof hang tear rattan screen . there be no ceiling , 
 and the harsh brilliance of the lamp be tone above into a soft half- 
 light that lose itself in the obscurity amongst the rafter . the front 
 wall be cut in two by the doorway of a central passage close by a red 
 curtain . the woman 's room open into that passage , which lead to the 
 back courtyard and to the cooking shed . in one of the side wall there 
 be a doorway . half obliterate word - " Office : Lingard and Co. " - be 
 still legible on the dusty door , which look as if it have not be 
 open for a very long time . close to the other side wall stand a bent- 
 wood rocking - chair , and by the table and about the verandah four wooden 
 armchair straggle forlornly , as if ashamed of their shabby 
 surrounding . a heap of common mat lie in one corner , with an old 
 hammock sling diagonally above . in the other corner , his head wrap in 
 a piece of red calico , huddle into a shapeless heap , sleep a Malay , one 
 of Almayer 's domestic slave - " my own people , " he use to call they . a 
 numerous and representative assembly of moth be hold high revel 
 round the lamp to the spirited music of swarm mosquito . under the 
 palm - leaf thatch lizard race on the beam call softly . a monkey , 
 chain to one of the verandah support - retire for the night under the 
 eave - peer and grin at Almayer , as it swing to one of the bamboo 
 roof stick and cause a shower of dust and bit of dry leaf to 
 settle on the shabby table . the floor be uneven , with many withered 
 plant and dry earth scatter about . a general air of squalid neglect 
 pervade the place . great red stain on the floor and wall testify to 
 frequent and indiscriminate betel - nut chewing . the light breeze from the 
 river sway gently the tattered blind , send from the wood opposite 
 a faint and sickly perfume as of decay flower . 
 under Almayer 's heavy tread the board of the verandah creak loudly . 
 the sleeper in the corner move uneasily , mutter indistinct word . 
 there be a slight rustle behind the curtain doorway , and a soft voice 
 ask in Malay , " be it you , father ? " 
 " yes , Nina . I be hungry . be everybody asleep in this house ? " 
 Almayer speak jovially and drop with a contented sigh into the 
 armchair near to the table . Nina Almayer come through the curtained 
 doorway follow by an old malay woman , who busy herself in set 
 upon the table a plateful of rice and fish , a jar of water , and a bottle 
 half full of genever . after carefully place before her master a 
 crack glass tumbler and a tin spoon she go away noiselessly . Nina 
 stand by the table , one hand lightly rest on its edge , the other 
 hang listlessly by her side . her face turn towards the outer 
 darkness , through which her dreamy eye seem to see some entrance 
 picture , wear a look of impatient expectancy . she be tall for a half- 
 caste , with the correct profile of the father , modify and strengthen 
 by the squareness of the low part of the face inherit from her 
 maternal ancestor - the Sulu pirate . her firm mouth , with the lip 
 slightly part and disclose a gleam of white tooth , put a vague 
 suggestion of ferocity into the impatient expression of her feature . and 
 yet her dark and perfect eye have all the tender softness of expression 
 common to malay woman , but with a gleam of superior intelligence ; they 
 look gravely , wide open and steady , as if face something invisible to 
 all other eye , while she stand there all in white , straight , flexible , 
 graceful , unconscious of herself , her low but broad forehead crown with 
 a shin mass of long black hair that fall in heavy tress over her 
 shoulder , and make her pale olive complexion look pale still by the 
 contrast of its coal - black hue . 
 Almayer attack his rice greedily , but after a few mouthful he pause , 
 spoon in hand , and look at his daughter curiously . 
 " do you hear a boat pass about half an hour ago Nina ? " he ask . 
 the girl give he a quick glance , and move away from the light stand 
 with she back to the table . 
 " no , " she say , slowly . 
 " there be a boat . at last ! dain himself ; and he go on to Lakamba . I 
 know it , for he tell I so . I speak to he , but he would not come here 
 to - night . will come to - morrow , he say . " 
 he swallow another spoonful , then say - 
 " I be almost happy to - night , Nina . I can see the end of a long road , and 
 it lead we away from this miserable swamp . we shall soon get away from 
 here , I and you , my dear little girl , and then - " 
 he rise from the table and stand look fixedly before he as if 
 contemplate some enchanting vision . 
 " and then , " he go on , " we shall be happy , you and I. Live rich and 
 respect far from here , and forget this life , and all this struggle , and 
 all this misery ! " 
 he approach his daughter and pass his hand caressingly over her hair . 
 " it be bad to have to trust a malay , " he say , " but I must own that this 
 Dain be a perfect gentleman - a perfect gentleman , " he repeat . 
 " do you ask he to come here , father ? " inquire Nina , not look at 
 he . 
 " well , of course . we shall start on the day after to - morrow , " say 
 Almayer , joyously . " we must not lose any time . be you glad , little 
 girl ? " 
 she be nearly as tall as himself , but he like to recall the time when 
 she be little and they be all in all to each other . 
 " I be glad , " she say , very low . 
 " of course , " say Almayer , vivaciously , " you can not imagine what be 
 before you . I myself have not be to Europe , but I have hear my mother 
 talk so often that I seem to know all about it . we shall live a - a 
 glorious life . you shall see . " 
 again he stand silent by his daughter 's side look at that enchanting 
 vision . after a while he shake his clenched hand towards the sleep 
 settlement . 
 " ah ! my friend Abdulla , " he cry , " we shall see who will have the good 
 of it after all these year ! " 
 he look up the river and remark calmly : 
 " another thunderstorm . well ! no thunder will keep I awake to - night , I 
 know ! good - night , little girl , " he whisper , tenderly kiss she 
 cheek . " you do not seem to be very happy to - night , but to - morrow you 
 will show a bright face . eh ? " 
 Nina have listen to her father with her face unmove , with her 
 half - close eye still gaze into the night now make more intense by a 
 heavy thunder - cloud that have creep down from the hill blot out the 
 star , merge sky , forest , and river into one mass of almost palpable 
 blackness . the faint breeze have die out , but the distant rumble of 
 thunder and pale flash of lightning give warning of the approach 
 storm . with a sigh the girl turn towards the table . 
 Almayer be in his hammock now , already half asleep . 
 " take the lamp , Nina , " he mutter , drowsily . " this place be full of 
 mosquito . go to sleep , daughter . " 
 but Nina put the lamp out and turn back again towards the balustrade of 
 the verandah , stand with her arm round the wooden support and look 
 eagerly towards the Pantai reach . and motionless there in the oppressive 
 calm of the tropical night she could see at each flash of lightning the 
 forest lining both bank up the river , bend before the furious blast 
 of the come tempest , the upper reach of the river whip into white 
 foam by the wind , and the black cloud tear into fantastic shape 
 trail low over the sway tree . round she all be as yet stillness 
 and peace , but she could hear afar off the roar of the wind , the hiss of 
 heavy rain , the wash of the wave on the tormented river . it come nearer 
 and nearer , with loud thunder - clap and long flash of vivid lightning , 
 follow by short period of appal blackness . when the storm reach 
 the low point divide the river , the house shake in the wind , and the 
 rain patter loudly on the palm - leaf roof , the thunder speak in one 
 prolong roll , and the incessant lightning disclose a turmoil of 
 leaping water , drive log , and the big tree bend before a brutal 
 and merciless force . 
 undisturbe by the nightly event of the rainy monsoon , the father sleep 
 quietly , oblivious alike of his hope , his misfortune , his friend , and 
 his enemy ; and the daughter stand motionless , at each flash of 
 lightning eagerly scan the broad river with a steady and anxious 
 gaze . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 when , in compliance with Lingard 's abrupt demand , Almayer consent to 
 we d the Malay girl , no one know that on the day when the interesting 
 young convert have lose all her natural relation and find a white 
 father , she have be fight desperately like the rest of they on board 
 the prau , and be only prevent from leap overboard , like the few 
 other survivor , by a severe wound in the leg . there , on the fore - deck 
 of the prau , old Lingard find she under a heap of dead and die 
 pirate , and have she carry on the poop of the Flash before the Malay 
 craft be set on fire and send adrift . she be conscious , and in the 
 great peace and stillness of the tropical evening succeed the turmoil 
 of the battle , she watch all she hold dear on earth after her own 
 savage manner , drift away into the gloom in a great roar of flame and 
 smoke . she lie there unheede the careful hand attend to her wound , 
 silent and absorb in gaze at the funeral pile of those brave man she 
 have so much admired and so well help in their contest with the 
 redoubtable " Rajah - Laut . " 
         
 the light night breeze fan the brig gently to the southward , and the 
 great blaze of light get small and small till it twinkle only on the 
 horizon like a set star . it set : the heavy canopy of smoke reflect 
 the glare of hide flame for a short time and then disappear also . 
 she realise that with this vanish gleam her old life depart too . 
 Thenceforth there be slavery in the far country , amongst stranger , in 
 unknown and perhaps terrible surrounding . be fourteen year old , she 
 realise her position and come to that conclusion , the only one possible 
 to a Malay girl , soon ripen under a tropical sun , and not unaware of 
 her personal charm , of which she hear many a young brave warrior of her 
 father 's crew express an appreciative admiration . there be in her the 
 dread of the unknown ; otherwise she accept her position calmly , after 
 the manner of her people , and even consider it quite natural ; for be 
 she not a daughter of warrior , conquer in battle , and do she not 
 belong rightfully to the victorious Rajah ? even the evident kindness of 
 the terrible old man must spring , she think , from admiration for his 
 captive , and the flattered vanity ease for she the pang of sorrow after 
 such an awful calamity . perhaps have she know of the high wall , the 
 quiet garden , and the silent nun of the Samarang convent , where her 
 destiny be lead she , she would have seek death in her dread and 
 hate of such a restraint . but in imagination she picture to herself the 
 usual life of a malay girl - the usual succession of heavy work and fierce 
 love , of intrigue , gold ornament , of domestic drudgery , and of that 
 great but occult influence which be one of the few right of half - savage 
 womankind . but her destiny in the rough hand of the old sea - dog , act 
 under unreasone impulse of the heart , take a strange and to she a 
 terrible shape . she bear it all - the restraint and the teaching and the 
 new faith - with calm submission , conceal her hate and contempt for all 
 that new life . she learn the language very easily , yet understand but 
 little of the new faith the good sister teach she , assimilate quickly 
 only the superstitious element of the religion . she call Lingard 
 father , gently and caressingly , at each of his short and noisy visit , 
 under the clear impression that he be a great and dangerous power it be 
 good to propitiate . be he not now her master ? and during those long 
 four year she nourish a hope of find favour in his eye and 
 ultimately become his wife , counsellor , and guide . 
 those dream of the future be dispel by the Rajah Laut 's " fiat , " 
 which make Almayer 's fortune , as that young man fondly hop . and 
 dress in the hateful finery of Europe , the centre of an interested 
 circle of batavian society , the young convert stand before the altar with 
 an unknown and sulky - look white man . for Almayer be uneasy , a little 
 disgusted , and greatly inclined to run away . a judicious fear of the 
 adopt father - in - law and a just regard for his own material welfare 
 prevent he from make a scandal ; yet , while swear fidelity , he be 
 concoct plan for get rid of the pretty malay girl in a more or 
 less distant future . she , however , have retain enough of conventual 
 teaching to understand well that accord to white man 's law she be 
 go to be Almayer 's companion and not his slave , and promise to 
 herself to act accordingly . 
 so when the Flash freight with material for build a new house 
 leave the harbour of Batavia , take away the young couple into the 
 unknown Borneo , she do not carry on her deck so much love and happiness 
 as old Lingard be will not to boast of before his casual friend in the 
 verandah of various hotel . the old seaman himself be perfectly happy . 
 now he have do his duty by the girl . " you know I make she an orphan , " 
 he often conclude solemnly , when talk about his own affair to a 
 scratch audience of shore loafer - as it be his habit to do . and the 
 approbative shout of his half - intoxicate auditor fill his simple 
 soul with delight and pride . " I carry everything right through , " be 
 another of his saying , and in pursuance of that principle he push the 
 building of house and godown on the Pantai River with feverish haste . 
 the house for the young couple ; the godown for the big trade Almayer be 
 go to develop while he   Lingard   would be able to give himself up to 
 some mysterious work which be only speak of in hint , but be 
 understand to relate to gold and diamond in the interior of the island . 
 Almayer be impatient too . have he know what be before he he might not 
 have be so eager and full of hope as he stand watch the last canoe 
 of the Lingard expedition disappear in the bend up the river . when , 
 turn round , he behold the pretty little house , the big godown build 
 neatly by an army of chinese carpenter , the new jetty round which be 
 cluster the trading canoe , he feel a sudden elation in the thought 
 that the world be his . 
 but the world have to be conquer first , and its conquest be not so easy 
 as he think . he be very soon make to understand that he be not 
 want in that corner of it where old Lingard and his own weak will 
 place he , in the midst of unscrupulous intrigue and of a fierce trade 
 competition . the Arabs have find out the river , have establish a 
 trading post in Sambir , and where they trade they would be master and 
 suffer no rival . Lingard return unsuccessful from his first 
 expedition , and depart again spend all the profit of the legitimate 
 trade on his mysterious journey . Almayer struggle with the 
 difficulty of his position , friendless and unaided , save for the 
 protection give to he for Lingard 's sake by the old Rajah , the 
 predecessor of Lakamba . lakamba himself , then live as a private 
 individual on a rice clearing , seven mile down the river , exercise all 
 his influence towards the help of the white man 's enemy , plot 
 against the old Rajah and Almayer with a certainty of combination , 
 point clearly to a profound knowledge of their most secret affair . 
 outwardly friendly , his portly form be often to be see on Almayer 's 
 verandah ; his green turban and gold - embroider jacket shine in the front 
 rank of the decorous throng of Malays come to greet Lingard on his 
 return from the interior ; his salaam be of the low , and his hand- 
 shaking of the heartiest , when welcome the old trader . but his small 
 eye take in the sign of the time , and he depart from those 
 interview with a satisfied and furtive smile to hold long consultation 
 with his friend and ally , Syed Abdulla , the chief of the arab trading 
 post , a man of great wealth and of great influence in the island . 
 it be currently believe at that time in the settlement that Lakamba 's 
 visit to Almayer 's house be not limit to those official interview . 
 often on moonlight night the belate fisherman of Sambira see a small 
 canoe shoot out from the narrow creek at the back of the white man 's 
 house , and the solitary occupant paddle cautiously down the river in the 
 deep shadow of the bank ; and those event , duly report , be discuss 
 round the evening fire far into the night with the cynicism of 
 expression common to aristocratic Malays , and with a malicious pleasure 
 in the domestic misfortune of the Orang Blando - the hat Dutchman . 
 Almayer go on struggle desperately , but with a feebleness of purpose 
 deprive he of all chance of success against man so unscrupulous and 
 resolute as his rival the Arabs . the trade fall away from the large 
 godown , and the godown themselves rot piecemeal . the old man 's 
 banker , Hudig of Macassar , fail , and with this go the whole available 
 capital . the profit of past year have be swallow up in Lingard 's 
 exploring craze . Lingard be in the interior - perhaps dead - at all 
 event give no sign of life . Almayer stand alone in the midst of those 
 adverse circumstance , derive only a little comfort from the 
 companionship of his little daughter , bear two year after the marriage , 
 and at the time some six year old . his wife have soon commence to treat 
 he with a savage contempt express by sulky silence , only occasionally 
 vary by a flood of savage invective . he feel she hat he , and see 
 her jealous eye watch himself and the child with almost an expression 
 of hate . she be jealous of the little girl 's evident preference for the 
 father , and Almayer feel he be not safe with that woman in the house . 
 while she be burn the furniture , and tear down the pretty curtain 
 in her unreasoning hate of those sign of civilisation , Almayer , cow by 
 these outburst of savage nature , meditate in silence on the good way of 
 get rid of she . he think of everything ; even plan murder in an 
 undecided and feeble sort of way , but dare do nothing - expect every 
 day the return of Lingard with news of some immense good fortune . he 
 return indeed , but aged , ill , a ghost of his former self , with the fire 
 of fever burn in his sunken eye , almost the only survivor of the 
 numerous expedition . but he be successful at last ! untold rich be 
 in his grasp ; he want more money - only a little more torealise a dream 
 of fabulous fortune . and Hudig have fail ! Almayer scrap all he could 
 together , but the old man want more . if Almayer could not get it he 
 would go to Singapore - to Europe even , but before all to Singapore ; and 
 he would take the little Nina with he . the child must be bring up 
 decently . he have good friend in Singapore who would take care of she 
 and have she teach properly . all would be well , and that girl , upon 
 whom the old seaman seem to have transfer all his former affection 
 for the mother , would be the rich woman in the East - in the world 
 even . so old Lingard shout , pace the verandah with his heavy quarter- 
 deck step , gesticulate with a smoulder cheroot ; ragged , dishevel , 
 enthusiastic ; and Almayer , sitting huddle up on a pile of mat , think 
 with dread of the separation with the only human being he love - with 
 great dread still , perhaps , of the scene with his wife , the savage 
 tigress deprive of her young . she will poison I , think the poor 
 wretch , well aware of that easy and final manner of solve the social , 
 political , or family problem in malay life . 
 to his great surprise she take the news very quietly , give only he and 
 Lingard a furtive glance , and say not a word . this , however , do not 
 prevent she the next day from jump into the river and swimming after 
 the boat in which Lingard be carry away the nurse with the scream 
 child . Almayer have to give chase with his whale - boat and drag she in by 
 the hair in the midst of cry and curse enough to make heaven fall . yet 
 after two day spend in wail , she return to her former mode of life , 
 chew betel - nut , and sit all day amongst her woman in stupefied 
 idleness . she age very rapidly after that , and only rouse herself from 
 her apathy to acknowledge by a scathing remark or an insulting 
 exclamation the accidental presence of her husband . he have build for her 
 a riverside hut in the compound where she dwelt in perfect seclusion . 
 Lakamba 's visit have cease when , by a convenient decree of providence 
 and the help of a little scientific manipulation , the old ruler of Sambir 
 depart this life . Lakamba reign in his stead now , have be well 
 serve by his arab friend with the dutch authority . Syed Abdulla be 
 the great man and trader of the Pantai . Almayer lie ruin and helpless 
 under the close - mesh net of their intrigue , owe his life only to his 
 suppose knowledge of Lingard 's valuable secret . Lingard have 
 disappear . he write once from Singapore say the child be well , and 
 under the care of a Mrs. Vinck , and that he himself be go to Europe 
 to raise money for the great enterprise . " he be come back soon . there 
 would be no difficulty , " he write ; " people would rush in with their 
 money . " evidently they do not , for there be only one letter more from 
 he say he be ill , have find no relation living , but little else 
 beside . then come a complete silence . Europe have swallow up the 
 Rajah Laut apparently , and Almayer look vainly westward for a ray of 
 light out of the gloom of his shattered hope . year pass , and the 
 rare letter from Mrs. Vinck , later on from the girl herself , be the 
 only thing to be look to to make life bearable amongst the triumphant 
 savagery of the river . Almayer live now alone , have even cease to 
 visit his debtor who would not pay , sure of lakamba 's protection . the 
 faithful Sumatrese Ali cook his rice and make his coffee , for he dare 
 not trust any one else , and least of all his wife . he kill time 
 wander sadly in the overgrown path round the house , visit the 
 ruin godown where a few brass gun cover with verdigris and only a 
 few broken case of moulder Manchester good remind he of the good 
 early time when all this be full of life and merchandise , and he 
 overlook a busy scene on the river bank , his little daughter by his 
 side . now the up - country canoe glide past the little rotten wharf of 
 Lingard and Co. , to paddle up the Pantai branch , and cluster round the 
 new jetty belong to Abdulla . not that they love Abdulla , but they 
 dare not trade with the man whose star have set . have they do so they 
 know there be no mercy to be expect from Arab or Rajah ; no rice to be 
 get on credit in the time of scarcity from either ; and Almayer could not 
 help they , have at time hardly enough for himself . Almayer , in his 
 isolation and despair , often envy his near neighbour the Chinaman , Jim- 
 Eng , whom he could see stretch on a pile of cool mat , a wooden pillow 
 under his head , an opium pipe in his nerveless finger . he do not seek , 
 however , consolation in opium - perhaps it be too expensive - perhaps his 
 white man 's pride save he from that degradation ; but most likely it be 
 the thought of his little daughter in the far - off Straits settlement . he 
 hear from her oftener since Abdulla buy a steamer , which run now 
 between Singapore and the Pantai settlement every three month or so . 
 Almayer feel himself nearer his daughter . he long to see she , and 
 plan a voyage to Singapore , but put off his departure from year to 
 year , always expect some favourable turn of fortune . he do not want 
 to meet she with empty hand and with no word of hope on his lip . he 
 could not take she back into that savage life to which he be condemn 
 himself . he be also a little afraid of she . what would she think of 
 he ? he reckon the year . a grown woman . a civilised woman , young 
 and hopeful ; while he feel old and hopeless , and very much like those 
 savage round he . he ask himself what be go to be her future . he 
 could not answer that question yet , and he dare not face she . and yet 
 he long after she . he hesitate for year . 
 his hesitation be put an end to by Nina 's unexpected appearance in 
 Sambir . she arrive in the steamer under the captain 's care . Almayer 
 behold she with surprise not unmixe with wonder . during those ten year 
 the child have change into a woman , black - haired , olive - skin , tall , 
 and beautiful , with great sad eye , where the startled expression common 
 to Malay womankind be modify by a thoughtful tinge inherit from her 
 european ancestry . Almayer think with dismay of the meeting of his 
 wife and daughter , of what this grave girl in european clothe would 
 think of her betel - nut chew mother , squat in a dark hut , 
 disorderly , half naked , and sulky . he also fear an outbreak of temper 
 on the part of that pest of a woman he have hitherto manage to keep 
 tolerably quiet , thereby save the remnant of his dilapidate 
 furniture . and he stand there before the closed door of the hut in the 
 blaze sunshine listen to the murmur of voice , wonder what go 
 on inside , wherefrom all the servant - maid have be expel at the 
 beginning of the interview , and now stand cluster by the paling with 
 half - cover face in a chatter of curious speculation . he forget 
 himself there try to catch a stray word through the bamboo wall , till 
 the captain of the steamer , who have walk up with the girl , fear a 
 sunstroke , take he under the arm and lead he into the shade of his own 
 verandah : where Nina 's trunk stand already , have be land by the 
 steamer 's man . as soon as Captain Ford have his glass before he and his 
 cheroot light , Almayer ask for the explanation of his daughter 's 
 unexpected arrival . Ford say little beyond generalise in vague but 
 violent term upon the foolishness of woman in general , and of Mrs. Vinck 
 in particular . 
 " you know , Kaspar , " say he , in conclusion , to the excited Almayer , " it 
 be deucedly awkward to have a half - caste girl in the house . there be such 
 a lot of fool about . there be that young fellow from the bank who use 
 to ride to the Vinck bungalow early and late . that old woman think it 
 be for that Emma of her . when she find out what he want exactly , 
 there be a row , I can tell you . she would not have Nina - not an hour 
 long - in the house . fact be , I hear of this affair and take the girl 
 to my wife . my wife be a pretty good woman - as woman go - and upon my 
 word we would have keep the girl for you , only she would not stay . now , 
 then ! do not   flare up , Kaspar . sit still . what can you do ? it be 
 well so . let she stay with you . she be never happy over there . those 
 two vinck girl be no well than dress - up monkey . they slight 
 she . you can not   make she white . it be no use you swear at I . you 
 can not . she be a good girl for all that , but she would not tell my wife 
 anything . if you want to know , ask she yourself ; but if I be you I 
 would leave she alone . you be welcome to her passage money , old fellow , 
 if you be short now . " and the skipper , throw away his cigar , walk 
 off to " wake they up on board , " as he express it . 
 Almayer vainly expect to hear of the cause of his daughter 's return 
 from his daughter 's lip . not that day , not on any other day do she 
 ever allude to her Singapore life . he do not care to ask , awe by the 
 calm impassiveness of her face , by those solemn eye look past he on 
 the great , still forest sleep in majestic repose to the murmur of the 
 broad river . he accept the situation , happy in the gentle and 
 protect affection the girl show he , fitfully enough , for she have , 
 as she call it , her bad day when she use to visit her mother and 
 remain long hour in the riverside hut , come out as inscrutable as 
 ever , but with a contemptuous look and a short word ready to answer any 
 of his speech . he get use even to that , and on those day keep quiet , 
 although greatly alarm by his wife 's influence upon the girl . otherwise 
 Nina adapt herself wonderfully to the circumstance of a half - savage 
 and miserable life . she accept without question or apparent disgust 
 the neglect , the decay , the poverty of the household , the absence of 
 furniture , and the preponderance of rice diet on the family table . she 
 live with Almayer in the little house   now sadly decay   build 
 originally by Lingard for the young couple . the Malays eagerly discuss 
 her arrival . there be at the begin crowded levee of malay woman 
 with their child , seek eagerly after " ubat " for all the ill of the 
 flesh from the young Mem Putih . in the cool of the evening grave Arabs 
 in long white shirt and yellow sleeveless jacket walk slowly on the 
 dusty path by the riverside towards Almayer 's gate , and make solemn call 
 upon that Unbeliever under shallow pretence of business , only to get a 
 glimpse of the young girl in a highly decorous manner . even Lakamba come 
 out of his stockade in a great pomp of war canoe and red umbrella , and 
 land on the rotten little jetty of Lingard and Co. he come , he say , 
 to buy a couple of brass gun as a present to his friend the chief of 
 Sambir Dyaks ; and while Almayer , suspicious but polite , busy himself in 
 unearth the old popgun in the godown , the Rajah sit on an armchair 
 in the verandah , surround by his respectful retinue wait in vain for 
 Nina 's appearance . she be in one of her bad day , and remain in her 
 mother 's hut watch with she the ceremonious proceeding on the 
 verandah . the Rajah depart , baffled but courteous , and soon Almayer 
 begin to reap the benefit of improved relation with the ruler in the 
 shape of the recovery of some debt , pay to he with many apology and 
 many a low salaam by debtor till then consider hopelessly insolvent . 
 under these improve circumstance Almayer brighten up a little . all 
 be not lose perhaps . those Arabs and Malays see at last that he be a 
 man of some ability , he think . and he begin , after his manner , to plan 
 great thing , to dream of great fortune for himself and Nina . especially 
 for Nina ! under these vivifying impulse he ask Captain Ford to write 
 to his friend in England make inquiry after Lingard . be he alive 
 or dead ? if dead , have he leave any paper , document ; any indication or 
 hint as to his great enterprise ? meantime he have find amongst the 
 rubbish in one of the empty room a note - book belong to the old 
 adventurer . he study the crab handwriting of its page and often 
 grow meditative over it . other thing also wake he up from his apathy . 
 the stir make in the whole of the island by the establishment of the 
 British Borneo Company affect even the sluggish flow of the Pantai 
 life . great change be expect ; annexation be talk of ; the Arabs 
 grow civil . Almayer begin build his new house for the use of the 
 future engineer , agent , or settler of the new Company . he spend every 
 available guilder on it with a confide heart . one thing only disturb 
 his happiness : his wife come out of her seclusion , import her green 
 jacket , scant sarong , shrill voice , and witch - like appearance , into his 
 quiet life in the small bungalow . and his daughter seem to accept that 
 savage intrusion into their daily existence with wonderful equanimity . he 
 do not like it , but dare say nothing . 
 CHAPTER III . 
 the deliberation conduct in London have a far - reach importance , and 
 so the decision issue from the fog - veil office of the Borneo Company 
 darken for Almayer the brilliant sunshine of the Tropics , and add 
 another drop of bitterness to the cup of his disenchantment . the claim 
 to that part of the East Coast be abandon , leave the Pantai river 
 under the nominal power of Holland . in Sambir there be joy and 
 excitement . the slave be hurry out of sight into the forest and 
 jungle , and the flag be run up to tall pole in the Rajah 's compound 
 in expectation of a visit from dutch man - of - war boat . 
 the frigate remain anchor outside the mouth of the river , and the 
 boat come up in tow of the steam launch , thread their way cautiously 
 amongst a crowd of canoe fill with gaily dress Malays . the officer 
 in command listen gravely to the loyal speech of Lakamba , return 
 the salaam of Abdulla , and assure those gentleman in choice Malay of 
 the great Rajah 's - down in Batavia - friendship and goodwill towards the 
 ruler and inhabitant of this model state of Sambir . 
 Almayer from his verandah watch across the river the festive 
 proceeding , hear the report of brass gun salute the new flag 
 present to Lakamba , and the deep murmur of the crowd of spectator 
 surge round the stockade . the smoke of the firing rise in white cloud 
 on the green background of the forest , and he could not help compare 
 his own fleeting hope to the rapidly disappear vapour . he be by no 
 mean patriotically elated by the event , yet he have to force himself into 
 a gracious behaviour when , the official reception be over , the naval 
 officer of the Commission cross the river to pay a visit to the 
 solitary white man of whom they have hear , no doubt wish also to catch 
 a glimpse of his daughter . in that they be disappoint , Nina refuse 
 to show herself ; but they seem easily console by the gin and cheroot 
 set before they by the hospitable Almayer ; and sprawl comfortably on 
 the lame armchair under the shade of the verandah , while the blaze 
 sunshine outside seem to set the great river simmer in the heat , 
 they fill the little bungalow with the unusual sound of european 
 language , with noise and laughter produce by naval witticism at the 
 expense of the fat lakamba whom they have be compliment so much that 
 very morning . the young man in an access of good fellowship make their 
 host talk , and Almayer , excite by the sight of european face , by the 
 sound of european voice , open his heart before the sympathising 
 stranger , unaware of the amusement the recital of his many misfortune 
 cause to those future admiral . they drink his health , wish he many 
 big diamond and a mountain of gold , express even an envy of the high 
 destiny await he yet . encourage by so much friendliness , the grey- 
 headed and foolish dreamer invite his guest to visit his new house . 
 they go there through the long grass in a straggling procession while 
 their boat be get ready for the return down the river in the cool of 
 the evening . and in the great empty room where the tepid wind enter 
 through the sashless window whirl gently the dry leaf and the dust 
 of many day of neglect , Almayer in his white jacket and flower sarong , 
 surround by a circle of glitter uniform , stamp his foot to show 
 the solidity of the neatly - fit floor and expatiate upon the 
 beauty and convenience of the building . they listen and assent , 
 amazed by the wonderful simplicity and the foolish hopefulness of the 
 man , till Almayer , carry away by his excitement , disclose his regret 
 at the non - arrival of the English , " who know how to develop a rich 
 country , " as he express it . there be a general laugh amongst the 
 dutch officer at that unsophisticated statement , and a move be make 
 towards the boat ; but when Almayer , step cautiously on the rotten 
 board of the Lingard jetty , try to approach the chief of the 
 Commission with some timid hint anent the protection require by the 
 dutch subject against the wily Arabs , that salt water diplomat tell he 
 significantly that the Arabs be well subject than hollander who 
 deal illegally in gunpowder with the Malays . the innocent Almayer 
 recognise there at once the oily tongue of Abdulla and the solemn 
 persuasiveness of lakamba , but ere he have time to frame an indignant 
 protest the steam launch and the string of boat move rapidly down the 
 river leave he on the jetty , stand open - mouthed in his surprise and 
 anger . there be thirty mile of river from Sambir to the gem - like 
 island of the estuary where the frigate be await the return of the 
 boat . the moon rise long before the boat have traverse half that 
 distance , and the black forest sleep peacefully under her cold ray 
 wake up that night to the ringing laughter in the small flotilla provoke 
 by some reminiscence of Almayer 's lamentable narrative . salt - water jest 
 at the poor man 's expense be pass from boat to boat , the 
 non - appearance of his daughter be comment upon with severe 
 displeasure , and the half - finish house build for the reception of 
 englishman receive on that joyous night the name of " Almayer 's Folly " by 
 the unanimous vote of the lighthearted seaman . 
 for many week after this visit life in Sambir resume its even and 
 uneventful flow . each day 's sun shoot its morning ray above the tree- 
 top light up the usual scene of daily activity . Nina walk on the path 
 that form the only street in the settlement see the accustomed sight of 
 man loll on the shady side of the house , on the high platform ; of 
 woman busily engage in husk the daily rice ; of naked brown child 
 race along the shady and narrow path lead to the clearing . Jim- 
 Eng , stroll before his house , greet she with a friendly nod before 
 climb up indoor to seek his beloved opium pipe . the elder child 
 cluster round she , dare from long acquaintance , pull the skirt of 
 her white robe with their dark finger , and show their brilliant tooth 
 in expectation of a shower of glass bead . she greet they with a quiet 
 smile , but always have a few friendly word for a siamese girl , a slave 
 own by Bulangi , whose numerous wife be say to be of a violent 
 temper . well - found rumour say also that the domestic squabble of 
 that industrious cultivator end generally in a combined assault of all 
 his wife upon the siamese slave . the girl herself never 
 complain - perhaps from dictate of prudence , but more likely through 
 the strange , resign apathy of half - savage womankind . from early 
 morning she be to be see on the path amongst the house - by the 
 riverside or on the jetty , the tray of pastry , it be her mission to 
 sell , skilfully balanced on her head . during the great heat of the day 
 she usually seek refuge in Almayer 's campong , often find shelter in 
 a shady corner of the verandah , where she squat with her tray before 
 she , when invite by Nina . for " Mem Putih " she have always a smile , but 
 the presence of Mrs. Almayer , the very sound of her shrill voice , be the 
 signal for a hurried departure . 
 to this girl Nina often speak ; the other inhabitant of Sambir seldom or 
 never hear the sound of her voice . they get use to the silent figure 
 move in their midst calm and white - rob , a being from another world 
 and incomprehensible to they . yet Nina 's life for all her outward 
 composure , for all the seem detachment from the thing and people 
 surround she , be far from quiet , in consequence of Mrs. Almayer be 
 much too active for the happiness and even safety of the household . she 
 have resume some intercourse with Lakamba , not personally , it be true 
  for the dignity of that potentate keep he inside his stockade , but 
 through the agency of that potentate 's prime minister , harbour master , 
 financial adviser , and general factotum . that gentleman - of Sulu 
 origin - be certainly endow with statesmanlike quality , although he 
 be totally devoid of personal charm . in truth he be perfectly 
 repulsive , possess only one eye and a pockmarked face , with nose and 
 lip horribly disfigure by the small - pox . this unengage individual 
 often stroll into Almayer 's garden in unofficial costume , compose of a 
 piece of pink calico round his waist . there at the back of the house , 
 squatting on his heel on scattered ember , in close proximity to the 
 great iron boiler , where the family daily rice be be cook by the 
 woman under Mrs. Almayer 's superintendence , do that astute negotiator 
 carry on long conversation in Sulu language with Almayer 's wife . what 
 the subject of their discourse be might have be guess from the 
 subsequent domestic scene by Almayer 's hearthstone . 
 of late Almayer have take to excursion up the river . in a small canoe 
 with two paddler and the faithful Ali for a steersman he would disappear 
 for a few day at a time . all his movement be no doubt closely 
 watch by Lakamba and Abdulla , for the man once in the confidence of 
 Rajah Laut be suppose to be in possession of valuable secret . the 
 coast population of Borneo believe implicitly in diamond of fabulous 
 value , in gold mine of enormous richness in the interior . and all those 
 imagining be heighten by the difficulty of penetrate far inland , 
 especially on the north - east coast , where the Malays and the river tribe 
 of Dyaks or head - hunter be eternally quarrel . it be true enough 
 that some gold reach the coast in the hand of those dyak when , during 
 short period of truce in the desultory warfare , they visit the coast 
 settlement of Malays . and so the wild exaggeration be build up and 
 add to on the slight basis of that fact . 
 Almayer in his quality of white man - as Lingard before he - have somewhat 
 well relation with the up - river tribe . yet even his excursion be 
 not without danger , and his return be eagerly look for by the 
 impatient lakamba . but every time the Rajah be disappoint . Vain be 
 the conference by the rice - pot of his factotum Babalatchi with the white 
 man 's wife . the white man himself be impenetrable - impenetrable to 
 persuasion , coax , abuse ; to soft word and shrill reviling ; to 
 desperate beseeching or murderous threat ; for Mrs. Almayer , in her 
 extreme desire to persuade her husband into an alliance with Lakamba , 
 play upon the whole gamut of passion . with her soil robe wind 
 tightly under the armpit across her lean bosom , her scant grayish hair 
 tumble in disorder over her project cheek - bone , in suppliant 
 attitude , she depict with shrill volubility the advantage of close 
 union with a man so good and so fair dealing . 
 " why do not   you go to the Rajah ? " she scream . " why do you go back to 
 those Dyaks in the great forest ? they should be kill . you can not kill 
 they , you can not ; but our Rajah 's man be brave ! you tell the Rajah 
 where the old white man 's treasure be . our Rajah be good ! he be our 
 very grandfather , Datu Besar ! he will kill those wretched dyak , and you 
 shall have half the treasure . oh , Kaspar , tell where the treasure be ! 
 tell I ! tell I out of the old man 's surat where you read so often at 
 night . " 
 on those occasion Almayer sit with rounded shoulder bend to the 
 blast of this domestic tempest , accentuate only each pause in the 
 torrent of his wife 's eloquence by an angry growl , " there be no treasure ! 
 go away , woman ! " exasperate by the sight of his patiently bent back , 
 she would at last walk round so as to face he across the table , and 
 clasp her robe with one hand she stretch the other lean arm and claw- 
 like hand to emphasise , in a passion of anger and contempt , the rapid 
 rush of scathing remark and bitter cursing heap on the head of the 
 man unworthy to associate with brave Malay chief . it end generally by 
 Almayer rise slowly , his long pipe in hand , his face set into a look of 
 inward pain , and walk away in silence . he descend the step and 
 plunge into the long grass on his way to the solitude of his new house , 
 drag his foot in a state of physical collapse from disgust and fear 
 before that fury . she follow to the head of the step , and send the 
 shaft of indiscriminate abuse after the retreating form . and each of 
 those scene be conclude by a pierce shriek , reach he far away . 
 " you know , Kaspar , I be your wife ! your own christian wife after your own 
 Blanda law ! " for she know that this be the bitter thing of all ; the 
 great regret of that man 's life . 
 all these scene Nina witness unmoved . she might have be deaf , dumb , 
 without any feeling as far as any expression of opinion go . yet oft 
 when her father have seek the refuge of the great dusty room of 
 " Almayer 's Folly , " and her mother , exhaust by rhetorical effort , 
 squat wearily on her heel with she back against the leg of the table , 
 Nina would approach she curiously , guard her skirt from betel juice 
 besprinkle the floor , and gaze down upon she as one might look into the 
 quiescent crater of a volcano after a destructive eruption . Mrs. 
 Almayer 's thought , after these scene , be usually turn into a 
 channel of childhood reminiscence , and she give they utterance in a kind 
 of monotonous recitative - slightly disconnected , but generally describe 
 the glory of the Sultan of Sulu , his great splendour , his power , his 
 great prowess ; the fear which benumb the heart of white man at the 
 sight of his swift piratical praus . and these muttered statement of her 
 grandfather 's might be mix up with bit of later recollection , where 
 the great fight with the " White Devil 's " brig and the convent life in 
 Samarang occupy the principal place . at that point she usually drop 
 the thread of her narrative , and pull out the little brass cross , 
 always suspend round her neck , she contemplate it with superstitious 
 awe . that superstitious feeling connect with some vague talismanic 
 property of the little bit of metal , and the still more hazy but 
 terrible notion of some bad Djinns and horrible torment invent , as she 
 think , for her especial punishment by the good Mother Superior in case 
 of the loss of the above charm , be Mrs. Almayer 's only theological 
 luggage for the stormy road of life . Mrs. Almayer have at least something 
 tangible to cling to , but Nina , bring up under the protestant wing of 
 the proper Mrs. Vinck , have not even a little piece of brass to remind she 
 of past teaching . and listen to the recital of those savage glory , 
 those barbarous fight and savage feasting , to the story of deed 
 valorous , albeit somewhat bloodthirsty , where man of her mother 's race 
 shine far above the Orang Blanda , she feel herself irresistibly 
 fascinated , and see with vague surprise the narrow mantle of civilised 
 morality , in which good - mean people have wrap her young soul , fall 
 away and leave her shivering and helpless as if on the edge of some deep 
 and unknown abyss . Strangest of all , this abyss do not frighten she 
 when she be under the influence of the witch - like be she call she 
 mother . she seem to have forget in civilised surrounding her life 
 before the time when Lingard have , so to speak , kidnap she from Brow . 
 since then she have have christian teaching , social education , and a good 
 glimpse of civilised life . unfortunately her teacher do not understand 
 her nature , and the education end in a scene of humiliation , in an 
 outburst of contempt from white people for her mixed blood . she have 
 taste the whole bitterness of it and remember distinctly that the 
 virtuous Mrs. Vinck 's indignation be not so much direct against the 
 young man from the bank as against the innocent cause of that young man 's 
 infatuation . and there be also no doubt in her mind that the principal 
 cause of Mrs. Vinck 's indignation be the thought that such a thing 
 should happen in a white nest , where her snow - white dove , the two Misses 
 Vinck , have just return from Europe , to find shelter under the maternal 
 wing , and there await the coming of irreproachable man of their destiny . 
 not even the thought of the money so painfully scrap together by 
 Almayer , and so punctually send for Nina 's expense , could dissuade Mrs. 
 Vinck from her virtuous resolve . Nina be send away , and in truth the 
 girl herself want to go , although a little frightened by the impending 
 change . and now she have live on the river for three year with a savage 
 mother and a father walk about amongst pitfall , with his head in the 
 cloud , weak , irresolute , and unhappy . she have live a life devoid of 
 all the decency of civilisation , in miserable domestic condition ; she 
 have breathe in the atmosphere of sordid plotting for gain , of the no 
 less disgusting intrigue and crime for lust or money ; and those thing , 
 together with the domestic quarrel , be the only event of her three 
 year ' existence . she do not die from despair and disgust the first 
 month , as she expect and almost hop for . on the contrary , at the end 
 of half a year it have seem to she that she have know no other life . her 
 young mind have be unskilfully permit to glance at well thing , 
 and then throw back again into the hopeless quagmire of barbarism , full 
 of strong and uncontrolled passion , have lose the power to discriminate . 
 it seem to Nina that there be no change and no difference . whether 
 they trade in brick godown or on the muddy river bank ; whether they 
 reach after much or little ; whether they make love under the shadow of 
 the great tree or in the shadow of the cathedral on the Singapore 
 promenade ; whether they plot for their own end under the protection 
 of law and accord to the rule of christian conduct , or whether they 
 seek the gratification of their desire with the savage cunning and the 
 unrestrained fierceness of nature as innocent of culture as their own 
 immense and gloomy forest , Nina see only the same manifestation of love 
 and hate and of sordid greed chase the uncertain dollar in all its 
 multifarious and vanish shape . to her resolute nature , however , 
 after all these year , the savage and uncompromise sincerity of purpose 
 show by her Malay kinsman seem at last preferable to the sleek 
 hypocrisy , to the polite disguise , to the virtuous pretence of such 
 white people as she have have the misfortune to come in contact with . after 
 all it be her life ; it be go to be her life , and so think she 
 fall more and more under the influence of her mother . seek , in her 
 ignorance , a well side to that life , she listen with avidity to the 
 old woman 's tale of the depart glory of the Rajahs , from whose race 
 she have spring , and she become gradually more indifferent , more 
 contemptuous of the white side of her descent represent by a feeble and 
 traditionless father . 
 Almayer 's difficulty be by no mean diminish by the girl 's presence 
 in Sambir . the stir cause by her arrival have die out , it be true , and 
 Lakamba have not renew his visit ; but about a year after the departure 
 of the man - of - war boat the nephew of Abdulla , Syed Reshid , return from 
 his pilgrimage to Mecca , rejoice in a green jacket and the proud title 
 of Hadji . there be a great letting off of rocket on board the steamer 
 which bring he in , and a great beating of drum all night in Abdulla 's 
 compound , while the feast of welcome be prolong far into the small 
 hour of the morning . Reshid be the favourite nephew and heir of 
 Abdulla , and that love uncle , meet Almayer one day by the riverside , 
 stop politely to exchange civility and to ask solemnly for an 
 interview . Almayer suspect some attempt at a swindle , or at any rate 
 something unpleasant , but of course consent with a great show of 
 rejoice . accordingly the next evening , after sunset , Abdulla come , 
 accompany by several other grey - beard and by his nephew . that young 
 man - of a very rakish and dissipate appearance - affect the great 
 indifference as to the whole of the proceeding . when the torch - bearer 
 have group themselves below the step , and the visitor have seat 
 themselves on various lame chair , Reshid stand apart in the shadow , 
 examine his aristocratically small hand with great attention . Almayer , 
 surprise by the great solemnity of his visitor , perch himself on the 
 corner of the table with a characteristic want of dignity quickly note 
 by the Arabs with grave disapproval . but Abdulla speak now , look 
 straight past Almayer at the red curtain hang in the doorway , where a 
 slight tremor disclose the presence of woman on the other side . he 
 begin by neatly compliment Almayer upon the long year they have dwelt 
 together in cordial neighbourhood , and call upon Allah to give he many 
 more year to gladden the eye of his friend by his welcome presence . he 
 make a polite allusion to the great consideration show he   Almayer   by 
 the dutch " Commissie , " and draw thence the flattering inference of 
 Almayer 's great importance amongst his own people . he - Abdulla - be also 
 important amongst all the Arabs , and his nephew reshid would be heir of 
 that social position and of great rich . now Reshid be a Hadji . he 
 be possessor of several malay woman , go on Abdulla , but it be time he 
 have a favourite wife , the first of the four allow by the Prophet . and , 
 speak with well - breed politeness , he explain far to the 
 dumbfound Almayer that , if he would consent to the alliance of his 
 offspring with that true believer and virtuous man Reshid , she would be 
 the mistress of all the splendour of Reshid 's house , and first wife of 
 the first Arab in the Islands , when he - Abdulla - be call to the joy 
 of Paradise by Allah the all - merciful . " you know , Tuan , " he say , in 
 conclusion , " the other woman would be her slave , and Reshid 's house be 
 great . from Bombay he have bring great divan , and costly carpet , and 
 european furniture . there be also a great look - glass in a frame 
 shin like gold . what could a girl want more ? " and while Almayer 
 look upon he in silent dismay Abdulla speak in a more confidential 
 tone , wave his attendant away , and finish his speech by point out 
 the material advantage of such an alliance , and offer to settle upon 
 Almayer three thousand dollar as a sign of his sincere friendship and 
 the price of the girl . 
 Poor Almayer be nearly have a fit . burn with the desire of take 
 Abdulla by the throat , he have but to think of his helpless position in 
 the midst of lawless man to comprehend the necessity of diplomatic 
 conciliation . he master his impulse , and speak politely and coldly , 
 say the girl be young and as the apple of his eye . Tuan Reshid , a 
 Faithful and a Hadji , would not want an infidel woman in his harem ; and , 
 see Abdulla smile sceptically at that last objection , he remain 
 silent , not trust himself to speak more , not dare to refuse point- 
 blank , nor yet to say anything compromise . Abdulla understand the 
 meaning of that silence , and rise to take leave with a grave salaam . he 
 wish his friend Almayer " a thousand year , " and move down the step , 
 help dutifully by Reshid . the torch - bearer shake their torch , 
 scatter a shower of spark into the river , and the cortege move off , 
 leave Almayer agitate but greatly relieve by their departure . he 
 drop into a chair and watch the glimmer of the light amongst the 
 tree trunk till they disappear and complete silence succeed the 
 tramp of foot and the murmur of voice . he do not move till the curtain 
 rustle and Nina come out on the verandah and sit in the rock - chair , 
 where she use to spend many hour every day . she give a slight rock 
 motion to her seat , lean back with half - close eye , her long hair 
 shade her face from the smoky light of the lamp on the table . Almayer 
 look at she furtively , but the face be as impassible as ever . she 
 turn her head slightly towards her father , and , speak , to his great 
 surprise , in English , ask - 
 " be that Abdulla here ? " 
 " yes , " say Almayer - " just go . " 
 " and what do he want , father ? " 
 " he want to buy you for Reshid , " answer Almayer , brutally , his anger 
 get the well of he , and look at the girl as if in expectation 
 of some outbreak of feeling . but Nina remain apparently unmove , 
 gaze dreamily into the black night outside . 
 " be careful , Nina , " say Almayer , after a short silence and rise from 
 his chair , " when you go paddle alone into the creek in your canoe . 
 that Reshid be a violent scoundrel , and there be no say what he may 
 do . do you hear I ? " 
 she be stand now , ready to go in , one hand grasp the curtain in 
 the doorway . she turn round , throw her heavy tress back by a 
 sudden gesture . 
 " do you think he would dare ? " she ask , quickly , and then turn again 
 to go in , add in a low tone , " he would not dare . Arabs be all 
 coward . " 
 Almayer look after she , astonish . he do not seek the repose of his 
 hammock . he walk the floor absently , sometimes stop by the 
 balustrade to think . the lamp go out . the first streak of dawn break 
 over the forest ; Almayer shiver in the damp air . " I give it up , " he 
 mutter to himself , lie down wearily . " damn those woman ! well ! if 
 the girl do not look as if she want to be kidnap ! " 
 and he feel a nameless fear creep into his heart , make he shiver 
 again . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 that year , towards the breaking up of the south - west monsoon , disquieting 
 rumour reach Sambir . Captain Ford , come up to Almayer 's house for 
 an evening 's chat , bring late number of the Straits Times give the 
 news of Acheen war and of the unsuccessful dutch expedition . the 
 Nakhodas of the rare trading praus ascend the river pay visit to 
 Lakamba , discuss with that potentate the unsettled state of affair , 
 and wag their head gravely over the recital of Orang Blanda exaction , 
 severity , and general tyranny , as exemplify in the total stoppage of 
 gunpowder trade and the rigorous visiting of all suspicious craft trading 
 in the strait of Macassar . even the loyal soul of Lakamba be stir 
 into a state of inward discontent by the withdrawal of his license for 
 powder and by the abrupt confiscation of one hundred and fifty barrel of 
 that commodity by the gunboat Princess Amelia , when , after a hazardous 
 voyage , it have almost reach the mouth of the river . the unpleasant 
 news be give he by Reshid , who , after the unsuccessful issue of his 
 matrimonial project , have make a long voyage amongst the island for 
 trading purpose ; have buy the powder for his friend , and be 
 overhaul and deprive of it on his return when actually congratulate 
 himself on his acuteness in avoid detection . Reshid 's wrath be 
 principally direct against Almayer , whom he suspect of have 
 notify the dutch authority of the desultory warfare carry on by the 
 Arabs and the Rajah with the up - river Dyak tribe . 
 to Reshid 's great surprise the Rajah receive his complaint very coldly , 
 and show no sign of vengeful disposition towards the white man . in 
 truth , Lakamba know very well that Almayer be perfectly innocent of any 
 meddling in state affair ; and besides , his attitude towards that much 
 persecute individual be wholly change in consequence of a 
 reconciliation effect between he and his old enemy by Almayer 's newly- 
 find friend , Dain Maroola . 
 Almayer have now a friend . shortly after Reshid 's departure on his 
 commercial journey , Nina , drift slowly with the tide in the canoe on 
 her return home after one of her solitary excursion , hear in one of the 
 small creek a splashing , as if of heavy rope drop in the water , and 
 the prolonged song of Malay seaman when some heavy pulling be to be do . 
 through the thick fringe of bush hide the mouth of the creek she see 
 the tall spar of some European - rig sailing vessel overtop the 
 summit of the Nipa palm . a brig be be haul out of the small 
 creek into the main stream . the sun have set , and during the short 
 moment of twilight Nina see the brig , aid by the evening breeze and 
 the flow tide , head towards sambir under her set foresail . the girl 
 turn she canoe out of the main river into one of the many narrow 
 channel amongst the woode islet , and paddle vigorously over the black 
 and sleepy backwater towards sambir . her canoe brush the water - palm , 
 skirt the short space of muddy bank where sedate alligator look at 
 she with lazy unconcern , and , just as darkness be set in , shoot out 
 into the broad junction of the two main branch of the river , where the 
 brig be already at anchor with sail furl , yard square , and deck 
 seemingly untenante by any human being . Nina have to cross the river and 
 pass pretty close to the brig in order to reach home on the low 
 promontory between the two branch of the Pantai . up both branch , in 
 the house build on the bank and over the water , the light twinkle 
 already , reflect in the still water below . the hum of voice , the 
 occasional cry of a child , the rapid and abruptly interrupt roll of a 
 wooden drum , together with some distant hailing in the darkness by the 
 return fisherman , reach she over the broad expanse of the river . she 
 hesitate a little before crossing , the sight of such an unusual object 
 as an European - rig vessel cause she some uneasiness , but the river 
 in its wide expansion be dark enough to render a small canoe invisible . 
 she urge her small craft with swift stroke of her paddle , kneel in 
 the bottom and bend forward to catch any suspicious sound while she 
 steer towards the little jetty of Lingard and Co. , to which the strong 
 light of the paraffin lamp shin on the whitewashed verandah of 
 Almayer 's bungalow serve as a convenient guide . the jetty itself , under 
 the shadow of the bank overgrow by droop bush , be hide in 
 darkness . before even she could see it she hear the hollow bumping of a 
 large boat against its rotten post , and hear also the murmur of 
 whisper conversation in that boat whose white paint and great 
 dimension , faintly visible on near approach , make she rightly guess 
 that it belong to the brig just anchor . stop her course by a 
 rapid motion of her paddle , with another swift stroke she send it 
 whirl away from the wharf and steer for a little rivulet which give 
 access to the back courtyard of the house . she land at the muddy head 
 of the creek and make her way towards the house over the trodden grass of 
 the courtyard . to the left , from the cooking shed , shine a red glare 
 through the banana plantation she skirt , and the noise of feminine 
 laughter reach she from there in the silent evening . she rightly 
 judge her mother be not near , laughter and Mrs. Almayer not be close 
 neighbour . she must be in the house , think Nina , as she run lightly 
 up the incline plane of shaky plank lead to the back door of the 
 narrow passage divide the house in two . outside the doorway , in the 
 black shadow , stand the faithful Ali . 
 " who be there ? " ask Nina . 
 " a great malay man have come , " answer Ali , in a tone of suppress 
 excitement . " he be a rich man . there be six man with lance . real 
 Soldat , you understand . and his dress be very brave . I have see his 
 dress . it shin ! what jewel ! do not   go there , Mem Nina . Tuan say 
 not ; but the old Mem be go . Tuan will be angry . merciful Allah ! what 
 jewel that man have get ! " 
 Nina slip past the outstretched hand of the slave into the dark 
 passage where , in the crimson glow of the hang curtain , close by its 
 other end , she could see a small dark form crouch near the wall . her 
 mother be feast her eye and ear with what be take place on the 
 front verandah , and Nina approach to take her share in the rare 
 pleasure of some novelty . she be meet by her mother 's extended arm and 
 by a low murmured warning not to make a noise . 
 " have you see they , mother ? " ask Nina , in a breathless whisper . 
 Mrs. Almayer turn her face towards the girl , and her sunken eye shine 
 strangely in the red half - light of the passage . 
 " I see he , " she say , in an almost inaudible tone , press she 
 daughter 's hand with her bony finger . " a great Rajah have come to 
 Sambir - a Son of Heaven , " mutter the old woman to herself . " go away , 
 girl ! " 
 the two woman stand close to the curtain , Nina wish to approach the 
 rent in the stuff , and her mother defend the position with angry 
 obstinacy . on the other side there be a lull in the conversation , but 
 the breathing of several man , the occasional light tinkling of some 
 ornament , the clink of metal scabbard , or of brass siri - vessel pass 
 from hand to hand , be audible during the short pause . the woman 
 struggle silently , when there be a shuffling noise and the shadow of 
 Almayer 's burly form fall on the curtain . 
 the woman cease struggle and remain motionless . Almayer have stand 
 up to answer his guest , turn his back to the doorway , unaware of what 
 be go on on the other side . he speak in a tone of regretful 
 irritation . 
 " you have come to the wrong house , Tuan Maroola , if you want to trade as 
 you say . I be a trader once , not now , whatever you may have hear about 
 I in Macassar . and if you want anything , you will not find it here ; I 
 have nothing to give , and want nothing myself . you should go to the 
 Rajah here ; you can see in the daytime his house across the river , 
 there , where those fire be burn on the shore . he will help you and 
 trade with you . or , well still , go to the Arabs over there , " he go 
 on bitterly , point with his hand towards the house of Sambir . 
 " abdulla be the man you want . there be nothing he would not buy , and 
 there be nothing he would not sell ; believe I , I know he well . " 
 he wait for an answer a short time , then add - 
 " all that I have say be true , and there be nothing more . " 
 Nina , hold back by her mother , hear a soft voice reply with a calm 
 evenness of intonation peculiar to the well class Malays - 
 " who would doubt a white Tuan 's word ? a man seek his friend where his 
 heart tell he . be this not true also ? I have come , although so late , 
 for I have something to say which you may be glad to hear . to - morrow I 
 will go to the Sultan ; a trader want the friendship of great man . then 
 I shall return here to speak serious word , if Tuan permit . I shall not 
 go to the Arabs ; their lie be very great ! what be they ? Chelakka ! " 
 Almayer 's voice sound a little more pleasantly in reply . 
 " well , as you like . I can hear you to - morrow at any time if you have 
 anything to say . bah ! after you have see the Sultan Lakamba you will 
 not want to return here , Inchi Dain . you will see . only mind , I will 
 have nothing to do with Lakamba . you may tell he so . what be your 
 business with I , after all ? " 
 " to - morrow we talk , Tuan , now I know you , " answer the Malay . " I speak 
 English a little , so we can talk and nobody will understand , and then - " 
 he interrupt himself suddenly , ask surprised , " what be that noise , 
 Tuan ? " 
 Almayer have also hear the increase noise of the scuffle recommence on 
 the woman 's side of the curtain . evidently Nina 's strong curiosity be 
 on the point of overcome Mrs. Almayer 's exalted sense of social 
 propriety . hard breathing be distinctly audible , and the curtain 
 shake during the contest , which be mainly physical , although Mrs. 
 Almayer 's voice be hear in angry remonstrance with its usual want of 
 strictly logical reasoning , but with the well - know richness of 
 invective . 
 " you shameless woman ! be you a slave ? " shout shrilly the irate 
 matron . " Veil your face , abandon wretch ! you white snake , I will not 
 let you ! " 
 Almayer 's face express annoyance and also doubt as to the advisability 
 of interfere between mother and daughter . he glance at his Malay 
 visitor , who be wait silently for the end of the uproar in an 
 attitude of amused expectation , and wave his hand contemptuously he 
 murmur - 
 " it be nothing . some woman . " 
 the Malay nod his head gravely , and his face assume an expression of 
 serene indifference , as etiquette demand after such an explanation . the 
 contest be end behind the curtain , and evidently the young will have 
 its way , for the rapid shuffle and click of Mrs. Almayer 's high - heel 
 sandal die away in the distance . the tranquillised master of the house 
 be go to resume the conversation when , strike by an unexpected change 
 in the expression of his guest 's countenance , he turn his head and see 
 Nina stand in the doorway . 
 after Mrs. Almayer 's retreat from the field of battle , Nina , with a 
 contemptuous exclamation , " it be only a trader , " have lift the conquered 
 curtain and now stand in full light , frame in the dark background on the 
 passage , her lip slightly part , her hair in disorder after the 
 exertion , the angry gleam not yet fade out of her glorious and sparkle 
 eye . she take in at a glance the group of white - clothe lanceman stand 
 motionless in the shadow of the far - off end of the verandah , and her gaze 
 rest curiously on the chief of that impose cortege . he stand , 
 almost face she , a little on one side , and strike by the beauty of the 
 unexpected apparition have bend low , elevate his joint hand above his 
 head in a sign of respect accord by Malays only to the great of this 
 earth . the crude light of the lamp shine on the gold embroidery of his 
 black silk jacket , break in a thousand sparkling ray on the jewel 
 hilt of his kriss protrude from under the many fold of the red sarong 
 gather into a sash round his waist , and play on the precious stone 
 of the many ring on his dark finger . he straighten himself up 
 quickly after the low bow , put his hand with a graceful ease on the 
 hilt of his heavy short sword ornament with brilliantly dye fringe of 
 horsehair . Nina , hesitate on the threshold , see an erect lithe figure 
 of medium height with a breadth of shoulder suggest great power . under 
 the fold of a blue turban , whose fringed end hang gracefully over the 
 leave shoulder , be a face full of determination and express a reckless 
 good - humour , not devoid , however , of some dignity . the squareness of 
 low jaw , the full red lip , the mobile nostril , and the proud carriage 
 of the head give the impression of a be half - savage , untamed , perhaps 
 cruel , and correct the liquid softness of the almost feminine eye , that 
 general characteristic of the race . now , the first surprise over , Nina 
 see those eye fix upon she with such an uncontrolled expression of 
 admiration and desire that she feel a hitherto unknown feeling of 
 shyness , mix with alarm and some delight , enter and penetrate her whole 
 be . 
 confuse by those unusual sensation she stop in the doorway and 
 instinctively draw the low part of the curtain across her face , leave 
 only half a rounded cheek , a stray tress , and one eye expose , wherewith 
 to contemplate the gorgeous and bold be so unlike in appearance to the 
 rare specimen of trader she have see before on that same verandah . 
 Dain Maroola , dazzle by the unexpected vision , forget the confused 
 Almayer , forget his brig , his escort star in open - mouthed admiration , 
 the object of his visit and all thing else , in his overpowering desire 
 to prolong the contemplation of so much loveliness meet so suddenly in 
 such an unlikely place - as he think . 
 " it be my daughter , " say Almayer , in an embarrassed manner . " it be of 
 no consequence . white woman have their custom , as you know Tuan , have 
 travel much , as you say . however , it be late ; we will finish our talk 
 to - morrow . " 
 Dain bent low try to convey in a last glance towards the girl the bold 
 expression of his overwhelming admiration . the next minute he be 
 shake Almayer 's hand with grave courtesy , his face wear a look of 
 stolid unconcern as to any feminine presence . his man file off , and he 
 follow they quickly , closely attend by a thick - set , savage - look 
 Sumatrese he have introduce before as the commander of his brig . Nina 
 walk to the balustrade of the verandah and see the sheen of moonlight 
 on the steel spear - head and hear the rhythmic jingle of brass anklet 
 as the man move in single file towards the jetty . the boat shove off 
 after a little while , loom large in the full light of the moon , a 
 black shapeless mass in the slight haze hang over the water . Nina 
 fancy she could distinguish the graceful figure of the trader stand 
 erect in the stern sheet , but in a little while all the outline get 
 blur , confused , and soon disappear in the fold of white vapour 
 shroud the middle of the river . 
 Almayer have approach his daughter , and lean with both arm over the 
 rail , be look moodily down on the heap of rubbish and broken bottle 
 at the foot of the verandah . 
 " what be all that noise just now ? " he growl peevishly , without look 
 up . " confound you and your mother ! what do she want ? what do you 
 come out for ? " 
 " she do not want to let I come out , " say Nina . " she be angry . she 
 say the man just go be some Rajah . I think she be right now . " 
 " I believe all you woman be crazy , " snarl Almayer . " what be that to 
 you , to she , to anybody ? the man want to collect trepang and bird ' 
 nest on the island . he tell I so , that Rajah of your . he will come 
 to - morrow . I want you both to keep away from the house , and let I 
 attend to my business in peace . " 
 Dain Maroola come the next day and have a long conversation with Almayer . 
 this be the beginning of a close and friendly intercourse which , at 
 first , be much remark in Sambir , till the population get use to the 
 frequent sight of many fire burn in Almayer 's campong , where 
 Maroola 's man be warm themselves during the cold night of the north- 
 east monsoon , while their master have long conference with the Tuan 
 Putih - as they style Almayer amongst themselves . Great be the 
 curiosity in Sambir on the subject of the new trader . have he see the 
 Sultan ? what do the Sultan say ? have he give any present ? what would 
 he sell ? what would he buy ? those be the question broach eagerly 
 by the inhabitant of bamboo house build over the river . even in more 
 substantial building , in Abdulla 's house , in the residence of principal 
 trader , Arab , Chinese , and Bugis , the excitement run high , and last 
 many day . with inborn suspicion they would not believe the simple 
 account of himself the young trader be always ready to give . yet it have 
 all the appearance of truth . he say he be a trader , and sell rice . he 
 do not want to buy gutta - percha or beeswax , because he intend to 
 employ his numerous crew in collect trepang on the coral reef outside 
 the river , and also in seek for bird 's nest on the mainland . those 
 two article he profess himself ready to buy if there be any to be 
 obtain in that way . he say he be from Bali , and a Brahmin , which 
 last statement he make good by refuse all food during his often 
 repeat visit to Lakamba 's and Almayer 's house . to Lakamba he go 
 generally at night and have long audience . Babalatchi , who be always a 
 third party at those meeting of potentate and trader , know how to resist 
 all attempt on the part of the curious to ascertain the subject of so 
 many long talk . when question with languid courtesy by the grave 
 Abdulla he seek refuge in a vacant stare of his one eye , and in the 
 affectation of extreme simplicity . 
 " I be only my master 's slave , " murmur Babalatchi , in a hesitating 
 manner . then as if make up his mind suddenly for a reckless confidence 
 he would inform Abdulla of some transaction in rice , repeat the word , 
 " a hundred big bag the Sultan buy ; a hundred , Tuan ! " in a tone of 
 mysterious solemnity . abdulla , firmly persuade of the existence of some 
 more important dealing , receive , however , the information with all the 
 sign of respectful astonishment . and the two would separate , the Arab 
 curse inwardly the wily dog , while Babalatchi go on his way walk 
 on the dusty path , his body sway , his chin with its few grey hair 
 push forward , resemble an inquisitive goat bend on some unlawful 
 expedition . attentive eye watch his movement . Jim - Eng , descry 
 Babalatchi far away , would shake off the stupor of an habitual opium 
 smoker and , totter on to the middle of the road , would await the 
 approach of that important person , ready with hospitable invitation . but 
 Babalatchi 's discretion be proof even against the combined assault of 
 good fellowship and of strong gin generously administer by the open- 
 hearted Chinaman . Jim - Eng , own himself beat , be leave uninformed 
 with the empty bottle , and gaze sadly after the depart form of the 
 statesman of Sambir pursue his devious and unsteady way , which , as 
 usual , lead he to Almayer 's compound . ever since a reconciliation have 
 be effect by Dain Maroola between his white friend and the Rajah , the 
 one - eyed diplomatist have again become a frequent guest in the Dutchman 's 
 house . to Almayer 's great disgust he be to be see there at all time , 
 stroll about in an abstracted kind of way on the verandah , skulk in 
 the passage , or else pop round unexpected corner , always willing to 
 engage Mrs. Almayer in confidential conversation . he be very shy of the 
 master himself , as if suspicious that the pen - up feeling of the white 
 man towards his person might find vent in a sudden kick . but the cooking 
 shed be his favourite place , and he become an habitual guest there , 
 squatting for hour amongst the busy woman , with his chin rest on his 
 knee , his lean arm clasp round his leg , and his one eye rove 
 uneasily - the very picture of watchful ugliness . Almayer want more 
 than once to complain to Lakamba of his Prime Minister 's intrusion , but 
 Dain dissuade he . " we can not say a word here that he do not hear , " 
 growl Almayer . 
 " then come and talk on board the brig , " retort Dain , with a quiet 
 smile . " it be good to let the man come here . lakamba think he know 
 much . perhaps the Sultan think I want to run away . well let the one- 
 eyed crocodile sun himself in your campong , Tuan . " 
 and Almayer assent unwillingly mutter vague threat of personal 
 violence , while he eye malevolently the aged statesman sit with 
 quiet obstinacy by his domestic rice - pot . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 at last the excitement have die out in Sambir . the inhabitant get use 
 to the sight of coming and going between Almayer 's house and the 
 vessel , now moor to the opposite bank , and speculation as to the 
 feverish activity display by Almayer 's boatman in repair old canoe 
 cease to interfere with the due discharge of domestic duty by the 
 woman of the Settlement . even the baffle Jim - Eng leave off trouble his 
 muddle brain with secret of trade , and relapse by the aid of his opium 
 pipe into a state of stupefied bliss , let Babalatchi pursue his way 
 past his house uninvited and seemingly unnoticed . 
 so on that warm afternoon , when the deserted river sparkle under the 
 vertical sun , the statesman of Sambir could , without any hindrance from 
 friendly inquirer , shove off his little canoe from under the bush , 
 where it be usually hide during his visit to Almayer 's compound . 
 slowly and languidly Babalatchi paddle , crouch low in the boat , 
 make himself small under his as enormous sun hat to escape the 
 scorch heat reflect from the water . he be not in a hurry ; his 
 master , Lakamba , be surely repose at this time of the day . he would 
 have ample time to cross over and greet he on his wake with important 
 news . will he be displease ? will he strike his ebony wood staff 
 angrily on the floor , frightening he by the incoherent violence of his 
 exclamation ; or will he squat down with a good - humour smile , and , 
 rub his hand gently over his stomach with a familiar gesture , 
 expectorate copiously into the brass siri - vessel , give vent to a low , 
 approbative murmur ? such be Babalatchi 's thought as he skilfully 
 handle his paddle , cross the river on his way to the Rajah 's campong , 
 whose stockade show from behind the dense foliage of the bank just 
 opposite to Almayer 's bungalow . 
 indeed , he have a report to make . something certain at last to confirm 
 the daily tale of suspicion , the daily hint of familiarity , of steal 
 glance he have see , of short and burn word he have overhear 
 exchange between Dain Maroola and Almayer 's daughter . 
 Lakamba have , till then , listen to it all , calmly and with evident 
 distrust ; now he be go to be convince , for Babalatchi have the proof ; 
 have it this very morning , when fish at break of day in the creek over 
 which stand Bulangi 's house . there from his skiff he see Nina 's long 
 canoe drift past , the girl sit in the stern bending over Dain , who 
 be stretch in the bottom with his head rest on the girl 's knee . he 
 see it . he follow they , but in a short time they take to the paddle 
 and get away from under his observant eye . a few minute afterwards he 
 see Bulangi 's slave - girl paddle in a small dug - out to the town with her 
 cake for sale . she also have see they in the grey dawn . and Babalatchi 
 grin confidentially to himself at the recollection of the slave - girl 's 
 discompose face , of the hard look in her eye , of the tremble in her 
 voice , when answer his question . that little Taminah evidently 
 admire Dain Maroola . that be good ! and Babalatchi laugh aloud at 
 the notion ; then become suddenly serious , he begin by some strange 
 association of idea to speculate upon the price for which Bulangi would , 
 possibly , sell the girl . he shake his head sadly at the thought that 
 Bulangi be a hard man , and have refuse one hundred dollar for that same 
 Taminah only a few week ago ; then he become suddenly aware that the 
 canoe have drift too far down during his meditation . he shake off the 
 despondency cause by the certitude of Bulangi 's mercenary disposition , 
 and , take up his paddle , in a few stroke sheer alongside the water- 
 gate of the Rajah 's house . 
 that afternoon Almayer , as be his will not lately , move about on the water- 
 side , overlook the repair to his boat . he have decide at last . 
 guide by the scrap of information contain in old Lingard 's pocket- 
 book , he be go to seek for the rich gold - mine , for that place where 
 he have only to stoop to gather up an immense fortune and realise the 
 dream of his young day . to obtain the necessary help he have share his 
 knowledge with Dain Maroola , he have consent to be reconcile with 
 Lakamba , who give his support to the enterprise on condition of share 
 the profit ; he have sacrifice his pride , his honour , and his loyalty in 
 the face of the enormous risk of his undertaking , dazzle by the 
 greatness of the result to be achieve by this alliance so distasteful 
 yet so necessary . the danger be great , but Maroola be brave ; his man 
 seem as reckless as their chief , and with Lakamba 's aid success seem 
 assure . 
 for the last fortnight Almayer be absorb in the preparation , walk 
 amongst his workman and slave in a kind of wake trance , where 
 practical detail as to the fitting out of the boat be mix up with 
 vivid dream of untold wealth , where the present misery of burn sun , 
 of the muddy and malodorous river bank disappear in a gorgeous vision 
 of a splendid future existence for himself and Nina . he hardly see Nina 
 during these last day , although the beloved daughter be ever present in 
 his thought . he hardly take notice of Dain , whose constant presence in 
 his house have become a matter of course to he now they be connect by 
 a community of interest . when meet the young chief he give he an 
 absent greeting and pass on , seemingly wish to avoid he , bent upon 
 forget the hat reality of the present by absorb himself in his 
 work , or else by let his imagination soar far above the tree - top 
 into the great white cloud away to the westward , where the paradise of 
 Europe be await the future eastern millionaire . and Maroola , now the 
 bargain be strike and there be no more business to be talk over , 
 evidently do not care for the white man 's company . yet Dain be always 
 about the house , but he seldom stay long by the riverside . on his 
 daily visit to the white man the malay chief prefer to make his way 
 quietly through the central passage of the house , and would come out into 
 the garden at the back , where the fire be burn in the cooking shed , 
 with the rice kettle swing over it , under the watchful supervision of 
 Mrs. Almayer . avoid that shed , with its black smoke and the warbling 
 of soft , feminine voice , Dain would turn to the left . there , on the 
 edge of a banana plantation , a clump of palm and mango tree form a 
 shady spot , a few scatter bush give it a certain seclusion into 
 which only the serve woman 's chatter or an occasional burst of laughter 
 could penetrate . once in , he be invisible ; and hide there , lean 
 against the smooth trunk of a tall palm , he wait with gleam eye and 
 an assured smile to hear the faint rustle of dry grass under the light 
 footstep of Nina . 
 from the very first moment when his eye beheld this - to he - perfection 
 of loveliness he feel in his inmost heart the conviction that she would 
 be his ; he feel the subtle breath of mutual understanding pass between 
 their two savage nature , and he do not want Mrs. Almayer 's encouraging 
 smile to take every opportunity of approach the girl ; and every time 
 he speak to she , every time he look into her eye , Nina , although 
 avert her face , feel as if this bold - look be who speak burn 
 word into her willing ear be the embodiment of her fate , the creature 
 of her dream - reckless , ferocious , ready with flash kriss for his 
 enemy , and with passionate embrace for his belove - the ideal Malay 
 chief of her mother 's tradition . 
 she recognise with a thrill of delicious fear the mysterious 
 consciousness of her identity with that be . listen to his word , 
 it seem to she she be bear only then to a knowledge of a new 
 existence , that her life be complete only when near he , and she 
 abandon herself to a feeling of dreamy happiness , while with 
 half - veil face and in silence - as become a malay girl - she listen to 
 Dain 's word give up to she the whole treasure of love and passion his 
 nature be capable of with all the unrestrained enthusiasm of a man 
 totally untrammelle by any influence of civilised self - discipline . 
 and they use to pass many a delicious and fast fleeting hour under the 
 mango tree behind the friendly curtain of bush till Mrs. Almayer 's 
 shrill voice give the signal of unwilling separation . Mrs. Almayer have 
 undertake the easy task of watch her husband lest he should interrupt 
 the smooth course of her daughter 's love affair , in which she take a 
 great and benignant interest . she be happy and proud to see Dain 's 
 infatuation , believe he to be a great and powerful chief , and she 
 find also a gratification of her mercenary instinct in Dain 's 
 open - handed generosity . 
 on the eve of the day when Babalatchi 's suspicion be confirm by 
 ocular demonstration , Dain and Nina have remain long than usual in 
 their shady retreat . only Almayer 's heavy step on the verandah and his 
 querulous clamour for food decide Mrs. Almayer to lift a warning cry . 
 Maroola leap lightly over the low bamboo fence , and make his way 
 stealthily through the banana plantation down to the muddy shore of the 
 back creek , while Nina walk slowly towards the house to minister to her 
 father 's want , as be she will not every evening . Almayer feel happy enough 
 that evening ; the preparation be nearly complete ; to - morrow he would 
 launch his boat . in his mind 's eye he see the rich prize in his grasp ; 
 and , with tin spoon in his hand , he be forget the plateful of rice 
 before he in the fanciful arrangement of some splendid banquet to take 
 place on his arrival in Amsterdam . Nina , recline in the long chair , 
 listen absently to the few disconnected word escape from her 
 father 's lip . expedition ! gold ! what do she care for all that ? but 
 at the name of Maroola mention by her father she be all attention . 
 Dain be go down the river with his brig to - morrow to remain away for 
 a few day , say Almayer . it be very annoying , this delay . as soon as 
 Dain return they would have to start without loss of time , for the 
 river be rise . he would not be surprised if a great flood be come . 
 and he push away his plate with an impatient gesture on rise from the 
 table . but now Nina hear he not . Dain go away ! that be why he have 
 order she , with that quiet masterfulness it be her delight to obey , to 
 meet he at break of day in Bulangi 's creek . be there a paddle in her 
 canoe ? she think . be it ready ? she would have to start early - at 
 four in the morning , in a very few hour . 
 she rise from her chair , think she would require rest before the long 
 pull in the early morning . the lamp be burn dimly , and her father , 
 tired with the day 's labour , be already in his hammock . Nina put the 
 lamp out and pass into a large room she share with her mother on the 
 left of the central passage . enter , she see that Mrs. Almayer have 
 desert the pile of mat serve she as bed in one corner of the room , 
 and be now bend over the open lid of her large wooden chest . half 
 a shell of cocoanut fill with oil , where a cotton rag float for a 
 wick , stand on the floor , surround she with a ruddy halo of light 
 shin through the black and odorous smoke . Mrs. Almayer 's back be 
 bent , and her head and shoulder hide in the deep box . her hand 
 rummage in the interior , where a soft clink as of silver money could be 
 hear . she do not notice at first her daughter 's approach , and Nina , 
 stand silently by she , look down on many little canvas bag range 
 in the bottom of the chest , wherefrom her mother extract handfuls of 
 shin guilde and mexican dollar , let they stream slowly back 
 again through her claw - like finger . the music of tinkle silver seem 
 to delight she , and her eye sparkle with the reflect gleam of freshly- 
 mint coin . she be mutter to herself : " and this , and this , and yet 
 this ! soon he will give more - as much more as I ask . he be a great 
 Rajah - a Son of Heaven ! and she will be a ranee - he give all this for 
 she ! who ever give anything for I ? I be a slave ! be I ? I be the 
 mother of a great ranee ! " she become aware suddenly of her daughter 's 
 presence , and cease she droning , shut the lid down violently ; then , 
 without rise from her crouch position , she look up at the girl 
 stand by with a vague smile on her dreamy face . 
 " you have see . have you ? " she shout , shrilly . " that be all mine , and 
 for you . it be not enough ! he will have to give more before he take 
 you away to the southern island where his father be king . you hear I ? 
 you be worth more , granddaughter of Rajahs ! More ! More ! " 
 the sleepy voice of Almayer be hear on the verandah recommend 
 silence . Mrs. Almayer extinguish the light and creep into her corner 
 of the room . Nina lay down on she back on a pile of soft mat , her 
 hand entwine under her head , gaze through the shutterless hole , 
 serve as a window at the star twinkle on the black sky ; she be 
 await the time of start for her appoint meeting - place . with quiet 
 happiness she think of that meeting in the great forest , far from all 
 human eye and sound . her soul , lapse again into the savage mood , 
 which the genius of civilisation work by the hand of Mrs. Vinck could 
 never destroy , experience a feeling of pride and of some slight trouble 
 at the high value her worldly - wise mother have put upon her person ; but 
 she remember the expressive glance and word of Dain , and , 
 tranquillise , she close her eye in a shiver of pleasant anticipation . 
 there be some situation where the barbarian and the , so - call , 
 civilised man meet upon the same ground . it may be suppose that Dain 
 Maroola be not exceptionally delighted with his prospective mother - in- 
 law , nor that he actually approve of that worthy woman 's appetite for 
 shin dollar . yet on that foggy morning when Babalatchi , lay aside 
 the care of state , go to visit his fish - basket in the Bulangi creek , 
 Maroola have no misgiving , experience no feeling but those of 
 impatience and longing , when paddle to the east side of the island 
 form the back - water in question . he hide his canoe in the bush and 
 strode rapidly across the islet , push with impatience through the 
 twig of heavy undergrowth intercrosse over his path . from motif of 
 prudence he would not take his canoe to the meeting - place , as Nina have 
 do . he have leave it in the main stream till his return from the other 
 side of the island . the heavy warm fog be close rapidly round he , 
 but he manage to catch a fleeting glimpse of a light away to the left , 
 proceed from Bulangi 's house . then he could see nothing in the 
 thickening vapour , and keep to the path only by a sort of instinct , which 
 also lead he to the very point on the opposite shore he wish to reach . 
 a great log have strand there , at right angle to the bank , form a 
 kind of jetty against which the swiftly flow stream break with a loud 
 ripple . he step on it with a quick but steady motion , and in two 
 stride find himself at the outer end , with the rush and swirl of the 
 foaming water at his foot . 
 stand there alone , as if separate from the world ; the heaven , earth ; 
 the very water roar under he swallow up in the thick veil of the 
 morning fog , he breathe out the name of Nina before he into the 
 apparently limitless space , sure of be hear , instinctively sure of 
 the nearness of the delightful creature ; certain of she be aware of 
 his near presence as he be aware of her . 
 the bow of Nina 's canoe loom up close to the log , cant high out of 
 the water by the weight of the sitter in the stern . Maroola lay his 
 hand on the stem and leap lightly in , give it a vigorous shove off . 
 the light craft , obey the new impulse , clear the log by a hair 's 
 breadth , and the river , with obedient complicity , swing it broadside to 
 the current , and bear it off silently and rapidly between the invisible 
 bank . and once more dain , at the foot of Nina , forget the world , feel 
 himself carry away helpless by a great wave of supreme emotion , by a 
 rush of joy , pride , and desire ; understand once more with overpowering 
 certitude that there be no life possible without that be he hold 
 clasped in his arm with passionate strength in a prolonged embrace . 
 Nina disengage herself gently with a low laugh . 
 " you will overturn the boat , Dain , " she whisper . 
 he look into her eye eagerly for a minute and let she go with a sigh , 
 then lie down in the canoe he put his head on her knee , gaze upwards 
 and stretch his arm backwards till his hand meet round the girl 's 
 waist . she bent over he , and , shake her head , frame both their face 
 in the fall lock of her long black hair . 
 and so they drift on , he speak with all the rude eloquence of a 
 savage nature give itself up without restraint to an overmaster 
 passion , she bend low to catch the murmur of word sweet to she than 
 life itself . to those two nothing exist then outside the gunwale of 
 the narrow and fragile craft . it be their world , fill with their 
 intense and all - absorb love . they take no heed of thickening mist , or 
 of the breeze die away before sunrise ; they forget the existence of the 
 great forest surround they , of all the tropical nature await the 
 advent of the sun in a solemn and impressive silence . 
 over the low river - mist hide the boat with its freight of young 
 passionate life and all - forgetful happiness , the star pal , and a 
 silvery - grey tint creep over the sky from the eastward . there be not a 
 breath of wind , not a rustle of stir leaf , not a splash of leaping 
 fish to disturb the serene repose of all live thing on the bank of 
 the great river . earth , river , and sky be wrap up in a deep sleep , 
 from which it seem there would be no waking . all the seethe life and 
 movement of tropical nature seem concentrate in the ardent eye , in 
 the tumultuously beat heart of the two being drift in the canoe , 
 under the white canopy of mist , over the smooth surface of the river . 
 suddenly a great sheaf of yellow ray shoot upwards from behind the black 
 curtain of tree line the bank of the Pantai . the star go out ; the 
 little black cloud at the zenith glow for a moment with crimson tint , 
 and the thick mist , stir by the gentle breeze , the sigh of wake 
 nature , whirl round and break into fantastically tear piece , 
 disclose the wrinkle surface of the river sparkle in the broad light 
 of day . great flock of white bird wheel scream above the swaying 
 tree - top . the sun have rise on the east coast . 
 Dain be the first to return to the care of everyday life . he rise and 
 glance rapidly up and down the river . his eye detect Babalatchi 's 
 boat astern , and another small black speck on the glitter water , which 
 be Taminah 's canoe . he move cautiously forward , and , kneeling , take up 
 a paddle ; Nina at the stern take her . they bent their body to the 
 work , throw up the water at every stroke , and the small craft go 
 swiftly ahead , leave a narrow wake fringe with a lace - like border of 
 white and gleam foam . without turn his head , Dain speak . 
 " somebody behind we , Nina . we must not let he gain . I think he be too 
 far to recognise we . " 
 " somebody before we also , " pant out Nina , without cease to paddle . 
 " I think I know , " rejoin Dain . " the sun shin over there , but I fancy 
 it be the girl Taminah . she come down every morning to my brig to sell 
 cake - stay often all day . it do not matter ; steer more into the 
 bank ; we must get under the bush . my canoe be hide not far from 
 here . " 
 as he speak his eye watch the broad - leave nipas which they be 
 brush in their swift and silent course . 
 " look out , Nina , " he say at last ; " there , where the water palm end and 
 the twig hang down under the lean tree . steer for the big green 
 branch . " 
 he stand up attentive , and the boat drift slowly in shore , Nina guide 
 it by a gentle and skilful movement of her paddle . when near enough Dain 
 lay hold of the big branch , and lean back shoot the canoe under a low 
 green archway of thickly matted creeper give access to a miniature bay 
 form by the caving in of the bank during the last great flood . his own 
 boat be there anchor by a stone , and he step into it , keep his 
 hand on the gunwale of Nina 's canoe . in a moment the two little 
 nutshell with their occupant float quietly side by side , reflect by 
 the black water in the dim light struggle through a high canopy of 
 dense foliage ; while above , away up in the broad day , flame immense red 
 blossom send down on their head a shower of great dew - sparkle 
 petal that descend rotate slowly in a continuous and perfume 
 stream ; and over they , under they , in the sleep water ; all around they 
 in a ring of luxuriant vegetation bath in the warm air charge with 
 strong and harsh perfume , the intense work of tropical nature go on : 
 plant shoot upward , entwine , interlace in inextricable confusion , 
 climb madly and brutally over each other in the terrible silence of a 
 desperate struggle towards the life - give sunshine above - as if strike 
 with sudden horror at the seething mass of corruption below , at the death 
 and decay from which they sprang . 
 " we must part now , " say Dain , after a long silence . " you must return at 
 once , Nina . I will wait till the brig drift down here , and shall get on 
 board then . " 
 " and will you be long away , Dain ? " ask Nina , in a low voice . 
 " Long ! " exclaim Dain . " would a man willingly remain long in a dark 
 place ? when I be not near you , Nina , I be like a man that be blind . what 
 be life to I without light ? " 
 Nina lean over , and with a proud and happy smile take Dain 's face 
 between her hand , look into his eye with a fond yet question 
 gaze . apparently she find there the confirmation of the word just 
 say , for a feeling of grateful security lighten for she the weight of 
 sorrow at the hour of parting . she believe that he , the descendant of 
 many great Rajahs , the son of a great chief , the master of life and 
 death , know the sunshine of life only in her presence . an immense wave 
 of gratitude and love well forth out of her heart towards he . how 
 could she make an outward and visible sign of all she feel for the man 
 who have fill her heart with so much joy and so much pride ? and in the 
 great tumult of passion , like a flash of lightning come to her the 
 reminiscence of that despise and almost forget civilisation she have 
 only glance at in her day of restraint , of sorrow , and of anger . in 
 the cold ash of that hateful and miserable past she would find the sign 
 of love , the fitting expression of the boundless felicity of the present , 
 the pledge of a bright and splendid future . she throw her arm around 
 Dain 's neck and press her lip to his in a long and burn kiss . he 
 close his eye , surprised and frighten at the storm raise in his 
 breast by the strange and to he hitherto unknown contact , and long after 
 Nina have push her canoe into the river he remain motionless , without 
 dare to open his eye , afraid to lose the sensation of intoxicate 
 delight he have taste for the first time . 
 now he want but immortality , he think , to be the equal of god , and 
 the creature that could open so the gate of paradise must be his - soon 
 would be his for ever ! 
 he open his eye in time to see through the archway of creeper the 
 bow of his brig come slowly into view , as the vessel drift past on its 
 way down the river . he must go on board now , he think ; yet he be loth 
 to leave the place where he have learn to know what happiness mean . 
 " time yet . let they go , " he mutter to himself ; and he close his eye 
 again under the red shower of scented petal , try to recall the scene 
 with all its delight and all its fear . 
 he must have be able to join his brig in time , after all , and find 
 much occupation outside , for it be in vain that Almayer look for his 
 friend 's speedy return . the low reach of the river where he so often 
 and so impatiently direct his eye remain deserted , save for the 
 rapid flitting of some fishing canoe ; but down the upper reach come 
 black cloud and heavy shower herald the final setting in of the 
 rainy season with its thunderstorm and great flood make the river 
 almost impossible of ascent for native canoe . 
 Almayer , stroll along the muddy beach between his house , watch 
 uneasily the river rise inch by inch , creep slowly near to the 
 boat , now ready and haul up in a row under the cover of drip 
 Kajang - mat . Fortune seem to elude his grasp , and in his weary tramp 
 backwards and forwards under the steady rain fall from the lower 
 sky , a sort of despairing indifference take possession of he . what do 
 it matter ? it be just his luck ! those two infernal savage , Lakamba 
 and Dain , induce he , with their promise of help , to spend his last 
 dollar in the fitting out of boat , and now one of they be go 
 somewhere , and the other shut up in his stockade would give no sign of 
 life . no , not even the scoundrelly Babalatchi , think Almayer , would 
 show his face near he , now they have sell he all the rice , brass gong , 
 and cloth necessary for his expedition . they have his very last coin , and 
 do not care whether he go or stay . and with a gesture of abandon 
 discouragement Almayer would climb up slowly to the verandah of his new 
 house to get out of the rain , and lean on the front rail with his head 
 sink between his shoulder he would abandon himself to the current of 
 bitter thought , oblivious of the flight of time and the pang of hunger , 
 deaf to the shrill cry of his wife call he to the evening meal . 
 when , rouse from his sad meditation by the first roll of the evening 
 thunderstorm , he stumble slowly towards the glimmer light of his old 
 house , his half - dead hope make his ear preternaturally acute to any 
 sound on the river . several night in succession he have hear the splash 
 of paddle and have see the indistinct form of a boat , but when hail 
 the shadowy apparition , his heart bound with sudden hope of hear 
 Dain 's voice , he be disappoint each time by the sulky answer conveying 
 to he the intelligence that the Arabs be on the river , bind on a 
 visit to the home - stay lakamba . this cause he many sleepless 
 night , spend in speculate upon the kind of villainy those estimable 
 personage be hatch now . at last , when all hope seem dead , he be 
 overjoy on hear Dain 's voice ; but Dain also appear very anxious to 
 see Lakamba , and Almayer feel uneasy owe to a deep and ineradicable 
 distrust as to that ruler 's disposition towards himself . still , Dain have 
 return at last . evidently he mean to keep to his bargain . Hope 
 revive , and that night Almayer sleep soundly , while Nina watch the 
 angry river under the lash of the thunderstorm sweep onward towards 
 the sea . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 Dain be not long in cross the river after leave Almayer . he land 
 at the water - gate of the stockade enclose the group of house which 
 compose the residence of the Rajah of Sambir . evidently somebody be 
 expect there , for the gate be open , and man with torch be ready to 
 precede the visitor up the inclined plane of plank lead to the 
 large house where Lakamba actually reside , and where all the business 
 of state be invariably transact . the other building within the 
 enclosure serve only to accommodate the numerous household and the wife 
 of the ruler . 
 Lakamba 's own house be a strong structure of solid plank , raise on 
 high pile , with a verandah of split bamboos surround it on all side ; 
 the whole be cover in by an immensely high - pitch roof of 
 palm - leaf , rest on beam blacken by the smoke of many torch . 
 the building stand parallel to the river , one of its long side face 
 the water - gate of the stockade . there be a door in the short side 
 look up the river , and the inclined plank - way lead straight from the 
 gate to that door . by the uncertain light of smoky torch , Dain notice 
 the vague outline of a group of armed man in the dark shadow to his 
 right . from that group Babalatchi step forward to open the door , and 
 Dain enter the audience chamber of the Rajah 's residence . about one- 
 third of the house be curtain off , by heavy stuff of european 
 manufacture , for that purpose ; close to the curtain there be a big arm- 
 chair of some black wood , much carve , and before it a rough deal table . 
 otherwise the room be only furnish with mat in great profusion . to 
 the left of the entrance stand a rude arm - rack , with three rifle with 
 fix bayonet in it . by the wall , in the shadow , the body - guard of 
 lakamba - all friend or relation - sleep in a confused heap of brown 
 arm , leg , and multi - coloured garment , from whence issue an occasional 
 snore or a subdue groan of some uneasy sleeper . an european lamp with a 
 green shade stand on the table make all this indistinctly visible to 
 Dain . 
 " you be welcome to your rest here , " say Babalatchi , look at Dain 
 interrogatively . 
 " I must speak to the Rajah at once , " answer Dain . 
 Babalatchi make a gesture of assent , and , turn to the brass gong 
 suspend under the arm - rack , strike two sharp blow . 
 the ear - splitting din wake up the guard . the snore cease ; outstretche 
 leg be draw in ; the whole heap move , and slowly resolve itself into 
 individual form , with much yawning and rub of sleepy eye ; behind 
 the curtain there be a burst of feminine chatter ; then the bass voice 
 of Lakamba be hear . 
 " be that the arab trader ? " 
 " no , Tuan , " answer Babalatchi ; " Dain have return at last . he be here 
 for an important talk , bitcharra - if you mercifully consent . " 
 evidently Lakamba 's mercy go so far - for in a short while he come out 
 from behind the curtain - but it do not go to the length of induce he 
 to make an extensive toilet . a short red sarong tighten hastily round 
 his hip be his only garment . the merciful ruler of Sambir look 
 sleepy and rather sulky . he sit in the arm - chair , his knee well apart , 
 his elbow on the arm - rest , his chin on his breast , breathe heavily 
 and wait malevolently for Dain to open the important talk . 
 but Dain do not seem anxious to begin . he direct his gaze towards 
 Babalatchi , squat comfortably at the foot of his master , and remain 
 silent with a slightly bent head as if in attentive expectation of come 
 word of wisdom . 
 Babalatchi cough discreetly , and , lean forward , push over a few 
 mat for Dain to sit upon , then lift up his squeaky voice he assure 
 he with eager volubility of everybody 's delight at this long - look - for 
 return . his heart have hunger for the sight of Dain 's face , and his 
 ear be wither for the want of the refresh sound of his voice . 
 everybody 's heart and ear be in the same sad predicament , accord 
 to Babalatchi , as he indicate with a sweeping gesture the other bank of 
 the river where the settlement slumber peacefully , unconscious of the 
 great joy await it on the morrow when Dain 's presence amongst they 
 would be disclose . " for " - go on Babalatchi - " what be the joy of a 
 poor man if not the open hand of a generous trader or of a great - " 
 here he check himself abruptly with a calculated embarrassment of 
 manner , and his rove eye seek the floor , while an apologetic smile 
 dwelt for a moment on his misshapen lip . once or twice during this 
 opening speech an amuse expression flit across Dain 's face , soon to 
 give way , however , to an appearance of grave concern . on Lakamba 's brow 
 a heavy frown have settle , and his lip move angrily as he listen to 
 his Prime Minister 's oratory . in the silence that fall upon the room 
 when Babalatchi cease speaking arise a chorus of varied snore from the 
 corner where the body - guard have resume their interrupted slumber , but 
 the distant rumble of thunder filling then Nina 's heart with apprehension 
 for the safety of her lover pass unheeded by those three man intent 
 each on their own purpose , for life or death . 
 after a short silence , Babalatchi , discard now the flower of polite 
 eloquence , speak again , but in short and hurried sentence and in a low 
 voice . they have be very uneasy . why do Dain remain so long absent ? 
 the man dwell on the low reach of the river hear the report of 
 big gun and see a fire - ship of the Dutch amongst the island of the 
 estuary . so they be anxious . rumour of a disaster have reach 
 Abdulla a few day ago , and since then they have be wait for Dain 's 
 return under the apprehension of some misfortune . for day they have 
 close their eye in fear , and wake up alarmed , and walk abroad 
 trembling , like man before an enemy . and all on account of Dain . would 
 he not allay their fear for his safety , not for themselves ? they be 
 quiet and faithful , and devote to the great Rajah in Batavia - may his 
 fate lead he ever to victory for the joy and profit of his servant ! 
 " and here , " go on Babalatchi , " lakamba my master be get thin in 
 his anxiety for the trader he have take under his protection ; and so be 
 Abdulla , for what would wicked man not say if perchance - " 
 " be silent , fool ! " growl Lakamba , angrily . 
 Babalatchi subside into silence with a satisfied smile , while Dain , who 
 have be watch he as if fascinate , turn with a sigh of relief 
 towards the ruler of sambir . Lakamba do not move , and , without raise 
 his head , look at Dain from under his eyebrow , breathe audibly , with 
 pout lip , in an air of general discontent . 
 " speak ! o dain ! " he say at last . " we have hear many rumour . many 
 night in succession have my friend Reshid come here with bad tiding . 
 news travel fast along the coast . but they may be untrue ; there be 
 more lie in man 's mouth in these day than when I be young , but I be 
 not easy to deceive now . " 
 " all my word be true , " say Dain , carelessly . " if you want to know 
 what befell my brig , then learn that it be in the hand of the Dutch . 
 believe I , Rajah , " he go on , with sudden energy , " the Orang Blanda 
 have good friend in Sambir , or else how do they know I be come 
 thence ? " 
 Lakamba give Dain a short and hostile glance . Babalatchi rise quietly , 
 and , go to the arm - rack , strike the gong violently . 
 outside the door there be a shuffle of bare foot ; inside , the guard wake 
 up and sit star in sleepy surprise . 
 " yes , you faithful friend of the white Rajah , " go on Dain , scornfully , 
 turn to Babalatchi , who have return to his place , " I have escape , 
 and I be here to gladden your heart . when I see the dutch ship I run the 
 brig inside the reef and put she ashore . they do not dare to follow 
 with the ship , so they send the boat . we take to ours and try to get 
 away , but the ship drop fireball at we , and kill many of my man . 
 but I be leave , o Babalatchi ! the Dutch be come here . they be 
 seek for I . they be come to ask their faithful friend Lakamba and 
 his slave Babalatchi . rejoice ! " 
 but neither of his hearer appear to be in a joyful mood . Lakamba have 
 put one leg over his knee , and go on gently scratch it with a 
 meditative air , while Babalatchi , sit cross - legged , seem suddenly 
 to become small and very limp , star straight before he vacantly . 
 the guard evince some interest in the proceeding , stretch themselves 
 full length on the mat to be near the speaker . one of they get up and 
 now stand lean against the arm - rack , play absently with the fringe 
 of his sword - hilt . 
 Dain wait till the crash of thunder have die away in distant muttering 
 before he speak again . 
 " be you dumb , o ruler of Sambir , or be the son of a great Rajah unworthy 
 of your notice ? I be come here to seek refuge and to warn you , and want 
 to know what you intend do . " 
 " you come here because of the white man 's daughter , " retort Lakamba , 
 quickly . " your refuge be with your father , the Rajah of Bali , the Son 
 of Heaven , the ' Anak Agong ' himself . what be I to protect great prince ? 
 only yesterday I plant rice in a burn clearing ; to - day you say I hold 
 your life in my hand . " 
 Babalatchi glance at his master . " no man can escape his fate , " he 
 murmur piously . " when love enter a man 's heart he be like a 
 child - without any understanding . be merciful , lakamba , " he add , 
 twitch the corner of the Rajah 's sarong warningly . 
 Lakamba snatch away the skirt of the sarong angrily . under the dawn 
 comprehension of intolerable embarrassment cause by Dain 's return to 
 Sambir he begin to lose such composure as he have be , till then , able to 
 maintain ; and now he raise his voice loudly above the whistling of the 
 wind and the patter of rain on the roof in the hard squall pass over 
 the house . 
 " you come here first as a trader with sweet word and great promise , 
 ask I to look the other way while you work your will on the white 
 man there . and I do . what do you want now ? when I be young I fight . 
 now I be old , and want peace . it be easy for I to have you kill 
 than to fight the Dutch . it be well for I . " 
 the squall have now pass , and , in the short stillness of the lull in the 
 storm , Lakamba repeat softly , as if to himself , " much easy . much 
 well . " 
 Dain do not seem greatly discompose by the Rajah 's threaten word . 
 while Lakamba be speak he have glance once rapidly over his shoulder , 
 just to make sure that there be nobody behind he , and , tranquillise in 
 that respect , he have extract a siri - box out of the fold of his waist- 
 cloth , and be wrap carefully the little bit of betel - nut and a small 
 pinch of lime in the green leaf tender he politely by the watchful 
 Babalatchi . he accept this as a peace - offering from the silent 
 statesman - a kind of mute protest against his master 's undiplomatic 
 violence , and as an omen of a possible understanding to be arrive at 
 yet . otherwise Dain be not uneasy . although recognise the justice of 
 Lakamba 's surmise that he have come back to sambir only for the sake of 
 the white man 's daughter , yet he be not conscious of any childish lack 
 of understanding , as suggest by Babalatchi . in fact , Dain know very 
 well that Lakamba be too deeply implicate in the gunpowder smuggling to 
 care for an investigation the dutch authority into that matter . when 
 send off by his father , the independent Rajah of Bali , at the time when 
 the hostility between Dutch and Malays threaten to spread from 
 Sumatra over the whole archipelago , Dain have find all the big trader 
 deaf to his guard proposal , and above the temptation of the great 
 price he be ready to give for gunpowder . he go to Sambir as a last 
 and almost hopeless resort , have hear in Macassar of the white man 
 there , and of the regular steamer trading from Singapore - allure also by 
 the fact that there be no dutch resident on the river , which would make 
 thing easy , no doubt . his hope get nearly wreck against the 
 stubborn loyalty of Lakamba arise from well - understand self - interest ; 
 but at last the young man 's generosity , his persuasive enthusiasm , the 
 prestige of his father 's great name , overpower the prudent hesitation 
 of the ruler of sambir . Lakamba would have nothing to do himself with 
 any illegal traffic . he also object to the Arabs be make use of in 
 that matter ; but he suggest Almayer , say that he be a weak man 
 easily persuade , and that his friend , the english captain of the 
 steamer , could be make very useful - very likely even would join in the 
 business , smuggle the powder in the steamer without Abdulla 's 
 knowledge . there again Dain meet in Almayer with unexpected resistance ; 
 Lakamba have to send Babalatchi over with the solemn promise that his eye 
 would be shut in friendship for the white man , Dain pay for the 
 promise and the friendship in good silver guilde of the hat Orang 
 Blanda . Almayer , at last consenting , say the powder would be obtain , 
 but Dain must trust he with dollar to send to Singapore in payment for 
 it . he would induce Ford to buy and smuggle it in the steamer on board 
 the brig . he do not want any money for himself out of the transaction , 
 but Dain must help he in his great enterprise after send off the 
 brig . Almayer have explain to Dain that he could not trust lakamba 
 alone in that matter ; he would be afraid of lose his treasure and his 
 life through the cupidity of the Rajah ; yet the Rajah have to be tell , and 
 insist on take a share in that operation , or else his eye would 
 remain shut no long . to this Almayer have to submit . have Dain not see 
 Nina he would have probably refuse to engage himself and his man in the 
 project expedition to Gunong Mas - the mountain of gold . as it be he 
 intend to return with half of his man as soon as the brig be clear of 
 the reef , but the persistent chase give he by the dutch frigate have 
 force he to run south and ultimately to wreck and destroy his vessel in 
 order to preserve his liberty or perhaps even his life . yes , he have come 
 back to Sambir for Nina , although aware that the Dutch would look for he 
 there , but he have also calculate his chance of safety in Lakamba 's 
 hand . for all his ferocious talk , the merciful ruler would not kill 
 he , for he have long ago be impressed with the notion that Dain 
 possess the secret of the white man 's treasure ; neither would he give 
 he up to the Dutch , for fear of some fatal disclosure of complicity in 
 the treasonable trade . so Dain feel tolerably secure as he sit 
 meditate quietly his answer to the Rajah 's bloodthirsty speech . yes , 
 he would point out to he the aspect of his position should he - dain - fall 
 into the hand of the Dutch and should he speak the truth . he would have 
 nothing more to lose then , and he would speak the truth . and if he do 
 return to sambir , disturb thereby Lakamba 's peace of mind , what then ? 
 he come to look after his property . do he not pour a stream of silver 
 into Mrs. Almayer 's greedy lap ? he have pay , for the girl , a price 
 worthy of a great prince , although unworthy of that delightfully 
 madden creature for whom his untamed soul long in an intensity of 
 desire far more tormenting than the sharp pain . he want his 
 happiness . he have the right to be in Sambir . 
 he rise , and , approach the table , lean both his elbow on it ; 
 Lakamba responsively edge his seat a little close , while Babalatchi 
 scramble to his foot and thrust his inquisitive head between his 
 master 's and Dain 's . they interchange their idea rapidly , speak in 
 whisper into each other 's face , very close now , Dain suggesting , 
 Lakamba contradict , Babalatchi conciliate and anxious in his vivid 
 apprehension of come difficulty . he speak most , whispering 
 earnestly , turn his head slowly from side to side so as to bring his 
 solitary eye to bear upon each of his interlocutor in turn . why should 
 there be strife ? say he . let Tuan Dain , whom he love only less than 
 his master , go trustfully into hiding . there be many place for that . 
 Bulangi 's house away in the clearing be good . 
 Bulangi be a safe man . in the network of crooked channel no white man 
 could find his way . white man be strong , but very foolish . it be 
 undesirable to fight they , but deception be easy . they be like silly 
 woman - they do not know the use of reason , and he be a match for any of 
 they - go on Babalatchi , with all the confidence of deficient 
 experience . probably the Dutch would seek Almayer . maybe they would 
 take away their countryman if they be suspicious of he . that would be 
 good . after the Dutch go away Lakamba and Dain would get the treasure 
 without any trouble , and there would be one person less to share it . do 
 he not speak wisdom ? will Tuan Dain go to Bulangi 's house till the 
 danger be over , go at once ? 
 Dain accept this suggestion of go into hiding with a certain sense 
 of confer a favour upon Lakamba and the anxious statesman , but he meet 
 the proposal of go at once with a decide no , look Babalatchi 
 meaningly in the eye . the statesman sigh as a man accept the 
 inevitable would do , and point silently towards the other bank of the 
 river . Dain bend his head slowly . 
 " yes , I be go there , " he say . 
 " before the day come ? " ask Babalatchi . 
 " I be go there now , " answer Dain , decisively . " the Orang Blanda 
 will not be here before to - morrow night , perhaps , and I must tell Almayer 
 of our arrangement . " 
 " no , Tuan . no ; say nothing , " protest Babalatchi . " I will go over 
 myself at sunrise and let he know . " 
 " I will see , " say Dain , prepare to go . 
 the thunderstorm be recommence outside , the heavy cloud hang low 
 overhead now . 
 there be a constant rumble of distant thunder punctuate by the nearer 
 sharp crash , and in the continuous play of blue lightning the wood and 
 the river show fitfully , with all the elusive distinctness of detail 
 characteristic of such a scene . outside the door of the Rajah 's house 
 Dain and Babalatchi stand on the shake verandah as if daze and stun 
 by the violence of the storm . they stand there amongst the cower 
 form of the Rajah 's slave and retainer seek shelter from the rain , 
 and Dain call aloud to his boatman , who respond with an unanimous 
 " Ada ! Tuan ! " while they look uneasily at the river . 
 " this be a great flood ! " shout Babalatchi into Dain 's ear . " the river 
 be very angry . look ! look at the drift log ! can you go ? " 
 Dain glance doubtfully on the livid expanse of seethe water bound 
 far away on the other side by the narrow black line of the forest . 
 suddenly , in a vivid white flash , the low point of land with the bend 
 tree on it and Almayer 's house , leap into view , flickered and 
 disappear . Dain push Babalatchi aside and run down to the water - gate 
 follow by his shiver boatman . 
 Babalatchi back slowly in and close the door , then turn round and 
 look silently upon Lakamba . the Rajah sit still , glare stonily upon 
 the table , and Babalatchi gaze curiously at the perplexed mood of the 
 man he have serve so many year through good and evil fortune . no doubt 
 the one - eyed statesman feel within his savage and much sophisticated 
 breast the unwonted feeling of sympathy with , and perhaps even pity for , 
 the man he call his master . from the safe position of a confidential 
 adviser , he could , in the dim vista of past year , see himself - a casual 
 cut - throat - find shelter under that man 's roof in the modest 
 rice - clearing of early beginning . then come a long period of unbroken 
 success , of wise counsel , and deep plotting resolutely carry out by 
 the fearless lakamba , till the whole east coast from Poulo Laut to 
 Tanjong Batu listen to Babalatchi 's wisdom speak through the mouth 
 of the ruler of Sambir . in those long year how many danger escape , 
 how many enemy bravely face , how many white man successfully 
 circumvent ! and now he look upon the result of so many year of 
 patient toil : the fearless Lakamba cow by the shadow of an impending 
 trouble . the ruler be grow old , and Babalatchi , aware of an uneasy 
 feeling at the pit of his stomach , put both his hand there with a 
 suddenly vivid and sad perception of the fact that he himself be grow 
 old too ; that the time of reckless daring be past for both of they , and 
 that they have to seek refuge in prudent cunning . they want peace ; they 
 be dispose to reform ; they be ready even to retrench , so as to have 
 the wherewithal to bribe the evil day away , if bribe away they could 
 be . Babalatchi sigh for the second time that night as he squat 
 again at his master 's foot and tender he his betel - nut box in mute 
 sympathy . and they sit there in close yet silent communion of betel - nut 
 chewer , move their jaw slowly , expectorate decorously into the wide- 
 mouthed brass vessel they pass to one another , and listen to the 
 awful din of the battle element outside . 
 " there be a very great flood , " remark Babalatchi , sadly . 
 " yes , " say Lakamba . " do Dain go ? " 
 " he go , Tuan . he run down to the river like a man possess of the 
 Sheitan himself . " 
 there be another long pause . 
 " he may get drown , " suggest Lakamba at last , with some show of 
 interest . 
 " the float log be many , " answer Babalatchi , " but he be a good 
 swimmer , " he add languidly . 
 " he ought to live , " say Lakamba ; " he know where the treasure be . " 
 Babalatchi assent with an ill - humour grunt . his want of success in 
 penetrate the white man 's secret as to the locality where the gold be 
 to be find be a sore point with the statesman of Sambir , as the only 
 conspicuous failure in an otherwise brilliant career . 
 a great peace have now succeed the turmoil of the storm . only the 
 little belate cloud , which hurry past overhead to catch up the main 
 body flash silently in the distance , send down short shower that 
 patter softly with a soothe hiss over the palm - leaf roof . 
 Lakamba rouse himself from his apathy with an appearance of have 
 grasp the situation at last . 
 " Babalatchi , " he call briskly , give he a slight kick . 
 " Ada Tuan ! I be listen . " 
 " if the Orang Blanda come here , Babalatchi , and take Almayer to Batavia 
 to punish he for smuggle gunpowder , what will he do , you think ? " 
 " I do not know , Tuan . " 
 " you be a fool , " comment Lakamba , exultingly . " he will tell they 
 where the treasure be , so as to find mercy . he will . " 
 Babalatchi look up at his master and nod his head with by no mean a 
 joyful surprise . he have not think of this ; there be a new 
 complication . 
 " Almayer must die , " say Lakamba , decisively , " to make our secret safe . 
 he must die quietly , Babalatchi . you must do it . " 
 Babalatchi assent , and rise wearily to his foot . " to - morrow ? " he 
 ask . 
 " yes ; before the Dutch come . he drink much coffee , " answer Lakamba , 
 with seem irrelevancy . 
 Babalatchi stretch himself yawn , but Lakamba , in the flattering 
 consciousness of a knotty problem solve by his own unaided intellectual 
 effort , grow suddenly very wakeful . 
 " Babalatchi , " he say to the exhausted statesman , " fetch the box of music 
 the white captain give I . I can not sleep . " 
 at this order a deep shade of melancholy settle upon Babalatchi 's 
 feature . he go reluctantly behind the curtain and soon reappear 
 carry in his arm a small hand - organ , which he put down on the table 
 with an air of deep dejection . Lakamba settle himself comfortably in 
 his arm - chair . 
 " Turn , Babalatchi , turn , " he murmur , with closed eye . 
 Babalatchi 's hand grasp the handle with the energy of despair , and as 
 he turn , the deep gloom on his countenance change into an expression 
 of hopeless resignation . through the open shutter the note of Verdi 's 
 music float out on the great silence over the river and forest . Lakamba 
 listen with closed eye and a delighted smile ; Babalatchi turn , at 
 time doze off and sway over , then catch himself up in a great 
 fright with a few quick turn of the handle . nature sleep in an 
 exhausted repose after the fierce turmoil , while under the unsteady hand 
 of the statesman of Sambir the Trovatore fitfully weep , wail , and bade 
 good - bye to his Leonore again and again in a mournful round of tearful 
 and endless iteration . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 the bright sunshine of the clear mistless morning , after the stormy 
 night , flood the main path of the settlement lead from the low shore 
 of the Pantai branch of the river to the gate of Abdulla 's compound . the 
 path be desert this morning ; it stretch its dark yellow surface , 
 hard beat by the tramp of many bare foot , between the cluster of palm 
 tree , whose tall trunk bar it with strong black line at irregular 
 interval , while the newly rise sun throw the shadow of their leafy 
 head far away over the roof of the building line the river , even 
 over the river itself as it flow swiftly and silently past the deserted 
 house . for the house be desert too . on the narrow strip of 
 trodden grass intervene between their open door and the road , the 
 morning fire smoulder untended , send thin fluted column of smoke 
 into the cool air , and spread the thin veil of mysterious blue 
 haze over the sunlit solitude of the settlement . Almayer , just out of 
 his hammock , gaze sleepily at the unwonted appearance of Sambir , 
 wonder vaguely at the absence of life . his own house be very quiet ; 
 he could not hear his wife 's voice , nor the sound of Nina 's footstep in 
 the big room , open on the verandah , which he call his sitting - room , 
 whenever , in the company of white man , he wish to assert his claim to 
 the commonplace decency of civilisation . nobody ever sit there ; there 
 be nothing there to sit upon , for Mrs. Almayer in her savage mood , when 
 excited by the reminiscence of the piratical period of her life , have 
 tear off the curtain to make sarong for the slave - girl , and have burn 
 the showy furniture piecemeal to cook the family rice . but Almayer be 
 not think of his furniture now . he be think of Dain 's return , of 
 Dain 's nocturnal interview with Lakamba , of its possible influence on his 
 long - mature plan , now near the period of their execution . he be 
 also uneasy at the non - appearance of Dain who have promise he an early 
 visit . " the fellow have plenty of time to cross the river , " he muse , 
 " and there be so much to be do to - day . the settling of detail for 
 the early start on the morrow ; the launching of the boat ; the thousand 
 and one finish touch . for the expedition must start complete , 
 nothing should be forget , nothing should - " 
 the sense of the unwonted solitude grow upon he suddenly , and in the 
 unusual silence he catch himself long even for the usually unwelcome 
 sound of his wife 's voice to break the oppressive stillness which seem , 
 to his frightened fancy , to portend the advent of some new misfortune . 
 " what have happen ? " he mutter half aloud , as he shuffle in his 
 imperfectly adjust slipper towards the balustrade of the verandah . " be 
 everybody asleep or dead ? " 
 the settlement be alive and very much awake . it be awake ever since 
 the early break of day , when Mahmat Banjer , in a fit of unheard - of 
 energy , arise and , take up his hatchet , step over the sleep form 
 of his two wife and walk shiver to the water 's edge to make sure 
 that the new house he be build have not float away during the night . 
 the house be be build by the enterprising Mahmat on a large raft , and 
 he have securely moor it just inside the muddy point of land at the 
 junction of the two branch of the Pantai so as to be out of the way of 
 drift log that would no doubt strand on the point during the freshet . 
 Mahmat walk through the wet grass say bourrouh , and curse softly 
 to himself the hard necessity of active life that drive he from his 
 warm couch into the cold of the morning . a glance show he that his 
 house be still there , and he congratulate himself on his foresight in 
 haul it out of harm 's way , for the increase light show he a 
 confuse wrack of drift - log , half - strand on the muddy flat , 
 interlock into a shapeless raft by their branch , toss to and fro 
 and grind together in the eddy cause by the meet current of the 
 two branch of the river . Mahmat walk down to the water 's edge to 
 examine the rattan mooring of his house just as the sun clear the 
 tree of the forest on the opposite shore . as he bend over the 
 fastening he glance again carelessly at the unquiet jumble of log and 
 see there something that cause he to drop his hatchet and stand up , 
 shade his eye with his hand from the ray of the rise sun . it be 
 something red , and the log roll over it , at time closing round it , 
 sometimes hide it . it look to he at first like a strip of red 
 cloth . the next moment Mahmat have make it out and raise a great shout . 
 " ah ya ! there ! " yell Mahmat . " there be a man amongst the log . " he 
 put the palm of his hand to his lip and shout , enunciate 
 distinctly , his face turn towards the settlement : " there be a body of a 
 man in the river ! come and see ! a dead - stranger ! " 
 the woman of the near house be already outside kindle the fire 
 and husk the morning rice . they take up the cry shrilly , and it 
 travel so from house to house , die away in the distance . the man 
 rush out excited but silent , and run towards the muddy point where the 
 unconscious log toss and ground and bump and roll over the dead 
 stranger with the stupid persistency of inanimate thing . the woman 
 follow , neglect their domestic duty and disregard the 
 possibility of domestic discontent , while group of child bring up 
 the rear , warble joyously , in the delight of unexpected excitement . 
 Almayer call aloud for his wife and daughter , but receive no 
 response , stand listen intently . the murmur of the crowd reach he 
 faintly , bring with it the assurance of some unusual event . he 
 glance at the river just as he be go to leave the verandah and 
 check himself at the sight of a small canoe cross over from the 
 Rajah 's landing - place . the solitary occupant   in whom Almayer soon 
 recognise Babalatchi   effect the crossing a little below the house and 
 paddle up to the Lingard jetty in the dead water under the bank . 
 Babalatchi clamber out slowly and go on fasten his canoe with 
 fastidious care , as if not in a hurry to meet Almayer , whom he see 
 look at he from the verandah . this delay give Almayer time to notice 
 and greatly wonder at Babalatchi 's official get - up . the statesman of 
 Sambir be clothe in a costume befit his high rank . a loudly checker 
 sarong encircle his waist , and from its many fold peep out the silver 
 hilt of the kriss that see the light only on great festival or during 
 official reception . over the left shoulder and across the otherwise 
 unclad breast of the aged diplomatist glisten a patent leather belt 
 bear a brass plate with the arm of Netherlands under the inscription , 
 " Sultan of Sambir . " Babalatchi 's head be cover by a red turban , whose 
 fringe end fall over the left cheek and shoulder give to his aged 
 face a ludicrous expression of joyous recklessness . when the canoe be 
 at last fasten to his satisfaction he straighten himself up , shake 
 down the fold of his sarong , and move with long stride towards 
 Almayer 's house , swing regularly his long ebony staff , whose gold head 
 ornament with precious stone flash in the morning sun . Almayer 
 wave his hand to the right towards the point of land , to he invisible , 
 but in full view from the jetty . 
 " oh , Babalatchi ! oh ! " he call out ; " what be the matter there ? can you 
 see ? " 
 Babalatchi stop and gaze intently at the crowd on the river bank , and 
 after a little while the astonish Almayer see he leave the path , 
 gather up his sarong in one hand , and break into a trot through the grass 
 towards the muddy point . Almayer , now greatly interested , run down the 
 step of the verandah . the murmur of man 's voice and the shrill cry 
 of woman reach he quite distinctly now , and as soon as he turn the 
 corner of his house he could see the crowd on the low promontory swaying 
 and push round some object of interest . he could indistinctly hear 
 Babalatchi 's voice , then the crowd open before the aged statesman and 
 close after he with an excited hum , end in a loud shout . 
 as Almayer approach the throng a man run out and rush past he 
 towards the settlement , unheede his call to stop and explain the cause 
 of this excitement . on the very outskirt of the crowd Almayer find 
 himself arrest by an unyielding mass of humanity , regardless of his 
 entreaty for a passage , insensible to his gentle push as he try to 
 work his way through it towards the riverside . 
 in the midst of his gentle and slow progress he fancy suddenly he have 
 hear his wife 's voice in the thickest of the throng . he could not 
 mistake very well Mrs. Almayer 's high - pitch tone , yet the word be 
 too indistinct for he to understand their purport . he pause in his 
 endeavour to make a passage for himself , intend to get some 
 intelligence from those around he , when a long and pierce shriek rent 
 the air , silence the murmur of the crowd and the voice of his 
 informant . for a moment Almayer remain as if turn into stone with 
 astonishment and horror , for he be certain now that he have hear his 
 wife wail for the dead . he remember Nina 's unusual absence , and 
 madden by his apprehension as to her safety , he push blindly and 
 violently forward , the crowd fall back with cry of surprise and pain 
 before his frantic advance . 
 on the point of land in a little clear space lie the body of the stranger 
 just haul out from amongst the log . on one side stand Babalatchi , his 
 chin rest on the head of his staff and his one eye gaze steadily at 
 the shapeless mass of broken limb , torn flesh , and bloodstaine rag . as 
 Almayer burst through the ring of horrified spectator , Mrs. Almayer 
 throw her own head - veil over the upturned face of the drown man , and , 
 squatting by it , with another mournful howl , send a shiver through the 
 now silent crowd . Mahmat , dripping wet , turn to Almayer , eager to tell 
 his tale . 
 in the first moment of reaction from the anguish of his fear the sunshine 
 seem to waver before Almayer 's eye , and he listen to word speak 
 around he without comprehend their meaning . when , by a strong effort 
 of will , he regain the possession of his sens , Mahmat be say - 
 " that be the way , Tuan . his sarong be catch in the broken branch , and 
 he hang with his head under water . when I see what it be I do not want 
 it here . I want it to get clear and drift away . why should we bury a 
 stranger in the midst of our house for his ghost to frighten our woman 
 and child ? have we not enough ghost about this place ? " 
 a murmur of approval interrupt he here . Mahmat look reproachfully 
 at Babalatchi . 
 " but the Tuan Babalatchi order I to drag the body ashore " - he go on 
 look round at his audience , but address himself only to 
 Almayer - " and I drag he by the foot ; in through the mud I have 
 drag he , although my heart long to see he float down the river to 
 strand perchance on Bulangi 's clearing - may his father 's grave be 
 defile ! " 
 there be subdue laughter at this , for the enmity of Mahmat and Bulangi 
 be a matter of common notoriety and of undying interest to the 
 inhabitant of sambir . in the midst of that mirth Mrs. Almayer wail 
 suddenly again . 
 " Allah ! what ail the woman ! " exclaim Mahmat , angrily . " here , I have 
 touch this carcass which come from nobody know where , and have most 
 likely defile myself before eat rice . by order of Tuan Babalatchi I 
 do this thing to please the white man . be you pleased , o Tuan Almayer ? 
 and what will be my recompense ? Tuan Babalatchi say a recompense there 
 will be , and from you . now consider . I have be defile , and if not 
 defile I may be under the spell . look at his anklet ! who ever hear 
 of a corpse appear during the night amongst the log with gold anklet 
 on its leg ? there be witchcraft there . however , " add Mahmat , after a 
 reflective pause , " I will have the anklet if there be permission , for I 
 have a charm against the ghost and be not afraid . God be great ! " 
 a fresh outburst of noisy grief from Mrs. Almayer check the flow of 
 Mahmat 's eloquence . Almayer , bewildered , look in turn at his wife , at 
 Mahmat , at Babalatchi , and at last arrest his fascinated gaze on the 
 body lie on the mud with covered face in a grotesquely unnatural 
 contortion of mangle and broken limb , one twisted and lacerated arm , 
 with white bone protrude in many place through the torn flesh , 
 stretch out ; the hand with outspread finger nearly touch his foot . 
 " do you know who this be ? " he ask of Babalatchi , in a low voice . 
 Babalatchi , star straight before he , hardly move his lip , while 
 Mrs. Almayer 's persistent lamentation drown the whisper of his 
 murmur reply intend only for Almayer 's ear . 
 " it be fate . look at your foot , white man . I can see a ring on those 
 tear finger which I know well . " 
 say this , Babalatchi step carelessly forward , put his foot as 
 if accidentally on the hand of the corpse and press it into the soft 
 mud . he swing his staff menacingly towards the crowd , which fall back a 
 little . 
 " go away , " he say sternly , " and send your woman to their cooking fire , 
 which they ought not to have leave to run after a dead stranger . this be 
 man 's work here . I take he now in the name of the Rajah . let no man 
 remain here but Tuan Almayer 's slave . now go ! " 
 the crowd reluctantly begin to disperse . the woman go first , drag 
 away the child that hang back with all their weight on the maternal 
 hand . the man stroll slowly after they in ever form and change 
 group that gradually dissolve as they near the settlement and every 
 man regain his own house with step quicken by the hungry 
 anticipation of the morning rice . only on the slight elevation where the 
 land slop down towards the muddy point a few man , either friend or 
 enemy of Mahmat , remain gaze curiously for some time long at the 
 small group stand around the body on the river bank . 
 " I do not understand what you mean , Babalatchi , " say Almayer . " what be 
 the ring you be talk about ? whoever he be , you have tread the poor 
 fellow 's hand right into the mud . uncover his face , " he go on , 
 address Mrs. Almayer , who , squat by the head of the corpse , rock 
 herself to and fro , shake from time to time she dishevel grey lock , 
 and mutter mournfully . 
 " Hai ! " exclaim Mahmat , who have linger close by . " look , Tuan ; the 
 log come together so , " and here he press the palm of his hand 
 together , " and his head must have be between they , and now there be no 
 face for you to look at . there be his flesh and his bone , the nose , 
 and the lip , and maybe his eye , but nobody could tell the one from the 
 other . it be write the day he be bear that no man could look at he 
 in death and be able to say , ' this be my friend 's face . ' " 
 " Silence , Mahmat ; enough ! " say Babalatchi , " and take thy eye off his 
 anklet , thou eater of pig flesh . Tuan Almayer , " he go on , lower 
 his voice , " have you see Dain this morning ? " 
 Almayer open his eye wide and look alarmed . " no , " he say quickly ; 
 " have not   you see he ? be he not with the Rajah ? I be wait ; why do 
 he not come ? " 
 Babalatchi nod his head sadly . 
 " he be come , Tuan . he leave last night when the storm be great and the 
 river speak angrily . the night be very black , but he have within he a 
 light that show the way to your house as smooth as a narrow backwater , 
 and the many log no big than wisps of dry grass . therefore he 
 go ; and now he lie here . " and Babalatchi nod his head towards the 
 body . 
 " how can you tell ? " say Almayer , excitedly , push his wife aside . he 
 snatch the cover off and look at the formless mass of flesh , hair , 
 and dry mud , where the face of the drowned man should have be . 
 " nobody can tell , " he add , turn away with a shudder . 
 Babalatchi be on his knee wipe the mud from the stiffen finger of 
 the outstretched hand . he rise to his foot and flash before Almayer 's 
 eye a gold ring set with a large green stone . 
 " you know this well , " he say . " this never leave Dain 's hand . I have to 
 tear the flesh now to get it off . do you believe now ? " 
 Almayer raise his hand to his head and let they fall listlessly by his 
 side in the utter abandonment of despair . Babalatchi , look at he 
 curiously , be astonish to see he smile . a strange fancy have take 
 possession of Almayer 's brain , distract by this new misfortune . it 
 seem to he that for many year he have be fall into a deep 
 precipice . day after day , month after month , year after year , he have 
 be fall , fall , fall ; it be a smooth , round , black thing , and 
 the black wall have be rush upwards with wearisome rapidity . a 
 great rush , the noise of which he fancy he could hear yet ; and now , 
 with an awful shock , he have reach the bottom , and behold ! he be alive 
 and whole , and Dain be dead with all his bone break . it strike he as 
 funny . a dead malay ; he have see many dead Malays without any emotion ; 
 and now he feel inclined to weep , but it be over the fate of a white man 
 he know ; a man that fall over a deep precipice and do not die . he 
 seem somehow to himself to be stand on one side , a little way off , 
 look at a certain Almayer who be in great trouble . poor , poor 
 fellow ! why do not   he cut his throat ? he wish to encourage he ; he 
 be very anxious to see he lie dead over that other corpse . why do 
 he not die and end this suffering ? he groan aloud unconsciously and 
 start with affright at the sound of his own voice . be he go mad ? 
 terrify by the thought he turn away and run towards his house 
 repeat to himself , I be not go mad ; of course not , no , no , no ! he 
 try to keep a firm hold of the idea . 
 not mad , not mad . he stumble as he run blindly up the step repeat 
 fast and ever fast those word wherein seem to lie his salvation . he 
 see Nina stand there , and wish to say something to she , but could 
 not remember what , in his extreme anxiety not to forget that he be not 
 go mad , which he still keep repeat mentally as he run round the 
 table , till he stumble against one of the arm - chair and drop into it 
 exhaust . he sit star wildly at Nina , still assure himself 
 mentally of his own sanity and wonder why the girl shrink from he in 
 open - eyed alarm . what be the matter with she ? this be foolish . he 
 strike the table violently with his clench fist and shout hoarsely , 
 " give I some gin ! run ! " then , while Nina run off , he remain in the 
 chair , very still and quiet , astonish at the noise he have make . 
 Nina return with a tumbler half fill with gin , and find her father 
 star absently before he . Almayer feel very tired now , as if he have 
 come from a long journey . he feel as if he have walk mile and mile 
 that morning and now want to rest very much . he take the tumbler with 
 a shake hand , and as he drink his tooth chatter against the glass 
 which he drain and set down heavily on the table . he turn his eye 
 slowly towards Nina stand beside he , and say steadily - 
 " now all be over , Nina . he be dead , and I may as well burn all my 
 boat . " 
 he feel very proud of be able to speak so calmly . decidedly he be 
 not go mad . this certitude be very comforting , and he go on 
 talk about the finding of the body , listen to his own voice 
 complacently . Nina stand quietly , her hand rest lightly on her 
 father 's shoulder , her face unmove , but every line of her feature , the 
 attitude of her whole body express the most keen and anxious 
 attention . 
 " and so Dain be dead , " she say coldly , when her father cease speak . 
 Almayer 's elaborately calm demeanour give way in a moment to an outburst 
 of violent indignation . 
 " you stand there as if you be only half alive , and talk to I , " he 
 exclaim angrily , " as if it be a matter of no importance . yes , he be 
 dead ! do you understand ? dead ! what do you care ? you never care ; you 
 see I struggle , and work , and strive , unmoved ; and my suffering you 
 could never see . no , never . you have no heart , and you have no mind , or 
 you would have understand that it be for you , for your happiness I be 
 work . I want to be rich ; I want to get away from here . I want 
 to see white man bow low before the power of your beauty and your 
 wealth . Old as I be I wish to seek a strange land , a civilisation to 
 which I be a stranger , so as to find a new life in the contemplation of 
 your high fortune , of your triumph , of your happiness . for that I bear 
 patiently the burden of work , of disappointment , of humiliation amongst 
 these savage here , and I have it all nearly in my grasp . " 
 he look at his daughter 's attentive face and jump to his foot 
 upset the chair . 
 " do you hear ? I have it all there ; so ; within reach of my hand . " 
 he pause , try to keep down his rise anger , and fail . 
 " have you no feeling ? " he go on . " have you live without hope ? " Nina 's 
 silence exasperate he ; his voice rise , although he try to master his 
 feeling . 
 " be you content to live in this misery and die in this wretched hole ? 
 say something , Nina ; have you no sympathy ? have you no word of comfort 
 for I ? I that love you so . " 
 he wait for a while for an answer , and receive none shake his fist in 
 his daughter 's face . 
 " I believe you be an idiot ! " he yell . 
 he look round for the chair , pick it up and sit down stiffly . his 
 anger be dead within he , and he feel ashamed of his outburst , yet 
 relieve to think that now he have lay clear before his daughter the 
 inner meaning of his life . he think so in perfect good faith , deceive 
 by the emotional estimate of his motif , unable to see the crookedness 
 of his way , the unreality of his aim , the futility of his regret . and 
 now his heart be fill only with a great tenderness and love for his 
 daughter . he want to see her miserable , and to share with her his 
 despair ; but he want it only as all weak nature long for a 
 companionship in misfortune with being innocent of its cause . if she 
 suffer herself she would understand and pity he ; but now she would 
 not , or could not , find one word of comfort or love for he in his dire 
 extremity . the sense of his absolute loneliness come home to his heart 
 with a force that make he shudder . he sway and fall forward with his 
 face on the table , his arm stretch straight out , extended and rigid . 
 Nina make a quick movement towards her father and stand look at the 
 grey head , on the broad shoulder shake convulsively by the violence of 
 feeling that find relief at last in sob and tear . 
 Nina sigh deeply and move away from the table . her feature lose the 
 appearance of stony indifference that have exasperate her father into his 
 outburst of anger and sorrow . the expression of her face , now unseen by 
 her father , undergo a rapid change . she have listen to Almayer 's 
 appeal for sympathy , for one word of comfort , apparently indifferent , yet 
 with her breast tear by conflict impulse raise unexpectedly by 
 event she have not foresee , or at least do not expect to happen so 
 soon . with her heart deeply move by the sight of Almayer 's misery , 
 know it in her power to end it with a word , long to bring peace to 
 that troubled heart , she hear with terror the voice of her overpowering 
 love command she to be silent . and she submit after a short and 
 fierce struggle of her old self against the new principle of her life . 
 she wrap herself up in absolute silence , the only safeguard against 
 some fatal admission . she could not trust herself to make a sign , to 
 murmur a word for fear of say too much ; and the very violence of the 
 feeling that stir the innermost recess of her soul seem to turn 
 her person into a stone . the dilated nostril and the flash eye be 
 the only sign of the storm rag within , and those sign of his 
 daughter 's emotion Almayer do not see , for his sight be dim by self- 
 pity , by anger , and by despair . 
 have Almayer look at his daughter as she leant over the front rail of 
 the verandah he could have see the expression of indifference give way 
 to a look of pain , and that again pass away , leave the glorious beauty 
 of her face mar by deep - draw line of watchful anxiety . the long 
 grass in the neglect courtyard stand very straight before her eye in 
 the noonday heat . from the river - bank there be voice and a shuffle of 
 bare foot approach the house ; Babalatchi could be hear give 
 direction to Almayer 's man , and Mrs. Almayer 's subdued wail become 
 audible as the small procession bear the body of the drowned man and 
 head by that sorrowful matron turn the corner of the house . 
 Babalatchi have take the break anklet off the man 's leg , and now hold it 
 in his hand as he move by the side of the bearer , while Mahmat linger 
 behind timidly , in the hope of the promise reward . 
 " Lay he there , " say Babalatchi to Almayer 's man , point to a pile of 
 dry plank in front of the verandah . " lay he there . he be a kaffir 
 and the son of a dog , and he be the white man 's friend . he drink the 
 white man 's strong water , " he add , with affected horror . " that I have 
 see myself . " 
 the man stretch out the broken limb on two plank they have lay level , 
 while Mrs. Almayer cover the body with a piece of white cotton cloth , 
 and after whisper for some time with Babalatchi depart to her 
 domestic duty . Almayer 's man , after lay down their burden , 
 disperse themselves in quest of shady spot wherein to idle the day 
 away . Babalatchi be leave alone by the corpse that lay rigid under the 
 white cloth in the bright sunshine . 
 Nina come down the step and join Babalatchi , who put his hand to his 
 forehead , and squat down with great deference . 
 " you have a bangle there , " say Nina , look down on Babalatchi 's 
 upturned face and into his solitary eye . 
 " I have , Mem Putih , " return the polite statesman . then turn towards 
 Mahmat he beckon he close , call out , " come here ! " 
 Mahmat approach with some hesitation . he avoid look at Nina , but 
 fix his eye on Babalatchi . 
 " now , listen , " say Babalatchi , sharply . " the ring and the anklet you 
 have see , and you know they belong to dain the trader , and to no 
 other . Dain return last night in a canoe . he speak with the Rajah , 
 and in the middle of the night leave to cross over to the white man 's 
 house . there be a great flood , and this morning you find he in the 
 river . " 
 " by his foot I drag he out , " mutter Mahmat under his breath . " Tuan 
 Babalatchi , there will be a recompense ! " he exclaim aloud . 
 Babalatchi hold up the gold bangle before Mahmat 's eye . " what I have 
 tell you , Mahmat , be for all ear . what I give you now be for your eye 
 only . take . " 
 Mahmat take the bangle eagerly and hide it in the fold of his 
 waist - cloth . " be I a fool to show this thing in a house with three woman 
 in it ? " he growl . " but I shall tell they about Dain the trader , and 
 there will be talk enough . " 
 he turn and go away , increase his pace as soon as he be outside 
 Almayer 's compound . 
 Babalatchi look after he till he disappear behind the bush . " have 
 I do well , Mem Putih ? " he ask , humbly address Nina . 
 " you have , " answer Nina . " the ring you may keep yourself . " 
 Babalatchi touch his lip and forehead , and scramble to his foot . he 
 look at Nina , as if expect she to say something more , but Nina 
 turn towards the house and go up the step , motion he away with 
 her hand . 
 Babalatchi pick up his staff and prepare to go . it be very warm , and 
 he do not care for the long pull to the Rajah 's house . yet he must go 
 and tell the Rajah - tell of the event ; of the change in his plan ; of all 
 his suspicion . he walk to the jetty and begin cast off the rattan 
 painter of his canoe . 
 the broad expanse of the low reach , with its shimmering surface dot 
 by the black speck of the fishing canoe , lie before his eye . the 
 fisherman seem to be race . Babalatchi pause in his work , and look 
 on with sudden interest . the man in the foremost canoe , now within hail 
 of the first house of Sambir , lay in his paddle and stand up shout - 
 " the boat ! the boat ! the man - of - war 's boat be come ! they be 
 here ! " 
 in a moment the settlement be again alive with people rush to the 
 riverside . the man begin to unfasten their boat , the woman stand in 
 group look towards the bend down the river . above the tree line 
 the reach a slight puff of smoke appear like a black stain on the 
 brilliant blue of the cloudless sky . 
 Babalatchi stand perplex , the painter in his hand . he look down the 
 reach , then up towards Almayer 's house , and back again at the river as if 
 undecide what to do . at last he make the canoe fast again hastily , and 
 run towards the house and up the step of the verandah . 
 " Tuan ! Tuan ! " he call , eagerly . " the boat be come . the man - of- 
 war 's boat . you have well get ready . the officer will come here , I 
 know . " 
 Almayer lift his head slowly from the table , and look at he 
 stupidly . 
 " Mem Putih ! " exclaim Babalatchi to Nina , " look at he . he do not 
 hear . you must take care , " he add meaningly . 
 Nina nod to he with an uncertain smile , and be go to speak , when 
 a sharp report from the gun mount in the bow of the steam launch that 
 be just then come into view arrest the word on her part lip . the 
 smile die out , and be replace by the old look of anxious attention . 
 from the hill far away the echo come back like a long - draw and mournful 
 sigh , as if the land have send it in answer to the voice of its master . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 the news as to the identity of the body lie now in Almayer 's compound 
 spread rapidly over the settlement . during the forenoon most of the 
 inhabitant remain in the long street discuss the mysterious return 
 and the unexpected death of the man who have become know to they as the 
 trader . his arrival during the north - east monsoon , his long sojourn in 
 their midst , his sudden departure with his brig , and , above all , the 
 mysterious appearance of the body , say to be his , amongst the log , be 
 subject to wonder at and to talk over and over again with undiminished 
 interest . Mahmat move from house to house and from group to group , 
 always ready to repeat his tale : how he see the body catch by the sarong 
 in a fork log ; how Mrs. Almayer come , one of the first , at his cry , 
 recognise it , even before he have it haul on shore ; how Babalatchi 
 order he to bring it out of the water . " by the foot I drag he in , 
 and there be no head , " exclaim Mahmat , " and how could the white man 's 
 wife know who it be ? she be a witch , it be well know . and do you 
 see how the white man himself run away at the sight of the body ? like a 
 deer he run ! " and here Mahmat imitate Almayer 's long stride , to the 
 great joy of the beholder . and for all his trouble he have nothing . the 
 ring with the green stone Tuan Babalatchi keep . " nothing ! nothing ! " he 
 spit down at his foot in sign of disgust , and leave that group to seek 
 far on a fresh audience . 
 the news spread to the furthermost part of the settlement find out 
 Abdulla in the cool recess of his godown , where he sit overlook his 
 arab clerk and the man load and unload the up - country canoe . 
 Reshid , who be busy on the jetty , be summon into his uncle 's presence 
 and find he , as usual , very calm and even cheerful , but very much 
 surprised . the rumour of the capture or destruction of Dain 's brig have 
 reach the Arab 's ear three day before from the sea - fisherman and 
 through the dweller on the low reach of the river . it have be 
 pass up - stream from neighbour to neighbour till Bulangi , whose clearing 
 be near to the settlement , have bring that news himself to Abdulla 
 whose favour he court . but rumour also speak of a fight and of Dain 's 
 death on board his own vessel . and now all the settlement talk of 
 Dain 's visit to the Rajah and of his death when cross the river in the 
 dark to see Almayer . 
 they could not understand this . reshid think that it be very strange . 
 he feel uneasy and doubtful . but Abdulla , after the first shock of 
 surprise , with the old age 's dislike for solve riddle , show a 
 become resignation . he remark that the man be dead now at all 
 event , and consequently no more dangerous . where be the use to wonder 
 at the decree of Fate , especially if they be propitious to the true 
 believer ? and with a pious ejaculation to Allah the Merciful , the 
 Compassionate , Abdulla seem to regard the incident as close for the 
 present . 
 not so Reshid . he linger by his uncle , pull thoughtfully his neatly 
 trim beard . 
 " there be many lie , " he murmur . " he have be dead once before , and 
 come to life to die again now . the Dutch will be here before many day 
 and clamour for the man . shall I not believe my eye soon than the 
 tongue of woman and idle man ? " 
 " they say that the body be be take to Almayer 's compound , " say 
 Abdulla . " if you want to go there you must go before the dutch arrive 
 here . go late . it should not be say that we have be see inside that 
 man 's enclosure lately . " 
 Reshid assent to the truth of this last remark and leave his uncle 's 
 side . he lean against the lintel of the big doorway and look idly 
 across the courtyard through the open gate on to the main road of the 
 settlement . it lie empty , straight , and yellow under the flood of light . 
 in the hot noontide the smooth trunk of palm tree , the outline of the 
 house , and away there at the other end of the road the roof of Almayer 's 
 house visible over the bush on the dark background of forest , seem to 
 quiver in the heat radiating from the steam earth . swarm of yellow 
 butterfly rise , and settle to rise again in short flight before 
 Reshid 's half - close eye . from under his foot arise the dull hum of 
 insect in the long grass of the courtyard . he look on sleepily . 
 from one of the side path amongst the house a woman step out on the 
 road , a slight girlish figure walk under the shade of a large tray 
 balanced on its head . the consciousness of something move stir 
 Reshid 's half - sleep sens into a comparative wakefulness . he 
 recognise Taminah , Bulangi 's slave - girl , with her tray of cake for 
 sale - an apparition of daily recurrence and of no importance whatever . 
 she be go towards Almayer 's house . she could be make useful . he 
 rouse himself up and run towards the gate call out , " Taminah O ! " the 
 girl stop , hesitate , and come back slowly . 
 reshid wait , sign to she impatiently to come nearer . 
 when near Reshid Taminah stand with downcast eye . reshid look at she 
 a while before he ask - 
 " be you go to Almayer 's house ? they say in the settlement that Dain 
 the trader , he that be find drown this morning , be lie in the white 
 man 's campong . " 
 " I have hear this talk , " whisper Taminah ; " and this morning by the 
 riverside I see the body . where it be now I do not know . " 
 " so you have see it ? " ask Reshid , eagerly . " be it Dain ? you have 
 see he many time . you would know he . " 
 the girl 's lip quiver and she remain silent for a while , breathe 
 quickly . 
 " I have see he , not a long time ago , " she say at last . " the talk be 
 true ; he be dead . what do you want from I , Tuan ? I must go . " 
 just then the report of the gun fire on board the steam launch be 
 hear , interrupt Reshid 's reply . leave the girl he run to the 
 house , and meet in the courtyard Abdulla come towards the gate . 
 " the Orang Blanda be come , " say Reshid , " and now we shall have our 
 reward . " 
 Abdulla shake his head doubtfully . " the white man 's reward be long in 
 come , " he say . " white man be quick in anger and slow in gratitude . 
 we shall see . " 
 he stand at the gate stroke his grey beard and listen to the distant 
 cry of greeting at the other end of the settlement . as Taminah be 
 turn to go he call she back . 
 " listen , girl , " he say : " there will be many white man in Almayer 's 
 house . you shall be there sell your cake to the man of the sea . what 
 you see and what you hear you may tell I . come here before the sun set 
 and I will give you a blue handkerchief with red spot . now go , and 
 forget not to return . " 
 he give she a push with the end of his long staff as she be go away 
 and make she stumble . 
 " this slave be very slow , " he remark to his nephew , look after the 
 girl with great disfavour . 
 Taminah walk on , her tray on the head , her eye fix on the ground . 
 from the open door of the house be hear , as she pass , friendly 
 call invite she within for business purpose , but she never heed 
 they , neglect her sale in the preoccupation of intense thinking . 
 since the very early morning she have hear much , she have also see much 
 that fill her heart with a joy mingle with great suffering and fear . 
 before the dawn , before she leave Bulangi 's house to paddle up to Sambir 
 she have hear voice outside the house when all in it but herself be 
 asleep . and now , with her knowledge of the word speak in the darkness , 
 she hold in her hand a life and carry in her breast a great sorrow . yet 
 from her springy step , erect figure , and face veil over by the everyday 
 look of apathetic indifference , nobody could have guess of the double 
 load she carry under the visible burden of the tray pile up high with 
 cake manufacture by the thrifty hand of Bulangi 's wife . in that 
 supple figure straight as an arrow , so graceful and free in its walk , 
 behind those soft eye that speak of nothing but of unconscious 
 resignation , there sleep all feeling and all passion , all hope and all 
 fear , the curse of life and the consolation of death . and she know 
 nothing of it all . she live like the tall palm amongst whom she be 
 pass now , seek the light , desire the sunshine , fear the storm , 
 unconscious of either . the slave have no hope , and know of no change . she 
 know of no other sky , no other water , no other forest , no other world , no 
 other life . she have no wish , no hope , no love , no fear except of a blow , 
 and no vivid feeling but that of occasional hunger , which be seldom , for 
 Bulangi be rich and rice be plentiful in the solitary house in his 
 clearing . the absence of pain and hunger be her happiness , and when she 
 feel unhappy she be simply tired , more than usual , after the day 's 
 labour . then in the hot night of the south - west monsoon she sleep 
 dreamlessly under the bright star on the platform build outside the 
 house and over the river . inside they sleep too : Bulangi by the door ; 
 his wife far in ; the child with their mother . she could hear 
 their breathing ; Bulangi 's sleepy voice ; the sharp cry of a child soon 
 hush with tender word . and she close her eye to the murmur of the 
 water below she , to the whisper of the warm wind above , ignorant of the 
 never - cease life of that tropical nature that speak to she in vain with 
 the thousand faint voice of the near forest , with the breath of tepid 
 wind ; in the heavy scent that linger around her head ; in the white 
 wraith of morning mist that hang over she in the solemn hush of all 
 creation before the dawn . 
 such have be her existence before the coming of the brig with the 
 stranger . she remember well that time ; the uproar in the settlement , 
 the never - end wonder , the day and night of talk and excitement . she 
 remember her own timidity with the strange man , till the brig moor to 
 the bank become in a manner part of the settlement , and the fear wear off 
 in the familiarity of constant intercourse . the call on board then 
 become part of her daily round . she walk hesitatingly up the slanting 
 plank of the gangway amidst the encourage shout and more or less 
 decent joke of the man idle over the bulwark . there she sell she 
 ware to those man that speak so loud and carry themselves so free . 
 there be a throng , a constant coming and go ; call interchange , 
 order give and execute with shout ; the rattle of block , the flinging 
 about of coil of rope . she sit out of the way under the shade of the 
 awning , with her tray before she , the veil draw well over her face , 
 feel shy amongst so many man . she smile at all buyer , but speak to 
 none , let their jest pass with stolid unconcern . she hear many 
 tale tell around she of far - off country , of strange custom , of event 
 stranger still . those man be brave ; but the most fearless of they 
 speak of their chief with fear . often the man they call their master 
 pass before she , walk erect and indifferent , in the pride of youth , 
 in the flash of rich dress , with a tinkle of gold ornament , while 
 everybody stand aside watch anxiously for a movement of his lip , 
 ready to do his bidding . then all her life seem to rush into her eye , 
 and from under her veil she gaze at he , charm , yet fearful to attract 
 attention . one day he notice she and ask , " who be that girl ? " " a 
 slave , Tuan ! a girl that sell cake , " a dozen voice reply together . 
 she rise in terror to run on shore , when he call she back ; and as she 
 stand tremble with head hang down before he , he speak kind word , 
 lift her chin with his hand and look into her eye with a smile . 
 " do not be afraid , " he say . he never speak to she any more . somebody 
 call out from the river bank ; he turn away and forget her existence . 
 Taminah see Almayer stand on the shore with Nina on his arm . she 
 hear Nina 's voice call out gaily , and see Dain 's face brighten with 
 joy as he leap on shore . she hat the sound of that voice ever since . 
 after that day she leave off visit Almayer 's compound , and pass the 
 noon hour under the shade of the brig awning . she watch for his 
 come with heart beat quick and quick , as he approach , into a 
 wild tumult of newly - arouse feeling of joy and hope and fear that die 
 away with Dain 's retreating figure , leave her tired out , as if after a 
 struggle , sit still for a long time in dreamy languor . then she 
 paddle home slowly in the afternoon , often let her canoe float with 
 the lazy stream in the quiet backwater of the river . the paddle hung 
 idle in the water as she sit in the stern , one hand support her chin , 
 her eye wide open , listen intently to the whispering of her heart 
 that seem to swell at last into a song of extreme sweetness . listen 
 to that song she husk the rice at home ; it dull her ear to the 
 shrill bickering of Bulangi 's wife , to the sound of angry reproach 
 address to herself . and when the sun be near its setting she walk 
 to the bathing - place and hear it as she stand on the tender grass of the 
 low bank , her robe at her foot , and look at the reflection of her 
 figure on the glass - like surface of the creek . listen to it she 
 walk slowly back , her wet hair hang over her shoulder ; lay down 
 to rest under the bright star , she close her eye to the murmur of the 
 water below , of the warm wind above ; to the voice of nature speak 
 through the faint noise of the great forest , and to the song of her own 
 heart . 
 she hear , but do not understand , and drink in the dreamy joy of her new 
 existence without troubling about its meaning or its end , till the full 
 consciousness of life come to she through pain and anger . and she 
 suffer horribly the first time she see Nina 's long canoe drift silently 
 past the sleep house of Bulangi , bear the two lover into the white 
 mist of the great river . her jealousy and rage culminate into a 
 paroxysm of physical pain that leave she lie pant on the river bank , 
 in the dumb agony of a wound animal . but she go on move patiently 
 in the enchanted circle of slavery , go through her task day after day 
 with all the pathos of the grief she could not express , even to herself , 
 lock within her breast . she shrink from Nina as she would have shrink 
 from the sharp blade of a knife cutting into her flesh , but she keep on 
 visit the brig to feed her dumb , ignorant soul on her own despair . she 
 see Dain many time . he never speak , he never look . could his eye 
 see only one woman 's image ? could his ear hear only one woman 's voice ? 
 he never notice she ; not once . 
 and then he go away . she see he and Nina for the last time on that 
 morning when Babalatchi , while visit his fish basket , have his 
 suspicion of the white man 's daughter 's love affair with Dain confirm 
 beyond the shadow of doubt . Dain disappear , and Taminah 's heart , where 
 lie useless and barren the seed of all love and of all hate , the 
 possibility of all passion and of all sacrifice , forget its joy and 
 its suffering when deprive of the help of the sens . her half - form , 
 savage mind , the slave of her body - as her body be the slave of 
 another 's will - forgot the faint and vague image of the ideal that have 
 find its beginning in the physical prompting of her savage nature . she 
 drop back into the torpor of her former life and find 
 consolation - even a certain kind of happiness - in the thought that now 
 Nina and Dain be separate , probably for ever . he would forget . this 
 thought soothe the last pang of die jealousy that have nothing now to 
 feed upon , and Taminah find peace . it be like the dreary tranquillity 
 of a desert , where there be peace only because there be no life . 
 and now he have return . she have recognise his voice call aloud in 
 the night for Bulangi . she have creep out after her master to listen 
 close to the intoxicate sound . Dain be there , in a boat , talk to 
 Bulangi . Taminah , listen with arrest breath , hear another voice . 
 the madden joy , that only a second before she think herself 
 incapable of contain within her fast - beat heart , die out , and leave 
 her shivering in the old anguish of physical pain that she have suffer 
 once before at the sight of Dain and Nina . Nina speak now , order and 
 entreating in turn , and Bulangi be refuse , expostulate , at last 
 consent . he go in to take a paddle from the heap lie behind the 
 door . outside the murmur of two voice go on , and she catch a word 
 here and there . she understand that he be flee from white man , that 
 he be seek a hiding - place , that he be in some danger . but she hear 
 also word which wake the rage of jealousy that have be asleep for so 
 many day in her bosom . crouch low on the mud in the black darkness 
 amongst the pile , she hear the whisper in the boat that make light of 
 toil , of privation , of danger , of life itself , if in exchange there could 
 be but a short moment of close embrace , a look from the eye , the feel of 
 light breath , the touch of soft lip . so speak Dain as he sit in the 
 canoe hold Nina 's hand while wait for Bulangi 's return ; and 
 Taminah , support herself by the slimy pile , feel as if a heavy weight 
 be crush she down , down into the black oily water at her foot . she 
 want to cry out ; to rush at they and tear their vague shadow apart ; to 
 throw Nina into the smooth water , cle to her close , hold she to the 
 bottom where that man could not find she . she could not cry , she could 
 not move . then footstep be hear on the bamboo platform above her 
 head ; she see Bulangi get into his small canoe and take the lead , the 
 other boat follow , paddle by Dain and Nina . with a slight splash of 
 the paddle dip stealthily into the water , their indistinct form 
 pass before her ache eye and vanish in the darkness of the creek . 
 she remain there in the cold and wet , powerless to move , breathe 
 painfully under the crush weight that the mysterious hand of Fate have 
 lay so suddenly upon her slender shoulder , and shiver , she feel 
 within a burn fire , that seem to feed upon her very life . when the 
 break day have spread a pale golden ribbon over the black outline of 
 the forest , she take up her tray and depart towards the settlement , 
 go about her task purely from the force of habit . as she approach 
 sambir she could see the excitement and she hear with momentary surprise 
 of the finding of Dain 's body . it be not true , of course . she know it 
 well . she regret that he be not dead . she should have like Dain to 
 be dead , so as to be part from that woman - from all woman . she feel a 
 strong desire to see Nina , but without any clear object . she hat she , 
 and fear she and she feel an irresistible impulse push she towards 
 Almayer 's house to see the white woman 's face , to look close at those 
 eye , to hear again that voice , for the sound of which Dain be ready to 
 risk his liberty , his life even . she have see she many time ; she have 
 hear her voice daily for many month past . what be there in she ? what 
 be there in that be to make a man speak as Dain have speak , to make 
 he blind to all other face , deaf to all other voice ? 
 she leave the crowd by the riverside , and wander aimlessly among the 
 empty house , resist the impulse that push she towards Almayer 's 
 campong to seek there in Nina 's eye the secret of her own misery . the 
 sun mount higher , shorten the shadow and pour down upon her a 
 flood of light and of stifle heat as she pass on from shadow to 
 light , from light to shadow , amongst the house , the bush , the tall 
 tree , in her unconscious flight from the pain in her own heart . in the 
 extremity of her distress she could find no word to pray for relief , she 
 know of no heaven to send her prayer to , and she wander on with tired 
 foot in the dumb surprise and terror at the injustice of the suffering 
 inflict upon she without cause and without redress . 
 the short talk with Reshid , the proposal of Abdulla steady she a little 
 and turn her thought into another channel . Dain be in some danger . 
 he be hide from white man . so much she have overhear last night . they 
 all think he dead . she know he be alive , and she know of his hiding- 
 place . what do the Arabs want to know about the white man ? the white 
 man want with Dain ? do they wish to kill he ? she could tell they 
 all - no , she would say nothing , and in the night she would go to he and 
 sell he his life for a word , for a smile , for a gesture even , and be his 
 slave in far - off country , away from Nina . but there be danger . the 
 one - eyed Babalatchi who know everything ; the white man 's wife - she be a 
 witch . perhaps they would tell . and then there be Nina . she must 
 hurry on and see . 
 in her impatience she leave the path and run towards Almayer 's dwelling 
 through the undergrowth between the palm tree . she come out at the back 
 of the house , where a narrow ditch , full of stagnant water that 
 overflow from the river , separate Almayer 's campong from the rest of 
 the settlement . the thick bush grow on the bank be hide from 
 her sight the large courtyard with its cooking shed . above they rise 
 several thin column of smoke , and from behind the sound of strange 
 voice inform Taminah that the Men of the Sea belong to the warship 
 have already land and be camp between the ditch and the house . to 
 the left one of Almayer 's slave - girl come down to the ditch and bent 
 over the shiny water , wash a kettle . to the right the top of the 
 banana plantation , visible above the bush , sway and shake under the 
 touch of invisible hand gather the fruit . on the calm water several 
 canoe moor to a heavy stake be crowd together , nearly bridge the 
 ditch just at the place where Taminah stand . the voice in the courtyard 
 rise at time into an outburst of call , reply , and laughter , and then 
 die away into a silence that soon be break again by a fresh clamour . 
 now and again the thin blue smoke rush out thick and blacker , and 
 drive in odorous mass over the creek , wrap she for a moment in a 
 suffocating veil ; then , as the fresh wood catch well alight , the smoke 
 vanish in the bright sunlight , and only the scent of aromatic wood 
 drift afar , to leeward of the crackling fire . 
 Taminah rest her tray on a stump of a tree , and remain stand with 
 her eye turn towards Almayer 's house , whose roof and part of a 
 whitewash wall be visible over the bush . the slave - girl finish 
 her work , and after look for a while curiously at Taminah , push she 
 way through the dense thicket back to the courtyard . Round Taminah there 
 be now a complete solitude . she throw herself down on the ground , and 
 hide her face in her hand . now when so close she have no courage to see 
 Nina . at every burst of loud voice from the courtyard she shiver in 
 the fear of hear Nina 's voice . she come to the resolution of wait 
 where she be till dark , and then go straight to Dain 's hiding - place . 
 from where she be she could watch the movement of white man , of Nina , 
 of all Dain 's friend , and of all his enemy . both be hateful alike 
 to she , for both would take he away beyond her reach . she hide herself 
 in the long grass to wait anxiously for the sunset that seem so slow to 
 come . 
 on the other side of the ditch , behind the bush , by the clear fire , the 
 seaman of the frigate have encamp on the hospitable invitation of 
 Almayer . Almayer , rouse out of his apathy by the prayer and 
 importunity of Nina , have manage to get down in time to the jetty so as 
 to receive the officer at their landing . the lieutenant in command 
 accept his invitation to his house with the remark that in any case 
 their business be with Almayer - and perhaps not very pleasant , he add . 
 Almayer hardly hear he . he shake hand with they absently and lead the 
 way towards the house . he be scarcely conscious of the polite word of 
 welcome he greet the stranger with , and afterwards repeat several 
 time over again in his effort to appear at ease . the agitation of 
 their host do not escape the officer 's eye , and the chief confide to 
 his subordinate , in a low voice , his doubt as to Almayer 's sobriety . the 
 young sub - lieutenant laugh and express in a whisper the hope that the 
 white man be not intoxicate enough to neglect the offer of some 
 refreshment . " he do not seem very dangerous , " he add , as they 
 follow Almayer up the step of the verandah . 
 " no , he seem more of a fool than a knave ; I have hear of he , " return 
 the senior . 
 they sit around the table . almayer with shake hand make gin 
 cocktail , offer they all round , and drink himself , with every gulp 
 feeling strong , steady , and well able to face all the difficulty 
 of his position . Ignorant of the fate of the brig he do not suspect the 
 real object of the officer 's visit . he have a general notion that 
 something must have leak out about the gunpowder trade , but apprehend 
 nothing beyond some temporary inconvenience . after empty his glass 
 he begin to chat easily , lie back in his chair with one of his leg 
 throw negligently over the arm . the lieutenant astride on his chair , a 
 glow cheroot in the corner of his mouth , listen with a sly smile 
 from behind the thick volume of smoke that escape from his compress 
 lip . the young sub - lieutenant , lean with both elbow on the table , 
 his head between his hand , look on sleepily in the torpor induce by 
 fatigue and the gin . Almayer talk on - 
 " it be a great pleasure to see white face here . I have live here many 
 year in great solitude . the Malays , you understand , be not company for 
 a white man ; moreover they be not friendly ; they do not understand our 
 way . great rascal they be . I believe I be the only white man on the 
 east coast that be a settle resident . we get visitor from Macassar or 
 Singapore sometimes - trader , agent , or explorer , but they be rare . 
 there be a scientific explorer here a year or more ago . he live in my 
 house : drink from morning to night . he live joyously for a few month , 
 and when the liquor he bring with he be go he return to Batavia 
 with a report on the mineral wealth of the interior . ha , ha , ha ! good , 
 be it not ? " 
 he cease abruptly and look at his guest with a meaningless stare . 
 while they laugh he be recite to himself the old story : " dain dead , 
 all my plan destroy . this be the end of all hope and of all thing . " 
 his heart sink within he . he feel a kind of deadly sickness . 
 " very good . capital ! " exclaim both officer . Almayer come out of his 
 despondency with another burst of talk . 
 " eh ! what about the dinner ? you have get a cook with you . that be all 
 right . there be a cooking shed in the other courtyard . I can give you a 
 goose . look at my geese - the only geese on the east coast - perhaps on 
 the whole island . be that your cook ? very good . here , Ali , show this 
 Chinaman the cooking place and tell Mem Almayer to let he have room 
 there . my wife , gentleman , do not come out ; my daughter may . meantime 
 have some more drink . it be a hot day . " 
 the lieutenant take the cigar out of his mouth , look at the ash 
 critically , shake it off and turn towards Almayer . 
 " we have a rather unpleasant business with you , " he say . 
 " I be sorry , " return Almayer . " it can be nothing very serious , 
 surely . " 
 " if you think an attempt to blow up forty man at least , not a serious 
 matter you will not find many people of your opinion , " retort the 
 officer sharply . 
 " blow up ! what ? I know nothing about it , " exclaim Almayer . " who do 
 that , or try to do it ? " 
 " a man with whom you have some dealing , " answer the lieutenant . " he 
 pass here under the name of Dain Maroola . you sell he the gunpowder 
 he have in that brig we capture . " 
 " how do you hear about the brig ? " ask Almayer . " I know nothing about 
 the powder he may have have . " 
 " an arab trader of this place have send the information about your going 
 on here to Batavia , a couple of month ago , " say the officer . " we be 
 wait for the brig outside , but he slip past we at the mouth of the 
 river , and we have to chase the fellow to the southward . when he sight 
 we he run inside the reef and put the brig ashore . the crew escape in 
 boat before we could take possession . as our boat near the craft it 
 blow up with a tremendous explosion ; one of the boat be too near get 
 swamp . two man drown - that be the result of your speculation , Mr. 
 Almayer . now we want this Dain . we have good ground to suppose he be 
 hide in Sambir . do you know where he be ? you have well put yourself 
 right with the authority as much as possible by be perfectly frank 
 with I . where be this Dain ? " 
 Almayer get up and walk towards the balustrade of the verandah . he 
 seem not to be think of the officer 's question . he look at the 
 body lay straight and rigid under its white cover on which the sun , 
 decline amongst the cloud to the westward , throw a pale tinge of red . 
 the lieutenant wait for the answer , take quick pull at his 
 half - extinguish cigar . behind they Ali move noiselessly lay the 
 table , range solemnly the ill - assorted and shabby crockery , the tin 
 spoon , the fork with broken prong , and the knife with saw - like blade 
 and loose handle . he have almost forget how to prepare the table for 
 white man . he feel aggrieve ; Mem Nina would not help he . he step 
 back to look at his work admiringly , feel very proud . this must be 
 right ; and if the master afterwards be angry and swear , then so much the 
 bad for Mem Nina . why do she not help ? he leave the verandah to fetch 
 the dinner . 
 " well , Mr. Almayer , will you answer my question as frankly as it be put 
 to you ? " ask the lieutenant , after a long silence . 
 Almayer turn round and look at his interlocutor steadily . " if you 
 catch this Dain what will you do with he ? " he ask . 
 the officer 's face flush . " this be not an answer , " he say , annoy . 
 " and what will you do with I ? " go on Almayer , not heed the 
 interruption . 
 " be you inclined to bargain ? " growl the other . " it would be bad 
 policy , I assure you . at present I have no order about your person , but 
 we expect your assistance in catch this malay . " 
 " ah ! " interrupt Almayer , " just so : you can do nothing without I , and 
 I , know the man well , be to help you in find he . " 
 " this be exactly what we expect , " assent the officer . " you have break 
 the law , Mr. Almayer , and you ought to make amend . " 
 " and save myself ? " 
 " well , in a sense yes . your head be not in any danger , " say the 
 lieutenant , with a short laugh . 
 " very well , " say Almayer , with decision , " I shall deliver the man up to 
 you . " 
 both officer rise to their foot quickly , and look for their side - arm 
 which they have unbuckle . Almayer laugh harshly . 
 " steady , gentleman ! " he exclaim . " in my own time and in my own way . 
 after dinner , gentleman , you shall have he . " 
 " this be preposterous , " urge the lieutenant . " Mr. Almayer , this be no 
 joking matter . the man be a criminal . he deserve to hang . while we 
 dine he may escape ; the rumour of our arrival - " 
 Almayer walk towards the table . " I give you my word of honour , 
 gentleman , that he shall not escape ; I have he safe enough . " 
 " the arrest should be effect before dark , " remark the young sub . 
 " I shall hold you responsible for any failure . we be ready , but can do 
 nothing just now without you , " add the senior , with evident annoyance . 
 Almayer make a gesture of assent . " on my word of honour , " he repeat 
 vaguely . " and now let we dine , " he add briskly . 
 Nina come through the doorway and stand for a moment hold the curtain 
 aside for Ali and the old malay woman bear the dish ; then she move 
 towards the three man by the table . 
 " allow I , " say Almayer , pompously . " this be my daughter . Nina , these 
 gentleman , officer of the frigate outside , have do I the honour to 
 accept my hospitality . " 
 Nina answer the low bow of the two officer by a slow inclination of 
 the head and take her place at the table opposite her father . all sit 
 down . the coxswain of the steam launch come up carry some bottle of 
 wine . 
 " you will allow I to have this put upon the table ? " say the lieutenant 
 to Almayer . 
 " what ! wine ! you be very kind . certainly , I have none myself . time 
 be very hard . " 
 the last word of his reply be speak by Almayer in a falter voice . 
 the thought that Dain be dead recur to he vividly again , and he feel 
 as if an invisible hand be grip his throat . he reach for the gin 
 bottle while they be uncork the wine and swallow a big gulp . the 
 lieutenant , who be speak to Nina , give he a quick glance . the young 
 sub begin to recover from the astonishment and confusion cause by Nina 's 
 unexpected appearance and great beauty . " she be very beautiful and 
 imposing , " he reflect , " but after all a half - caste girl . " this thought 
 cause he to pluck up heart and look at Nina sideways . Nina , with 
 compose face , be answer in a low , even voice the eld officer 's 
 polite question as to the country and her mode of life . Almayer push 
 his plate away and drink his guest 's wine in gloomy silence . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 " can I believe what you tell I ? it be like a tale for man that listen 
 only half awake by the camp fire , and it seem to have run off a woman 's 
 tongue . " 
 " who be there here for I to deceive , o Rajah ? " answer Babalatchi . 
 " without you I be nothing . all I have tell you I believe to be true . I 
 have be safe for many year in the hollow of your hand . this be no 
 time to harbour suspicion . the danger be very great . we should advise 
 and act at once , before the sun set . " 
 " right . right , " mutter Lakamba , pensively . 
 they have be sit for the last hour together in the audience chamber 
 of the Rajah 's house , for Babalatchi , as soon as he have witness the 
 landing of the dutch officer , have cross the river to report to his 
 master the event of the morning , and to confer with he upon the line of 
 conduct to pursue in the face of altered circumstance . they be both 
 puzzle and frighten by the unexpected turn the event have take . the 
 Rajah , sit crosslegge on his chair , look fixedly at the floor ; 
 Babalatchi be squat close by in an attitude of deep dejection . 
 " and where do you say he be hide now ? " ask Lakamba , break at last 
 the silence full of gloomy foreboding in which they both have be lose 
 for a long while . 
 " in Bulangi 's clearing - the furth one , away from the house . they go 
 there that very night . the white man 's daughter take he there . she 
 tell I so herself , speak to I openly , for she be half white and have 
 no decency . she say she be wait for he while he be here ; then , 
 after a long time , he come out of the darkness and fall at her foot 
 exhaust . he lie like one dead , but she bring he back to life in her 
 arm , and make he breathe again with her own breath . that be what she 
 say , speak to my face , as I be speak now to you , Rajah . she be 
 like a white woman and know no shame . " 
 he pause , deeply shocked . Lakamba nod his head . " well , and then ? " 
 he ask . 
 " they call the old woman , " go on Babalatchi , " and he tell they 
 all - about the brig , and how he try to kill many man . he know the 
 Orang Blanda be very near , although he have say nothing to we about 
 that ; he know his great danger . he think he have kill many , but there 
 be only two dead , as I have hear from the man of the sea that come in 
 the warship 's boat . " 
 " and the other man , he that be find in the river ? " interrupt Lakamba . 
 " that be one of his boatman . when his canoe be overturn by the log 
 those two swam together , but the other man must have be hurt . dain 
 swam , hold he up . he leave he in the bush when he go up to the 
 house . when they all come down his heart have cease to beat ; then the 
 old woman speak ; Dain think it be good . he take off his anklet and 
 break it , twist it round the man 's foot . his ring he put on that 
 slave 's hand . he take off his sarong and clothe that thing that want 
 no clothe , the two woman hold it up meanwhile , their intent be to 
 deceive all eye and to mislead the mind in the settlement , so that they 
 could swear to the thing that be not , and that there could be no 
 treachery when the white - man come . then Dain and the white woman 
 depart to call up Bulangi and find a hiding - place . the old woman 
 remain by the body . " 
 " Hai ! " exclaim Lakamba . " she have wisdom . " 
 " yes , she have a Devil of her own to whisper counsel in her ear , " assent 
 Babalatchi . " she drag the body with great toil to the point where 
 many log be strand . all these thing be do in the darkness 
 after the storm have pass away . then she wait . at the first sign of 
 daylight she batter the face of the dead with a heavy stone , and she 
 push he amongst the log . she remain near , watch . at sunrise 
 Mahmat Banjer come and find he . they all believe ; I myself be 
 deceive , but not for long . the white man believe , and , grieve , flee 
 to his house . when we be alone I , have doubt , speak to the woman , 
 and she , fear my anger and your might , tell I all , ask for help in 
 save Dain . " 
 " he must not fall into the hand of the Orang Blanda , " say Lakamba ; " but 
 let he die , if the thing can be do quietly . " 
 " it can not , Tuan ! remember there be that woman who , be half white , be 
 ungovernable , and would raise a great outcry . also the officer be 
 here . they be angry enough already . Dain must escape ; he must go . we 
 must help he now for our own safety . " 
 " be the officer very angry ? " inquire Lakamba , with interest . 
 " they be . the principal chief use strong word when speak to I - to 
 I when I salaam in your name . I do not think , " add Babalatchi , 
 after a short pause and look very worried - " I do not think I see a 
 white chief so angry before . he say we be careless or even bad . he 
 tell I he would speak to the Rajah , and that I be of no account . " 
 " speak to the Rajah ! " repeat Lakamba , thoughtfully . " listen , 
 Babalatchi : I be sick , and shall withdraw ; you cross over and tell the 
 white man . " 
 " yes , " say Babalatchi , " I be go over at once ; and as to Dain ? " 
 " you get he away as you can well . this be a great trouble in my heart , " 
 sigh Lakamba . 
 Babalatchi get up , and , go close to his master , speak earnestly . 
 " there be one of our praus at the southern mouth of the river . the dutch 
 warship be to the northward watch the main entrance . I shall send 
 Dain off to - night in a canoe , by the hide channel , on board the prau . 
 his father be a great prince , and shall hear of our generosity . let the 
 prau take he to Ampanam . your glory shall be great , and your reward in 
 powerful friendship . Almayer will no doubt deliver the dead body as 
 Dain 's to the officer , and the foolish white man shall say , ' this be 
 very good ; let there be peace . ' and the trouble shall be remove from 
 your heart , Rajah . " 
 " true ! true ! " say Lakamba . 
 " and , this be accomplish by I who be your slave , you shall reward 
 with a generous hand . that I know ! the white man be grieve for the 
 lose treasure , in the manner of white man who thirst after dollar . now , 
 when all other thing be in order , we shall perhaps obtain the treasure 
 from the white man . Dain must escape , and Almayer must live . " 
 " now go , Babalatchi , go ! " say Lakamba , get off his chair . " I be 
 very sick , and want medicine . tell the white chief so . " 
 but Babalatchi be not to be get rid of in this summary manner . he know 
 that his master , after the manner of the great , like to shift the burden 
 of toil and danger on to his servant ' shoulder , but in the difficult 
 strait in which they be now the Rajah must play his part . he may be 
 very sick for the white man , for all the world if he like , as long as he 
 would take upon himself the execution of part at least of Babalatchi 's 
 carefully think - of plan . Babalatchi want a big canoe man by 
 twelve man to be send out after dark towards Bulangi 's clearing . dain 
 may have to be overpower . a man in love can not be expect to see 
 clearly the path of safety if it lead he away from the object of his 
 affection , argue Babalatchi , and in that case they would have to use 
 force in order to make he go . would the Rajah see that trusty man 
 man the canoe ? the thing must be do secretly . perhaps the Rajah 
 would come himself , so as to bring all the weight of his authority to 
 bear upon Dain if he should prove obstinate and refuse to leave his 
 hiding - place . the Rajah would not commit himself to a definite promise , 
 and anxiously press Babalatchi to go , be afraid of the white man 
 pay he an unexpected visit . the aged statesman reluctantly take his 
 leave and go into the courtyard . 
 before go down to his boat Babalatchi stop for a while in the big 
 open space where the thick - leave tree put black patch of shadow which 
 seem to float on a flood of smooth , intense light that roll up to the 
 house and down to the stockade and over the river , where it break and 
 sparkle in thousand of glitter wavelet , like a band weave of azure 
 and gold edge with the brilliant green of the forest guard both 
 bank of the Pantai . in the perfect calm before the coming of the 
 afternoon breeze the irregularly jagged line of tree - top stand 
 unchanging , as if trace by an unsteady hand on the clear blue of the hot 
 sky . in the space shelter by the high palisade there linger the 
 smell of decaying blossom from the surround forest , a taint of dry 
 fish ; with now and then a whiff of acrid smoke from the cooking fire 
 when it eddy down from under the leafy bough and clung lazily about 
 the burn - up grass . 
 as Babalatchi look up at the flagstaff over - top a group of low 
 tree in the middle of the courtyard , the tricolour flag of the 
 Netherlands stir slightly for the first time since it have be hoist 
 that morning on the arrival of the man - of - war boat . with a faint rustle 
 of tree the breeze come down in light puff , play capriciously for a 
 time with this emblem of Lakamba 's power , that be also the mark of his 
 servitude ; then the breeze freshen in a sharp gust of wind , and the 
 flag fly out straight and steady above the tree . a dark shadow run 
 along the river , roll over and cover up the sparkle of decline 
 sunlight . a big white cloud sail slowly across the darken sky , and 
 hang to the westward as if wait for the sun to join it there . man and 
 thing shake off the torpor of the hot afternoon and stir into life 
 under the first breath of the sea breeze . 
 Babalatchi hurry down to the water - gate ; yet before he pass through 
 it he pause to look round the courtyard , with its light and shade , with 
 its cheery fire , with the group of Lakamba 's soldier and retainer 
 scatter about . his own house stand amongst the other building in that 
 enclosure , and the statesman of Sambir ask himself with a sink heart 
 when and how would it be give he to return to that house . he have to 
 deal with a man more dangerous than any wild beast of his experience : a 
 proud man , a man wilful after the manner of prince , a man in love . and 
 he be go forth to speak to that man word of cold and worldly wisdom . 
 could anything be more appalling ? what if that man should take umbrage 
 at some fancy slight to his honour or disregard of his affection and 
 suddenly " amok " ? the wise adviser would be the first victim , no doubt , 
 and death would be his reward . and underlie the horror of this 
 situation there be the danger of those meddlesome fool , the white man . 
 a vision of comfortless exile in far - off Madura rise up before 
 Babalatchi . would not   that be bad than death itself ? and there be 
 that half - white woman with threaten eye . how could he tell what an 
 incomprehensible creature of that sort would or would not do ? she know 
 so much that she make the killing of Dain an impossibility . that much 
 be certain . and yet the sharp , rough - edged kriss be a good and discreet 
 friend , think Babalatchi , as he examine his own lovingly , and put it 
 back in the sheath , with a sigh of regret , before unfasten his canoe . 
 as he cast off the painter , push out into the stream , and take up his 
 paddle , he realise vividly how unsatisfactory it be to have woman mix 
 up in state affair . young woman , of course . for Mrs. Almayer 's mature 
 wisdom , and for the easy aptitude in intrigue that come with year to 
 the feminine mind , he feel the most sincere respect . 
 he paddle leisurely , let the canoe drift down as he cross towards 
 the point . the sun be high yet , and nothing press . his work would 
 commence only with the coming of darkness . avoid the Lingard jetty , 
 he round the point , and paddle up the creek at the back of Almayer 's 
 house . there be many canoe lie there , their nose all draw 
 together , fasten all to the same stake . Babalatchi push his little 
 craft in amongst they and step on shore . on the other side of the 
 ditch something move in the grass . 
 " who be that hiding ? " hail Babalatchi . " come out and speak to I . " 
 nobody answer . Babalatchi cross over , pass from boat to boat , and 
 poke his staff viciously in the suspicious place . Taminah jump up 
 with a cry . 
 " what be you do here ? " he ask , surprised . " I have nearly step 
 on your tray . be I a Dyak that you should hide at my sight ? " 
 " I be weary , and - I sleep , " whisper Taminah , confusedly . 
 " you sleep ! you have not sell anything to - day , and you will be beat 
 when you return home , " say Babalatchi . 
 Taminah stand before he abash and silent . Babalatchi look she over 
 carefully with great satisfaction . decidedly he would offer fifty 
 dollar more to that thief Bulangi . the girl please he . 
 " now you go home . it be late , " he say sharply . " tell Bulangi that I 
 shall be near his house before the night be half over , and that I want 
 he to make all thing ready for a long journey . you understand ? a long 
 journey to the southward . tell he that before sunset , and do not forget 
 my word . " 
 Taminah make a gesture of assent , and watch Babalatchi recross the 
 ditch and disappear through the bush border Almayer 's compound . she 
 move a little far off the creek and sink in the grass again , lie 
 down on her face , shiver in dry - eyed misery . 
 Babalatchi walk straight towards the cooking - shed look for Mrs. 
 Almayer . the courtyard be in a great uproar . a strange Chinaman have 
 possession of the kitchen fire and be noisily demand another 
 saucepan . he hurl objurgation , in the Canton dialect and bad Malay , 
 against the group of slave - girl stand a little way off , half 
 frightened , half amuse , at his violence . from the camping fire round 
 which the seaman of the frigate be sit come word of encouragement , 
 mingle with laughter and jeering . in the midst of this noise and 
 confusion Babalatchi meet Ali , an empty dish in his hand . 
 " where be the white man ? " ask Babalatchi . 
 " they be eat in the front verandah , " answer Ali . " do not stop I , 
 Tuan . I be give the white man their food and be busy . " 
 " where 's Mem Almayer ? " 
 " inside in the passage . she be listen to the talk . " 
 Ali grin and pass on ; Babalatchi ascend the plankway to the rear 
 verandah , and beckon out Mrs. Almayer , engage she in earnest 
 conversation . through the long passage , close at the further end by the 
 red curtain , they could hear from time to time Almayer 's voice mingle 
 in conversation with an abrupt loudness that make Mrs. Almayer look 
 significantly at Babalatchi . 
 " listen , " she say . " he have drink much . " 
 " he have , " whisper Babalatchi . " he will sleep heavily to - night . " 
 Mrs. Almayer look doubtful . 
 " sometimes the devil of strong gin make he keep awake , and he walk up 
 and down the verandah all night , curse ; then we stand afar off , " 
 explain Mrs. Almayer , with the full knowledge bear of twenty odd 
 year of married life . 
 " but then he do not hear , nor understand , and his hand , of course , have 
 no strength . we do not want he to hear to - night . " 
 " no , " assent Mrs. Almayer , energetically , but in a cautiously subdue 
 voice . " if he hear he will kill . " 
 Babalatchi look incredulous . 
 " Hai Tuan , you may believe I . have I not live many year with that 
 man ? have I not see death in that man 's eye more than once when I be 
 young and he guess at many thing . have he be a man of my own 
 people I would not have see such a look twice ; but he - " 
 with a contemptuous gesture she seem to fle unutterable scorn on 
 Almayer 's weak - minded aversion to sudden bloodshed . 
 " if he have the wish but not the strength , then what do we fear ? " ask 
 Babalatchi , after a short silence during which they both listen to 
 Almayer 's loud talk till it subside into the murmur of general 
 conversation . " what do we fear ? " repeat Babalatchi again . 
 " to keep the daughter whom he love he would strike into your heart and 
 mine without hesitation , " say Mrs. Almayer . " when the girl be go he 
 will be like the devil unchain . then you and I have well beware . " 
 " I be an old man and fear not death , " answer Babalatchi , with a 
 mendacious assumption of indifference . " but what will you do ? " 
 " I be an old woman , and wish to live , " retort Mrs. Almayer . " she be my 
 daughter also . I shall seek safety at the foot of our Rajah , speak in 
 the name of the past when we both be young , and he - " 
 Babalatchi raise his hand . 
 " Enough . you shall be protect , " he say soothingly . 
 again the sound of Almayer 's voice be hear , and again interrupt 
 their talk , they listen to the confused but loud utterance come in 
 burst of unequal strength , with unexpected pause and noisy repetition 
 that make some word and sentence fall clear and distinct on their ear 
 out of the meaningless jumble of excited shouting emphasise by the 
 thumping of Almayer 's fist upon the table . on the short interval of 
 silence , the high complain note of tumbler , stand close together 
 and vibrate to the shock , linger , grow fainter , till it leapt up 
 again into tumultuous ringing , when a new idea start a new rush of 
 word and bring down the heavy hand again . at last the quarrelsome 
 shouting cease , and the thin plaint of disturb glass die away into 
 reluctant quietude . 
 Babalatchi and Mrs. Almayer have listen curiously , their body bent and 
 their ear turn towards the passage . at every loud shout they nod 
 at each other with a ridiculous affectation of scandalise propriety , and 
 they remain in the same attitude for some time after the noise have 
 cease . 
 " this be the devil of gin , " whisper Mrs. Almayer . " yes ; he talk like 
 that sometimes when there be nobody to hear he . " 
 " what do he say ? " inquire Babalatchi , eagerly . " you ought to 
 understand . " 
 " I have forget their talk . a little I understand . he speak without 
 any respect of the white ruler in Batavia , and of protection , and say he 
 have be wrong ; he say that several time . More I do not understand . 
 listen ! again he speak ! " 
 " Tse ! tse ! tse ! " click Babalatchi , try to appear shocked , but with a 
 joyous twinkle of his solitary eye . " there will be great trouble between 
 those white man . I will go round now and see . you tell your daughter 
 that there be a sudden and a long journey before she , with much glory and 
 splendour at the end . and tell she that Dain must go , or he must die , 
 and that he will not go alone . " 
 " no , he will not go alone , " slowly repeat Mrs. Almayer , with a 
 thoughtful air , as she creep into the passage after see Babalatchi 
 disappear round the corner of the house . 
 the statesman of Sambir , under the impulse of vivid curiosity , make his 
 way quickly to the front of the house , but once there he move slowly and 
 cautiously as he creep step by step up the stair of the verandah . on 
 the high step he sit down quietly , his foot on the step below , ready 
 for flight should his presence prove unwelcome . he feel pretty safe so . 
 the table stand nearly endway to he , and he see Almayer 's back ; at Nina 
 he look full face , and have a side view of both officer ; but of the 
 four person sit at the table only Nina and the young officer 
 notice his noiseless arrival . the momentary dropping of Nina 's eyelid 
 acknowledge Babalatchi 's presence ; she then speak at once to the young 
 sub , who turn towards she with attentive alacrity , but her gaze be 
 fasten steadily on her father 's face while Almayer be speak 
 uproariously . 
 " . . . disloyalty and unscrupulousness ! what have you ever do to make 
 I loyal ? you have no grip on this country . I have to take care of 
 myself , and when I ask for protection I be meet with threat and 
 contempt , and have arab slander throw in my face . I ! a white man ! " 
 " do not   be violent , Almayer , " remonstrate the lieutenant ; " I have hear 
 all this already . " 
 " then why do you talk to I about scruple ? I want money , and I give 
 powder in exchange . how could I know that some of your wretched man be 
 go to be blow up ? scruple ! pah ! " 
 he grope unsteadily amongst the bottle , try one after another , 
 grumble to himself the while . 
 " no more wine , " he mutter discontentedly . 
 " you have have enough , Almayer , " say the lieutenant , as he light a 
 cigar . " be it not time to deliver to we your prisoner ? I take it you 
 have that Dain Maroola stow away safely somewhere . still we have well 
 get that business over , and then we shall have more drink . come ! do not 
 look at I like this . " 
 Almayer be star with stony eye , his tremble finger fumble about 
 his throat . 
 " gold , " he say with difficulty . " Hem ! a hand on the windpipe , you 
 know . sure you will excuse . I want to say - a little gold for a little 
 powder . what be that ? " 
 " I know , I know , " say the lieutenant soothingly . 
 " no ! you do not   know . not one of you know ! " shout Almayer . " the 
 government be a fool , I tell you . heap of gold . I be the man that 
 know ; I and another one . but he will not   speak . he be - " 
 he check himself with a feeble smile , and , make an unsuccessful 
 attempt to pat the officer on the shoulder , knock over a couple of 
 empty bottle . 
 " personally you be a fine fellow , " he say very distinctly , in a 
 patronising manner . his head nod drowsily as he sit mutter to 
 himself . 
 the two officer look at each other helplessly . 
 " this will not   do , " say the lieutenant , address his junior . " have the 
 man muster in the compound here . I must get some sense out of he . hi ! 
 Almayer ! wake up , man . redeem your word . you give your word . you give 
 your word of honour , you know . " 
 Almayer shake off the officer 's hand with impatience , but his ill - humour 
 vanish at once , and he look up , put his forefinger to the side of 
 his nose . 
 " you be very young ; there be time for all thing , " he say , with an air 
 of great sagacity . 
 the lieutenant turn towards Nina , who , lean back in her chair , 
 watch her father steadily . 
 " really I be very much distressed by all this for your sake , " he 
 exclaim . " I do not know ; " he go on , speak with some 
 embarrassment , " whether I have any right to ask you anything , unless , 
 perhaps , to withdraw from this painful scene , but I feel that I must - for 
 your father 's good - suggest that you should - I mean if you have any 
 influence over he you ought to exert it now to make he keep the promise 
 he give I before he - before he get into this state . " 
 he observe with discouragement that she seem not to take any notice of 
 what he say sit still with half - close eye . 
 " I trust - " he begin again . 
 " what be the promise you speak of ? " abruptly ask Nina , leave her seat 
 and move towards her father . 
 " nothing that be not just and proper . he promise to deliver to we a man 
 who in time of profound peace take the life of innocent man to escape 
 the punishment he deserve for break the law . he plan his mischief 
 on a large scale . it be not his fault if it fail , partially . of 
 course you have hear of Dain Maroola . your father secure he , I 
 understand . we know he escape up this river . perhaps you - " 
 " and he kill white man ! " interrupt Nina . 
 " I regret to say they be white . yes , two white man lose their life 
 through that scoundrel 's freak . " 
 " two only ! " exclaim Nina . 
 the officer look at she in amazement . 
 " why ! why ! you - " he stammer , confused . 
 " there might have be more , " interrupt Nina . " and when you get 
 this - this scoundrel will you go ? " 
 the lieutenant , still speechless , bow his assent . 
 " then I would get he for you if I have to seek he in a burn fire , " 
 she burst out with intense energy . " I hate the sight of your white 
 face . I hate the sound of your gentle voice . that be the way you 
 speak to woman , drop sweet word before any pretty face . I have 
 hear your voice before . I hop to live here without see any other 
 white face but this , " she add in a gentle tone , touch lightly her 
 father 's cheek . 
 Almayer cease his mumbling and open his eye . he catch hold of his 
 daughter 's hand and press it to his face , while Nina with the other 
 hand smooth his rumpled grey hair , look defiantly over her father 's 
 head at the officer , who have now regain his composure and return she 
 look with a cool , steady stare . below , in front of the verandah , they 
 could hear the tramp of seaman muster there accord to order . the 
 sub - lieutenant come up the step , while Babalatchi stand up uneasily and , 
 with finger on lip , try to catch Nina 's eye . 
 " you be a good girl , " whisper Almayer , absently , drop his 
 daughter 's hand . 
 " Father ! father ! " she cry , bend over he with passionate entreaty . 
 " see those two man look at we . send they away . I can not bear it any 
 more . send they away . do what they want and let they go . " 
 she catch sight of Babalatchi and cease speak suddenly , but her foot 
 tap the floor with rapid beat in a paroxysm of nervous restlessness . 
 the two officer stand close together look on curiously . 
 " what have happen ? what be the matter ? " whisper the young man . 
 " do not   know , " answer the other , under his breath . " one be furious , and 
 the other be drunk . not so drunk , either . Queer , this . look ! " 
 Almayer have rise , hold on to his daughter 's arm . he hesitate a 
 moment , then he let go his hold and lurch half - way across the verandah . 
 there he pull himself together , and stand very straight , breathe hard 
 and glare round angrily . 
 " be the man ready ? " ask the lieutenant . 
 " all ready , sir . " 
 " now , Mr. Almayer , lead the way , " say the lieutenant 
 Almayer rest his eye on he as if he see he for the first time . 
 " two man , " he say thickly . the effort of speaking seem to interfere 
 with his equilibrium . he take a quick step to save himself from a fall , 
 and remain sway backwards and forwards . " two man , " he begin again , 
 speak with difficulty . " two white man - man in uniform - honourable 
 man . I want to say - man of honour . be you ? " 
 " come ! none of that , " say the officer impatiently . " let we have that 
 friend of your . " 
 " what do you think I be ? " ask Almayer , fiercely . 
 " you be drunk , but not so drunk as not to know what you be do . 
 enough of this tomfoolery , " say the officer sternly , " or I will have you 
 put under arrest in your own house . " 
 " arrest ! " laugh Almayer , discordantly . " ha ! ha ! ha ! arrest ! why , I 
 have be try to get out of this infernal place for twenty year , and 
 I can not . you hear , man ! I can not , and never shall ! never ! " 
 he end his word with a sob , and walk unsteadily down the stair . 
 when in the courtyard the lieutenant approach he , and take he by the 
 arm . the sub - lieutenant and Babalatchi follow close . 
 " that be well , Almayer , " say the officer encouragingly . " where be you 
 go to ? there be only plank there . here , " he go on , shake he 
 slightly , " do we want the boat ? " 
 " no , " answer Almayer , viciously . " you want a grave . " 
 " what ? wild again ! try to talk sense . " 
 " Grave ! " roar Almayer , struggle to get himself free . " a hole in the 
 ground . do not   you understand ? you must be drunk . let I go ! let go , I 
 tell you ! " 
 he tear away from the officer 's grasp , and reel towards the plank 
 where the body lie under its white cover ; then he turn round quickly , 
 and face the semicircle of interested face . the sun be sink 
 rapidly , throw long shadow of house and tree over the courtyard , but 
 the light linger yet on the river , where the log go drift past in 
 midstream , look very distinct and black in the pale red glow . the 
 trunk of the tree in the forest on the east bank be lose in gloom 
 while their high branch sway gently in the depart sunlight . the 
 air feel heavy and cold in the breeze , expire in slight puff that come 
 over the water . 
 Almayer shiver as he make an effort to speak , and again with an 
 uncertain gesture he seem to free his throat from the grip of an 
 invisible hand . his bloodshot eye wander aimlessly from face to face . 
 " there ! " he say at last . " be you all there ? he be a dangerous man . " 
 he drag at the cover with hasty violence , and the body roll stiffly 
 off the plank and fall at his foot in rigid helplessness . 
 " cold , perfectly cold , " say Almayer , look round with a mirthless 
 smile . " sorry can do no well . and you can not   hang he , either . as you 
 observe , gentleman , " he add gravely , " there be no head , and hardly any 
 neck . " 
 the last ray of light be snatch away from the tree - top , the river 
 grow suddenly dark , and in the great stillness the murmur of the flow 
 water seem to fill the vast expanse of grey shadow that descend upon 
 the land . 
 " this be Dain , " go on Almayer to the silent group that surround he . 
 " and I have keep my word . first one hope , then another , and this be my 
 last . nothing be leave now . you think there be one dead man here ? 
 Mistake , I ' sure you . I be much more dead . why do not   you hang I ? " he 
 suggest suddenly , in a friendly tone , address the lieutenant . " I 
 assure , assure you it would be a mat - matter of form altog - altogether . " 
 these last word he mutter to himself , and walk zigzag towards his 
 house . " get out ! " he thunder at Ali , who be approach timidly with 
 offer of assistance . from afar , scared group of man and woman watch 
 his devious progress . he drag himself up the stair by the banister , 
 and manage to reach a chair into which he fall heavily . he sit for 
 awhile pant with exertion and anger , and look round vaguely for 
 Nina ; then make a threatening gesture towards the compound , where he 
 have hear Babalatchi 's voice , he overturn the table with his foot in a 
 great crash of smashed crockery . he mutter yet menacingly to himself , 
 then his head fall on his breast , his eye close , and with a deep sigh 
 he fall asleep . 
 that night - for the first time in its history - the peaceful and 
 flourish settlement of Sambir see the light shin about " Almayer 's 
 Folly . " these be the lantern of the boat hang up by the seaman under 
 the verandah where the two officer be hold a court of inquiry into 
 the truth of the story relate to they by Babalatchi . Babalatchi have 
 regain all his importance . he be eloquent and persuasive , call 
 Heaven and Earth to witness the truth of his statement . there be also 
 other witness . Mahmat Banjer and a good many other undergo a close 
 examination that drag its weary length far into the evening . a 
 messenger be send for Abdulla , who excuse himself from come on the 
 score of his venerable age , but send Reshid . Mahmat have to produce the 
 bangle , and see with rage and mortification the lieutenant put it in his 
 pocket , as one of the proof of Dain 's death , to be send in with the 
 official report of the mission . Babalatchi 's ring be also impound for 
 the same purpose , but the experienced statesman be resign to that loss 
 from the very beginning . he do not mind as long as he be sure , that 
 the white man believe . he put that question to himself earnestly as he 
 leave , one of the last , when the proceeding come to a close . he be not 
 certain . still , if they believe only for a night , he would put Dain 
 beyond their reach and feel safe himself . he walk away fast , look 
 from time to time over his shoulder in the fear of be follow , but he 
 see and hear nothing . 
 " ten o'clock , " say the lieutenant , look at his watch and yawn . " I 
 shall hear some of the captain 's complimentary remark when we get back . 
 miserable business , this . " 
 " do you think all this be true ? " ask the young man . 
 " true ! it be just possible . but if it be not   true what can we do ? if we 
 have a dozen boat we could patrol the creek ; and that would not   be much 
 good . that drunken madman be right ; we have not   enough hold on this 
 coast . they do what they like . be our hammock sling ? " 
 " yes , I tell the coxswain . strange couple over there , " say the sub , 
 with a wave of his hand towards Almayer 's house . 
 " Hem ! Queer , certainly . what have you be tell she ? I be 
 attend to the father most of the time . " 
 " I assure you I have be perfectly civil , " protest the other warmly . 
 " all right . do not   get excited . she object to civility , then , from what 
 I understand . I think you might have be tender . you know we be on 
 service . " 
 " well , of course . never forget that . coldly civil . that be all . " 
 they both laugh a little , and not feel sleepy begin to pace the 
 verandah side by side . the moon rise stealthily above the tree , and 
 suddenly change the river into a stream of scintillate silver . the 
 forest come out of the black void and stand sombre and pensive over the 
 sparkling water . the breeze die away into a breathless calm . 
 Seamanlike , the two officer tramp measuredly up and down without 
 exchange a word . the loose plank rattle rhythmically under their 
 step with obstrusive dry sound in the perfect silence of the night . as 
 they be wheel round again the young man stand attentive . 
 " do you hear that ? " he ask . 
 " no ! " say the other . " hear what ? " 
 " I think I hear a cry . ever so faint . seem a woman 's voice . in 
 that other house . ah ! again ! hear it ? " 
 " no , " say the lieutenant , after listen awhile . " you young fellow 
 always hear woman 's voice . if you be go to dream you have well get 
 into your hammock . good - night . " 
 the moon mount higher , and the warm shadow grow small and creep away 
 as if hide before the cold and cruel light . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 " it have set at last , " say Nina to her mother point towards the hill 
 behind which the sun have sink . " listen , mother , I be go now to 
 Bulangi 's creek , and if I should never return - " 
 she interrupt herself , and something like doubt dim for a moment the 
 fire of suppress exaltation that have glow in her eye and have 
 illuminate the serene impassiveness of her feature with a ray of eager 
 life during all that long day of excitement - the day of joy and anxiety , 
 of hope and terror , of vague grief and indistinct delight . while the sun 
 shine with that dazzle light in which her love be bear and grow till 
 it possess her whole being , she be keep firm in her unwavering resolve 
 by the mysterious whispering of desire which fill her heart with 
 impatient longing for the darkness that would mean the end of danger and 
 strife , the beginning of happiness , the fulfilling of love , the 
 completeness of life . it have set at last ! the short tropical twilight 
 go out before she could draw the long breath of relief ; and now the 
 sudden darkness seem to be full of menacing voice call upon she to 
 rush headlong into the unknown ; to be true to her own impulse , to give 
 herself up to the passion she have evoke and share . he be wait ! in 
 the solitude of the seclude clearing , in the vast silence of the forest 
 he be wait alone , a fugitive in fear of his life . indifferent to his 
 danger he be wait for she . it be for she only that he have come ; and 
 now as the time approach when he should have his reward , she ask 
 herself with dismay what mean that chilling doubt of her own will and of 
 her own desire ? with an effort she shake off the fear of the passing 
 weakness . he should have his reward . her woman 's love and her woman 's 
 honour overcome the falter distrust of that unknown future wait for 
 she in the darkness of the river . 
 " no , you will not return , " mutter Mrs. Almayer , prophetically . 
 " without you he will not go , and if he remain here - " she wave she 
 hand towards the light of " Almayer 's Folly , " and the unfinished sentence 
 die out in a threatening murmur . 
 the two woman have meet behind the house , and now be walk slowly 
 together towards the creek where all the canoe be moor . arrive at 
 the fringe of bush they stop by a common impulse , and Mrs. Almayer , 
 lay her hand on her daughter 's arm , try in vain to look close into 
 the girl 's avert face . when she attempt to speak her first word 
 be lose in a stifle sob that sound strangely come from that woman 
 who , of all human passion , seem to know only those of anger and hate . 
 " you be go away to be a great ranee , " she say at last , in a voice 
 that be steady enough now , " and if you be wise you shall have much power 
 that will endure many day , and even last into your old age . what have I 
 be ? a slave all my life , and I have cook rice for a man who have no 
 courage and no wisdom . Hai ! I ! even I , be give in gift by a chief and 
 a warrior to a man that be neither . Hai ! Hai ! " 
 she wail to herself softly , lament the lost possibility of murder 
 and mischief that could have fall to her lot have she be mat with a 
 congenial spirit . Nina bend down over Mrs. Almayer 's slight form and 
 scan attentively , under the star that have rush out on the black sky 
 and now hang breathless over that strange parting , her mother 's 
 shrivelled feature , and look close into the sunken eye that could see 
 into her own dark future by the light of a long and a painful experience . 
 again she feel herself fascinated , as of old , by her mother 's exalted 
 mood and by the oracular certainty of expression which , together with she 
 fit of violence , have contribute not a little to the reputation for 
 witchcraft she enjoy in the settlement . 
         
 " I be a slave , and you shall be a queen , " go on Mrs. Almayer , look 
 straight before she ; " but remember man 's strength and their weakness . 
 tremble before his anger , so that he may see your fear in the light of 
 day ; but in your heart you may laugh , for after sunset he be your slave . " 
 " a slave ! he ! the master of life ! you do not know he , mother . " 
 Mrs. Almayer condescend to laugh contemptuously . 
 " you speak like a fool of a white woman , " she exclaim . " what do you 
 know of man 's anger and of man 's love ? have you watch the sleep of man 
 weary of deal death ? have you feel about you the strong arm that 
 could drive a kriss deep into a beat heart ? yah ! you be a white 
 woman , and ought to pray to a woman - god ! " 
 " why do you say this ? I have listen to your word so long that I have 
 forget my old life . if I be white would I stand here , ready to go ? 
 Mother , I shall return to the house and look once more at my father 's 
 face . " 
 " no ! " say Mrs. Almayer , violently . " no , he sleep now the sleep of gin ; 
 and if you go back he might awake and see you . no , he shall never see 
 you . when the terrible old man take you away from I when you be 
 little , you remember - " 
 " it be such a long time ago , " murmur Nina . 
 " I remember , " go on Mrs. Almayer , fiercely . " I want to look at your 
 face again . he say no ! I hear you cry and jump into the river . you 
 be his daughter then ; you be my daughter now . never shall you go back 
 to that house ; you shall never cross this courtyard again . no ! no ! " 
 her voice rise almost to a shout . on the other side of the creek there 
 be a rustle in the long grass . the two woman hear it , and listen for 
 a while in startled silence . " I shall go , " say Nina , in a cautious but 
 intense whisper . " what be your hate or your revenge to I ? " 
 she move towards the house , Mrs. Almayer cling to she and try to 
 pull she back . 
 " stop , you shall not go ! " she gasp . 
 Nina push away her mother impatiently and gather up her skirt for a 
 quick run , but Mrs. Almayer run forward and turn round , face her 
 daughter with outstretche arm . 
 " if you move another step , " she exclaim , breathe quickly , " I shall 
 cry out . do you see those light in the big house ? there sit two white 
 man , angry because they can not have the blood of the man you love . and 
 in those dark house , " she continue , more calmly as she point towards 
 the settlement , " my voice could wake up man that would lead the Orang 
 Blanda soldier to he who be wait - for you . " 
 she could not see her daughter 's face , but the white figure before she 
 stand silent and irresolute in the darkness . Mrs. Almayer pursue she 
 advantage . 
 " give up your old life ! forget ! " she say in entreat tone . " forget 
 that you ever look at a white face ; forget their word ; forget their 
 thought . they speak lie . and they think lie because they despise we 
 that be well than they be , but not so strong . forget their 
 friendship and their contempt ; forget their many god . girl , why do you 
 want to remember the past when there be a warrior and a chief ready to 
 give many life - his own life - for one of your smile ? " 
 while she speak she push gently her daughter towards the canoe , hiding 
 her own fear , anxiety , and doubt under the flood of passionate word that 
 leave Nina no time to think and no opportunity to protest , even if she have 
 wish it . but she do not wish it now . at the bottom of that pass 
 desire to look again at her father 's face there be no strong affection . 
 she feel no scruple and no remorse at leave suddenly that man whose 
 sentiment towards herself she could not understand , she could not even 
 see . there be only an instinctive clinging to old life , to old habit , 
 to old face ; that fear of finality which lurk in every human breast and 
 prevent so many heroism and so many crime . for year she have stand 
 between her mother and her father , the one so strong in her weakness , the 
 other so weak where he could have be strong . between those two being 
 so dissimilar , so antagonistic , she stand with mute heart wonder and 
 angry at the fact of her own existence . it seem so unreasonable , so 
 humiliating to be fling there in that settlement and to see the day rush 
 by into the past , without a hope , a desire , or an aim that would justify 
 the life she have to endure in ever - grow weariness . she have little 
 belief and no sympathy for her father 's dream ; but the savage raving of 
 her mother chance to strike a responsive chord , deep down somewhere in 
 her despairing heart ; and she dream dream of her own with the 
 persistent absorption of a captive thinking of liberty within the wall 
 of his prison cell . with the coming of Dain she find the road to 
 freedom by obey the voice of the new - bear impulse , and with surprised 
 joy she think she could read in his eye the answer to all the 
 questioning of her heart . she understand now the reason and the aim of 
 life ; and in the triumphant unveiling of that mystery she throw away 
 disdainfully her past with its sad thought , its bitter feeling , and its 
 faint affection , now withered and dead in contact with her fierce 
 passion . 
 Mrs. Almayer unmoore Nina 's own canoe and , straighten herself 
 painfully , stand , painter in hand , look at her daughter . 
 " quick , " she say ; " get away before the moon rise , while the river be 
 dark . I be afraid of Abdulla 's slave . the wretch prowl in the night 
 often , and might see and follow you . there be two paddle in the 
 canoe . " 
 Nina approach her mother and hesitatingly touch lightly with her lip 
 the wrinkle forehead . Mrs. Almayer snort contemptuously in protest 
 against that tenderness which she , nevertheless , fear could be 
 contagious . 
 " shall I ever see you again , mother ? " murmur Nina . 
 " no , " say Mrs. Almayer , after a short silence . " why should you return 
 here where it be my fate to die ? you will live far away in splendour and 
 might . when I hear of white man drive from the island , then I shall 
 know that you be alive , and that you remember my word . " 
 " I shall always remember , " return Nina , earnestly ; " but where be my 
 power , and what can I do ? " 
 " do not let he look too long in your eye , nor lie his head on your 
 knee without remind he that man should fight before they rest . and 
 if he linger , give he his kriss yourself and bid he go , as the wife of 
 a mighty prince should do when the enemy be near . let he slay the 
 white man that come to we to trade , with prayer on their lip and load 
 gun in their hand . ah ! " - she end with a sigh - " they be on every 
 sea , and on every shore ; and they be very many ! " 
 she swing the bow of the canoe towards the river , but do not let go the 
 gunwale , keep her hand on it in irresolute thoughtfulness . 
 Nina put the point of the paddle against the bank , ready to shove off 
 into the stream . 
 " what be it , mother ? " she ask , in a low voice . " do you hear anything ? " 
 " no , " say Mrs. Almayer , absently . " listen , Nina , " she continue , 
 abruptly , after a slight pause , " in after year there will be other 
 woman - " 
 a stifle cry in the boat interrupt she , and the paddle rattle in the 
 canoe as it slip from Nina 's hand , which she put out in a protest 
 gesture . Mrs. Almayer fall on her knee on the bank and lean over the 
 gunwale so as to bring her own face close to her daughter 's . 
 " there will be other woman , " she repeat firmly ; " I tell you that , 
 because you be half white , and may forget that he be a great chief , and 
 that such thing must be . hide your anger , and do not let he see on 
 your face the pain that will eat your heart . meet he with joy in your 
 eye and wisdom on your lip , for to you he will turn in sadness or in 
 doubt . as long as he look upon many woman your power will last , but 
 should there be one , one only with whom he seem to forget you , then - " 
 " I could not live , " exclaim Nina , cover her face with both her 
 hand . " do not speak so , mother ; it could not be . " 
 " then , " go on Mrs. Almayer , steadily , " to that woman , Nina , show no 
 mercy . " 
 she move the canoe down towards the stream by the gunwale , and grip 
 it with both her hand , the bow pointing into the river . 
 " be you cry ? " she ask sternly of her daughter , who sit still with 
 cover face . " Arise , and take your paddle , for he have wait long 
 enough . and remember , Nina , no mercy ; and if you must strike , strike 
 with a steady hand . " 
 she put out all her strength , and swing her body over the water , shoot 
 the light craft far into the stream . when she recover herself from the 
 effort she try vainly to catch a glimpse of the canoe that seem to 
 have dissolve suddenly into the white mist trail over the heated 
 water of the Pantai . after listen for a while intently on her knee , 
 Mrs. Almayer rise with a deep sigh , while two tear wander slowly down 
 her wither cheek . she wipe they off quickly with a wisp of her grey 
 hair as if ashamed of herself , but could not stifle another loud sigh , 
 for her heart be heavy and she suffer much , be unused to tender 
 emotion . this time she fancy she have hear a faint noise , like the 
 echo of her own sigh , and she stop , strain her ear to catch the 
 slight sound , and peer apprehensively towards the bush near she . 
 " who be there ? " she ask , in an unsteady voice , while her imagination 
 people the solitude of the riverside with ghost - like form . " who be 
 there ? " she repeat faintly . 
 there be no answer : only the voice of the river murmur in sad 
 monotone behind the white veil seem to swell louder for a moment , to 
 die away again in a soft whisper of eddy wash against the bank . 
 Mrs. Almayer shake her head as if in answer to her own thought , and 
 walk quickly away from the bush , look to the right and leave 
 watchfully . she go straight towards the cooking - shed , observe that 
 the ember of the fire there glow more brightly than usual , as if 
 somebody have be add fresh fuel to the fire during the evening . as 
 she approach , Babalatchi , who have be squat in the warm glow , rise 
 and meet she in the shadow outside . 
 " be she go ? " ask the anxious statesman , hastily . 
 " yes , " answer Mrs. Almayer . " what be the white man do ? when do 
 you leave they ? " 
 " they be sleep now , I think . may they never wake ! " exclaim 
 Babalatchi , fervently . " oh ! but they be devil , and make much talk and 
 trouble over that carcase . the chief threaten I twice with his hand , 
 and say he would have I tie up to a tree . tie I up to a tree ! I ! " 
 he repeat , strike his breast violently . 
 Mrs. Almayer laugh tauntingly . 
 " and you salaam and ask for mercy . man with arm by their side act 
 otherwise when I be young . " 
 " and where be they , the man of your youth ? you mad woman ! " retort 
 Babalatchi , angrily . " kill by the Dutch . aha ! but I shall live to 
 deceive they . a man know when to fight and when to tell peaceful lie . 
 you would know that if you be not a woman . " 
 but Mrs. Almayer do not seem to hear he . with bent body and 
 outstretche arm she appear to be listen to some noise behind the 
 shed . 
 " there be strange sound , " she whisper , with evident alarm . " I have 
 hear in the air the sound of grief , as of a sigh and weeping . that be 
 by the riverside . and now again I hear - " 
 " where ? " ask Babalatchi , in an altered voice . " what do you hear ? " 
 " close here . it be like a breath long draw . I wish I have burn the 
 paper over the body before it be bury . " 
 " yes , " assent Babalatchi . " but the white man have he throw into a 
 hole at once . you know he find his death on the river , " he add 
 cheerfully , " and his ghost may hail the canoe , but would leave the land 
 alone . " 
 Mrs. Almayer , who have be crane her neck to look round the corner of 
 the shed , draw back her head . 
 " there be nobody there , " she say , reassure . " be it not time for the 
 Rajah war - canoe to go to the clearing ? " 
 " I have be wait for it here , for I myself must go , " explain 
 Babalatchi . " I think I will go over and see what make they late . when 
 will you come ? the Rajah give you refuge . " 
 " I shall paddle over before the break of day . I can not leave my dollar 
 behind , " mutter Mrs. Almayer . 
 they separate . Babalatchi cross the courtyard towards the creek to 
 get his canoe , and Mrs. Almayer walk slowly to the house , ascend the 
 plankway , and pass through the back verandah enter the passage 
 lead to the front of the house ; but before go in she turn in the 
 doorway and look back at the empty and silent courtyard , now light up by 
 the ray of the rise moon . no soon she have disappear , however , 
 than a vague shape flit out from amongst the stalk of the banana 
 plantation , dart over the moonlit space , and fall in the darkness at 
 the foot of the verandah . it might have be the shadow of a driving 
 cloud , so noiseless and rapid be its passage , but for the trail of 
 disturb grass , whose feathery head tremble and sway for a long time 
 in the moonlight before they rest motionless and gleaming , like a 
 design of silver spray embroider on a sombre background . 
 Mrs. Almayer light the cocoanut lamp , and lift cautiously the red 
 curtain , gaze upon her husband , shade the light with her hand . 
 Almayer , huddle up in the chair , one of his arm hang down , the other 
 throw across the low part of his face as if to ward off an invisible 
 enemy , his leg stretch straight out , sleep heavily , unconscious of the 
 unfriendly eye that look upon he in disparage criticism . at his 
 foot lie the overturned table , amongst a wreck of crockery and broken 
 bottle . the appearance as of trace leave by a desperate struggle be 
 accentuate by the chair , which seem to have be scatter violently 
 all over the place , and now lie about the verandah with a lamentable 
 aspect of inebriety in their helpless attitude . only Nina 's big rocking- 
 chair , stand black and motionless on its high runner , tower above 
 the chaos of demoralised furniture , unflinchingly dignified and patient , 
 wait for its burden . 
 with a last scornful look towards the sleeper , Mrs. Almayer pass behind 
 the curtain into her own room . a couple of bat , encourage by the 
 darkness and the peaceful state of affair , resume their silent and 
 oblique gambol above Almayer 's head , and for a long time the profound 
 quiet of the house be unbroken , save for the deep breathing of the 
 sleep man and the faint tinkle of silver in the hand of the woman 
 prepare for flight . in the increase light of the moon that have rise 
 now above the night mist , the object on the verandah come out strongly 
 outline in black splash of shadow with all the uncompromise ugliness 
 of their disorder , and a caricature of the sleep Almayer appear on 
 the dirty whitewash of the wall behind he in a grotesquely exaggerated 
 detail of attitude and feature enlarge to a heroic size . the 
 discontent bat depart in quest of dark place , and a lizard come 
 out in short , nervous rush , and , please with the white table - cloth , 
 stop on it in breathless immobility that would have suggest sudden 
 death have it not be for the melodious call he exchange with a less 
 adventurous friend hide amongst the lumber in the courtyard . then the 
 board in the passage creak , the lizard vanish , and Almayer stir 
 uneasily with a sigh : slowly , out of the senseless annihilation of 
 drunken sleep , he be return , through the land of dream , to wake 
 consciousness . Almayer 's head roll from shoulder to shoulder in the 
 oppression of his dream ; the heavens have descend upon he like a heavy 
 mantle , and trail in star fold far under he . star above , star 
 all round he ; and from the star under his foot rise a whisper full of 
 entreaty and tear , and sorrowful face flit amongst the cluster of 
 light fill the infinite space below . how escape from the importunity 
 of lamentable cry and from the look of star , sad eye in the face 
 which press round he till he gasp for breath under the crush 
 weight of world that hang over his ache shoulder ? get away ! but 
 how ? if he attempt to move he would step off into nothing , and perish 
 in the crash fall of that universe of which he be the only support . 
 and what be the voice say ? urge he to move ! why ? move to 
 destruction ! not likely ! the absurdity of the thing fill he with 
 indignation . he get a firm foothold and stiffen his muscle in 
 heroic resolve to carry his burden to all eternity . and age pass in 
 the superhuman labour , amidst the rush of circle world ; in the 
 plaintive murmur of sorrowful voice urge he to desist before it be 
 too late - till the mysterious power that have lay upon he the giant task 
 seem at last to seek his destruction . with terror he feel an 
 irresistible hand shake he by the shoulder , while the chorus of voice 
 swell louder into an agonise prayer to go , go before it be too late . 
 he feel himself slip , lose his balance , as something drag at his 
 leg , and he fall . with a faint cry he glide out of the anguish of 
 perish creation into an imperfect wake that seem to be still under 
 the spell of his dream . 
 " what ? what ? " he murmur sleepily , without move or open his eye . 
 his head still feel heavy , and he have not the courage to raise his 
 eyelid . in his ear there still linger the sound of entreating 
 whisper . - " be I awake ? - why do I hear the voice ? " he argue to himself , 
 hazily . - " I can not get rid of the horrible nightmare yet . - I have be 
 very drunk . - what be that shake I ? I be dream yet - I must open my 
 eye and be do with it . I be only half awake , it be evident . " 
 he make an effort to shake off his stupor and see a face close to his , 
 glare at he with star eyeball . he close his eye again in amazed 
 horror and sit up straight in the chair , tremble in every limb . what 
 be this apparition ? - his own fancy , no doubt . - his nerve have be much 
 try the day before - and then the drink ! he would not see it again if 
 he have the courage to look . - he would look directly . - get a little 
 steady first . - so . - now . 
 he look . the figure of a woman stand in the steely light , her hand 
 stretch forth in a suppliant gesture , confront he from the far - off 
 end of the verandah ; and in the space between he and the obstinate 
 phantom float the murmur of word that fall on his ear in a jumble of 
 torture sentence , the meaning of which escape the utmost effort of 
 his brain . who speak the Malay word ? who run away ? why too late - and 
 too late for what ? what mean those word of hate and love mix so 
 strangely together , the ever - recur name fall on his ear again 
 and again - Nina , Dain ; Dain , Nina ? Dain be dead , and Nina be sleep , 
 unaware of the terrible experience through which he be now pass . be 
 he go to be torment for ever , sleep or wake , and have no peace 
 either night or day ? what be the meaning of this ? 
 he shout the last word aloud . the shadowy woman seem to shrink and 
 recede a little from he towards the doorway , and there be a shriek . 
 exasperate by the incomprehensible nature of his torment , Almayer make a 
 rush upon the apparition , which elude his grasp , and he bring up 
 heavily against the wall . quick as lightning he turn round and pursue 
 fiercely the mysterious figure flee from he with pierce shriek 
 that be like fuel to the flame of his anger . over the furniture , 
 round the overturned table , and now he have it corner behind Nina 's 
 chair . to the left , to the right they dodge , the chair rock madly 
 between they , she send out shriek after shriek at every feint , and he 
 growl meaningless curse through his hard set tooth . " oh ! the 
 fiendish noise that split his head and seem to choke his breath . - it 
 would kill he . - it must be stop ! " an insane desire to crush that 
 yelling thing induce he to cast himself recklessly over the chair with 
 a desperate grab , and they come down together in a cloud of dust amongst 
 the splintered wood . the last shriek die out under he in a faint 
 gurgle , and he have secure the relief of absolute silence . 
 he look at the woman 's face under he . a real woman ! he know she . by 
 all that be wonderful ! Taminah ! he jump up ashamed of his fury and 
 stand perplexed , wipe his forehead . the girl struggle to a kneeling 
 posture and embrace his leg in a frenzied prayer for mercy . 
 " do not   be afraid , " he say , raise she . " I shall not hurt you . why do 
 you come to my house in the night ? and if you have to come , why not go 
 behind the curtain where the woman sleep ? " 
 " the place behind the curtain be empty , " gasp Taminah , catch her 
 breath between the word . " there be no woman in your house any more , 
 Tuan . I see the old Mem go away before I try to wake you . I do not 
 want your woman , I want you . " 
 " Old Mem ! " repeat Almayer . " do you mean my wife ? " 
 she nod her head . 
 " but of my daughter you be not afraid ? " say Almayer . 
 " have you not hear I ? " she exclaim . " have I not speak for a long 
 time when you lay there with eye half open ? she be go too . " 
 " I be asleep . can you not tell when a man be sleep and when awake ? " 
 " sometimes , " answer Taminah in a low voice ; ' sometimes the spirit 
 linger close to a sleep body and may hear . I speak a long time 
 before I touch you , and I speak softly for fear it would depart at a 
 sudden noise and leave you sleep for ever . I take you by the shoulder 
 only when you begin to mutter word I could not understand . have you not 
 hear , then , and do you know nothing ? " 
 " nothing of what you say . what be it ? tell again if you want I to 
 know . " 
 he take she by the shoulder and lead she unresisting to the front of the 
 verandah into a strong light . she wring her hand with such an 
 appearance of grief that he begin to be alarm . 
 " speak , " he say . " you make noise enough to wake even dead man . and yet 
 nobody live come , " he add to himself in an uneasy whisper . " be you 
 mute ? speak ! " he repeat . 
 in a rush of word which break out after a short struggle from she 
 trembling lip she tell he the tale of Nina 's love and her own jealousy . 
 several time he look angrily into her face and tell she to be silent ; 
 but he could not stop the sound that seem to he to run out in a hot 
 stream , swirl about his foot , and rise in scald wave about he , 
 high , high , drown his heart , touch his lip with a feel of 
 molten lead , blot out his sight in scorch vapour , close over his 
 head , merciless and deadly . when she speak of the deception as to Dain 's 
 death of which he have be the victim only that day , he glance again at 
 she with terrible eye , and make her falter for a second , but he turn 
 away directly , and his face suddenly lose all expression in a stony stare 
 far away over the river . ah ! the river ! his old friend and his old 
 enemy , speak always with the same voice as he run from year to year 
 bring fortune or disappointment happiness or pain , upon the same 
 varying but unchanged surface of glance current and swirl eddy . 
 for many year he have listen to the passionless and soothe murmur 
 that sometimes be the song of hope , at time the song of triumph , of 
 encouragement ; more often the whisper of consolation that speak of well 
 day to come . for so many year ! so many year ! and now to the 
 accompaniment of that murmur he listen to the slow and painful beating 
 of his heart . he listen attentively , wonder at the regularity of 
 its beat . he begin to count mechanically . one , two . why count ? at 
 the next beat it must stop . no heart could suffer so and beat so 
 steadily for long . those regular stroke as of a muffle hammer that 
 ring in his ear must stop soon . still beat unceasing and cruel . no 
 man can bear this ; and be this the last , or will the next one be the 
 last ? - how much long ? o God ! how much long ? his hand weigh 
 heavy unconsciously on the girl 's shoulder , and she speak the last 
 word of her story crouch at his foot with tear of pain and shame and 
 anger . be her revenge to fail she ? this white man be like a senseless 
 stone . too late ! too late ! 
 " and you see she go ? " Almayer 's voice sound harshly above her head . 
 " do I not tell you ? " she sob , try to wriggle gently out from under 
 his grip . " do I not tell you that I see the witchwoman push the canoe ? 
 I lie hide in the grass and hear all the word . she that we use to 
 call the white Mem want to return to look at your face , but the 
 witchwoman forbid she , and - " 
 she sink lower yet on her elbow , turn half round under the downward 
 push of the heavy hand , her face lift up to he with spiteful eye . 
 " and she obey , " she shout out in a half - laugh , half - cry of pain . " let 
 I go , Tuan . why be you angry with I ? Hasten , or you shall be too 
 late to show your anger to the deceitful woman . " 
 Almayer drag she up to her foot and look close into her face while 
 she struggle , turn her head away from his wild stare . 
 " who send you here to torment I ? " he ask , violently . " I do not 
 believe you . you lie . " 
 he straighten his arm suddenly and fling she across the verandah 
 towards the doorway , where she lie immobile and silent , as if she have 
 leave her life in his grasp , a dark heap , without a sound or a stir . 
 " oh ! Nina ! " whisper Almayer , in a voice in which reproach and love 
 speak together in pained tenderness . " oh ! Nina ! I do not believe . " 
 a light draught from the river run over the courtyard in a wave of bow 
 grass and , enter the verandah , touch Almayer 's forehead with its 
 cool breath , in a caress of infinite pity . the curtain in the woman 's 
 doorway blow out and instantly collapse with startling helplessness . he 
 star at the flutter stuff . 
 " Nina ! " cry Almayer . " where be you , Nina ? " 
 the wind pass out of the empty house in a tremulous sigh , and all be 
 still . 
 Almayer hide his face in his hand as if to shut out a loathsome sight . 
 when , hear a slight rustle , he uncover his eye , the dark heap by 
 the door be go . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 in the middle of a shadowless square of moonlight , shin on a smooth 
 and level expanse of young rice - shoot , a little shelter - hut perch on 
 high post , the pile of brushwood near by and the glow ember of a 
 fire with a man stretch before it , seem very small and as if lose in 
 the pale green iridescence reflect from the ground . on three side of 
 the clearing , appear very far away in the deceptive light , the big 
 tree of the forest , lash together with manifold bond by a mass of 
 tangle creeper , look down at the grow young life at their foot 
 with the sombre resignation of giant that have lose faith in their 
 strength . and in the midst of they the merciless creeper clung to the 
 big trunk in cable - like coil , leap from tree to tree , hang in thorny 
 festoon from the low bough , and , send slender tendril on high to 
 seek out the small branch , carry death to their victim in an 
 exult riot of silent destruction . 
 on the fourth side , follow the curve of the bank of that branch of the 
 Pantai that form the only access to the clearing , run a black line of 
 young tree , bush , and thick second growth , unbroken save for a small 
 gap chop out in one place . at that gap begin the narrow footpath 
 lead from the water 's edge to the grass - build shelter use by the 
 night watcher when the ripen crop have to be protect from the wild 
 pig . the pathway end at the foot of the pile on which the hut be 
 build , in a circular space cover with ash and bit of burn wood . in 
 the middle of that space , by the dim fire , lie Dain . 
 he turn over on his side with an impatient sigh , and , pillow his 
 head on his bent arm , lie quietly with his face to the die fire . the 
 glow ember shine redly in a small circle , throw a gleam into his 
 wide - open eye , and at every deep breath the fine white ash of bygone 
 fire rise in a light cloud before his part lip , and dance away from 
 the warm glow into the moonbeam pour down upon Bulangi 's clearing . 
 his body be weary with the exertion of the past few day , his mind more 
 weary still with the strain of solitary wait for his fate . never 
 before have he feel so helpless . he have hear the report of the gun fire 
 on board the launch , and he know that his life be in untrustworthy 
 hand , and that his enemy be very near . during the slow hour of the 
 afternoon he roam about on the edge of the forest , or , hide in the 
 bush , watch the creek with unquiet eye for some sign of danger . he 
 fear not death , yet he desire ardently to live , for life to he be 
 Nina . she have promise to come , to follow he , to share his danger and 
 his splendour . but with she by his side he care not for danger , and 
 without she there could be no splendour and no joy in existence . 
 crouch in his shady hiding - place , he close his eye , try to evoke 
 the gracious and charming image of the white figure that for he be the 
 beginning and the end of life . with eye shut tight , his tooth hard set , 
 he try in a great effort of passionate will to keep his hold on that 
 vision of supreme delight . in vain ! his heart grow heavy as the figure 
 of Nina fade away to be replace by another vision this time - a vision 
 of armed man , of angry face , of glitter arm - and he seem to hear 
 the hum of excited and triumphant voice as they discover he in his 
 hiding - place . startle by the vividness of his fancy , he would open his 
 eye , and , leap out into the sunlight , resume his aimless wandering 
 around the clearing . as he skirt in his weary march the edge of the 
 forest he glance now and then into its dark shade , so entice in its 
 deceptive appearance of coolness , so repellent with its unrelieved gloom , 
 where lay , entomb and rot , countless generation of tree , and 
 where their successor stand as if mourning , in dark green foliage , 
 immense and helpless , await their turn . only the parasite seem to 
 live there in a sinuous rush upwards into the air and sunshine , feed 
 on the dead and the die alike , and crown their victim with pink and 
 blue flower that gleam amongst the bough , incongruous and cruel , like 
 a strident and mocking note in the solemn harmony of the doom tree . 
 a man could hide there , think Dain , as he approach a place where the 
 creeper have be tear and hack into an archway that might have be 
 the beginning of a path . as he bend down to look through he hear angry 
 grunting , and a sounder of wild pig crash away in the undergrowth . an 
 acrid smell of damp earth and of decay leaf take he by the throat , 
 and he draw back with a scared face , as if he have be touch by the 
 breath of death itself . the very air seem dead in there - heavy and 
 stagnating , poison with the corruption of countless age . he go on , 
 stagger on his way , urge by the nervous restlessness that make he 
 feel tired yet cause he to loathe the very idea of immobility and 
 repose . be he a wild man to hide in the wood and perhaps be kill 
 there - in the darkness - where there be no room to breathe ? he would 
 wait for his enemy in the sunlight , where he could see the sky and feel 
 the breeze . he know how a malay chief should die . the sombre and 
 desperate fury , that peculiar inheritance of his race , take possession of 
 he , and he glare savagely across the clearing towards the gap in the 
 bush by the riverside . they would come from there . in imagination he 
 see they now . he see the bearded face and the white jacket of the 
 officer , the light on the level barrel of the rifle . what be the 
 bravery of the great warrior before the firearm in the hand of a 
 slave ? he would walk toward they with a smile face , with his hand 
 hold out in a sign of submission till he be very near they . he would 
 speak friendly word - come near yet - yet near - so near that they 
 could touch he with their hand and stretch they out to make he a 
 captive . that would be the time : with a shout and a leap he would be in 
 the midst of they , kriss in hand , killing , killing , killing , and would 
 die with the shout of his enemy in his ear , their warm blood spurt 
 before his eye . 
 carry away by his excitement , he snatch the kriss hide in his 
 sarong , and , draw a long breath , rush forward , strike at the empty 
 air , and fall on his face . he lie as if stun in the sudden reaction 
 from his exaltation , think that , even if he die thus gloriously , it 
 would have to be before he see Nina . well so . if he see she again he 
 feel that death would be too terrible . with horror he , the descendant of 
 Rajahs and of conqueror , have to face the doubt of his own bravery . his 
 desire of life torment he in a paroxysm of agonising remorse . he have 
 not the courage to stir a limb . he have lose faith in himself , and there 
 be nothing else in he of what make a man . the suffering remain , for 
 it be order that it should abide in the human body even to the last 
 breath , and fear remain . dimly he could look into the depth of his 
 passionate love , see its strength and its weakness , and feel afraid . 
 the sun go down slowly . the shadow of the western forest march over 
 the clearing , cover the man 's scorch shoulder with its cool mantle , 
 and go on hurriedly to mingle with the shadow of other forest on the 
 eastern side . the sun linger for a while amongst the light tracery of 
 the high branch , as if in friendly reluctance to abandon the body 
 stretch in the green paddy - field . then Dain , revive by the cool of 
 the evening breeze , sit up and star round he . as he do so the sun 
 dip sharply , as if ashamed of be detect in a sympathising 
 attitude , and the clearing , which during the day be all light , become 
 suddenly all darkness , where the fire gleam like an eye . Dain walk 
 slowly towards the creek , and , divest himself of his torn sarong , his 
 only garment , enter the water cautiously . he have have nothing to eat 
 that day , and have not dare show himself in daylight by the water - side to 
 drink . now , as he swam silently , he swallow a few mouthful of water 
 that lap about his lip . this do he good , and he walk with 
 great confidence in himself and other as he return towards the fire . 
 have he be betray by Lakamba all would have be over by this . he 
 make up a big blaze , and while it last dry himself , and then lie down 
 by the ember . he could not sleep , but he feel a great numbness in all 
 his limb . his restlessness be go , and he be content to lay still , 
 measure the time by watch the star that rise in endless succession 
 above the forest , while the slight puff of wind under the cloudless sky 
 seem to fan their twinkle into a great brightness . dreamily he 
 assure himself over and over again that she would come , till the 
 certitude creep into his heart and fill he with a great peace . yes , 
 when the next day break , they would be together on the great blue sea 
 that be like life - away from the forest that be like death . he 
 murmur the name of Nina into the silent space with a tender smile : this 
 seem to break the spell of stillness , and far away by the creek a frog 
 croak loudly as if in answer . a chorus of loud roar and plaintive 
 call rise from the mud along the line of bush . he laugh heartily ; 
 doubtless it be their love - song . he feel affectionate towards the frog 
 and listen , please with the noisy life near he . 
 when the moon peep above the tree he feel the old impatience and the 
 old restlessness steal over he . why be she so late ? true , it be a 
 long way to come with a single paddle . with what skill and what 
 endurance could those small hand manage a heavy paddle ! it be very 
 wonderful - such small hand , such soft little palm that know how to 
 touch his cheek with a feel light than the fanning of a butterfly 's 
 wing . wonderful ! he lose himself lovingly in the contemplation of this 
 tremendous mystery , and when he look at the moon again it have rise a 
 hand 's breadth above the tree . would she come ? he force himself to 
 lay still , overcome the impulse to rise and rush round the clearing 
 again . he turn this way and that ; at last , quiver with the effort , 
 he lie on his back , and see her face among the star look down on he . 
 the croaking of frog suddenly cease . with the watchfulness of a hunted 
 man Dain sit up , listen anxiously , and hear several splash in the 
 water as the frog take rapid header into the creek . he know that they 
 have be alarm by something , and stand up suspicious and attentive . a 
 slight grating noise , then the dry sound as of two piece of wood strike 
 against each other . somebody be about to land ! he take up an armful of 
 brushwood , and , without take his eye from the path , hold it over the 
 ember of his fire . he wait , undecided , and see something gleam 
 amongst the bush ; then a white figure come out of the shadow and 
 seem to float towards he in the pale light . his heart give a great 
 leap and stand still , then go on shake his frame in furious beat . he 
 drop the brushwood upon the glowing coal , and have an impression of 
 shout her name - of rush to meet she ; yet he emit no sound , he 
 stir not an inch , but he stand silent and motionless like chisel 
 bronze under the moonlight that stream over his naked shoulder . as he 
 stand still , fight with his breath , as if bereft of his sens by the 
 intensity of his delight , she walk up to he with quick , resolute 
 step , and , with the appearance of one about to leap from a dangerous 
 height , throw both her arm round his neck with a sudden gesture . a 
 small blue gleam creep amongst the dry branch , and the crackling of 
 reviving fire be the only sound as they face each other in the 
 speechless emotion of that meeting ; then the dry fuel catch at once , and 
 a bright hot flame shoot upwards in a blaze as high as their head , and in 
 its light they see each other 's eye . 
 neither of they speak . he be regain his sens in a slight tremor 
 that run upwards along his rigid body and hang about his trembling lip . 
 she draw back her head and fasten her eye on his in one of those long 
 look that be a woman 's most terrible weapon ; a look that be more 
 stirring than the close touch , and more dangerous than the thrust of a 
 dagger , because it also whip the soul out of the body , but leave the 
 body alive and helpless , to be sway here and there by the capricious 
 tempest of passion and desire ; a look that enwrap the whole body , and 
 that penetrate into the innermost recess of the being , bring 
 terrible defeat in the delirious uplifting of accomplished conquest . it 
 have the same meaning for the man of the forest and the sea as for the 
 man thread the path of the more dangerous wilderness of house and 
 street . man that have feel in their breast the awful exultation such a 
 look awaken become mere thing of to - day - which be paradise ; forget 
 yesterday - which be suffer ; care not for to - morrow - which may be 
 perdition . they wish to live under that look for ever . it be the look 
 of woman 's surrender . 
 he understand , and , as if suddenly release from his invisible bond , 
 fall at her foot with a shout of joy , and , embrace her knee , hide his 
 head in the fold of her dress , murmur disjoint word of gratitude 
 and love . never before have he feel so proud as now , when at the foot of 
 that woman that half belong to his enemy . her finger play with 
 his hair in an absent - minded caress as she stand absorb in thought . the 
 thing be do . her mother be right . the man be her slave . as she 
 glance down at his kneeling form she feel a great pitying tenderness for 
 that man she be use to call - even in her thought - the master of life . 
 she lift her eye and look sadly at the southern heavens under which 
 lay the path of their life - her own , and that man be at her foot . do he 
 not say himself be that she be the light of his life ? she would be his 
 light and his wisdom ; she would be his greatness and his strength ; yet 
 hide from the eye of all man she would be , above all , his only and 
 last weakness . a very woman ! in the sublime vanity of her kind she 
 be think already of mould a god from the clay at her foot . a god 
 for other to worship . she be content to see he as he be now , and to 
 feel he quiver at the slight touch of her light finger . and while 
 her eye look sadly at the southern star a faint smile seem to be 
 play about her firm lip . who can tell in the fitful light of a camp 
 fire ? it might have be a smile of triumph , or of conscious power , or 
 of tender pity , or , perhaps , of love . 
 she speak softly to he , and he rise to his foot , put his arm round 
 she in quiet consciousness of his ownership ; she lay her head on his 
 shoulder with a sense of defiance to all the world in the encircling 
 protection of that arm . he be her with all his quality and all his 
 fault . his strength and his courage , his recklessness and his daring , 
 his simple wisdom and his savage cunning - all be her . as they pass 
 together out of the red light of the fire into the silver shower of ray 
 that fall upon the clearing he bend his head over her face , and she see 
 in his eye the dreamy intoxication of boundless felicity from the close 
 touch of her slight figure clasp to his side . with a rhythmical swing 
 of their body they walk through the light towards the outlying 
 shadow of the forest that seem to guard their happiness in solemn 
 immobility . their form melt in the play of light and shadow at the 
 foot of the big tree , but the murmur of tender word linger over the 
 empty clearing , grow faint , and die out . a sigh as of immense sorrow 
 pass over the land in the last effort of the die breeze , and in the 
 deep silence which succeed , the earth and the heaven be suddenly 
 hush up in the mournful contemplation of human love and human 
 blindness . 
 they walk slowly back to the fire . he make for she a seat out of the 
 dry branch , and , throw himself down at her foot , lie his head in her 
 lap and give himself up to the dreamy delight of the passing hour . their 
 voice rise and fall , tender or animate as they speak of their love and 
 of their future . she , with a few skilful word speak from time to time , 
 guide his thought , and he let his happiness flow in a stream of talk 
 passionate and tender , grave or menacing , accord to the mood which she 
 evoke . he speak to she of his own island , where the gloomy forest and 
 the muddy river be unknown . he speak of its terrace field , of the 
 murmur clear rill of sparkle water that flow down the side of 
 great mountain , bring life to the land and joy to its tiller . and 
 he speak also of the mountain peak that rise lonely above the belt of 
 tree know the secret of the pass cloud , and be the dwelling - place 
 of the mysterious spirit of his race , of the guardian genius of his 
 house . he speak of vast horizon sweep by fierce wind that whistle 
 high above the summit of burn mountain . he speak of his forefather 
 that conquer age ago the island of which he be to be the future 
 ruler . and then as , in her interest , she bring she face near to his , 
 he , touch lightly the thick tress of her long hair , feel a sudden 
 impulse to speak to she of the sea he love so well ; and he tell she of 
 its never - cease voice , to which he have listen as a child , wonder 
 at its hidden meaning that no live man have penetrate yet ; of its 
 enchanting glitter ; of its senseless and capricious fury ; how its surface 
 be for ever change , and yet always entice , while its depth be for 
 ever the same , cold and cruel , and full of the wisdom of destroy life . 
 he tell she how it hold man slave of its charm for a lifetime , and then , 
 regardless of their devotion , swallow they up , angry at their fear of 
 its mystery , which it would never disclose , not even to those that love 
 it most . while he talk , Nina 's head have be gradually sink low , 
 and her face almost touch his now . her hair be over his eye , her 
 breath be on his forehead , her arm be about his body . no two being 
 could be close to each other , yet she guess rather than understand the 
 meaning of his last word that come out after a slight hesitation in a 
 faint murmur , die out imperceptibly into a profound and significant 
 silence : " the sea , o Nina , be like a woman 's heart . " 
 she close his lip with a sudden kiss , and answer in a steady voice - 
 " but to the man that have no fear , o master of my life , the sea be ever 
 true . " 
 over their head a film of dark , thread - like cloud , look like immense 
 cobwebs drift under the star , darken the sky with the presage of 
 the come thunderstorm . from the invisible hill the first distant 
 rumble of thunder come in a prolonged roll which , after toss about 
 from hill to hill , lose itself in the forest of the Pantai . Dain and 
 Nina stand up , and the former look at the sky uneasily . 
 " it be time for Babalatchi to be here , " he say . " the night be more than 
 half go . our road be long , and a bullet travel quick than the good 
 canoe . " 
 " he will be here before the moon be hide behind the cloud , " say Nina . 
 " I hear a splash in the water , " she add . " do you hear it too ? " 
 " Alligator , " answer Dain shortly , with a careless glance towards the 
 creek . " the dark the night , " he continue , " the short will be our 
 road , for then we could keep in the current of the main stream , but if it 
 be light - even no more than now - we must follow the small channel of 
 sleeping water , with nothing to help our paddle . " 
 " dain , " interpose Nina , earnestly , " it be no alligator . I hear the 
 bush rustle near the landing - place . " 
 " yes , " say Dain , after listen awhile . " it can not be Babalatchi , who 
 would come in a big war canoe , and openly . those that be come , 
 whoever they be , do not wish to make much noise . but you have hear , 
 and now I can see , " he go on quickly . " it be but one man . stand 
 behind I , Nina . if he be a friend he be welcome ; if he be an enemy you 
 shall see he die . " 
 he lay his hand on his kriss , and await the approach of his unexpected 
 visitor . the fire be burn very low , and small cloud - precursor of 
 the storm - cross the face of the moon in rapid succession , and their 
 fly shadow darken the clearing . he could not make out who the man 
 might be , but he feel uneasy at the steady advance of the tall figure 
 walk on the path with a heavy tread , and hail it with a command to 
 stop . the man stop at some little distance , and Dain expect he to 
 speak , but all he could hear be his deep breathing . through a break in 
 the fly cloud a sudden and fleeting brightness descend upon the 
 clearing . before the darkness close in again , Dain see a hand hold 
 some glitter object extend towards he , hear Nina 's cry of 
 " Father ! " and in an instant the girl be between he and Almayer 's 
 revolver . Nina 's loud cry wake up the echo of the sleep wood , and 
 the three stand still as if wait for the return of silence before they 
 would give expression to their various feeling . at the appearance of 
 Nina , Almayer 's arm fall by his side , and he make a step forward . dain 
 push the girl gently aside . 
 " be I a wild beast that you should try to kill I suddenly and in the 
 dark , Tuan Almayer ? " say Dain , break the strained silence . " throw 
 some brushwood on the fire , " he go on , speak to Nina , " while I watch 
 my white friend , lest harm should come to you or to I , o delight of my 
 heart ! " 
 Almayer grind his tooth and raise his arm again . with a quick bind 
 Dain be at his side : there be a short scuffle , during which one chamber 
 of the revolver go off harmlessly , then the weapon , wrench out of 
 Almayer 's hand , whirl through the air and fall in the bush . the two 
 man stand close together , breathe hard . the replenished fire throw out 
 an unsteady circle of light and shine on the terrified face of Nina , who 
 look at they with outstretche hand . 
 " Dain ! " she cry out warningly , " Dain ! " 
 he wave his hand towards she in a reassuring gesture , and , turn to 
 Almayer , say with great courtesy - 
 " now we may talk , Tuan . it be easy to send out death , but can your 
 wisdom recall the life ? she might have be harm , " he continue , 
 indicate Nina . " your hand shake much ; for myself I be not afraid . " 
 " Nina ! " exclaim Almayer , " come to I at once . what be this sudden 
 madness ? what bewitch you ? come to your father , and together we shall 
 try to forget this horrible nightmare ! " 
 he open his arm with the certitude of clasp she to his breast in 
 another second . she do not move . as it dawn upon he that she do 
 not mean to obey he feel a deadly cold creep into his heart , and , 
 press the palm of his hand to his temple , he look down on the 
 ground in mute despair . Dain take Nina by the arm and lead she towards 
 her father . 
 " speak to he in the language of his people , " he say . " he be 
 grieve - as who would not grieve at lose thee , my pearl ! speak to he 
 the last word he shall hear speak by that voice , which must be very 
 sweet to he , but be all my life to I . " 
 he release she , and , step back a few pace out of the circle of 
 light , stand in the darkness look at they with calm interest . the 
 reflection of a distant flash of lightning light up the cloud over their 
 head , and be follow after a short interval by the faint rumble of 
 thunder , which mingle with Almayer 's voice as he begin to speak . 
 " do you know what you be do ? do you know what be wait for you if 
 you follow that man ? have you no pity for yourself ? do you know that 
 you shall be at first his plaything and then a scorned slave , a drudge , 
 and a servant of some new fancy of that man ? " 
 she raise her hand to stop he , and turn her head slightly , ask - 
 " you hear this dain ! be it true ? " 
 " by all the god ! " come the impassioned answer from the darkness - " by 
 heaven and earth , by my head and thine I swear : this be a white man 's 
 lie . I have deliver my soul into your hand for ever ; I breathe with 
 your breath , I see with your eye , I think with your mind , and I take you 
 into my heart for ever . " 
 " you thief ! " shout the exasperate Almayer . 
 a deep silence succeed this outburst , then the voice of Dain be hear 
 again . 
 " Nay , Tuan , " he say in a gentle tone , " that be not true also . the girl 
 come of her own will . I have do no more but to show she my love like a 
 man ; she hear the cry of my heart , and she come , and the dowry I have 
 give to the woman you call your wife . " 
 Almayer groan in his extremity of rage and shame . Nina lay her hand 
 lightly on his shoulder , and the contact , light as the touch of a fall 
 leaf , seem to calm he . he speak quickly , and in English this time . 
 " tell I , " he say - " tell I , what have they do to you , your mother and 
 that man ? what make you give yourself up to that savage ? for he be a 
 savage . between he and you there be a barrier that nothing can remove . 
 I can see in your eye the look of those who commit suicide when they be 
 mad . you be mad . do not   smile . it break my heart . if I be to see 
 you drown before my eye , and I without the power to help you , I could 
 not suffer a great torment . have you forget the teaching of so many 
 year ? " 
 " no , " she interrupt , " I remember it well . I remember how it end 
 also . Scorn for scorn , contempt for contempt , hate for hate . I be not 
 of your race . between your people and I there be also a barrier that 
 nothing can remove . you ask why I want to go , and I ask you why I should 
 stay . " 
 he stagger as if strike in the face , but with a quick , unhesitate 
 grasp she catch he by the arm and steady he . 
 " why you should stay ! " he repeat slowly , in a daze manner , and stop 
 short , astounded at the completeness of his misfortune . 
 " you tell I yesterday , " she go on again , " that I could not understand 
 or see your love for I : it be so . how can I ? no two human being 
 understand each other . they can understand but their own voice . you 
 want I to dream your dream , to see your own vision - the vision of 
 life amongst the white face of those who cast I out from their midst in 
 angry contempt . but while you speak I listen to the voice of my own 
 self ; then this man come , and all be still ; there be only the murmur of 
 his love . you call he a savage ! what do you call my mother , your 
 wife ? " 
 " Nina ! " cry Almayer , " take your eye off my face . " 
 she look down directly , but continue speak only a little above a 
 whisper . 
 " in time , " she go on , " both our voice , that man 's and mine , speak 
 together in a sweetness that be intelligible to our ear only . you be 
 speak of gold then , but our ear be fill with the song of our 
 love , and we do not hear you . then I find that we could see through 
 each other 's eye : that he see thing that nobody but myself and he could 
 see . we enter a land where no one could follow we , and least of all 
 you . then I begin to live . " 
 she pause . Almayer sigh deeply . with her eye still fix on the 
 ground she begin speak again . 
 " and I mean to live . I mean to follow he . I have be reject with 
 scorn by the white people , and now I be a malay ! he take I in his arm , 
 he lay his life at my foot . he be brave ; he will be powerful , and I 
 hold his bravery and his strength in my hand , and I shall make he great . 
 his name shall be remember long after both our body be lay in the 
 dust . I love you no less than I do before , but I shall never leave he , 
 for without he I can not live . " 
 " if he understand what you have say , " answer Almayer , scornfully , " he 
 must be highly flattered . you want he as a tool for some 
 incomprehensible ambition of your . enough , Nina . if you do not go down 
 at once to the creek , where Ali be wait with my canoe , I shall tell 
 he to return to the settlement and bring the dutch officer here . you 
 can not escape from this clearing , for I have cast adrift your canoe . if 
 the Dutch catch this hero of yours they will hang he as sure as I stand 
 here . now go . " 
 he make a step towards his daughter and lay hold of she by the shoulder , 
 his other hand point down the path to the landing - place . 
 " beware ! " exclaim Dain ; " this woman belong to I ! " 
 Nina wrench herself free and look straight at Almayer 's angry face . 
 " no , I will not go , " she say with desperate energy . " if he die I shall 
 die too ! " 
 " you die ! " say Almayer , contemptuously . " oh , no ! you shall live a life 
 of lie and deception till some other vagabond come along to sing ; how 
 do you say that ? the song of love to you ! make up your mind quickly . " 
 he wait for a while , and then add meaningly - 
 " shall I call out to Ali ? " 
 " call out , " she answer in Malay , " you that can not be true to your own 
 countryman . only a few day ago you be sell the powder for their 
 destruction ; now you want to give up to they the man that yesterday you 
 call your friend . oh , Dain , " she say , turn towards the motionless 
 but attentive figure in the darkness , " instead of bring you life I 
 bring you death , for he will betray unless I leave you for ever ! " 
 Dain come into the circle of light , and , throw his arm around Nina 's 
 neck , whisper in her ear - " I can kill he where he stand , before a 
 sound can pass his lip . for you it be to say yes or no . Babalatchi 
 can not be far now . " 
 he straighten himself up , take his arm off her shoulder , and 
 confront Almayer , who look at they both with an expression of 
 concentrated fury . 
 " no ! " she cry , cling to Dain in wild alarm . " no ! kill I ! then 
 perhaps he will let you go . you do not know the mind of a white man . he 
 would rather see I dead than stand where I be . forgive I , your 
 slave , but you must not . " she fall at his foot sob violently and 
 repeat , " kill I ! kill I ! " 
 " I want you alive , " say Almayer , speak also in Malay , with sombre 
 calmness . " you go , or he hang . will you obey ? " 
 Dain shake Nina off , and , make a sudden lunge , strike Almayer full in 
 the chest with the handle of his kriss , keep the point towards 
 himself . 
 " Hai , look ! it be easy for I to turn the point the other way , " he say 
 in his even voice . " go , Tuan Putih , " he add with dignity . " I give you 
 your life , my life , and her life . I be the slave of this woman 's desire , 
 and she will it so . " 
 there be not a glimmer of light in the sky now , and the top of the 
 tree be as invisible as their trunk , be lose in the mass of cloud 
 that hang low over the wood , the clearing , and the river . 
 every outline have disappear in the intense blackness that seem to 
 have destroy everything but space . only the fire glimmer like a star 
 forget in this annihilation of all visible thing , and nothing be 
 hear after Dain cease speaking but the sob of Nina , whom he hold in 
 his arm , kneel beside the fire . Almayer stand look down at they 
 in gloomy thoughtfulness . as he be open his lip to speak they be 
 startle by a cry of warning by the riverside , follow by the splash of 
 many paddle and the sound of voice . 
 " Babalatchi ! " shout Dain , lift up Nina as he get upon his foot 
 quickly . 
 " Ada ! Ada ! " come the answer from the pant statesman who run up the 
 path and stand amongst they . " run to my canoe , " he say to Dain 
 excitedly , without take any notice of Almayer . " run ! we must go . that 
 woman have tell they all ! " 
 " what woman ? " ask Dain , look at Nina . just then there be only one 
 woman in the whole world for he . 
 " the she - dog with white tooth ; the seven time accurse slave of Bulangi . 
 she yell at Abdulla 's gate till she wake up all sambir . now the white 
 officer be come , guide by she and reshid . if you want to live , do 
 not look at I , but go ! " 
 " how do you know this ? " ask Almayer . 
 " oh , Tuan ! what matter how I know ! I have only one eye , but I see 
 light in Abdulla 's house and in his campong as we be paddle past . I 
 have ear , and while we lay under the bank I have hear the messenger 
 send out to the white man 's house . " 
 " will you depart without that woman who be my daughter ? " say Almayer , 
 address Dain , while Babalatchi stamp with impatience , muttering , 
 " run ! run at once ! " 
 " no , " answer Dain , steadily , " I will not go ; to no man will I abandon 
 this woman . " 
 " then kill I and escape yourself , " sob out Nina . 
 he clasp her close , look at her tenderly , and whisper , " we will 
 never part , o Nina ! " 
 " I shall not stay here any long , " break in Babalatchi , angrily . " this 
 be great foolishness . no woman be worth a man 's life . I be an old man , 
 and I know . " 
 he pick up his staff , and , turn to go , look at Dain as if offer 
 he his last chance of escape . but Dain 's face be hide amongst Nina 's 
 black tress , and he do not see this last appeal glance . 
 Babalatchi vanish in the darkness . shortly after his disappearance 
 they hear the war canoe leave the landing - place in the swish of the 
 numerous paddle dip in the water together . almost at the same time 
 Ali come up from the riverside , two paddle on his shoulder . 
 " our canoe be hide up the creek , Tuan Almayer , " he say , " in the dense 
 bush where the forest come down to the water . I take it there because I 
 hear from Babalatchi 's paddler that the white man be come here . " 
 " wait for I there , " say Almayer , " but keep the canoe hide . " 
 he remain silent , listen to Ali 's footstep , then turn to Nina . 
 " Nina , " he say sadly , " will you have no pity for I ? " 
 there be no answer . she do not even turn her head , which be press 
 close to Dain 's breast . 
 he make a movement as if to leave they and stop . by the dim glow of 
 the burning - out fire he see their two motionless figure . the woman 's 
 back turn to he with the long black hair stream down over the white 
 dress , and Dain 's calm face look at he above her head . 
 " I can not , " he mutter to himself . after a long pause he speak again a 
 little low , but in an unsteady voice , " it would be too great a 
 disgrace . I be a white man . " he break down completely there , and go 
 on tearfully , " I be a white man , and of good family . very good family , " 
 he repeat , weep bitterly . " it would be a disgrace . . . all over 
 the island , . . . the only white man on the east coast . no , it can not 
 be . . . white man find my daughter with this malay . my daughter ! " he 
 cry aloud , with a ring of despair in his voice . 
 he recover his composure after a while and say distinctly - 
 " I will never forgive you , Nina - never ! if you be to come back to I 
 now , the memory of this night would poison all my life . I shall try to 
 forget . I have no daughter . there use to be a half - caste woman in my 
 house , but she be go even now . you , Dain , or whatever your name may 
 be , I shall take you and that woman to the island at the mouth of the 
 river myself . come with I . " 
 he lead the way , follow the bank as far as the forest . Ali answer to 
 his call , and , push their way through the dense bush , they step 
 into the canoe hide under the overhang branch . Dain lay Nina in 
 the bottom , and sit hold her head on his knee . Almayer and Ali each 
 take up a paddle . as they be go to push out Ali hiss warningly . 
 all listen . 
 in the great stillness before the bursting out of the thunderstorm they 
 could hear the sound of oar work regularly in their row - lock . the 
 sound approach steadily , and Dain , look through the branch , could 
 see the faint shape of a big white boat . a woman 's voice say in a 
 cautious tone - 
 " there be the place where you may land white man ; a little high - there ! " 
 the boat be pass they so close in the narrow creek that the blade of 
 the long oar nearly touch the canoe . 
 " way enough ! stand by to jump on shore ! he be alone and unarmed , " be 
 the quiet order in a man 's voice , and in Dutch . 
 somebody else whisper : " I think I can see a glimmer of a fire through 
 the bush . " and then the boat float past they , disappear instantly 
 in the darkness . 
 " now , " whisper Ali , eagerly , " let we push out and paddle away . " 
 the little canoe swing into the stream , and as it spring forward in 
 response to the vigorous dig of the paddle they could hear an angry 
 shout . 
 " he be not by the fire . spread out , man , and search for he ! " 
 Blue light blaze out in different part of the clearing , and the shrill 
 voice of a woman cry in accent of rage and pain - 
 " too late ! o senseless white man ! he have escape ! " 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 " that be the place , " say Dain , indicate with the blade of his paddle a 
 small islet about a mile ahead of the canoe - " that be the place where 
 Babalatchi promise that a boat from the prau would come for I when the 
 sun be overhead . we will wait for that boat there . " 
 Almayer , who be steer , nod without speak , and by a slight sweep 
 of his paddle lay the head of the canoe in the require direction . 
 they be just leave the southern outlet of the Pantai , which lay 
 behind they in a straight and long vista of water shin between two 
 wall of thick verdure that run downwards and towards each other , till at 
 last they join and sink together in the far - away distance . the sun , 
 rise above the calm water of the Straits , mark its own path by a 
 streak of light that glide upon the sea and dart up the wide reach of 
 the river , a hurried messenger of light and life to the gloomy forest of 
 the coast ; and in this radiance of the sun 's pathway float the black 
 canoe head for the islet which lie bath in sunshine , the yellow 
 sand of its encircling beach shin like an inlaid golden disc on the 
 polished steel of the unwrinkled sea . to the north and south of it rise 
 other islet , joyous in their brilliant colouring of green and yellow , 
 and on the main coast the sombre line of mangrove bush end to the 
 southward in the reddish cliff of Tanjong Mirrah , advance into the 
 sea , steep and shadowless under the clear , light of the early morning . 
 the bottom of the canoe grate upon the sand as the little craft run upon 
 the beach . Ali leap on shore and hold on while Dain step out 
 carry Nina in his arm , exhaust by the event and the long 
 travel during the night . Almayer be the last to leave the boat , and 
 together with Ali run it higher up on the beach . then Ali , tired out by 
 the long paddling , lay down in the shade of the canoe , and incontinently 
 fall asleep . Almayer sit sideways on the gunwale , and with his arm 
 cross on his breast , look to the southward upon the sea . 
 after carefully lay Nina down in the shade of the bush grow in 
 the middle of the islet , Dain throw himself beside she and watch in 
 silent concern the tear that run down from under her closed eyelid , and 
 lose themselves in that fine sand upon which they both be lie face to 
 face . these tear and this sorrow be for he a profound and 
 disquieting mystery . now , when the danger be past , why should she 
 grieve ? he doubt her love no more than he would have doubt the fact 
 of his own existence , but as he lie look ardently in her face , 
 watch her tear , her part lip , her very breath , he be uneasily 
 conscious of something in she he could not understand . Doubtless she have 
 the wisdom of perfect being . he sigh . he feel something invisible 
 that stand between they , something that would let he approach she so 
 far , but no far . no desire , no longing , no effort of will or length 
 of life could destroy this vague feeling of their difference . with awe 
 but also with great pride he conclude that it be her own incomparable 
 perfection . she be his , and yet she be like a woman from another 
 world . his ! his ! he exult in the glorious thought ; nevertheless her 
 tear pain he . 
 with a wisp of her own hair which he take in his hand with timid 
 reverence he try in an access of clumsy tenderness to dry the tear 
 that tremble on her eyelash . he have his reward in a fleeting smile 
 that brighten her face for the short fraction of a second , but soon the 
 tear fall fast than ever , and he could bear it no more . he rise and 
 walk towards Almayer , who still sit absorb in his contemplation of 
 the sea . it be a very , very long time since he have see the sea - that 
 sea that lead everywhere , bring everything , and take away so much . he 
 have almost forget why he be there , and dreamily he could see all his 
 past life on the smooth and boundless surface that glitter before his 
 eye . 
 Dain 's hand lay on Almayer 's shoulder recall he with a start from 
 some country very far away indeed . he turn round , but his eye seem 
 to look rather at the place where Dain stand than at the man himself . 
 Dain feel uneasy under the unconscious gaze . 
 " what ? " say Almayer . 
 " she be cry , " murmur Dain , softly . 
 " she be cry ! why ? " ask Almayer , indifferently . 
 " I come to ask you . my ranee smile when look at the man she love . 
 it be the white woman that be cry now . you would know . " 
 Almayer shrug his shoulder and turn away again towards the sea . 
 " go , Tuan Putih , " urge Dain . " go to she ; her tear be more terrible to 
 I than the anger of god . " 
 " be they ? you will see they more than once . she tell I she could not 
 live without you , " answer Almayer , speak without the faint spark 
 of expression in his face , ' so it behove you to go to she quick , for 
 fear you may find she dead . " 
 he burst into a loud and unpleasant laugh which make Dain stare at he 
 with some apprehension , but get off the gunwale of the boat and move 
 slowly towards Nina , glance up at the sun as he walk . 
 " and you go when the sun be overhead ? " he say . 
 " yes , Tuan . then we go , " answer Dain . 
 " I have not long to wait , " mutter Almayer . " it be most important for 
 I to see you go . both of you . most important , " he repeat , stop 
 short and look at Dain fixedly . 
 he go on again towards Nina , and Dain remain behind . Almayer 
 approach his daughter and stand for a time look down on she . she 
 do not open her eye , but hear footstep near she , murmur in a low 
 sob , " Dain . " 
 Almayer hesitate for a minute and then sink on the sand by her side . 
 she , not hear a responsive word , not feel a touch , open she 
 eye - see her father , and sit up suddenly with a movement of terror . 
 " oh , father ! " she murmur faintly , and in that word there be express 
 regret and fear and dawn hope . 
 " I shall never forgive you , Nina , " say Almayer , in a dispassionate 
 voice . " you have tear my heart from I while I dream of your happiness . 
 you have deceive I . your eye that for I be like truth itself lie 
 to I in every glance - for how long ? you know that well . when you be 
 caress my cheek you be count the minute to the sunset that be 
 the signal for your meeting with that man - there ! " 
 he cease , and they both sit silent side by side , not look at each 
 other , but gaze at the vast expanse of the sea . Almayer 's word have 
 dry Nina 's tear , and her look grow hard as she star before she into 
 the limitless sheet of blue that shine limpid , unwave , and steady like 
 heaven itself . he look at it also , but his feature have lose all 
 expression , and life in his eye seem to have go out . the face be a 
 blank , without a sign of emotion , feeling , reason , or even knowledge of 
 itself . all passion , regret , grief , hope , or anger - all be go , 
 erase by the hand of fate , as if after this last stroke everything be 
 over and there be no need for any record . 
 those few who see Almayer during the short period of his remain day 
 be always impress by the sight of that face that seem to know 
 nothing of what go on within : like the blank wall of a prison enclose 
 sin , regret , and pain , and waste life , in the cold indifference of 
 mortar and stone . 
 " what be there to forgive ? " ask Nina , not address Almayer directly , 
 but more as if argue with herself . " can I not live my own life as you 
 have live your ? the path you would have wish I to follow have be 
 close to I by no fault of mine . " 
 " you never tell I , " mutter Almayer . 
 " you never ask I , " she answer , " and I think you be like the 
 other and do not care . I bear the memory of my humiliation alone , and 
 why should I tell you that it come to I because I be your daughter ? I 
 know you could not avenge I . " 
 " and yet I be think of that only , " interrupt Almayer , " and I want 
 to give you year of happiness for the short day of your suffering . I 
 only know of one way . " 
 " ah ! but it be not my way ! " she reply . " could you give I happiness 
 without life ? life ! " she repeat with sudden energy that send the word 
 ring over the sea . " life that mean power and love , " she add in a 
 low voice . 
 " that ! " say Almayer , point his finger at Dain stand close by and 
 look at they in curious wonder . 
 " yes , that ! " she reply , look her father full in the face and 
 noticing for the first time with a slight gasp of fear the unnatural 
 rigidity of his feature . 
 " I would have rather strangle you with my own hand , " say Almayer , in 
 an expressionless voice which be such a contrast to the desperate 
 bitterness of his feeling that it surprise even himself . he ask 
 himself who speak , and , after look slowly round as if expect to see 
 somebody , turn again his eye towards the sea . 
 " you say that because you do not understand the meaning of my word , " she 
 say sadly . " between you and my mother there never be any love . when I 
 return to Sambir I find the place which I think would be a peaceful 
 refuge for my heart , fill with weariness and hatred - and mutual 
 contempt . I have listen to your voice and to her voice . then I see 
 that you could not understand I ; for be I not part of that woman ? of 
 she who be the regret and shame of your life ? I have to choose - I 
 hesitate . why be you so blind ? do you not see I struggle before 
 your eye ? but , when he come , all doubt disappear , and I see only the 
 light of the blue and cloudless heaven - " 
 " I will tell you the rest , " interrupt Almayer : " when that man come I 
 also see the blue and the sunshine of the sky . a thunderbolt have fall 
 from that sky , and suddenly all be still and dark around I for ever . I 
 will never forgive you , Nina ; and to - morrow I shall forget you ! I shall 
 never forgive you , " he repeat with mechanical obstinacy while she sit , 
 her head bow down as if afraid to look at her father . 
 to he it seem of the utmost importance that he should assure she of 
 his intention of never forgive . he be convince that his faith in she 
 have be the foundation of his hope , the motive of his courage , of his 
 determination to live and struggle , and to be victorious for her sake . 
 and now his faith be go , destroy by her own hand ; destroy 
 cruelly , treacherously , in the dark ; in the very moment of success . in 
 the utter wreck of his affection and of all his feeling , in the chaotic 
 disorder of his thought , above the confused sensation of physical pain 
 that wrap he up in a sting as of a whiplash curl round he from 
 his shoulder down to his foot , only one idea remain clear and 
 definite - not to forgive she ; only one vivid desire - to forget she . and 
 this must be make clear to she - and to himself - by frequent repetition . 
 that be his idea of his duty to himself - to his race - to his respectable 
 connection ; to the whole universe unsettle and shake by this frightful 
 catastrophe of his life . he see it clearly and believe he be a strong 
 man . he have always pride himself upon his unflinche firmness . and 
 yet he be afraid . she have be all in all to he . what if he should 
 let the memory of his love for she weaken the sense of his dignity ? she 
 be a remarkable woman ; he could see that ; all the latent greatness of 
 his nature - in which he honestly believe - have be transfuse into that 
 slight , girlish figure . great thing could be do ! what if he should 
 suddenly take she to his heart , forget his shame , and pain , and anger , 
 and - follow she ! what if he change his heart if not his skin and make 
 her life easy between the two love that would guard she from any 
 mischance ! his heart yearn for she . what if he should say that his 
 love for she be great than . . . 
 " I will never forgive you , Nina ! " he shout , leap up madly in the 
 sudden fear of his dream . 
 this be the last time in his life that he be hear to raise his voice . 
 henceforth he speak always in a monotonous whisper like an instrument of 
 which all the string but one be break in a last ring clamour under 
 a heavy blow . 
 she rise to her foot and look at he . the very violence of his cry 
 soothe she in an intuitive conviction of his love , and she hug to she 
 breast the lamentable remnant of that affection with the unscrupulous 
 greediness of woman who cling desperately to the very scrap and rag of 
 love , any kind of love , as a thing that of right belong to they and be 
 the very breath of their life . she put both her hand on Almayer 's 
 shoulder , and look at he half tenderly , half playfully , she say - 
 " you speak so because you love I . " 
 Almayer shake his head . 
 " yes , you do , " she insist softly ; then after a short pause she add , 
 " and you will never forget I . " 
 Almayer shiver slightly . she could not have say a more cruel thing . 
 " here be the boat come now , " say Dain , his arm outstretche towards a 
 black speck on the water between the coast and the islet . 
 they all look at it and remain stand in silence till the little 
 canoe come gently on the beach and a man land and walk towards they . 
 he stop some distance off and hesitate . 
 " what news ? " ask Dain . 
 " we have have order secretly and in the night to take off from this islet 
 a man and a woman . I see the woman . which of you be the man ? " 
 " come , delight of my eye , " say Dain to Nina . " now we go , and your 
 voice shall be for my ear only . you have speak your last word to the 
 Tuan Putih , your father . come . " 
 she hesitate for a while , look at Almayer , who keep his eye steadily 
 on the sea , then she touch his forehead in a linger kiss , and a 
 tear - one of her tear - fall on his cheek and run down his immovable 
 face . 
 " Goodbye , " she whisper , and remain irresolute till he push she 
 suddenly into Dain 's arm . 
 " if you have any pity for I , " murmur Almayer , as if repeat some 
 sentence learn by heart , " take that woman away . " 
 he stand very straight , his shoulder throw back , his head hold high , 
 and look at they as they go down the beach to the canoe , walk 
 enlace in each other 's arm . he look at the line of their footstep 
 mark in the sand . he follow their figure move in the crude blaze 
 of the vertical sun , in that light violent and vibrating , like a 
 triumphal flourish of brazen trumpet . he look at the man 's brown 
 shoulder , at the red sarong round his waist ; at the tall , slender , 
 dazzle white figure he support . he look at the white dress , at the 
 fall mass of the long black hair . he look at they embark , and 
 at the canoe grow small in the distance , with rage , despair , and 
 regret in his heart , and on his face a peace as that of a carve image of 
 oblivion . inwardly he feel himself tear to piece , but Ali - who now 
 arouse - stand close to his master , see on his feature the blank 
 expression of those who live in that hopeless calm which sightless eye 
 only can give . 
 the canoe disappear , and Almayer stand motionless with his eye fix 
 on its wake . Ali from under the shade of his hand examine the coast 
 curiously . as the sun decline , the sea - breeze spring up from the 
 northward and shiver with its breath the glassy surface of the water . 
 " Dapat ! " exclaim Ali , joyously . " got he , master ! got prau ! not 
 there ! look more Tanah Mirrah side . aha ! that way ! Master , see ? now 
 plain . see ? " 
 Almayer follow Ali 's forefinger with his eye for a long time in vain . 
 at last he sight a triangular patch of yellow light on the red 
 background of the cliff of Tanjong Mirrah . it be the sail of the prau 
 that have catch the sunlight and stand out , distinct with its gay tint , 
 on the dark red of the cape . the yellow triangle creep slowly from cliff 
 to cliff , till it clear the last point of land and shine brilliantly 
 for a fleeting minute on the blue of the open sea . then the prau bear up 
 to the southward : the light go out of the sail , and all at once the 
 vessel itself disappear , vanish in the shadow of the steep headland 
 that look on , patient and lonely , watch over the empty sea . 
 Almayer never move . round the little islet the air be full of the talk 
 of the ripple water . the crest wavelet run up the beach 
 audaciously , joyously , with the lightness of young life , and die 
 quickly , unresistingly , and graciously , in the wide curve of transparent 
 foam on the yellow sand . above , the white cloud sail rapidly 
 southward as if intent upon overtake something . Ali seem anxious . 
 " Master , " he say timidly , " time to get house now . long way off to pull . 
 all ready , sir . " 
 " wait , " whisper Almayer . 
 now she be go his business be to forget , and he have a strange notion 
 that it should be do systematically and in order . to Ali 's great 
 dismay he fall on his hand and knee , and , creep along the sand , 
 erase carefully with his hand all trace of Nina 's footstep . he pile 
 up small heap of sand , leave behind he a line of miniature graf 
 right down to the water . after bury the last slight imprint of Nina 's 
 slipper he stand up , and , turn his face towards the headland where he 
 have last see the prau , he make an effort to shout out loud again his 
 firm resolve to never forgive . Ali watch he uneasily see only his 
 lip move , but hear no sound . he bring his foot down with a stamp . he 
 be a firm man - firm as a rock . let she go . he never have a daughter . he 
 would forget . he be forget already . 
 Ali approach he again , insist on immediate departure , and this time 
 he consent , and they go together towards their canoe , Almayer 
 lead . for all his firmness he look very dejected and feeble as he 
 drag his foot slowly through the sand on the beach ; and by his 
 side - invisible to Ali - stalk that particular fiend whose mission it be 
 to jog the memory of man , lest they should forget the meaning of life . 
 he whisper into Almayer 's ear a childish prattle of many year ago . 
 Almayer , his head bend on one side , seem to listen to his invisible 
 companion , but his face be like the face of a man that have die strike 
 from behind - a face from which all feeling and all expression be 
 suddenly wipe off by the hand of unexpected death . 
         
 they sleep on the river that night , moor their canoe under the bush 
 and lie down in the bottom side by side , in the absolute exhaustion 
 that kill hunger , thirst , all feeling and all thought in the 
 overpowering desire for that deep sleep which be like the temporary 
 annihilation of the tired body . next day they start again and fight 
 doggedly with the current all the morning , till about midday they reach 
 the settlement and make fast their little craft to the jetty of Lingard 
 and Co. Almayer walk straight to the house , and Ali follow , paddle 
 on shoulder , think that he would like to eat something . as they 
 cross the front courtyard they notice the abandon look of the place . 
 Ali look in at the different servant ' house : all be empty . in the 
 back courtyard there be the same absence of sound and life . in the 
 cooking - shed the fire be out and the black ember be cold . a tall , 
 lean man come stealthily out of the banana plantation , and go away 
 rapidly across the open space look at they with big , frightened eye 
 over his shoulder . some vagabond without a master ; there be many such 
 in the settlement , and they look upon Almayer as their patron . they 
 prowl about his premise and pick their living there , sure that 
 nothing bad could befall they than a shower of curse when they get in 
 the way of the white man , whom they trust and like , and call a fool 
 amongst themselves . in the house , which Almayer enter through the back 
 verandah , the only live thing that meet his eye be his small monkey 
 which , hungry and unnoticed for the last two day , begin to cry and 
 complain in monkey language as soon as it catch sight of the familiar 
 face . Almayer soothe it with a few word and order Ali to bring in 
 some banana , then while Ali be go to get they he stand in the doorway 
 of the front verandah look at the chaos of overturn furniture . 
 finally he pick up the table and sit on it while the monkey let itself 
 down from the roof - stick by its chain and perch on his shoulder . when 
 the banana come they have their breakfast together ; both hungry , both 
 eat greedily and shower the skin round they recklessly , in the 
 trusting silence of perfect friendship . Ali go away , grumble , to 
 cook some rice himself , for all the woman about the house have 
 disappear ; he do not know where . Almayer do not seem to care , and , 
 after he finish eat , he sit on the table swing his leg and 
 star at the river as if lose in thought . 
 after some time he get up and go to the door of a room on the right of 
 the verandah . that be the office . the office of Lingard and Co. he 
 very seldom go in there . there be no business now , and he do not 
 want an office . the door be lock , and he stand bite his low lip , 
 try to think of the place where the key could be . suddenly he 
 remember : in the woman 's room hang upon a nail . he go over to the 
 doorway where the red curtain hang down in motionless fold , and 
 hesitate for a moment before push it aside with his shoulder as if 
 break down some solid obstacle . a great square of sunshine enter 
 through the window lie on the floor . on the left he see Mrs. Almayer 's 
 big wooden chest , the lid throw back , empty ; near it the brass nail of 
 Nina 's european trunk shone in the large initial N. a. on the cover . a 
 few of Nina 's dress hang on wooden peg , stiffen in a look of 
 offend dignity at their abandonment . he remember make the peg 
 himself and notice that they be very good peg . where be the key ? he 
 look round and see it near the door where he stand . it be red with 
 rust . he feel very much annoyed at that , and directly afterwards 
 wonder at his own feeling . what do it matter ? there soon would be no 
 key - no door - nothing ! he pause , key in hand , and ask himself whether 
 he know well what he be about . he go out again on the verandah and 
 stand by the table thinking . the monkey jump down , and , snatch a 
 banana skin , absorb itself in pick it to shred industriously . 
 " forget ! " mutter Almayer , and that word start before he a sequence 
 of event , a detailed programme of thing to do . he know perfectly well 
 what be to be do now . first this , then that , and then forgetfulness 
 would come easy . very easy . he have a fix idea that if he should not 
 forget before he die he would have to remember to all eternity . certain 
 thing have to be take out of his life , stamp out of sight , destroy , 
 forget . for a long time he stand in deep thought , lose in the 
 alarming possibility of unconquerable memory , with the fear of death 
 and eternity before he . " Eternity ! " he say aloud , and the sound of 
 that word recall he out of his reverie . the monkey start , drop 
 the skin , and grin up at he amicably . 
 he go towards the office door and with some difficulty manage to open 
 it . he enter in a cloud of dust that rise under his foot . 
 book open with tear page bestrew the floor ; other book lie about 
 grimy and black , look as if they have never be open . account 
 book . in those book he have intend to keep day by day a record of his 
 rise fortune . long time ago . a very long time . for many year there 
 have be no record to keep on the blue and red rule page ! in the 
 middle of the room the big office desk , with one of its leg break , 
 careen over like the hull of a strand ship ; most of the drawer have 
 fall out , disclose heap of paper yellow with age and dirt . the 
 revolve office chair stand in its place , but he find the pivot set 
 fast when he try to turn it . no matter . he desist , and his eye 
 wander slowly from object to object . all those thing have cost a lot 
 of money at the time . the desk , the paper , the torn book , and the 
 break shelf , all under a thick coat of dust . the very dust and bone 
 of a dead and go business . he look at all these thing , all that be 
 leave after so many year of work , of strife , of weariness , of 
 discouragement , conquer so many time . and all for what ? he stand 
 think mournfully of his past life till he hear distinctly the clear 
 voice of a child speak amongst all this wreck , ruin , and waste . he 
 start with a great fear in his heart , and feverishly begin to rake in 
 the paper scatter on the floor , break the chair into bit , splinter 
 the drawer by bang they against the desk , and make a big heap of all 
 that rubbish in one corner of the room . 
 he come out quickly , slam the door after he , turn the key , and , 
 take it out , run to the front rail of the verandah , and , with a great 
 swing of his arm , send the key whizzing into the river . this do he 
 go back slowly to the table , call the monkey down , unhook its 
 chain , and induce it to remain quiet in the breast of his jacket . then 
 he sit again on the table and look fixedly at the door of the room he 
 have just leave . he listen also intently . he hear a dry sound of 
 rustle ; sharp crack as of dry wood snapping ; a whirr like of a bird 's 
 wing when it rise suddenly , and then he see a thin stream of smoke come 
 through the keyhole . the monkey struggle under his coat . Ali appear 
 with his eye start out of his head . 
 " Master ! House burn ! " he shout . 
 Almayer stand up hold by the table . he could hear the yell of alarm 
 and surprise in the settlement . Ali wring his hand , lament aloud . 
 " stop this noise , fool ! " say Almayer , quietly . " pick up my hammock and 
 blanket and take they to the other house . quick , now ! " 
 the smoke burst through the crevice of the door , and Ali , with the 
 hammock in his arm , clear in one bind the step of the verandah . 
 " it have catch well , " mutter Almayer to himself . " be quiet , Jack , " he 
 add , as the monkey make a frantic effort to escape from its 
 confinement . 
 the door split from top to bottom , and a rush of flame and smoke drive 
 Almayer away from the table to the front rail of the verandah . he hold 
 on there till a great roar overhead assure he that the roof be ablaze . 
 then he run down the step of the verandah , coughing , half choke with 
 the smoke that pursue he in bluish wreath curl about his head . 
 on the other side of the ditch , separate Almayer 's courtyard from the 
 settlement , a crowd of the inhabitant of Sambir look at the burning 
 house of the white man . in the calm air the flame rush up on high , 
 coloured pale brick - red , with violet gleam in the strong sunshine . the 
 thin column of smoke ascend straight and unwavering till it lose itself 
 in the clear blue of the sky , and , in the great empty space between the 
 two house the interested spectator could see the tall figure of the 
 Tuan Putih , with bow head and drag foot , walk slowly away from 
 the fire towards the shelter of " Almayer 's Folly . " 
 in that manner do Almayer move into his new house . he take possession 
 of the new ruin , and in the undying folly of his heart set himself to 
 wait in anxiety and pain for that forgetfulness which be so slow to 
 come . he have do all he could . every vestige of Nina 's existence have 
 be destroy ; and now with every sunrise he ask himself whether the 
 long - for oblivion would come before sunset , whether it would come 
 before he die ? he want to live only long enough to be able to forget , 
 and the tenacity of his memory fill he with dread and horror of death ; 
 for should it come before he could accomplish the purpose of his life he 
 would have to remember for ever ! he also long for loneliness . he 
 want to be alone . but he be not . in the dim light of the room with 
 their closed shutter , in the bright sunshine of the verandah , wherever 
 he go , whichever way he turn , he see the small figure of a little 
 maiden with pretty olive face , with long black hair , her little pink robe 
 slip off her shoulder , her big eye look up at he in the tender 
 trustfulness of a pet child . Ali do not see anything , but he also 
 be aware of the presence of a child in the house . in his long talk by 
 the evening fire of the settlement he use to tell his intimate friend 
 of Almayer 's strange doing . his master have turn sorcerer in his old 
 age . Ali say that often when Tuan Putih have retire for the night he 
 could hear he talk to something in his room . Ali think that it be 
 a spirit in the shape of a child . he know his master speak to a child 
 from certain expression and word his master use . his master speak in 
 Malay a little , but mostly in English , which he , Ali , could understand . 
 Master speak to the child at time tenderly , then he would weep over it , 
 laugh at it , scold it , beg of it to go away ; curse it . it be a bad and 
 stubborn spirit . Ali think his master have imprudently call it up , 
 and now could not get rid of it . his master be very brave ; he be not 
 afraid to curse this spirit in the very presence ; and once he fight with 
 it . Ali have hear a great noise as of run about inside the room and 
 groan . his master groan . spirit do not groan . his master be 
 brave , but foolish . you can not hurt a spirit . Ali expect to find his 
 master dead next morning , but he come out very early , look much old 
 than the day before , and have no food all day . 
 so far Ali to the settlement . to Captain Ford he be much more 
 communicative , for the good reason that Captain Ford have the purse and 
 give order . on each of Ford 's monthly visit to Sambir Ali have to go on 
 board with a report about the inhabitant of " Almayer 's Folly . " on his 
 first visit to Sambir , after Nina 's departure , Ford have take charge of 
 Almayer 's affair . they be not cumbersome . the shed for the storage 
 of good be empty , the boat have disappear , appropriate - generally in 
 night - time - by various citizen of sambir in need of mean of transport . 
 during a great flood the jetty of Lingard and Co. leave the bank and 
 float down the river , probably in search of more cheerful surrounding ; 
 even the flock of geese - " the only geese on the east coast " - depart 
 somewhere , prefer the unknown danger of the bush to the desolation 
 of their old home . as time go on the grass grow over the black patch 
 of ground where the old house use to stand , and nothing remain to mark 
 the place of the dwelling that have shelter Almayer 's young hope , his 
 foolish dream of splendid future , his awakening , and his despair . 
 Ford do not often visit Almayer , for visit Almayer be not a pleasant 
 task . at first he use to respond listlessly to the old seaman 's 
 boisterous inquiry about his health ; he even make effort to talk , 
 ask for news in a voice that make it perfectly clear that no news from 
 this world have any interest for he . then gradually he become more 
 silent - not sulkily - but as if he be forget how to speak . he use 
 also to hide in the dark room of the house , where Ford have to seek 
 he out guide by the patter of the monkey gallop before he . the 
 monkey be always there to receive and introduce Ford . the little animal 
 seem to have take complete charge of its master , and whenever it 
 wish for his presence on the verandah it would tug perseveringly at his 
 jacket , till Almayer obediently come out into the sunshine , which he 
 seem to dislike so much . 
 one morning Ford find he sit on the floor of the verandah , his back 
 against the wall , his leg stretch stiffly out , his arm hang by his 
 side . his expressionless face , his eye open wide with immobile pupil , 
 and the rigidity of his pose , make he look like an immense man - doll 
 break and fling there out of the way . as Ford come up the step he 
 turn his head slowly . 
 " Ford , " he murmur from the floor , " I can not forget . " 
 " can not   you ? " say Ford , innocently , with an attempt at joviality : " I wish 
 I be like you . I be lose my memory - age , I suppose ; only the other 
 day my mate - " 
 he stop , for Almayer have get up , stumble , and steady himself on his 
 friend 's arm . 
 " Hallo ! you be well to - day . soon be all right , " say Ford , 
 cheerfully , but feel rather scared . 
 Almayer let go his arm and stand very straight with his head up and 
 shoulder throw back , look stonily at the multitude of sun shin 
 in ripple of the river . his jacket and his loose trouser flap in 
 the breeze on his thin limb . 
 " let she go ! " he whisper in a grating voice . " let she go . to - morrow I 
 shall forget . I be a firm man , . . . firm as a . . . rock , . . . firm . . . " 
 Ford look at his face - and flee . the skipper be a tolerably firm man 
 himself - as those who have sail with he could testify - but Almayer 's 
 firmness be altogether too much for his fortitude . 
 next time the steamer call in Sambir Ali come on board early with a 
 grievance . he complain to Ford that Jim - Eng the Chinaman have invade 
 Almayer 's house , and actually have live there for the last month . 
 " and they both smoke , " add Ali . 
 " Phew ! Opium , you mean ? " 
 Ali nod , and Ford remain thoughtful ; then he mutter to himself , 
 " poor devil ! the soon the well now . " in the afternoon he walk up 
 to the house . 
 " what be you do here ? " he ask of Jim - Eng , whom he find stroll 
 about on the verandah . 
 Jim - Eng explain in bad Malay , and speak in that monotonous , 
 uninterested voice of an opium smoker pretty far go , that his house be 
 old , the roof leak , and the floor be rotten . so , be an old friend 
 for many , many year , he take his money , his opium , and two pipe , and 
 come to live in this big house . 
 " there be plenty of room . he smoke , and I live here . he will not smoke 
 long , " he conclude . 
 " where be he now ? " ask Ford . 
 " inside . he sleep , " answer Jim - Eng , wearily . Ford glance in through 
 the doorway . in the dim light of the room he could see Almayer lie on 
 his back on the floor , his head on a wooden pillow , the long white beard 
 scatter over his breast , the yellow skin of the face , the half - close 
 eyelid show the white of the eye only . . . . 
 he shudder and turn away . as he be leave he notice a long strip 
 of fade red silk , with some chinese letter on it , which Jim - Eng have 
 just fasten to one of the pillar . 
 " what be that ? " he ask . 
 " that , " say Jim - Eng , in his colourless voice , " that be the name of the 
 house . all the same like my house . very good name . " 
 Ford look at he for awhile and go away . he do not know what the 
 crazy - look maze of the chinese inscription on the red silk meant . have 
 he ask Jim - Eng , that patient Chinaman would have inform he with 
 proper pride that its meaning be : " House of heavenly delight . " 
 in the evening of the same day Babalatchi call on Captain Ford . the 
 captain 's cabin open on deck , and Babalatchi sit astride on the high 
 step , while Ford smoke his pipe on the settee inside . the steamer be 
 leave next morning , and the old statesman come as usual for a last 
 chat . 
 " we have news from Bali last moon , " remark Babalatchi . " a grandson be 
 bear to the old Rajah , and there be great rejoicing . " 
 Ford sit up interested . 
 " yes , " go on Babalatchi , in answer to Ford 's look . " I tell he . that 
 be before he begin to smoke . " 
 " well , and what ? " ask Ford . 
 " I escape with my life , " say Babalatchi , with perfect gravity , " because 
 the white man be very weak and fall as he rush upon I . " then , after a 
 pause , he add , " she be mad with joy . " 
 " Mrs. Almayer , you mean ? " 
 " yes , she live in our Rajah 's house . she will not die soon . such woman 
 live a long time , " say Babalatchi , with a slight tinge of regret in his 
 voice . " she have dollar , and she have bury they , but we know where . we 
 have much trouble with those people . we have to pay a fine and listen to 
 threat from the white man , and now we have to be careful . " he sigh 
 and remain silent for a long while . then with energy : 
 " there will be fight . there be a breath of war on the island . shall 
 I live long enough to see ? . . . ah , Tuan ! " he go on , more quietly , 
 " the old time be good . even I have sail with Lanun man , and board 
 in the night silent ship with white sail . that be before an English 
 Rajah rule in Kuching . then we fight amongst ourselves and be happy . 
 now when we fight with you we can only die ! " 
 he rise to go . " Tuan , " he say , " you remember the girl that man Bulangi 
 have ? she that cause all the trouble ? " 
 " yes , " say Ford . " what of she ? " 
 " she grow thin and could not work . then Bulangi , who be a thief and a 
 pig - eater , give she to I for fifty dollar . I send she amongst my woman 
 to grow fat . I want to hear the sound of her laughter , but she must 
 have be bewitch , and . . . she die two day ago . Nay , Tuan . why do 
 you speak bad word ? I be old - that be true - but why should I not like 
 the sight of a young face and the sound of a young voice in my house ? " he 
 pause , and then add with a little mournful laugh , " I be like a white 
 man talk too much of what be not man 's talk when they speak to one 
 another . " 
 and he go off look very sad . 
         
 the crowd mass in a semicircle before the step of " Almayer 's Folly , " 
 sway silently backwards and forwards , and open out before the group 
 of white - rob and turbane man advance through the grass towards the 
 house . Abdulla walk first , support by Reshid and follow by all the 
 Arabs in Sambir . as they enter the lane make by the respectful throng 
 there be a subdued murmur of voice , where the word " Mati " be the only 
 one distinctly audible . Abdulla stop and look round slowly . 
 " be he dead ? " he ask . 
 " may you live ! " answer the crowd in one shout , and then there succeed 
 a breathless silence . 
 Abdulla make a few pace forward and find himself for the last time face 
 to face with his old enemy . whatever he might have be once he be not 
 dangerous now , lie stiff and lifeless in the tender light of the early 
 day . the only white man on the east coast be dead , and his soul , 
 deliver from the trammel of his earthly folly , stand now in the 
 presence of Infinite Wisdom . on the upturned face there be that serene 
 look which follow the sudden relief from anguish and pain , and it 
 testify silently before the cloudless heaven that the man lie there 
 under the gaze of indifferent eye have be permit to forget before he 
 die . 
 Abdulla look down sadly at this Infidel he have fight so long and have 
 best so many time . such be the reward of the Faithful ! yet in the 
 Arab 's old heart there be a feeling of regret for that thing go out of 
 his life . he be leave fast behind he friendship , and enmity , 
 success , and disappointment - all that make up a life ; and before he 
 be only the end . Prayer would fill up the remainder of the day 
 allot to the True Believer ! he take in his hand the bead that hung 
 at his waist . 
 " I find he here , like this , in the morning , " say Ali , in a low and 
 awed voice . 
 Abdulla glance coldly once more at the serene face . 
 " let we go , " he say , address Reshid . 
 and as they pass through the crowd that fall back before they , the 
 bead in Abdulla 's hand click , while in a solemn whisper he breathe 
 out piously the name of Allah ! the Merciful ! the Compassionate ! 
